You
You're lecture is Dr. Ron B. Davis, Jr. Dr. Davis is a
visiting assistant professor of chemistry at Georgetown
University, where he has been teaching introductory organic
chemistry laboratory since 2008. He earned his PhD in
chemistry from the Pennsylvania State University. Dr. Davis
research has been published in such scholarly journals as
proteins and biochemistry and has been presented at the annual
symposium of the Protein Society. He also maintains an
educational YouTube channel and provides interviews and content
to various media outlets, including the Discovery
Channel. At Penn State, Dr. Davis received a Delilian
Fellowship and the Denmark Teaching Award.
Most of our understanding of the chemistry of carbon based
compounds has been accumulated since the discovery of some
of the most fundamental elements less than 300 years ago. In
fact, it was only about 3000 years ago that ancient Greek and
Chinese thinkers were the first to postulate the existence of
fundamental substances at all. But Mother Nature got a head
star on us about 3 billion years ago, when the first living
organic chemist on Earth came into existence. Here's one.
Cyanobacteria believed by most to be the first living organisms
to inhabit the face of the Earth. Fossil evidence shows that
these bacteria took up residence here about 2.7 billion years
ago. Now these little creatures fed, grew and self replicated.
They contain lipids, proteins and nucleic acids, all the usual
suspects from a modern biochemistry course. And for the
basis of their biochemistry, the central element upon which they
built the molecular machinery which sustained their own
existence, they chose carbon. Through the process of evolution,
the foundations of their biochemistry were passed on to
each and every living thing that has ever lived on Earth. As
unicellular organisms continued to evolve and their chemical
systems grew in complexity, more ordered eukaryotic cells formed
with organelles to carry out specialized functions. Then came
multicellular aquatic organisms and terrestrial plant life and
animals. But through 2.7 billion years of evolution, to the best
of our knowledge, life as we know it has never, not once
abandoned its choice of carbon as the foundation onto which it
builds its most essential chemistry. With almost 100
naturally occurring elements and such an expansive time frame,
you might think that somewhere, sometime under some set of
environmental stresses, life would try a different element and
have some success. Yet all evidence points to the contrary,
it simply hasn't. But why?
Carbon is not the most abundant element on Earth, nor is it
particularly scarce. It's easily made in the furnace of a star
like our sun. But then so are the other 25 of the lightest 26
elements in our universe. At the sixth smallest in size, its
atoms don't have an unusually complex or simple structure to
them. Can't stack up to the ferocious reactivity of elements
like fluorine, nor is it rock stable like helium. At a glance,
it seems that there is nothing special about carbon. But in a
way, that is just what makes carbon such a perfect choice to
serve as the scaffold for the chemistry of life. It strikes the
right balance of properties, which make it uniquely suited to
its role in living systems. And it's this balance that makes
carbon the undisputed centerpiece of living systems.
But carbon's story doesn't end there. Not only is it central to
the chemistry of life, but it also serves as a structural basis
for materials of incredible strength, fuels with tremendous
amounts of stored chemical energy, and life saving
medicines. Carbon's story is nothing short of incredible. So
incredible that we've honored it with something no other element
has its own branch of chemistry. And we call this branch organic
chemistry.
Today, I would like to discuss the essentials of organic
chemistry. We'll be looking at what organic chemistry is, how
organic chemistry is practiced, and where we can find organic
chemistry operating in our world. And don't fall into the trap of
thinking about the science that goes on in laboratories. Organic
chemistry is going on in places many of us may not typically
imagine. We can find it at work all around us in places as
distant and exotic as deep within the Earth's crust, or
interstellar space. It's also all around us going on right now
inside countless manufacturing facilities around the world. It's
powering the engines of the vehicles passing by this studio. And
it's even going on in your own body right now.
During our time together today, I'll be discussing what is
arguably one of humanity's greatest intellectual achievements,
the science of chemistry. Then we'll explore how our growing
understanding of how to manipulate the molecules of life
eventually led us to establish the discipline of organic
chemistry. Next, we will briefly discuss the structure of the
fundamental unit of all known elements, the atom. We'll also
take a look at a portion of the well-known tool of chemists, the
periodic table of the elements, which helps us to predict their
behavior and their properties. Here we will be answering the
question, what is it about carbon that makes it nature's choice
to serve as the basic scaffold for many of the molecules we
depend on to sustain and improve life. Finally, we'll take a
look at a few real world examples of how carbon atoms come
together to form the backbones of the molecules that become our
building materials, food, fuels, drugs, and so much more.
By the end of our discussion, I hope that you'll have a deeper
appreciation of organic chemistry, of its definition, its
origins, and how it helps to improve the quality of life of
nearly every human on the planet. If I'm able to succeed in
that endeavor, I invite you to stay for the next 35 lectures to
learn even more about this well understood, but ever evolving
and growing branch of chemistry. So first, let's define the
science of chemistry. Scientists define chemistry as the study
of matter and its properties, particularly those of atomic and
molecular systems. One of the defining tenets of chemistry is
the idea that all substances can be broken down into their
basic elements, which can no longer be subdivided while still
retaining their identity. Ancient Greek and Chinese
civilizations are often credited with first theorizing the
existence of fundamental elements that combine to form all
other substances. Both of these civilizations postulated that
air, water, earth, and fire were among these elements. Of
course, today we know this list to be inaccurate. Now, the
realization of this began in the 18th century, when a French
chemist and nobleman named Antoine Lavoisier became the
first to catalog the existence and properties of some of the
elements as we know them today. Lavoisier started to develop
this catalog when he challenged the two millennium old notion
that water is an element. He knew that if water were an
element, then he should not be able to decompose it into
simpler substances. But he noted that heating water in the
presence of iron in a closed system had two intriguing
effects. First, it turned the iron to rust, which appeared to
increase the mass of the iron sample. And second, it produced
a vapor which could be collected separately and then burned in
air to regenerate water. What was going on here was that the
iron was acting as a sink for oxygen, pulling the oxygen out
of the water to become iron oxide and leaving hydrogen gas
behind as a byproduct. Any doubt that water had in fact been
decomposed was eradicated when Lavoisier showed that he could
burn the collected gas to reform his water. So, Lavoisier had
successfully disassembled and then reassembled water in the
1700s. Lavoisier's tinkering proves that contrary to ancient
thought, water is not an element, but instead is made up of
more basic materials in combination with each other. But
Lavoisier's best efforts to decompose the resulting gases
from his first experiment failed, prompting him to
categorize those as elements. Now, since it could be burned in
air, at least the gas that he collected, could be burned in air
to produce water, he dubbed it hydrogen, meaning water maker.
Lavoisier's classification techniques quickly gained favor
in the scientific community and the list of identified elements
rapidly grew in the decades following his work. In the late
1800s, a Russian chemist by the name of Dmitry Mendeleev took
notice of something extraordinary. Mendeleev realized
that when he listed the known elements in order of increasing
atomic mass, they formed a series of materials, some of which
seemed to have similar sets of chemical and physical properties.
And when he spaced these elements so that similar properties
repeated every eight positions in the list, he could account for
all the known elements of his day. But what is even more
amazing is that the gaps left in Mendeleev's table allowed him
to predict the properties of yet undiscovered elements, all of
which eventually turned up. Mendeleev's true genius was to
visually demonstrate this repeating pattern by wrapping
the lines of atoms into rows, much like lines of text in a
paragraph. And by doing this, he created a table with columns of
elements sharing similar chemical properties. We call these
columns from his table groups of elements. More than 200 years
later, his pivotal invention has been refined and expanded into
what we know as the modern periodic table. So we've seen
that chemistry is the study of matter and its properties.
Given that all objects in the universe can be classified as
matter, and that nearly all of this matter is made up of atoms
and molecules, you can understand why chemistry is an
extremely broad field of study. And with such a tremendous field
of cover, it's easy to see why those practicing the science
divide their interest into subdisciplines, like biological
chemistry, physical chemistry, organic chemistry, and more. And
while each subdiscipline is a topic worthy of study and
appreciation, for the duration of this course, we will be
interested in organic chemistry. Although there will
inevitably be times when organic chemistry bleeds into these
other realms. So what is organic chemistry? When most people
think of the word organic, they may think of expensive
salad greens, health food stores or sustainable farming
techniques. But to the chemist, the word organic means
something very different. Organic chemistry is most simply
defined as the study of carbon based molecules. Compounds
such as the hydrocarbons and gasoline, the sugars in the
foods we eat, many modern materials ranging from
explosives to plastics are all built on carbon based
backbones, and therefore all fall into this category. The term
organic as it pertains to the study of chemistry was coined in
the late 1700s. It's a reflection of a common paradigm of
that day, that only organisms could create these kinds of
carbon based molecules. See, scientists of that day had
already successfully isolated carbon based compounds like
urea from biological sources. And it was commonly presumed that
living things possessed a special trait known as vitality that
was necessary to produce the chemicals of living systems.
This dogma persisted for many decades, until 1828, when
German chemist Friedrich Voller produced urea without the aid of
a living organism. Voller simply heated the inorganic materials
ammonia and cyanic acid in an attempt to synthesize another
inorganic material called ammonium cyanate. But much to his
surprise, the product of his synthesis was instead urea. Since
then, Voller's synthesis has become the stuff of chemistry
lore. Many chemists point to it as a seminal moment in chemistry
when vitalism was disproven, and scientists began to realize
organic compounds could be made and manipulated, not just in
living things, but in a beaker as well. In the nearly two
centuries since Voller's inspiration will all be at
accidental synthesis. Organic chemists have classified and
created millions of organic compounds that enhance the
quality of life of nearly everyone on Earth. With over 100
elements in the modern periodic table, we're forced to ask the
question, What makes carbon so special? Why does carbon get
its own branch of chemistry? Now, the answer to this question
lies in a balance of three key factors, abundance, complexity,
and stability. When we compare carbon to the other elements
in the first three rows of the periodic table, we'll see that
only carbon is able to blend these three factors in a unique
way. Let's start by comparing abundance. If we were to make a
table of the estimated relative abundance of elements in our
solar system by mass, we'd see something like this. Many of the
elements are so vanishingly rare that they don't even register
on our chart. Hydrogen is the clear winner at about 73
mass percent, followed by helium comprising 24% and then
oxygen at about 1%. So out of more than 100 known elements,
just this trio makes up 98% of all the matter in our solar
system. But coming in at number four is carbon, making up
somewhere around one half of 1% of all the matter in the solar
system. Now, based on this information alone, you might
expect to find subdisciplines of chemistry focusing on the
chemistry of hydrogen, helium or oxygen as well. Yet these
subdisciplines do not exist. These numbers are a bit different
when we consider just the earth or even portions of it. Now, the
truth is, we're not quite sure just how much of each element
makes up the overall mass of our planet. We do know, however,
that as the planet cooled more than 4 billion years ago, much of
the denser elements like iron and nickel found their way to the
core of the planet. Intermediate sized elements like silicon and
aluminum were sorted into the crust, leaving behind even
lighter elements like carbon and higher concentrations at and
near the surface. So carbon is ever present near the surface of
the earth in environments which might support life as we know
it. But our best estimates of the amount of carbon in those
environments, the world's atmosphere, oceans and crust is
never more than about 1% of the total mass. This means that
there's enough carbon there to work with. But if abundance were
the only concern, then there would clearly be better choices.
And yet, when we turn our attention to our own bodies, we
see that we are actually made up of about 20% carbon by mass.
This is far more than the relative abundance of carbon in our
environment, far more than the oceans, the atmosphere or dry
land. So carbon is available, but so are many other candidates.
So what's going on here? What makes the difference? Why use
carbon?
Well, clearly, there's something about carbon that makes it a
better choice for the structural basis of organic
molecules. With such an enormous amount of carbon in
biological systems relative to the environment around us, it's
easy to see how the concept of vitalism was originally
conceived.
But if vitalism has been shown to be an invalid theory, why is it
that carbon has been selected by nature to be the backbone for
the molecules essential to life?
Why would life go to the trouble of increasing carbon content
20 fold over what was available in the environment, especially
when there are much more abundant elements available, like
nitrogen, which makes up 78% of our atmosphere, or oxygen and
hydrogen, which combined to make up a staggering 96% of our
oceans, or silicon, which comes in at a very respectable 27% of
the Earth's crust?
In order to answer this question, we'll have to take a look at
the bonding behavior of carbon compared to other even more
abundant elements and try to explain a bit better why carbon
is so special when compared to them.
But before we can have this discussion, we first need to
consider the structure of atoms.
All atoms consist of a positively charged nucleus surrounded
by a cloud of negatively charged electrons.
The electron clouds of two or more atoms can interact with one
another in ways which can find those atoms to a fixed distance
in space.
We call this interaction between atoms a covalent chemical bond.
Now, one of the remarkable things about Mendeleev's brain
child, the periodic table of the elements, is that it actually
predicts the maximum number of these covalent bonding
interactions that a particular atom can form with others.
If we start from the leftmost column of the table, elements
of the first group can form one bond at most.
Those of the second can form two, and the trend continues
until we reach the fourth group.
After this, the maximum number of possible bonds begins to
decrease again to three, two, one, and finally, zero.
This makes hydrogen a relatively uninteresting nucleus
from the bonding perspective, since it can only form a single
bond with another atom.
So hydrogen atoms are the end-linked chains of bonded atoms.
They can't bond any more or two anymore atoms to continue
creating a complex structure, because doing so would require
that they make a second bond.
That makes hydrogen the placeholder of organic chemistry,
occupying locations on a molecule in which differing groups
of atoms might be placed to alter that molecule's
identity and reactivity.
Helium, nature's second most abundant element overall,
though vanishingly rare on Earth, appears in group
eight of the periodic table, making it unlikely to form
any bonds at all.
Helium actually exists only naturally as isolated atoms
that don't commonly react with other elements.
It's not essential to life at all.
In fact, Helium's lack of reactivity kept its existence
concealed from chemists for nearly a century after the
discovery of elements like hydrogen.
French astronomer Pierre Janssen first observed Helium
when studying a solar eclipse in 1868, a century after
Lavoisier's work.
And it was only after several more decades of searching
that Helium was finally found to be present on Earth.
An English physicist, Sir William Ramsey, found it,
trapped inside of radioactively decomposing minerals,
not exactly a biologically relevant environment.
And our final contender with carbon for the role of backbone
molecule is oxygen.
Oxygen typically makes two bonds to other atoms.
In doing so, oxygen can act either as a bridge,
bonding two different atoms together perpetuating a chain,
or as a terminal atom, making what is known as a double bond.
But once oxygen's two bonds are established,
it is satisfied, and there are no additional locations
available to decorate or modify an oxygen chain.
Using an oxygen chain as a backbone would then lead to
a rather dull set of molecules, just a set of ever-lengthening
chains of oxygen atoms with no additional complexity at all.
But carbon interests organic chemists because it's found
in group four of the periodic table.
This means that it can, and often does, form four bonds
to complete its electron-shell octet.
This is more bonds than any other element in the second row
of the periodic table.
And this allows carbon to bond to itself to form not only chains,
but branched structures, loops, and many, many more.
Furthermore, these complex carbon scaffolds often have
remaining unsatisfied bonds, which can be terminated
by hydrogen atoms, or decorated by hydrogen atoms,
or decorated by hydrogen atoms.
So it should be clear now that those extra bonds
that carbon can form are going to make all the difference.
But we aren't quite done yet.
If you're keeping score, we still have nitrogen
and silicon on the list of possible backbone elements
for larger complex scaffolds.
Nitrogen and silicon have withstood the test
of both abundance and of bonding conditions
in the second row of the periodic table.
And silicon and silicon have withstood the test
of both abundance and of bonding complexity.
With nitrogen abundant in the atmosphere,
able to form three bonds, while silicon makes up
a large part of the Earth's crust and is able to make four bonds.
So we're close.
But what separates carbon from nitrogen and silicon
is the last factor that we have to consider, strength.
You wouldn't build a skyscraper with a frame
because the structural support has to be stronger
than the doors, windows, and walls which it holds in place.
Organic molecules are no different.
Just like a building, they need a support structure
tough enough to hold the functional parts
of the compound in place.
Any candidate for this role will have to be tough enough
to withstand the conditions which cause other parts
of the compound to break their bonds and react.
So the final factor leading to nature's choice of carbon
for small molecule scaffolds is the stability
of the carbon-carbon bond.
You see, bonding is an energetically beneficial arrangement.
And a bond's strength is usually measured
by the amount of energy required to separate the bonded atoms.
Scientists call this the bond enthalpy.
So the larger the bond enthalpy, the harder it is
to pull two bonded atoms apart,
and the stronger the chemical bond is.
If we compare the experimentally determined bond enthalpies
of all first, second, and third row elements
in the periodic table to other atoms of the same kind of element,
we can see that only hydrogen and boron form single bonds
to other atoms of the same kind with similar strengths to carbon.
So hydrogen does bond to itself strongly
and is very abundant, but its one bond limit rules it out.
Boron can form stable bonds with itself
in networks with up to three bonds.
But it's so vanishingly rare in the environment
that it simply can't play an important role
in the chemistry of life.
Our last two viable candidates, nitrogen and silicon,
are finally ruled out when we consider bond strength.
With bonds only about half as strong as carbon,
nitrogen can't compete.
And even silicon, a favorite candidate of sci-fi aficionados everywhere,
as carbons alternate because of its abundance
and ability to form four bonds, fails to meet the final standard.
Because a covalent network of silicon atoms
would simply not be stable enough to survive chemical reactions
meant to modify other bonds within the molecules it would comprise.
So if we consider the first three rows of the periodic table,
removing elements of prohibitively low abundance,
elements incapable of forming more than two bonds,
and those which do not form strong single bonds to themselves,
it now becomes obvious how these three factors
make carbon uniquely suited to the formation of molecular scaffolds.
So I hope that by now I've convinced you
that carbon is nature's best available choice
for the construction of molecular scaffolds
because of its abundance, complex bonding
and the stable bonds it forms with other carbon atoms.
Now I would like to show you specifically how carbon atoms
can combine to form distinct structures
and how decorating these structures with other atoms
can lead to a rich and diverse library of compounds.
Part of what makes carbon scaffolds so prolific and diverse
is the multiple ways in which the four bonds to carbon atoms
can arrange themselves in space.
Remember that chemical bonds are formed when electron clouds overlap
and this produces a region of dense negative charge
between the atom's nuclei.
So these bonds made up of negatively charged electrons
can be thought of as being negatively charged themselves
and just as you might expect
because they're made up of like charged particles they repel one another.
Positioning themselves as far apart as possible
around the central atom.
So when a carbon atom is connected to two other atoms
either by two double bonds or by a single bond and a triple bond
the connected atoms are 180 degrees apart from one another
forming a linear geometry among those three atoms.
When a carbon atom is connected to three other atoms
two atoms by a single bond and one other atom by a double bond
the atoms form a planar geometry in the shape of an equilateral triangle
with bond angles of 120 degrees among all of the atoms.
We call this type of geometry trigonal planar.
But the real magic happens when we use all four bonds
to connect to four distinct bonding partners.
In this case a planar geometry would require 90 degree bond angles
but giving these bonds access to the third dimension
allows them to separate even more from one another
forming bond angles of 109.5 degrees.
And we call this arrangement tetrahedral
because tracing lines among all bonded atoms produces the shape of a tetrahedron.
So by bonding carbon atoms together using some or all of these geometries
linear trigonal planar and particularly tetrahedral
we can form almost any three-dimensional arrangement imaginable.
But notice that in all of the examples of carbon scaffolds shown here
there are remaining bonds terminated by hydrogen atoms
which could easily be replaced by other sets of atoms.
This means that each carbon scaffold can act as a backbone
supporting hundreds, thousands or even millions of distinct atom combinations.
By designing molecules in this way
chemists are able to create compounds with very specific and rationally designed shapes
physical properties and reactivities.
As you can probably imagine this quickly leads to a virtually limitless library of possible compounds
all of which rely on the stability and geometry of their carbon scaffold to function.
As we progress through the course
we will take a detailed look at how building upon these scaffolds
leads to libraries of compounds with extremely diverse properties.
And I'd like to close our conversation today with a few examples.
Consider compounds with only six carbons in their scaffold.
Using these six atoms we can construct a variety of scaffolds
such as straight chains, branched scaffolds, cyclic scaffolds, fused bicyclics and even more.
Now let's see what we can do with just six carbon atoms in a scaffold
and a little bit of imagination.
Let's bring up those six carbon atoms and place them in a linear chain.
If I saturate this structure with hydrogens
meaning I put hydrogens at all the remaining bonding locations on the carbons
I create a molecule known as hexane.
Hexane is a component of motor fuels.
But if I make just a few alterations inserting some oxygen atoms
I create a molecule known as glucose
a simple sugar found in foods and used by your body to store energy.
If we make a few more changes and throw in a nitrogen atom here
we create lysine, an essential amino acid which your body uses to make enzymes and tissues.
But let's go back to our carbons and rearrange them.
Let's create a branched chain now.
This branched chain when saturated with hydrogens
is isohexane, yet another component that's blended into motor fuels.
If I add a little bit to it
I can create leucine, yet another amino acid essential to life.
But I can make another change
and create isohexyl acetate, a flavor and fragrance additive that smells a bit like fruit.
Let's continue. Let's take those carbons and put them into a ring.
When I saturate my six-membered ring I create cyclohexane, yet another motor fuel.
But that's not all cyclohexane can do.
If I make a little change I can create the heart medication, cyclohexyl nitrite.
Or I can make the artificial sweetener, cyclomate.
One last example. Let's take those atoms again and put them into a ring.
But this time let's put them into a ring where they have a different bonding structure to one another.
This is called a benzene ring.
And when it's saturated with hydrogens we call that molecule benzene,
an industrial solvent and also one that we use in the laboratory quite frequently.
But just a small change to that structure gives me aspirin, popular analgesic.
Yet another change gives me TNT, a high explosive.
Impressive versatility and variability, isn't it? All done with just six atoms.
So all of these possibilities and countless more are accessible with just six carbon atoms.
Not only can the number of carbon atoms in scaffolds be changed,
but there is a long library of reactive groups made from other elements
that can be bonded to these carbon scaffolds that we've discussed today.
In tandem, these two factors combine to form a practically inexhaustible library of possibilities.
So let's review what we've discussed today.
We've explored what organic chemistry is, how it got started,
and how our understanding of it has changed over the years.
We've also scratched the surface of explaining how carbon's abundance,
bonding complexity and bonding strength all combine to make it such a unique
and versatile element for building complex small molecules.
Finally, we've looked at how the decoration of these scaffolds with groups of other atoms
can lead to a diverse library of useful compounds.
Next time, we'll take a much more detailed look at atomic structure and chemical bonding,
examining exactly why some of the trends predicted by the periodic table exist.
And in doing so, we will continue to deepen our understanding of the complex geometries
of the carbon frameworks on which every living thing relies.
I look forward to seeing you then.
