Let's get back to one of my favorite stories.
The years 1870, and in the laboratories of Alexander Butlarov at the University of Kazan,
are working two men who will become arguably the two most prolific chemical researchers
of the coming decade.
Vladimir Markovnikov and Alexander Zetsev.
Now Markovnikov and Zetsev have little love for one another.
Their mutual contempt is driving these two men to forge ahead in their research in the
hopes of not only making a name for themselves, but of one upping the other.
We've already seen how one of their most prominent battlegrounds was the chemistry
of alkyl halides and alkenes, both how they're made and how they react.
During our lecture on alkenes, I told you about Zetsev's great victory in the debate
over alkene stability.
But I chose to show you how modern chemists go about proving his rule.
By the end of the day today, we'll have all the necessary understanding to survey the
reactions Zetsev himself used, one of the principle methods of producing alkenes, elimination
reactions.
Alkyl halides and other compounds containing good leaving groups need not necessarily undergo
substitution reactions.
There's another class of reactions in which these types of compounds often participate.
Now instead of substituting a new group in place of the leaving group, a pi bond is formed
by the loss of an adjacent proton, which we call the beta proton.
Elimination reactions always proceed with the production of a byproduct formed by the
leaving group, but they don't consume a nucleophile in the process.
So in contrast to substitution reactions, which are entropically neutral, elimination
reactions actually proceed with a pretty significant increase in entropy, because they're making
two or more molecules from one.
Now this is a good thing, because the exchange of sigma bonds for a pi bond means that the
enthalpy of this reaction is not usually favorable.
So elimination reactions are driven by factors like increased heat and time, as well as the
formation of stable leaving groups and alkene products.
Eliminations are always a possibility and are usually competing pathways in substitution
reactions.
It's when this competing pathway becomes dominant that we call the reaction an elimination.
So just as we did with substitution, let's start from the very beginning.
Let's limit ourselves to only the knowledge available to Markovnikov and Zetsev in the
1870s and consider exactly how elimination reactions might take place.
Completing an elimination reaction requires that two things be removed from the starting
material, a stable leaving group and a beta proton from an adjacent carbon.
Zetsev's theory that more substituted alkenes would form in these reactions proved true.
Markovnikov instead hung his hat on a theory called microscopic reversibility.
Having observed that alkyl halides of low substitution could be used to prepare alkenes,
he theorized that reversing the reaction should produce the original starting material.
But Markovnikov and Zetsev lacked the tools to probe these mechanisms much, if at all.
Decades later it was our friend Christopher Engeld who once again left his mark on organic
chemistry by recognizing that there were three potential mechanisms which he had to consider.
The first of these three possibilities would involve having the base abstract the proton
from our alkyl halide's beta carbon to initiate the reaction, so first the base will take
the proton, then the remainder of the reaction will complete.
If I do this, I have to go through an intermediate called the carbanion which then undergoes
the remainder of the reaction, losing the leaving group to form the new alkene.
The problem with this particular mechanism is that our base is trying to abstract a
proton from something with a pKa of about 50.
And you'll recall from our lecture on alkenes and alkynes that pKa's of 44, like those
in an alkene, are considered to be prohibitive.
So in this case with a pKa of 50, it's simply not possible.
The substrate is just not acidic enough.
But we still have two more possibilities.
So let's take a look at another one.
How about a reaction in which the base abstracts that beta proton at the same time as departure
of the leaving group and the formation of the pi bond?
If this all takes place in a single concerted step, we avoid that very unstable conjugate
base.
So this is a very viable reaction mechanism.
And if this were a reaction mechanism that we're taking place, since it happens in a
single step, we expect its rate law to involve both the concentration of the base and the
concentration of the substrate.
In other words, this is a second order elimination engulfed called these E2 mechanisms.
The third possibility would involve the departure of the leaving group before the base abstracts
the proton.
In other words, we're going to go through a carbocation intermediate.
This carbocation intermediate can then act as an acid protonating our base and leading
to products.
This is also a perfectly viable mechanism, as we're well aware carbocation is frequently
formed from alkyl halides.
So in this case, because the rate limiting step occurs before the base reacts with the
acidic proton, the rate law should only contain the substrate concentration.
In other words, this is a first order elimination or an E1 reaction.
So just as in the case of substitution, we're left pondering two believable mechanisms for
the elimination of an alkyl halide to form an alkene, one with a rate dependent only
on substrate concentration and another dependent on both substrate and base concentration.
So which is correct?
Well, just as with substitution, the conditional answer here is both.
Engle realized that in each potential reaction mechanism was a base accepting a beta proton
from the substrate.
But in one mechanism, the base participates in the rate limiting step while in the other,
it did not.
And again, kinetic studies were the key to unlocking the rules governing these two mechanisms.
Let's begin with the E2 reaction pathway, which involves simultaneous deprotonation
and leaving group departure.
In our previous lecture, we defined nucleophiles as electron rich species, which have high
negative charge density and lone pair electrons to donate in heterogenic bond formation.
You may recall that in an earlier lecture, we mentioned another type of reagent which
has a very similar set of properties, right?
Lewis bases.
So if nucleophiles and bases have similar properties, is it possible for a nucleophile
to act as a base?
And the answer is yes.
You may also recall from our last lecture that SN2 reactions take place when strong
nucleophiles attack a substrate of low substitution from the backside.
A natural question to follow that observation is, what happens if the nucleophile is strong,
like hydroxide, but the substrate is of high substitution, like t-butyl chloride?
The answer to this question should be clear.
The nucleophile unable to attack the obstructed electrophile is not going to wait to react.
When nucleophilic attack isn't possible, it will instead react as a base.
The protonation of the beta carbon seems like the next best alternative to satiate these
very reactive species.
But we already know simple deprotonation would be a highly disfavored reaction because of
the high pKa of the alkyl halide beta protons.
But there's a second process which can be coupled to the proton removal, that's the
departure of the leaving group.
And it's the simultaneous removal of the beta proton, departure of the leaving group, and
formation of a new double bond, which all come together to form a single step process
resulting in the formation of an alkene.
Now a beta proton, which is at opposition to the leaving group, is the one which will
be removed.
Remember leaving groups and second order reactions depart when electrons move in from the backside
of the electrophilic carbon.
In order to accomplish this in an E2 substrate, the bond holding the acidic proton has to
be on the backside of the molecule relative to the leaving group.
This orientation is only achieved when the beta proton has a 180 degree dihedral angle
relative to the leaving group.
We call this orientation of substituents anti-coplanar.
Fortunately, in this saturated alkyl halide, the bond joining the electrophilic carbon
and the beta carbon has free rotation, so it can easily achieve this arrangement, allowing
the E2 reaction to take place.
So in this case, we form 2-methylpropene.
Now let's consider a different situation, which might lead to a first order reaction.
One in which an alkyl halide of high substitution is placed in the presence of a very weak base.
In a situation like this, any elimination which might occur would likely fall into the
E1 class of reactions.
Now by very weak base, I mean a species which can accept a proton only under extreme conditions.
Usually this means a neutral compound such as a molecule of solvent, or one which is
negatively charged but has lots of resonance to help stabilize that charge, like this dihydrogen
phosphate ion.
So let's consider the same substrate as before, but with a weak nucleophile like water.
In this situation, carbocation should form quite easily from something like t-butyl chloride,
but even so, there's no strong nucleophile to be found.
So what's a carbocation to do?
Under the circumstances, the only way to produce a product is to lose an adjacent proton and
form an alkene.
In the case of t-butyl chloride, the elimination product is exactly the same as that obtained
in our E2 example, but don't be fooled.
We'll soon see some examples in which this is not true.
So you can see the distinguishing property of E1 reactions is that they tend to run best
under acidic conditions where there's no good nucleophile, and at higher temperatures
which favor systems of greater entropy.
One consideration which sets second order elimination, or E2 reactions, apart from second
order substitution, SN2 reactions, is the wide variety of possible products which can
form from the same combination of reagents.
For example, unlike the SN2 pathway, which involves the attack of a nucleophile on the
carbon-bearing the leaving group, giving it only one potential reactive site, the E2 reaction
requires the abstraction of an adjacent proton, of which there may be many.
When I first introduced this mechanism, I was careful to select a t-butyl halide, since
all of its beta protons are equivalent, so eliminates that consideration.
But most substrates for elimination reactions aren't so convenient.
Issues of regiospecificity and stereospecificity will arise quickly.
So let's take a look at this reaction between hydroxide ions and S2 bromo-3-methylbutane.
Now in this case I'm going to have an elimination mechanism take place so that we can observe
the potential products that form.
Now in this case I actually have a substrate which has two different kinds of beta protons.
I have the outside ones here labeled in green on a primary carbon, and I have this more
interior beta proton which is on a tertiary carbon.
So if hydroxide ion is going to act as a base rather than a nucleophile in this situation,
there are two different protons which it can abstract from my alkyl halide.
And depending upon which one it takes, I will get a different structural isomer of the resulting
alkene.
So if the green proton participates in the reaction, I'll get this product.
This particular alkene has three hydrogens and one R-group attached to its functional
group.
But if instead the purple interior proton is abstracted, I'll get the lower product
in which there is one hydrogen and three attached alkyl groups.
So in this case I'm also going to get a little bit of water and bromide ion, but my primary
product is going to be the Zetsev product.
That is the one that's more substituted because we know it to be more stable.
Now in situations like this one, the more substituted alkene product tends to be the
major product of the reaction.
And you'll recall from the alkene lecture that Zetsev's rule states the major product
of an elimination reaction will be the most substituted alkene possible.
So applying Zetsev's rule to our problem of 2-bromo-3-methylbutane with hydroxide gave
us the tri-substituted product in greater abundance than the monosubstituted product.
By extension, Zetsev's rule accurately predicts the major products of these elimination reactions
as well.
But there's one more wrinkle to this story that we have to consider.
You see, we can safely apply Zetsev's rule for E2 reactions when the base is particularly
small like that hydroxide ion was.
The picture, however, can become a bit more complicated when we use bulkier bases like
tbutoxide.
When we attempt to react tbutoxide with 2-bromo-3-methylbutane to obtain an elimination product,
we run into a little snag in predicting what's going to happen.
So here's an example of a reaction between tbutoxide ion and the same substrate as in
our previous example where we used hydroxide as the base.
So just like hydroxide, the tbutoxide ion has a choice of two different protons, which
it can abstract, to form two different structural isomers of the alkene product.
The difference in this situation is that the ratio of these products is flipped over.
It's on its head.
When we do this analysis, we find that we get tbutanol and bromide ion byproducts.
And as the major product, we have our alkene, which has only one R group.
So in this case, we've made more of the antiseptsep product or the Hoffman product.
So the question here is, why did this happen?
Well, the reason that it happened is because this large, bulky tbutoxide base has difficulty
accessing this sterically crowded interior hydrogen.
So more often than not, it simply reacts with its third choice.
Can't get to the electrophilic carbon, can't get to the interior hydrogen.
The only thing left to react with are these protons that are out on the edge of the molecule.
And removing one of those protons results in the formation of the antiseptsep or Hoffman
product.
Now let's consider regiospecificity in the E1 mechanism.
Just as with E2 reactions, we need to be careful to consider how an E1 might produce multiple
products of varying stability.
And we've already established that E1 reactions are expected to proceed through a carbocation
intermediate.
And this has two important influences on the products formed by such a reaction.
First, the carbocation is planar, which means that they form a planar intermediate, making
the even more sterically obstructed beta protons accessible to the weak base.
This means E1 reactions are much less prone to form Hoffman or antiseptsep products.
So the reaction of water with 2-bromo-2-methylbutane forms 2-methyl-2-butene, just as the analogous
E2 reaction.
But the reaction with t-butanol, a bulky weak base, has little effect.
We still get the zets of product as the major species.
But there's another consideration which always comes with first-order reactants, carbocation
rearrangements.
So the reaction of water with 2-bromo-3-4-dimethylpentane will produce a carbocation, which can not
only undergo a secondary rearrangement, but will then form the tetra-substituted zetsip
product.
So take a look at this product.
The double bond is not even on the original electrophilic carbon.
Now, our explanation of these mechanisms, though, isn't quite complete.
See, when we work with elimination reactions, just like with substitution reactions, we
must not only consider regiospecificity, but also consider the possible effects on the
stereochemistry of products.
Since the product of this reaction is an alkene, of course there's no potential for a chiral
center to form, but a stereocenter may yet be produced in the form of cis and trans isomers.
Take the example of 2-bromo-butane.
Because this is a secondary alkyl halide, it can undergo an E2 elimination in the presence
of a strong base or an E1 elimination in the presence of a weak one.
Let's begin by considering an E2 product, which we might generate with a strong base
like t-butoxide or hydroxide.
We already know that Zetsev's rule predicts the reaction to take place through deprotonation
of the secondary beta proton, leading to a disubstituted alkene, 2-butene, rather than
a primary hydrogen, which would lead to a monosubstituted alkene.
But the 2-butene products can form two different isomers, cis or trans.
Now, each of these products results when we have a different dihedral angle among the
methyl and bromine substituents.
You might recall that I alluded to this issue when we first introduced Newman projections.
Well, here's my Newman projection of S2-bromobutane.
I can place this molecule in a reactive position for an E2 by aligning either of the two beta
protons anti-coplanar to the bromine.
But look at what happens to the methyl substituents.
Depending on which rotational state, or rotamer, is adopted, a different beta proton is removed
and I get a different arrangement of substituents in the resulting alkene.
With methyl groups anti-to-one another, I get the transisomer, or E2-butene.
Whereas when the alternative hydrogen is aligned for the E2 reaction, methyl groups are gauche
to one another, creating a less stable starting state for the reaction.
So as you might guess, the major elimination product is the one formed by the most often
sampled reactive rotamer in the starting material, or the E-isomer.
But there are instances in which only one isomer is possible for an E2.
For example, take S2-bromo R3-methylpentane.
If I were to begin with this starting material, a large base like t-butoxide might give me
the Hoffman or anti-Zetzep product of which only one isomer exists.
But if we use a compact, strong base like hydroxide, there's only one rotameric state
which will allow an E2 reaction to take place.
As you can see from the Newman projection, the predicted product is actually the Z-isomer
of the alkene.
E1 reactions are also prone to stereospecificity, but almost always preferentially form E-isomers
because carbocation have free rotation, which allows them to adopt the most stable confirmation
with large groups at opposition before the elimination completes.
So in most cases, this means the E-isomer.
So far, we've considered elimination reactions using branched and linear alkyl halides as
starting materials.
All of these examples have enjoyed free rotation about the bonds between alpha and beta carbons,
allowing them to adopt reactive confirmations for E2 reactions.
But there's a class of alkyl halide which doesn't have this free rotation.
Think about a cyclic alkyl halide.
Just as with cyclic alkanes, there is an associated ring strain in smaller cyclic alkyl halides,
which means that the carbon-carbon bonds making up the ring can't freely rotate, and this
can cause a serious problem.
Let's consider the first-order reaction between trans, 1-chloro-2-methylcyclohexane, and water.
Water is a very weak nucleophile, and our substrate is secondary.
So when I react these two with one another, what potential products might I make?
Well, the secondary carbocation produced in this E1 reaction can form one of two products,
three-methylhexene, or one-methylhexene.
But this carbocation can also rearrange by a hydride shift to form a tertiary carbocation,
which can also produce one-methylhexene.
But also a small amount of methylene-cyclohexane can occur as well.
So by switching to an E2 mechanism, using hydroxide, you might be tempted to say that
the major product would be one-methylcyclohexane in accordance with Zetzsev's rule.
But in this case, there's a problem.
The ring restricts rotation of the bond between the alpha and beta carbons, and simply will
not allow the tertiary beta proton to achieve the necessary anti-coplanar alignment for
the reaction.
So this reaction will produce only one elimination product in the form of three-methylcyclohexane.
The ability of cyclic alkyl halides to undergo E2 reactions is also severely limited by the
need for the halide to be in an axial position for the proper orbital alignments.
Consider the two isomers of one T-butyl-4-chlorocyclohexane.
The trans-isomer is essentially incapable of undergoing E2 reactions, because a set of
one-three-diaxial interactions is so strong that the molecule simply can't achieve that
reactive confirmation.
But now take a look at the cis-confirmation.
Now that T-butyl group wanting to be equatorial forces the chloride-leaving group into a reactive
confirmation, so the order of reactivity with respect to E2 is trans-1-T-butyl-4-chlorocyclohexane,
then chlorocyclohexane, and finally the most reactive is cis-1-T-butyl-4-chlorocyclohexane.
So far I've done my best to keep the world of substitution and elimination reactions
separate from one another, showing my best attempts at examples which strongly favor
one process or the other.
Even so, you might have already noticed that I used the exact same set of reagents to show
you SN1 and E1 reactions, so clearly there's a potential here for competition.
And the truth is that substitution and elimination reactions go together like coffee and donuts.
They are seldom found occurring exclusively, and they often compete with one another.
And the key to defining which mechanism will prevail is in the reaction conditions.
Now you'll recall that the Gibbs free energy equation is a function of temperature, so
the extent to which entropy contributes to a process's spontaneity is a function of
temperature.
Higher temperature means entropy has a greater role, and as you might expect, increasing
temperature makes the increased entropy of the elimination products more favored.
So if I have a reaction with competing substitution and elimination pathways, one way to tip the
scales in the direction I want is to use a little bit of heat.
For example, the reaction of methoxide with tube-romo-3-ethyl pentane forms the substitution
product predominantly at room temperature.
But there will be more of the 3-ethyl-2-pentene product forming when the reaction is run at
elevated temperatures.
So if we instead want to maximize the yield of the antiseptic product, 3-ethyl-1-pentene,
we can substitute a bulkier base like t-butoxide in place of the methoxide, still running
at higher temperatures to encourage elimination.
We can actually direct the double bond to the primary carbon by careful selection of
the base.
The strong bases favor second-order reactions, lower temperatures favor substitution, higher
temperatures with small strong bases favor elimination to form the Zetzev product, while
higher temperatures with bulky bases tend to favor the antisetzev or Hoffman product.
So today we've covered our second major class of organic reaction, eliminations.
We got to know Zetzev again, a Russian chemist whose epic power struggle with Markovnikov
at the University of Kazan in the 1870s led to much of our understanding about this class
of reaction.
We saw how elimination takes place when Lewis bases abstract beta protons instead of acting
as nucleophiles.
We looked at second-order E2 elimination reactions, in which direction takes place with a highly
substituted substrate or strong base.
We saw how a beta proton in an anticoplanar relationship to the leaving group can be abstracted,
causing simultaneous leaving group departure to form an alkene.
We also looked at E1 reactions, which take place when there is only a weak non-nucleophilic
base present.
These reactions progress through a carbocation intermediate, which makes them subject to rearrangements.
We took a look at how the strength of the base dictates the order of the reaction.
Strong bases for second-order, weaker bases for first-order.
We saw how bulky bases combined with more substituted beta carbons can lead to a situation
in which Zetzev's rule fails to accurately predict the major product.
We also briefly discussed the idea that substitution and elimination frequently compete with one
another in the same flask, and how certain reaction conditions, most notably the temperature,
can be altered to promote the desired mechanism.
We'll see all of these topics applied again as we begin to discuss more specific and complex
elimination reactions.
But before we can do that, we need to complete the trifecta of major organic reaction types.
We still have to consider addition reactions, in which alkenes and alkynes can give up,
some are all of their pi bonds, to be converted into a host of useful compounds, from vinyl
chlorides used to make plastics to the margarine that you put on your toast this morning.
I'll see you then.
