Previously, we discussed the method of recrystallization as a means of purifying non-volatile, organic
crystalline solids.
Recrystallization is a powerful technique for the isolation of products when they have
melting points well in excess of a solvent's boiling points, and of course when the desired
compound is present in great abundance, ensuring that it will become saturated in the cooling
solution long before any impurities will.
But what can be done when a compound does not have the necessary physical properties
for recrystallization, or if it's not the dominant material in a mixture?
We really can't turn to recrystallization to obtain an effective separation.
But there are other ways to isolate organic compounds from one another based on a phenomenon
known as partitioning.
Today we will talk about one of the most common classes of techniques used in this principle,
extraction.
But first, let's just think about partitioning itself in terms of something most of us can
relate to, salad dressing.
The contents of this bottle include water and olive oil.
We can clearly see the two ingredients because they create two distinct phases.
Since the oil and water are immiscible, or don't dissolve in one another, one simply
floats on the other.
In this case, the oil is above the water because the oil is less dense.
Also in this bottle are some other ingredients, including salt and some herbs and herb oils.
To simplify, let's just say the recipe contains water and oil as solvents, and salt and oregano,
or the oil of oregano, as a solute.
So the water and oil provide two different chemical environments, in which the sodium
and chloride ions from the salt and the organic carvacrol oil from oregano can dissolve.
Now knowing what we know about intermolecular forces and the role they play in solubility,
we expect to find the ions of the salt, preferentially dissolved in the high polarity water, which
can orient its bondi poles to create favorable interactions with the dissolved ions.
And of course, the low polarity carvacrol from the herb oils dissolves in the low polarity
oil layer on top, because the larger oil molecules are more polarizable and can form dispersion
forces which solvate the carvacrol.
It's exactly because of this separation that the proper blend of flavors is only obtained
when we vigorously shake the bottle just before use.
So to pour just the top layer would be to put only the herb oils onto my salad, while
to pour just the lower layer would only add the salt, acid and water.
So when we shake the dressing, we're getting ready for lunch.
But when we don't shake the dressing, but rather deliberately allow the two phases to
stay separate, dispensing each individually, we're doing a very simple form of liquid-liquid
extraction.
In our first example in this lecture, I used a system in which we assumed that all the
particular solute accumulated in one of the two phases available to it.
In part, I was able to make this assumption because of how drastically different sodium
chloride and carvacrol are being ionic and organic compounds respectively.
But the truth for most organic molecules in a system like this isn't so simple.
Many of them have an appreciable solubility in both water and a certain organic solvent.
And when this is the case, we can expect a solute to establish a set of equilibrium concentrations
in both solvents based upon its relative solubility in each of them.
We call this effect partitioning, and the equilibrium constant which governs it is
a partitioning coefficient.
Partitioning coefficients are easily calculated from the maximum solubility of the solute
in each of the two solvents.
They give a numerical value, which allows us to predict how much of each solute will
be in each layer at equilibrium.
So let's take a look at a partitioning event as it happens.
In this case, I'm going to use one butanol and water as solvents and some blue-colored
food dye as a solute.
Now we can be pretty sure that this fairly polar food dye would rather be dissolved in
the water layer, which is on the bottom of these two funnels.
And yet it's dissolved in the top layer right now, which is an butanol, a less polar solvent.
It's up there now because I very carefully and very deliberately added it to the top
without disturbing the lower layer so that we could see the conditions before I actually
perform a liquid-liquid extraction.
Now the glassware that I'm using today are called separatory funnels, and their design
is very specific for this purpose.
They contain a ground glass stopper, which leads to a port on top so that I can add my
liquids to the separatory funnel itself, which is a sort of a pear-shaped funnel which leads
to a Teflon stopcock.
And that Teflon stopcock can be used to open the bottom of the funnel, draining the liquid
through the stem.
So I can add liquid to the top, but I can remove liquids from the bottom.
Now you can see I've already charged them very carefully with my two different solutions.
So at the moment, my food dye dissolved in an butanol is on top because the density of
an butanol is about 80% out of water, and I have some pure water underneath.
But that food dye is very polar organic molecule, and it really would much rather be in the
water than in the butanol.
So why isn't it there already?
Well, it's not there already because it needs a little bit of assistance.
You see, partitioning takes place very, very slowly when we rely on nothing more than random
molecular motion and a very narrow interface between the two solvents to allow them to
jump from one side to the other.
They need a little bit of assistance from me in the form of agitation.
So what I'm going to do next is take one of my two separatory funnels and agitate the
mixture, creating many inclusions of one solvent in the other, thereby drastically increasing
the surface area contact.
Now when I do this, it's going to take about a moment for everything to come back to equilibrium
and for my two phases to separate again.
But when they do, I think we'll see something very different than what we have now.
So let's take this separatory funnel, and again agitate a bit to create some inclusions
of one solvent in the other, periodically venting to make sure there's no pressure building
up.
I don't want that to happen, and then I'm going to return it to the stand.
Now if we look closely, we can already start to see the two phases separating, and that's
not too surprising because enbutanol and water are immiscible in one another.
But what is surprising is, notice the different colors of the layers.
Clearly, the food dye is accumulating in the lower layer.
That's because it's more soluble overall in water than it is in enbutanol.
So I have affected a liquid-liquid extraction here.
I've removed some, but not quite all, of the dye molecules from my enbutanol.
Now at this point, if it were my goal to retrieve those molecules, all I need is a beaker, remove
my stopper so that I don't have a reduction in pressure in the head space, and I can simply
drain my aqueous layer through the stem, and isolate the dye molecules in aqueous solution
from my enbutanol.
All right, and I think that's probably about enough if we can stop that.
Now this is where the conical shape of the flask comes into play.
If I watch my interface as I drain this, let's go for a little bit more here.
If you watch the interface as I drain it, as it reaches the narrow portion of the stem,
I can very carefully and very precisely cut the flow just as that reaches the stopcock,
thereby collecting the maximum amount of my aqueous solution.
So the dye that was in the enbutanol is now in water.
So you probably noticed there that even though most of that dye made its way into the aqueous
layer, that a little bit of it remained in the organic enbutanol layer.
So there was an equilibrium of concentrations there, and this equilibrium is governed by
a constant which is equal to the maximum solubility of that dye in the aqueous solvent divided
by the maximum solubility in the organic solvent.
So that's what we call the partitioning coefficient.
So in this case, my dye had a very large partitioning coefficient, so I managed to extract most
of it into the aqueous layer.
But this isn't always the case for organic compounds.
Sometimes they're pretty fussy about going into aqueous solutions.
So if I want to extract an organic compound from an organic solution into water, I'm going
to have to play some tricks.
And one of the best tricks we have is altering the pH of the aqueous layer.
So let's look at a representative organic molecule and start to think about the factors
that affect its solubility in aqueous solution.
For my demonstration, I'm going to use two naphthol.
This is an aromatic alcohol with a pKa of about 10.
So this hydroxyl group here is slightly acidic because of the resonance stabilization afforded
by the benzene or the aromatic ring that it's attached to.
Now we have to think back to our lecture on acids and bases and the Henderson-Husselbach
equation, which gives us a way to relate the amount of a weak acid, which is deprotonated
with that which is protonated, as a function of pH and the pKa of that compound.
If we do a little bit of rearranging and use the Henderson-Husselbach equation to create
a plot of the percent ionized in aqueous solution as a function of the pH of that aqueous
solution, we get a trace that looks something like this.
Notice the very steep transition that takes place right around the pKa of the compound.
So in this case, if I were to attempt to dissolve naphthol in water at a pH of about, let's say,
it's not going to dissolve as well as it could.
And the reason for this is that at a pH of about 6, none of the dissolved naphthol is
going to be ionized, or practically none of it will be ionized.
So if I were to pour some liquid into a beaker, adjust that liquid to pH 6, and attempt to
dissolve naphthol, only a very small amount will actually go into solution.
Remember, partitioning coefficients are dictated by solubility.
So if I can change its solubility, I can change its partitioning coefficient.
Now to do that, all I have to do is adjust the pH of my aqueous solution so that I'm
on the other side of the pKa.
So let's do that now.
If I move over to a pH that's greater than 12, let's say, 14, four pH units above the
pKa, well in excess of what I would need, I'm not dissolving naphthol anymore.
I'm dissolving naphthalate.
I'm dissolving the ionized version of my weak acid.
Now polar water interacts much better with ions than it does with neutral organics, and
that means that these naphthalate ions have a much higher solubility.
So by altering its solubility in water, by adjusting the pH, I'm changing its partitioning
behavior when I try to run a liquid-liquid extraction.
So let's do that now.
Here is my naphthol, but I've drawn two different equilibria, and the reason I've
done this is that we now know that depending upon the pH of an aqueous layer, I'll either
be dealing with the equilibrium between two naphthol in the organic and two naphthol in
the aqueous layer, or between two naphthol in the organic and two naphtholate in the
aqueous layer.
Let's see how that affects the extraction properties by looking at a Mach extraction
funnel here.
I've got my Henderson-Hosselbach plot with my transition at the pKa of my compound, and
as long as I'm two pH units above or below that position, I'm in a situation where I
can consider it to be either all ionized or all unionized.
So let's zoom in on this extraction funnel and see what happens.
So here I am at the interface with an organic layer, let's say ether, and an aqueous layer,
which I've adjusted to a low pH, less than 8.
That means that I'm dealing with an equilibrium between two naphthol in the organic layer
and two naphthol in the aqueous layer.
So at this point, I'm dealing with these neutral organic compounds, and they're not terribly
soluble.
So at best, I can hope that a small fraction of them is going to move down here into the
aqueous layer.
I'm not going to be able to wash very much of it away in this fashion, so my extraction
is suboptimal at this point.
But what happens if I change the pH of that aqueous layer?
Let's move to the other side of the Henderson-Hasselbach plot, to where our pH is greater
than 12, more than two units above the pKa.
Well now I'm dealing with naphtholate, and its solubility is higher, so its partitioning
coefficient is greater.
So simply by carefully choosing the pH of my aqueous layer, I can make my extraction
work better, or worse, depending on my goals.
So I can affect a different partitioning coefficient on a compound, at least if it's
titratable, simply by adjusting the pH of the aqueous layer that I use.
So how can I use that to my advantage when I'm trying to extract one organic compound
from another?
And the answer to this lies in the fact that most organic compounds have slightly different
pKa values from one another, and slightly different acid-base properties.
For example, we've already considered naphthol and naphtholate, but take a look at naphthoic
acid.
Now this is a compound that's very similar to naphthol, yet its pKa is about four, rather
than ten.
So if I were to plot its Henderson-Hasselbach equation, I'd get a plot that looks something
like this, in which I have a similar shape, but the transition is taking place at a much
lower pH.
So I can solubilize naphthoic acid in water much more easily.
I only have to have a pH of around six, or higher.
Now compare that to the equilibrium we just looked at, naphthol and naphtholate, where
the pKa is ten.
Its Henderson-Hasselbach plot has a transition at a much higher pH.
So that's a difference that I can use.
If we take it one step further and consider a compound which is not acidic, but is basic.
For example, naphthylamine.
Now naphthylamine actually picks up a proton and becomes charged to form naphthylammonium
ion, which has a pKa of around 4.6.
But because naphthylammonium, the conjugate acid, is charged, not only will my Henderson-Hasselbach
plot shift, but it will reverse on the vertical axis.
And I'll have more ionized at a lower pH.
Again, something I can exploit, difference in how they behave based upon the pH of the
extraction solution.
So again, our acidic compounds are charged when they're at high pH, but our basic compound
is charged at low pH.
So now that we've laid this groundwork, we're ready to actually perform an extraction.
Let's assume that we needed to separate this naphthoic acid from two naphthol, two compounds
whose pKa and acid-base behavior we've already characterized pretty well.
Their two Henderson-Hasselbach plots are kind of similar in shape, but they have a different
transitional pH.
So you can already begin to see, if you look carefully here, there is a region of the plot
where they're behaving very differently from one another, but there are also regions of
the plot where they behave very similarly to one another.
And if we're going to separate them, our goal is to be in that zone where they're different.
So if we were to take a look at an extraction taking place with an organic layer on top
and a very acidic aqueous layer on the bottom, what would we see?
Well, we would see a situation where neither of them is particularly ionized in the aqueous
layer, and therefore their solubilities are much greater up here in the organics.
I've color-coded them a little bit.
I've shaded them in green and orange so they're a bit easier to tell apart from one another.
You'll see that the orange is my naphthoic acid and that the greens are my naphthol.
So let's move along our Henderson-Hasselbach plot to a different pH and see if we can do
better.
We move up to about neutral pH, around pH 7.
Take a look at what's happened here.
I have reached a point on my Henderson-Hasselbach plot where there is a huge difference in the
amount present as ions in the aqueous solution.
My naphthoic acid is completely deprotonated when in water, but my naphthol is completely
neutral.
So their solubilities are very different, which leads to a situation where one partitions
into the water as its conjugate base, the other remains up here in the organic layer
as its conjugate acid.
So if I were to attempt an extraction with an aqueous layer of this pH, separating the
two is as simple as opening the stopcock at the bottom of the funnel.
But if I go too far and I raise my pH all the way to say 12 or higher, I reach a point
at which not only is my naphthoic acid going to be very water soluble, but so is my naphthol
because now it can dissolve as naphtholate.
So at this point, I will have a preponderance of both compounds accumulating in the aqueous
layer.
My extraction will have been compromised.
And as a final example, let's take a look at the difference between weak acids and weak
bases.
For example, the extraction of naphthol and naphtholamine.
So if I had a physical mixture of these two and wanted to separate them using this technique,
how would that be different from the extraction of two weak acids, one from the other, like
we just looked at?
Well, remember the Henderson-Husselbach plot for my naphtholamine is reversed.
It's flipped over on the vertical axis.
So it's more ionized at low pHs and less ionized at high pHs.
So what does that mean for my extraction?
What that means is that if I start my extraction with a very acidic aqueous layer, I expect
that my naphthylamine will actually be naphthylammonium ion and therefore very soluble in the water.
So I'll start at a very low pH with an effective extraction, which places the naphthylamine
in the aqueous layer and places the naphthol in the organic layer.
But as I raise my pH, I run into a problem again.
If I try this extraction with neutral water, I have a situation where my naphthylammonium
is not soluble in water because it's now naphthylamine, and it's going to migrate preferentially
into the organic layer where the naphthol already is.
So by using a neutral aqueous solution, I'm not going to extract anything, at least not
to any appreciable extent.
Finally, if I continue, raise the pH even farther, I reach a situation where now my naphthol
can become deprotonated in the aqueous layer, leaving behind the naphthylamine.
I have a good extraction once again, but this time I've got my naphthol accumulating in
the aqueous layer as opposed to the naphthylamine that I had at the beginning.
So one of the benefits of trying to extract an acid from a base is that we can choose
which layer each will move into.
I could put my basic compound in the aqueous layer by using an acidic aqueous solution,
or I can put my acidic compound in by using a basic.
And of course, the drawback is I have to use a lot of acid or base to get it done.
Now so far in this lecture, we've thought of partitioning in terms of two immiscible
liquid phases, but partitioning can also take place between any two distinct phases.
Some other examples are solid liquid or liquid gas systems, so naturally it should be possible
to conduct extractions using these kinds of systems as well.
Now probably the most obvious example of an extraction using solid liquid partitioning
is the process of brewing a cup of tea.
As you add hot water to a tea leaf, certain compounds are going to dissolve in water better
than others.
Now in this case, the large and insoluble material making up the tea leaves can interact
with say caffeine, polyphenols, and other compounds which would otherwise be soluble
in cold water.
But we all know from experience that steeping tea in cold water leads to a very weak beverage.
So just as we can manipulate the partitioning coefficient in a liquid-liquid extraction
with pH, so we can manipulate the partitioning coefficients of compounds in solid liquid
systems using temperature, and tea connoisseurs will understand this well.
Green tea.
It's famous for its delicate flavors and aromas, but green tea also contains particularly
high levels, tannins, a polyphenolic class of compounds with a bitter taste and a very
dry mouth feel.
So the goal in preparing this delightful beverage is temperature control.
Fine green teas require careful attention to brewing temperature, as water, just below
its boiling point, partitions the pleasant and aroma-granting compounds into that water
effectively.
But water too close to boiling will separate the polyphenolic compounds which have a more
bitter taste, ruining the otherwise enjoyable experience of a well-crafted green tea.
Just take a look at the pleasant-tasting amino acid, theanine, which makes up a sizable portion
of the amino acid content of green tea.
Now take a look at tannic acid, a common polyphenol with a bitter dry taste.
Is it any wonder why theanine can be liberated from the hydroxyl-rich cellulose fibers of
tea leaves more easily?
All those hydrogen bonders, it's obvious, it simply clings on tighter.
So a well-made green tea is a textbook example of a solid-liquid chemical extraction, selectively
partitioning one type of compound into the liquid while leaving the other behind adhered
to the solid matrix.
So if you're a green tea drinker, I congratulate you on being a great bench chemist as well.
So let's review what we've covered in this lecture.
We discussed the concept of immiscible liquids and how solvents of very low polarity tend
to be immiscible in higher polarity solvents like water.
We talked about how organic solutes have a finite solubility in each solvent and how
we can use this finite solubility to calculate what's known as a partitioning coefficient.
We then saw how the partitioning coefficient can be used to predict the relative amount
of a given compound which will be found in each solvent at equilibrium.
Next we took a look at how the pH of water can affect the total solubility of titratable
organic compounds in that solvent and how that can drastically change partitioning coefficients
predictably and often usefully.
Finally we took a look at solid-liquid extractions in which partitioning occurs not between two
immiscible liquid phases but between being dissolved in solvent and being adhered to
an insoluble solid.
We saw how this technique is no different than the quest for the perfect cup of green tea.
But our discussion of partitioning is only half over.
We still need to consider one last caveat.
See this lecture's discussion focused on partitioning between two phases which are at rest.
Next time we're going to set one of those phases in motion, opening up the discussion
to one of the most powerful separation techniques ever invented, chromatography.
I'll see you then.
