Well, last time I gave an unfair amount of attention to beer when we had our lecture
on aldehydes and ketones.
So in this lecture, I'm going to try to give wine its due attention.
Now most of us know the conversion of grapes into wine introduces new flavors and smells.
And we also know that as wine ages, its flavor profile and bouquet are expected to change,
usually for the better at first with flavors mellowing and pleasing aromas intensifying.
Now the complexity of wine starts with the many chemical processes which take place
during fermentation.
One of these is the formation of new pleasant smelling organic compounds called esters.
Esters and also organic acids contain a functional group or motif that we can look at here on
our hologram.
So let's pull that up now.
Now the motif that defines these two classes of compounds has a carbonyl, which would be
a carbon double bonded to an oxygen, just like we saw in aldehydes and ketones.
But the carbonyl carbon is also bonded to an sp3 oxygen.
So this motif is distinct from our ketones, aldehydes, alcohols, and ethers in the sense
that it combines more than one oxygen atom into a single organic motif.
Now we can see this motif in compounds, which give wine some of its pleasing aromas.
For example, this molecule is pentyl acetate, and it has the aroma of pears.
But if we change a little bit of the R groups attached to this motif, we get ethyl butyrate,
which is reminiscent of pineapple, or octyl acetate, which is more of an orange like aroma.
So you can see that they all contain the same internal structure with the carbonyl and the
sp3 oxygen.
But what's changing here is the identity of the attached R groups.
But the complexity doesn't stop there.
See, over time, esters and others like them can interconvert chemically inside the bottle.
And this creates a changing mixture, which stimulates your nose and your palate differently
through time, making the experience that a wine offers change as the years go by.
Now another type of compound, which can affect the flavors of wines, are organic acids, and
they share a very similar structure to esters.
So let's go back to that motif we just looked at, where we have a carbonyl to which there
is also bonded an sp3 oxygen.
Now keeping this motif in mind, see if you can find it in the following molecules.
This is tartaric acid, which is responsible for giving wine a sort of tart flavor.
But if we change the molecule up, we get malic acid.
And malic acid is actually the flavor of green apples.
We can change the structure slightly again and get lactic acid, which is responsible
for more of a milky flavor in mouthfeel in wines.
So just like esters, these acids are formed, consumed, and even interconverted as the contents
of a bottle of wine age, making the same vintage taste different from one year to the next.
So with a little bit of time, organic chemistry can improve that bottle of wine that you so
carefully sought out during your last visit to Napa.
But an overly protective connoisseur might hold that bottle a little bit too long with
disastrous consequences.
See wine's a complex mixture of many classes of organic compounds, including quite a bit
of the alcohol ethanol.
Now I venture to say that most of us already knew that much, but what you may not realize
is that in addition to all those pleasant tasting and smelling components, every wine
bottle also has a sinister gang of microbial chemists at work in it.
Microbes like this one, called acetobacter.
Now acetobacter quickly set up residents in grapes when they're still in the vine.
And they're practically impossible to remove, and they simply love to drink your wine.
So the growth of these bacteria is held at bay by the careful exclusion of vital oxygen
and the addition of some sodium metabysulfite.
Sodium metabysulfite is a flavorless inorganic material which slowly decomposes into antibacterial
sulfur dioxide under acidic conditions, inhibiting microbial growth while not particularly affecting
the flavor of the wine.
But slowly with time and just a little bit of oxygen permeating the seal of the bottle,
acetobacter eventually overwhelms the preservative and metabolically converts the wine's ethanol
into acetic acid for energy.
This process destroys the flavor profile that the vinter works so tirelessly to create
and demotes your favorite bottle of wine to the ranks of what we commonly call wine vinegar.
Now we've already considered the oxidation of ethanol to ethanol also known as acid aldehyde.
This is a process which chemists perform on the bench and which you perform in your own
bloodstream after a night on the town.
Today, among other things, we're going to take a look at the next step in this oxidation
process, that of acid aldehyde to acetic acid.
Now all of these compounds, the complex esters and acids that form that perfect bottle, as
well as the acetic acid, which ultimately causes its devise, are members of a subset
of organic compounds which contain not one, but two oxygen atoms.
But these two types of compounds don't find their only home in the beverage industry.
Carboxylic acids are a primary component of compounds that we come into contact with every
day, including many detergents like the loric acid you might find in your shampoo bottle,
the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory ibuprofen, and the commonly used food preservative benzoic
acid.
Esters include compounds like isoamyl acetate, the fragrance and flavor component of bananas,
and also, coincidentally, a signaling hormone which is released from the stinger of an attacking
bee to call for backup.
So I'm guessing this means that beekeepers aren't particularly fond of banana flavored
anything, especially on a work day.
Now esters also find use in the drug industry in a cleverly designed class of compounds
known as pro-drugs, which include heart medications, antivirals, and more.
Because they're at the end of the line in many natural oxidative processes, simple
carboxylic acids were discovered very early in the history of organic chemistry.
So some of them have common names which will actually serve as the basis for their more
modern IUPAC substituent prefixes, so let's take a look at those now.
Let's start just by looking at the four simplest carboxylic acids.
The simplest of all is formic acid.
This takes its name from the Latin word for ant, because it was first isolated from the
venom of fire ants.
Another common carboxylic acid is acetic acid, which gets its name from the Latin word for
acid itself, because this was the very first compound which was characterized which had
these properties.
Next is propionic acid.
Propionic acid takes its name from the Greek, meaning first fat.
This is because it was the first organic acid which was isolated which wouldn't dissolve
in water.
And finally, the next largest would be butyric acid, which gets its name because it was first
isolated from butter.
Now you can see the commonalities here in all of these structures.
They all contain the essential carbonyl group, to which is bonded an sp3 oxygen.
And there's one more crucial part of the structure which makes them carboxylic acids.
That is that they have a hydrogen attached to that sp3 oxygen.
So this is the structural motif which makes carboxylic acids carboxylic acids.
So now that we have a better understanding of the structures of carboxylic acids and
how some of them are named, let's take a look at some esters of similar size and you'll
probably notice quite a few of these names reproducing themselves.
Take the example of the simplest possible ester, methylformane.
Notice the name, formate.
It gets that name because our ester contains an R group which is simply one carbon, methyl,
and it also has this carbonyl carbon which is by itself.
So one carbon sort of gets this prefix form a lot of the time.
So methylformate is a natural choice for the name.
Very similarly we have ethylacetate which takes the acetate name from the two carbons
that are in the carbonyl containing portion of the structure.
Next is propylpropionate and just like that butylbutyrate.
Now it's not necessary for both sides of the ester to have the same number of atoms as
they do in my examples here, for example 4 and 4, 3 and 3.
They could just as easily be a mixture of two different chain lengths.
But the nomenclature system would stay basically the same.
And what defines them all is the presence of a carbonyl group attached to an sp3 oxygen
but this time the sp3 oxygen contains that second R group rather than a hydrogen.
So let's take a look at how we name acids and esters from an IUPAC perspective as opposed
to their traditional names.
We're going to use the rules that we have devised before for many other classes of
organic compounds but in the case of acids we always want to be sure that the carbonyl
carbon is included in the parent chain because it's a functional group.
We always want to give it the lowest number for the same reason and we'll name our parent
compound using the suffix oic acid to indicate the presence of this functional group.
So let's work an example here.
Let's try to name this compound using IUPAC nomenclature.
First thing I'm going to do is find my organic acid group here it is.
And then I'm going to label the longest attached carbon chain which I haven't done yet.
Did you catch this?
There's a longer chain so I have to use this one as my parent.
So this will be a pentanoic acid because it's a five carbon chain terminating in an
organic acid functional group.
I have one substituent with a single carbon so this is a methyl substituent.
And again because the carboxylic acid is a functional group it receives priority in
numbering.
So I'll number my parent chain in this way one to five in my example here from right
to left.
Now I can construct my name using the standard rules three methyl one pentanoic acid but
because the organic acid necessarily terminates a chain see it has two bonds to oxygen here
one bond to oxygen here leaving only one bond to go to the chain.
It's really not necessary to include the one so we omit this three methyl pentanoic acid.
The IUPAC nomenclature of esters is similar but there's one very important change and
that is that we have to remember that there is an R group attached to an oxygen now and
that oxygen won't have an address because it's not part of the parent carbon chain.
So that sp3 oxygen now becomes an address in and of itself otherwise we'll be following
the same essential nomenclature rules ultimately naming it a carboxylate.
Let's do an example.
Let's name this ester.
Again we want to first find the functional group and the parent carbon chain which would
include the carbonyl so I've highlighted that here in orange.
Now I have a butanowate because I have four carbons but I now have an ethyl substituent
on the sp3 oxygen rather than simply a hydrogen.
I also of course have this chloro group out here on the parent carbon chain now remember
the substituent on the sp3 oxygen always gets priority in the naming so in this case
I'll number my chain and I'll move the ethyl to the front of the name followed by my three
chloro for the substituent followed by my butanowate.
So this is ethyl three chloro butanowate.
So now that we've talked a little bit about nomenclature let's move on and think about
the properties of acids and esters.
Specifically let's take a look at a carboxylic acid here propionic acid and we'll break
its structure down and see if we can use that to explain some of the observations that we
make when we work with it in the laboratory.
Now propionic acid has carbon oxygen double bond with a dipole right here a carbon oxygen
single bond dipole here and also an OH dipole here.
So there are a number of polar bonds in this molecule which means that it's going to have
very high polarity.
It's also got oxygens with lone pair electrons and a very important OH motif.
This means that it is not only a hydrogen bond acceptor but can also be a hydrogen bond
donor.
So one molecule of propionic acid can easily create hydrogen bonds to another molecule
of propionic acid.
This leads to relatively high boiling points and means that acids tend to be either very
low volatility liquids or usually even solids around room temperature.
Now by comparison esters like this methyl acetate have the carbon oxygen double bond
dipole and actually two CO single bond dipoles but you notice that even though they have
all these polar bonds within the motif that they are lacking one very important piece
of the motif that we saw previously and that is there's no OH motif there's no OH bond
here.
That means that even though this methyl acetate can be a hydrogen bond acceptor through its
oxygens it has no way of donating a hydrogen and that means that with another methyl acetate
molecule they really can't interact in this way and what this means is that esters tend
to have lower boiling points than do their similar sized carboxylic acids.
So notice here that methyl acetate's boiling point is closer to that of pentane a hydrocarbon
of similar size than it is to propionic acid.
So this allows us to explain in some ways why it is that esters seem to be so important
in the aromas of wines whereas we see that acids tend to be more important toward the
flavors of wines.
It's a simple question of volatility you can't smell that which doesn't vaporize.
So let's survey all the boiling points from some of the oxygen containing compounds we've
looked at so far.
When we do we can see which types of bonds within the motif are most important to increasing
boiling points.
Notice that if I take pentane with no oxygens at all I get the lowest boiling point of all
but that simply adding sp3 oxygens or even carbonyls that can't hydrogen bond to other
molecules of the same kind I have only a modest increase in boiling point.
For example an ether, methyl acetate, butanol and methyl ethyl ketone.
But as soon as I introduce that OH group there allowing these molecules to hydrogen bond
to other molecules of the same type we see a drastic rise in the boiling points and therefore
we see a very different type of chemical behavior as well as physical behavior.
Now another very important difference between carboxylic acids and esters is their acid base
behavior.
Carboxylic acids get their name of course because they have an acidic hydrogen but they're
also amphoteric being ever so slightly basic.
So let's take a look at a carboxylic acid acting as a base for a moment.
Here is acetic acid a very simple carboxylic acid which has a carbonyl oxygen which is
at least in theory capable of donating an electron pair to form a new bond to a proton.
Now when it does this it creates this very unstable looking species but this very unstable
looking species also has resonance stabilization.
Not a lot but just enough to make it possible.
So what we're dealing with is the equilibrium between the acid and a conjugate base with
this very slight resonance stabilization but which is otherwise not very favorable looking
structure.
So it has a pKa of around negative seven.
This is a very strong acid right here a protonated carboxylic acid has acid strengths that begin
to rival things like hydrochloric acid some of the stronger mineral acids that we know
of but they can form under extreme conditions.
Of course carboxylic acids are much better at acting as acids and in that case they lose
their acidic hydrogen which is the OH to form a resonance stabilized carboxylate.
This is a fairly stable anion and therefore the pKa of a neutral carboxylic acid is somewhere
around five.
Now think about that compared to an alcohol with a pKa of around sixteen or seventeen
so we're talking about something that's millions of times more acidic.
Esters on the other hand although they are still considered as amphoteric can act as
a base in very much the same way.
Again my carbonyl oxygen here has lone pair electrons which you can use to form a new
bond and again create this resonance stabilized but somewhat unstable looking conjugate acid.
So in this case the pKa of our protonated esters it rivals that of our protonated carboxylic
acids at about negative seven but the real difference comes when we try to look at the
acidity of a neutral ester.
In this case there is no OH to be deprotonated so instead the most acidic hydrogen is here
one bond away from our carbonyl motif.
Now to deprotonate this we have to rely again on resonance stabilization to make it possible
but even this resonance stabilization doesn't make our deprotonated ester even remotely
as stable as a deprotonated carboxylic acid.
Consequence of this is that we have an acid, well not an acid, an ester which has a pKa
of about twenty five.
Now carboxylic acids are the end of the line as oxidation of primary alcohols goes.
They can be produced using our now familiar aqueous chromic acid reaction in which one
round of oxidation produces an aldehyde followed by hydration and a second round of oxidation.
You may remember that last time we learned pyridinium chlorochromate or PCC could be
used to halt ethanol oxidation at the acid-aldehyde stage, indeed it could do this for any primary
alcohol.
But if we instead wanted to continue oxidation to the extreme and reach a carboxylic acid
we can treat that primary alcohol with aqueous chromic acid and in this way not only would
a primary alcohol like ethanol be oxidized to an aldehyde like ethanol but it would then
be oxidized again to ethanoic acid which we commonly know as acetic acid.
But carboxylic acids don't have to be created from starting materials that have oxygen in
them.
Now certain alkenes can also be oxidized to form acids using a suitable oxidizing agent
as well.
Consider for example 2-butene which can be reacted with potassium permanganate under acidic
conditions to produce two molecules of acetic acid.
This reaction takes place to an intermediate which we would call a viscinal dial and the
viscinal dial quickly splits under acidic conditions to form two carboxylic acids, in
this case two molecules of acetic acid.
So we sometimes refer to this technique as oxidative cleavage of a double bond.
No discussion of carboxylic acids and esters is complete without mentioning one of the
most prolific chemists of the 1800s and someone whose contributions to the science we've
already begun to explore in earlier lectures.
I'm speaking of Hermann and Milfischer, a revered German chemist whose work on carbohydrates
will be one of the highlights of our lecture on that topic.
Now far from being just a carbohydrate chemist, Fischer was driven to synthesize many of the
small biologically relevant molecules we encounter on an almost daily basis.
These include caffeine found in coffee and tea and the theobromine found in chocolate.
He's also well known for developing a technique for producing an ester from a carboxylic acid
under very mild reaction conditions, a reaction which bears his name to this day.
This reaction called the Fischer esterification is a condensation reaction, meaning that it
forms water as a byproduct.
It relies on a strong mineral acid catalyst to protonate the carbonyl of a carboxylic acid.
Now just like ketone and aldehyde carbonyls, in this protonated state the carbon of a carboxylic
acid becomes significantly electrophilic and can be attacked by even weak nucleophiles
like a neutral alcohol.
This attack forms a tetrahedral intermediate, which can take on two different tautomeric
states, one in which the attacking alcohol oxygen is protonated and one in which a hydroxyl
oxygen of the original acid is protonated.
So the departure of an alcohol from this original tautomer would constitute a simple
reversal of the first step.
But if instead a water can depart from the second tautomer, thereby you get a protonated
ester, which quickly loses the catalytic proton to become neutral again.
So one of the great benefits of Fischer esterifications when compared to other methods of the day
is that none of the reagents are sensitive to water, notoriously difficult substance
to exclude from organic reactions.
But this benefit comes at a cost, that the reaction is an equilibrium, which only very
slightly favors product formation.
So Fischer esterifications usually require the use of one reagent in extremely high concentrations
to ensure that the other is almost completely converted.
Now in yet another twist, the nearly equal energies of the reactants and products means
that we can turn the Fischer esterification reaction around, reversing the roles of product
and reactant.
So we can exploit Le Chatelier's principle and turn a Fischer esterification into an
ester hydrolysis, simply by changing the solvent from alcohol to water.
The product of this reaction should be a nearly complete conversion of ester to acid.
So let's take a look at an interesting ester that you may have already encountered and
not even known it.
There's a popular antiviral drug that's on the market today, it's called Tamiflu.
And Tamiflu itself contains an ester motif, and it's part of a very interesting class
of compounds called prodrux.
This is a molecule called Oseltamivir.
Now Oseltamivir, you'll notice, has an ester motif.
Here's another molecule that's very similar, called Oseltamivir carboxylic, which I've
drawn as a carboxylic acid, but could just as easily have been drawn in its deprotonated
state.
What's interesting about these two molecules is the properties that they have.
So it turns out Oseltamivir, when you swallow it, about 80% of that molecule gets from your
GI tract into your bloodstream.
This is a pretty good delivery for a drug molecule.
Whereas Oseltamivir carboxylate is only about 5% absorbed, meaning that for every 20 molecules
of this that you swallow, only one of them ultimately makes it all the way into your
bloodstream.
Now here's another interesting factoid.
Oseltamivir does absolutely nothing to help you get over the flu.
Whereas Oseltamivir carboxylate does.
It actually binds to the capsids of viruses and thereby sort of prevents them from adhering
to the cell so that they can inject their RNA into their damage.
But remember, Oseltamivir carboxylate is not absorbed into your bloodstream where it could
help you.
So are we, is all lost here?
Is there no reason to continue looking at or working with either one of these molecules?
I don't think so.
They differ by, again, only one functional group, this ethyl ester and this carboxylic
acid.
But we know how to convert one into the other so we can exploit the properties of both molecules.
This is the way that Tamiflu works.
Oseltamivir is put into a pill or capsule which a patient swallows.
This molecule reaches the patient's GI tract where it is transferred into the bloodstream
very efficiently but where it also can't do anything to help fight a viral infection.
But in your bloodstream naturally is water and also enzymes from your liver which specialize
in hydrolyzing this bond in the same way that a fissurist verification would.
So once this molecule is already in your bloodstream, your body converts it from the ethyl ester
into the carboxylic acid.
Oseltamivir carboxylate can now do its job having been delivered as a different molecule
altogether.
So this strategy constitutes what we call a pro-drug and you'll find uses of them in
many different therapies, not just antivirals.
So we know that esters can be chemically broken down to acids by enzymes in our body or in
a beaker using aqueous acid as an a fissurist verification.
But there's yet another method available for hydrolyzing esters which was in use long before
beakers even existed.
See, soap making is a process nearly as old as or possibly even older than recorded history
with the first credible historical sources of these recipes being on a Babylonian tablet
which is nearly 5,000 years old.
So early soap makers deserve credit as some of the first, albeit unwitting, organic chemists
of the human race.
The traditional making of soap uses a reaction which accomplishes nearly the same result
as an acidic ester hydrolysis reaction, but it does so irreversibly and with remarkable
ease and efficiency.
You may recall that animal fats and vegetable oils contain compounds known as triacylglycerides.
We've already seen how Sabatier in his contemporaries toyed with the saturation of these alkyl chains
using hydrogenation reactions.
But triacylglycerides are useful for much more than just a food source.
When the ester bonds are broken in these molecules, several useful compounds can result, including
those used in soap.
So instead of relying on the acidity to increase the electrophilicity of an ester, suponification
relies on the removal of a proton from water to produce a stronger nucleophile in the form
of hydroxide.
This is easily accomplished even in ancient times by allowing rainwater to percolate through
wood ashes, which creates a material known as lye.
Modern chemists would probably call this potassium hydroxide.
The hydroxide from lye is a much better nucleophile than water, and it attacks the carbonyl of
neutral esters easily to form a tetrahedral intermediate.
Just as with the acidic mechanism, this intermediate is now faced with two options, lose a hydroxide,
go back to starting materials, or lose an alkoxide as it recovers its carbonyl bond.
So now we can see the secret to the irreversibility of suponification and why it's so easy to
run this reaction to completion.
The final step in the mechanism involves the transfer of a proton from the resulting carboxylic
acid, the pKa of about 5, to the byproduct alkoxide, which has a conjugate acid pKa of
about 16.
With pKa values this drastically different, clearly the proton transfer is not only fast,
but irreversible, and the products obtained are alcohol and the carboxylate salt of an
organic acid.
This carboxylate salt is no longer reactive and can be isolated from the resulting glycerol,
so our soap preparation is complete.
But suponification is not limited to the hydrolysis of fats.
It can be used to disassemble a range of esters into carboxylates and alcohols, and so it
gives us yet another tool to break down practically any small organic ester that we desire.
I think it's time now.
We've finally amassed a substantial arsenal of techniques for the inner conversion of
hydrocarbons, alkyl halides, and oxygen-containing compounds that we can begin to appreciate
and participate in a synthetic design problem.
So let's pretend that we're chemists attempting to synthesize adipic acid, a dicarboxylic
acid used frequently in the manufacture of nylon.
But let's simplify this problem and say we have only cyclohexanol and other common inorganic
reagents to work with.
Now your instinct might be to begin by considering cyclohexanol and all the different compounds
one could make from it, then consider how each of those might be modified.
But even our small arsenal of techniques leads to a hopelessly complex diagram of potential
reactions which could take us far too long to consider.
Not only that, but a typical lab will have an inventory of reagents, all of which could
be considered as starting materials.
So the number of permutations of reactions grows so rapidly that it becomes absolutely
overwhelming.
So is all hope lost?
Well, of course not.
Just like solving a maze can be much simpler if you start from the destination and work
backwards, so can a synthesis puzzle be better attacked in that way?
One way which chemists attack this is to use a technique that we call retro-synthetic analysis.
So if we turn our attention from the starting material to the product and ask ourselves
what could I make this material from, usually we find just a few realistic possibilities.
Contemplating the reaction in this way, in reverse, it's called retro-synthetic analysis.
And often block arrows are used to distinguish this kind of analysis from a forward synthesis.
For example, adipic acid can be produced in a single step using only two of our techniques,
either the oxidation of a dialdehyde or the oxidative cleavage of a cyclic alkene.
Now let's take a look at these two and ask ourselves how might we prepare these potential
intermediates?
Well, the needed dialdehyde could be produced by oxidation of a corresponding diol, but
we're two steps along our retro-synthesis and this product isn't looking much like
our available starting material, is it?
Ah, but cyclohexene shows promise.
It more closely resembles the starting material because of the six-membered ring that it has.
Now a quick survey of methods for preparing alkenes reminds us that we can prepare them
by elimination reactions involving the appropriate alcohol under acidic conditions.
So what appears to be an overwhelming synthetic problem is now solved in just a few short
steps using retro-synthetic analysis.
So today we concluded our tour of oxygen-containing compounds by covering carboxylic acids and
esters.
We discussed how both of these motifs contain an sp3 oxygen connected to a carbonyl carbon.
How carboxylic acids stand alone among compounds we've looked at so far and how acidic they
are and how replacement of that acidic hydrogen converts the motif to what is known as an ester
with drastically different solubility, volatility, and acid-base properties.
We took a look at two ways to prepare carboxylic acids.
First, by the oxidation of aldehydes with chromic acid, emulating the action of acetylbacter,
and second we saw how they can be prepared by the oxidative cleavage of alkenes with
hot potassium permanganate.
Then we took a look at the Fischer's Derrification, which allows us to produce esters from an organic
acid and an alcohol.
We also saw how this process can be reversed to get the acid and alcohol back in a process
called acid hydrolysis.
We discussed how enzymes in your body can accelerate the same process in your bloodstream,
prompting medical researchers to use esters frequently in a class of pharmaceuticals
known as pro-drugs, including products like Tamiflu, which have significantly improved
bioavailability over the active compound alone.
Next we covered saponification, an age-old process in which a strong hydroxide solution
is used to promote hydrolysis of esters.
This process is most well-known for its use in the production of soap products, but is
applicable to a wide range of organic reactions.
And finally, we were introduced to a technique known as retro-synthetic analysis, in which
we navigate a synthetic problem backwards in order to minimize the number of reactions
that we have to consider.
As we close the book on oxygen-containing motifs, we'll move forward and add yet another
highly influential element to our discussion.
Nitrogen is next on our tour of common functional groups.
I'll see you then.
