Okay, so, what do you think?
It's salt.
But you and I both know it's more than that.
I mean, we could get into the technical size, but you just got here.
We'll do that later.
I'm more concerned about what you actually think.
Remember that recommendation to cut salt.
Salt.
Salt.
It has to be America's favorite flavoring.
You might say the extra ingredient is salt.
Put it in your medical study.
New study.
New study.
Recent study is shiny light on the amount of sodium Americans eat.
Slash salt.
Easier said than done.
This is one of those medical stories that people get confused about.
Number one risk for a diet-related death sodium.
Do you know the origin of your thoughts on salt?
For some of us, yes.
For the rest of us, think about it.
Think about your thoughts.
Thought-ception.
Because what if I told you what you believe or don't believe about salt was influenced
by something you never even considered?
Look around.
A standard American diet.
We didn't just wake up like this.
The research behind the food is how we ended up like this.
Welcome to No Lab Corp require.
My name is Johnny Cole Dixon and I swear we won't do the entire video like this.
Sodium has a reputation.
More accurately, it has an association.
How many times have you heard, I'm limiting my salt, I'm watching over my blood pressure?
Right now is probably the best time to mention that sodium and salt are not the same thing.
We get the two mixed up and it's perfectly fine.
It's okay.
It happens.
Even in the sacred world of academia, I've seen a research paper making this mistake.
Sodium is an ingredient of salt.
If you take a pinch of salt, only 40% is sodium.
The rest of it is chloride.
The other ingredient needed to make salt.
Okay.
Editing Johnny here.
I know.
Back to back interruptions.
That's crazy.
But now is probably also the best time to mention that I want this to be relevant for you.
So we're talking about blood pressure, but why does this matter?
Well, blood pressure is what we know as a precursor, meaning it comes before the main
thing.
The only thing we really want to avoid is the number one disease in the world, heart
disease or cardiovascular disease, some form of fashion, just like if you wanted to graduate
top of your class, that doesn't just happen.
There has to be a precursor.
Something has to take place prior.
What will have to take place?
You'd have to study a lot.
Salt and blood pressure.
Where did this association come from?
Is it valid or invalid?
How does this work in the body physically speaking?
How much sodium do I need?
So many questions.
Adventure awaits.
Let's hop in.
Self-organization put out a publication in March of 2023, a big old document on sodium
intake reduction.
Because as they state, the evidence is clear.
The more sodium we consume, the more our blood pressure rises and blood pressure is reduced
when dietary sodium intake is reduced.
Reducing sodium intake is one of the most cost effective ways to improve health.
Dang.
Poor sodium.
It ain't got a lot going for it right now.
So according to the WHO, the answer is as straightforward as an error.
Real quick, because I brought up the WHO, it always seems that health communicators are
at odds with these big entities, right?
WHO, FDA, USDA.
It must be because they're corrupted and want to profit off of everything with two
legs.
Not entirely.
Look at it this way.
Just entertain this with me.
Let's say you're getting a lecture from Professor Johnny about the sun.
Professor Johnny says the sun is great for plants, not for humans.
Put sunscreen on and stay in the shade if you know what's good for you.
You go to a different lecture where a separate professor, Professor Cole Dixon, is talking
about the sun as well, but his presentation is different.
He talks about the different rays the sun provides, vitamin D, melanin production, the
spectrum of extreme sun exposure to being a vampire.
What's the difference between these two professors?
Nuance.
You see, a lack of nuance raises three flags against a communicator.
Flag one, it seems they've ignored the blatantly obvious contrarian evidence.
Flag two, they're one-sided points just reek of bias.
Flag three, which is really just a result of flag one and two, is that they look like
they have an ulterior motive.
And turns out Professor Johnny was a sunscreen dealer, CEO of Sunny Johnny's sunscreen
enterprises.
Okay, let's go back to that WHO passage and highlight something.
The more sodium we consume, the more our blood pressure rises.
That's the messaging.
How do we get here?
Let's find out.
1904, where it all began.
This was the first study to report a positive correlation between salt intake and blood
pressure in humans.
Two French researchers gathered six patients and noticed an increase in salt intake was
associated with a rise of blood pressure.
Interestingly, the researchers also observed that some of the patient's blood pressure
barely budged after massive salt intake.
And the researchers wondered, perhaps there's an internal factor that modulates the blood
pressure from one person to another.
Possibly, what made these two groups have totally separate responses to high salt intake?
We'll get to this later.
This was a novel finding.
The French researchers were going to advance their field greatly from this one discovery.
But they were rebutted only three years later by a German researcher who opposed the findings
of the French.
He was skeptical of the salt blood pressure relationship.
He called out his French peers as wrong and labeled their experimentation as flawed.
There it was in early 1900s in black and white, two opposite findings, two opposing sides,
the pioneers and the skeptics.
Sounds like a good baseball game.
This is when the salty saga, the great debate, officially began.
You're given the options when you grocery shop.
You can get the regular item or you can get the item's low sodium cousin.
People read something like low sodium, light or less salt.
When food companies take an ingredient out, it's usually something we've all agreed
upon is generally not great for humans, right?
Like high fructose corn syrup.
But salt, as this academic commentary states, is the only essential component of mammals
to have obtained an unattractive status.
The world salt may have found its footing in the early 1900s, but it wasn't until 1960
when a man hailing from Long Island, New York, by the name Louis Kitchener Dahl, made everybody
pick a side.
Two studies.
Dahl published two studies, one in 1960 and one in 1962, which is like back to back in
scientific standards, two back to back albums, holding it down from the 60 to the 62.
These two studies are what many consider to be the seminal point.
This is when the salty saga really started to heat up.
Study number one, Dahl had been doing some observational work with salt intake and populations.
He traveled around the world with a small elite task force to perform a duty of the
utmost importance, collecting pee.
That's right, the 24 hour pee test is the gold standard for measuring a person's sodium
intake levels.
Over 90% of sodium is excreted through the kidney.
Considering you're healthy and didn't just come off of a mean game of Batman or an intense
game of chess, anything you'd sweat significantly because a collection of the last 24 hours
of your urine says a lot about where your sodium is at.
Dahl and his team collected data from the US, northern Japan, southern Japan, Marshall
Islanders, which is somewhere in the middle of the ocean, and finally Alaska.
The Alaskans average less than four grams of salt consumption, the Marshall Islanders
about seven grams, the Americans about 10, the southern Japanese 14, and the northern
Japanese 26 grams.
He then measured up these folks salt intake against the prevalence of high blood pressure,
which he indicated as 140 over 90.
I'm in an extremely uncomfortable position before we get into Dahl's results for my
folks who could use a little bit more insight on blood pressure.
The measurement of blood pressure is expressed by two numbers called systolic and diastolic.
Okay, sweet beans, what are the numbers actually telling us?
So when our blood travels throughout the body, it's being pressed up against the walls
of our blood vessels.
And I know that sounds a little violent, but our blood vessels are perfectly capable
of handling this.
When the heart is actively pumping blood, we get systolic pressure, the high number because
our blood just zoomed.
And between heartbeats, the heart's relaxed and we get diastolic pressure, the lower
number when the blood isn't zooming as much.
This is the only place where you can define blood pressure with the word zooming.
Stay in school.
Dahl's results, we get them in 1960 and you guessed it.
A near perfect correlation between sodium intake and prevalence of hypertension.
The more solid you ate, the higher your blood pressure.
Now Dahl's science here wasn't perfect and in fact to some it was considered negligible.
As this commentary states, there were no details given concerning the measures if any that
were used to avoid confounding and bias.
Now this is a really big deal and we actually have to talk about this.
A confounding factor is a variable that sneakily influences the outcome you're measuring.
We can stick with the topic on hand.
If we're measuring sodium and hypertension, a.k.a. chronically elevated blood pressure,
what are some things other than sodium that may contribute to that?
Well, we got stress, physical inactivity and we got age.
These would be our confounding factors.
Without proper action to account for these potential confounding factors influencing
our results, we end up with a inflated conclusion.
And if you're super slimy, you ignore confounding on purpose to give yourself leeway to say
there's a relationship between two things.
It's the difference between rolling a strike with the kitty railing up versus the kitty
railing down.
A kid may think his accuracy is all that, but he didn't account for the fact that the
kitty railing greatly influenced his outcome.
He would have been guttering it up.
It's based on a true story.
I was a kid.
Now we can pick apart Dahl's research all day and there's been plenty of old researches
to do just that.
But this first study wasn't important because of its findings, but because it showed Dahl's
beliefs about salt.
You see, Dahl's paper plainly revealed what side of the fence he was on when it came
to salt, categorizing it as a subtle lethal agent and putting it in the same light as
fallout and carcinogens, later comparing it to fat, cigarettes, and alcohol.
This was essentially Dahl's entry into the conversation, right?
This was Dahl arriving at the pool party, but this next study, the 1962 one, was like
him jumping into the pool, cannonballing and splashing everybody.
How'd you like that one?
Uh, I was not following.
Sounded pretty descriptive though.
Study number two, Dahl's 1962 study.
This would be the one to effectively change the way Americans ate.
Before we get into that, I did want to say that I thought I had a solid understanding
of how big of a deal this salt thing was.
Usually my research phase for a video can last anywhere from two days to two weeks.
This took much longer than that.
But rummaging through all of these old, salty research papers, I started to understand how
big of a deal this was when I came across this.
The Political Science of Salt.
Written by Gary Tovs, it illustrates the territory we're about to embark on.
The salt controversy constitutes one of the longest running, most vitriolic, and surreal
disputes in all of medicine.
On the one side are those experts who insist that the evidence that salt raises blood pressure
is effectively irrefutable.
On the other side are those researchers who argue that the data supporting universal salt
reduction have never been compelling.
You see, I wanted this video to be like flipping a coin, right?
We all just want one answer.
Believe me, I know.
How cautious, if at all, do we have to be over our salt intake?
Is that too much to ask?
It shouldn't be, but it is.
Why is that?
Well, there's two reasons.
One, we'll get to later.
It's scientific.
But this one, it's about ideology.
You see, the study that opened up the salt saga in 1904 was monumental because of new
revelation.
We learned that salt may have something to do with blood pressure.
As time passed, hypertension quickly became an area of high focus because it was recognized
as a precursor to the number one disease in the world, heart disease.
So many studies were done.
Money was poured in.
Resources were poured in.
We need answers.
And guess what?
We got them.
We started off so dang tribal about salt that it became less about the science and discovering
truth and more about picking a side.
The moment we pick a side is the moment we engage with science's greatest enemy, and
that is confirmation bias.
The mind under the veil of confirmation bias is so fascinating.
We become so fixated on the thing that we believe or are convinced of that we will go
to any length to prove that we're right, usually to ourselves.
Back with any evidence that says otherwise, it's either black or it's white.
There's no room for gray.
And ignoring nuance affords us the luxury of being right.
Bias can come from an agenda or it can come from straight up ego.
Either way, we've made an absolute mess.
Every government entity, every health communicator, every salty researcher has staked their position
and gave guidelines.
Either one, two, three, four, five, six or seven or eight grams of salt a day without
regarding the nuance.
And when we go deeper into the science in a bit here, we'll understand why this is
such a huge mistake we've been making.
So back to the Lewis Kitchener doll study of 1962, study number two.
What do we got?
We got rats.
Varmit.
Rodents.
Just, it's just rats.
Doll took 47 lab rats, just about half male and half female.
They were put on an 11.6% seesaw chow over the course of four weeks.
Observe something interesting.
Some rats were developing elevated blood pressure.
Some rats weren't.
The Zynga, he then went on a selective breeding spree.
Rats with the highest blood pressures were bred together and those with the lowest pressures
were bred together.
The kids of the high blood pressure parents were put on the same salty regimen and those
of them that developed the highest blood pressures were then bred again.
The rest were sent to lab rat heaven.
And then of course on the flip side, the same went for the kids of the low blood pressure
rats.
Can you call it offspring of rats kids?
Doll ended up with three generations of two separate groups of rats.
Those that responded to the salt regimen with a relatively high blood pressure and those
that responded with a relatively low blood pressure.
And holy smokes, Doll jumped up, slapped his desk, yelled Eureka and brought around for
all of his colleagues because he knew he was on to something.
I mean, there's no evidence he actually did that, but good imagine.
His rats that responded with high blood pressure from excess salt were coin salt sensitive.
His rats that responded with low blood pressures were coin salt resistant.
The results were published and it made absolute waves.
I mean, as much as a scientific white paper could make, am I right?
But the paper was so big and so impactful because it established the idea of salt sensitivity.
Let's break down salt sensitivity, but first you're probably wondering if Doll's 1962
study was better than his 1961 study.
Let it be known that there has never been a single research paper published that did
not undergo criticism.
I mean, the world of academia is absolutely cutthroat, but for some reason when it comes
to salt, it's cutthroat, ear, arm and leg.
But 1962, that study published by Doll was actually pretty good.
I mean, there was one sly researcher who pointed out an absolutely massive issue with the study.
We're going to talk about this in a bit, but the structure and the way the study was performed
was undeniably good.
Salt sensitivity, the idea that we can inherit our blood pressure response to salt, as Doll
put it, is about a genetically transmitted sensitivity to salt.
What he observed was that the strain most prone to develop hypertension from salt did
not develop hypertension when excess dietary salt was emitted.
If you're anything like me, you're probably a little confused.
Think of it this way.
If my parents were Serena Williams and LeBron James, actually they're both happily married
with kids.
If I had two stellar athlete parents, I would have a predisposition to excel at sports.
But if I was never exposed to a single basketball tennis racket or hockey stick, I would never
have the chance to develop those athlete stellar skills.
In the same way, the offspring of the high blood pressure rats never developed high
blood pressure because they were never exposed to excess salt.
Okay, now how well does Doll study and the concept of salt sensitivity translate to the
real world?
Doll was working with lab rats in a controlled environment where mating was precisely calculated.
Humans don't live in that kind of world, so of course this isn't an exact translation.
In fact, far from it because humans are really just that genetically complex.
Now a quick search up on Dr. Google and you'll come across some entities settling on salt
sensitivity as the resolution of salt's relationship with blood pressure.
For example, the National Heart, Long and Blood Institute make mention of salt sensitivity
in their Causes and Risk Factors article.
Okay, now the concept of salt sensitivity is okay, it makes sense, but one of its biggest
thoughts is that it is impossible to measure.
There is no consensus on the defining lines that make an individual salt sensitive.
These researchers put it best, both the amount of salt administered and the magnitude of
the response above which pressure is considered to be salt sensitive vary enormously among
studies.
So basically scientists have been experimenting with the idea of salt sensitivity, but they're
all using different amounts of salt and different salt sensitive thresholds.
Like when is a person salt sensitive after they take in this much salt and their blood
pressure rises this much or after they take in this much salt and their blood pressure
rises this much?
We can imagine this just opens up the world of conflicting data as each study is able
to move the goalpost to how they see fit.
Okay, now let's get to the Sly researcher who pointed out the massive issue with Dahl's
1962 lab rat study.
His name was F. O. Simpson.
I'm not excited to say how many research papers I looked through to find this man's
first name, but I do know his middle name is Olaf.
He's often cited for pointing out that the amount of salt that Dahl gave those rats was
simply enormous.
According to Simpson's calculations, if you translate the amount of salt consumed by
the rats and you make it relative to a 150-ish pound man, that man would be ingesting 560
grams of salt a day.
That's like knocking back 75% of an umbrella girl's salt container a day.
That's over 215,000 milligrams of sodium.
Now I did some more rodent research to find out if his calculations were accurate and
from what I can judge, his formula was a little inflated, so I cut it in half.
And obviously we're still talking about a ridiculous amount of salt at 280 grams of
salt or 107,000 milligrams of sodium.
So Dahl's 1962 lab rat study, on the one hand, it says a lot about the power of genetics.
On the other hand, in order to achieve hypertension in those rats, he gave them just flat-out
boo-cool loads of salt, unrealistic to the amount any human would ever consume.
So the study has a twang of deep value and a few sprinkles of irrelevance.
What do you make of it?
It doesn't matter because Dahl and his rats quickly became the salt reduction champions
of the United States.
If you're talking salt and hypertension, you're talking Lewis, Kitchener, Dahl.
He quickly became the front-running scientist for limiting salt.
His influence started to reach beyond just the scientific community, now the government
is getting involved.
1969, the White House had its first meeting to talk about reducing salt for the nation.
And in 1972, the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute sponsored the National Blood
Pressure Education campaign, the first campaign.
America is starting to get the message, and this campaign did not come out of nowhere.
Just earlier, in the same year, Dahl released one of his most controversial papers yet,
salt and hypertension.
It was a mix of a commentary and a review, and in it, he revealed that this was about
more than just the scientific facts.
Dahl wrote,
My social life is plagued by people who think I am against their eating salt.
I am convinced that adding salt is bad, but I do not believe that it is a sin.
I noticed something when reading Dahl's papers.
He had a repulsion for adding salt, the literal action of adding salt to a meal.
It clearly bothered him.
In his earlier work, he came up with the idea to classify people in groups depending on
if they added salt to their meal or not.
Those who added salt without tasting food were classified as high intake.
Now this is a hilariously fallible way to classify people, and Dahl would acknowledge
that, but what this does is it unmasks the theory that Dahl is driven by.
The salt that is present naturally in a food is all that is necessary.
Any salt added after that is bad.
That's right, completely unsalted meals for the king of salt reduction in America.
He will stand at 10 toes down, you couldn't shove him off his position if you were coming
in at 6'5 and 280 pounds.
As he wrote,
What?
In other words, Dahl was saying that he believed his conclusion to be true regardless of any
evidence you brought to his table to say otherwise.
And uh oh, Dahl's immovable position seemed to have rubbed off on the government.
You see, we may think that we have lower sodium options at the grocery store because the public
spoke out and demanded better lower salt options or else, but no, that didn't happen.
Low salt labels aren't a result of the public's cry out, but a direct result of the government's
numerous initiatives.
You see, it wasn't just the WHO or just the NHLBI.
After that 1969 meeting, everyone got involved.
The USDA, FDA, ADA, AHA, AMA, NBA, I mean the list goes on.
Agencies comprised of scientists, doctors, health professionals, agencies I'd never
heard of, the media got involved.
This was a nationwide effort from every relevant corner of the entire government.
The government tasked food industries to emphasize low sodium labeling and to make more low sodium
options.
Low salt labeling started to appear in grocery stores all across America.
This is one of the most grand dietary movements to ever take place in the United States.
Okay, so back to thinking about our thoughts.
We didn't get this from staying hip to the latest research.
Most of us had no idea what was going on in the 70s, but all of us have been in the grocery
store.
When you see a food and you see the low salt alternative, you cannot avoid the thought
that this ingredient cannot be good for me.
Now, multiply this by the media influence on the topic, multiply this by what your friends
and family say about salt, and we may not have paid attention to it, but most of us
have subliminally villainized salt.
You see, we have the order all wrong.
The research started it all, which then influenced the government, which then charged food industries,
which then influenced us.
The problem here is the same problem that we've been having for decades.
Where is the influence coming from?
There's two options.
In TOPS, who I mentioned earlier, I think he hit the nail on the head.
Public health policy versus good science.
Two behemoths, Godzilla versus King Kong.
TOPS also quoted Drum and Rini, an esteemed nephrologist who says, you can say without
a shadow of a doubt that NHLBI has made a commitment to salt education that goes way
beyond the scientific facts.
So Godzilla might be cheating a little bit.
The government going beyond the scope of facts to make policy sounds shady, right?
Any time there's a gap between the government doing something and why the government is
doing something, it's very tempting to want to bridge it.
Any attempt to bridge this gap is going to come off as conspiratorial.
If anything like me, you kind of check out when things become all about conspiracy.
They may serve a function somewhere, but in general, they kind of leave you cynical versus
empowered.
All masters will only have two things left to do.
We got to get down to dirty with the biology.
What's actually taking place in the body between sodium and blood pressure?
Then we got to look at the science, the big picture, and come up with a salty verdict.
Hey, fun fact.
Did you know I make these videos all on my own, completely independent?
And I'm not saying that for any reason other than the fact that I've read that some of
you guys think that I have a team.
I don't.
It's just me.
But I do have my supporters, you guys, and we still haven't come up with a community
name, but I think we're onto something with this hat.
It's yours.
It's available to you.
Check it out in the below.
In the below.
I almost had it one take.
Check it out in the link in the description.
Sodium and hypertension, a large part driving the confusion behind the topic, is the question
of how.
If sodium is affecting blood pressure, then how?
What mechanisms are at play here?
As this review states, pathophysiologic mechanisms leading to increased blood pressure values
have been long time debated and have not yet been completely elucidated.
In other words, the connection between sodium and blood pressure is an intricate one, and
no one has been able to say with 100% certainty that they know exactly what's going on here.
There are really three theories we're going to go over here, and it may be time to sit
up and lean in because this first one is packed with stuff we got to talk about.
Most folks, including a lot of scientists, believe in this first theory, and that is
the water retention theory.
We know sodium as an electrolyte.
We know a trait of electrolytes is that where they go, water follows.
With this, we can assume that an increase of sodium leads to a retention of sodium,
which leads to a retention of water.
The kidney is only letting out so much free water as it wants to keep some, so we aren't
too soft concentrated.
We end up reaching this steady water retained state.
More water means increased blood value, and increased blood value means increased blood
pressure.
Okay, can anybody guess where this theory can go wrong?
The answer isn't right in our face, and actually we have to zoom in a little bit.
A group of researchers were in a lab studying six healthy nonhypertensive men and gave them
increasingly more salt over the course of 24 days with the intentions of measuring something
totally unrelated to the subject at hand.
But their procedure led them to accidentally discover something that they weren't expecting.
They found that an increase of sodium did not lead to an increase of the body's water,
but a shift in the body's water.
The finding was so exciting that they did another study to focus on just that finding.
They performed a randomized control trial.
We got ourselves a gold batch.
They took 32 healthy nonhypertensive men and split them into four groups to be fed different
amounts of salt over seven days.
One group at 1,500 milligrams of salt, one at 6,000, one at 12,100, and finally, one
at 16,700.
Enough salt to make Louis Ketchum the doll sit up in his grave.
What they found was remarkable.
There was no water retention effect.
No water retention effect.
You hear that voice switch up, mess around, drop a podcast on y'all, change the game up.
Listen, if you really want to understand the weight of these researchers' results, and
not only that, but the actual relationship between salt and blood pressure, we do have
to go a little deeper.
And if you're anything like me, once you start to go a little deep, you kind of lose it.
So I heard that if you hit the like button, that increases your chances of understanding
by like 15%.
Don't be the person to not find out.
Intracellular water is the water that resides inside of ourselves.
There's a lot of places for the body to put water other than inside of ourselves, so extracellular
water, water outside of ourselves, has to be compartmentalized to smaller subcompartments.
One is intravascular water, the water within our blood vessels.
The other is interstitial water, the water running in between everything.
What these researchers found was that the intravascular fluid volume was the fluid compartment that
increased after salt loading, and somehow, extracellular fluid volume was unaffected.
Now, when I say I was befuddled reading this, I was absolutely befuddled.
How can something that is within something increase in volume, but the whole entire thing
doesn't increase in volume?
If we picture this out, it's like having one big balloon, and inside of it are two
smaller balloons.
One of them increases in volume, but the big balloon's volume doesn't change.
How can this happen?
Well, the researchers found there was a shift of the interstitial fluid into the intravascular
fluid, like one little balloon giving air to the other.
The researchers also found this experiment to have no effect on the participant's blood
pressure throughout the study.
How?
Intravascular fluid increased, which means blood volume increased, which means blood pressure
should increase, right?
The researchers mentioned after a high salt mill, the blood volume is going to increase.
It seems for healthy individuals, this effect is temporary, or what we call transient.
As the researchers noted, this increased blood volume lasted for only an hour or two.
This is me saying this, not them.
I believe they didn't find an effect on blood pressure because it's not like the
blood pressure never budged during the study, but they said that they measured it in the
morning, not directly after salt loading, which would mean that the participant's underlying
blood pressure throughout the entire study was unaffected.
I told you to lean in and buckle up.
Now how can the body hold more sodium, yet not retain a corresponding amount of water?
This was hinted at a non-osmolar storage of sodium, meaning sodium in the body that is
not impacting water balance.
This is absolutely buck wild.
This ninja sodium in the body.
If we dove deeper into this, we'd be steering way off of the course of this video, but we're
starting to enter the territory of understanding just how complex this relationship between
sodium and blood pressure actually is.
This isn't the only research paper that shakes things up.
We're learning and discovering that sodium handling, how the body handles sodium, it's
much more dynamic than what we thought.
Theory number two is a popular theory introduced by scientists named Guyton in 1991, explained
that the kidney and its related system is really the judge of if we undergo high blood pressure
from excess salt or not.
The kidney is closely intertwined with hormones, enzymes, and other little things that tightly
regulate fluid balance, the tightening and widening of blood vessels, as well as blood
pressure overall.
To keep things simple, we'll refer to this as the kidney fluid system.
The kidney fluid system is one of the systems in charge of keeping the body in homeostasis,
a.k.a. a state of physiological balance.
The Guyton theory goes as follows.
Increased salt results in increased thirst, increased thirst results in increased water
drinking to balance it out.
This increase in body fluid leads to increased volume of the blood, which then increases
blood pressure.
He says as long as the kidney fluid system functions normally, we can eat either extremely
small amounts of salt or as much as 50 times as much without a major alteration in blood
pressure.
By this theory, regarding blood pressure, a person's salt sensitivity could be determined
by how much of a bottleneck or a handicap a person's kidney fluid system is.
In a sense that if a person's kidney cannot pee out enough sodium to keep things balanced
without sufficiently raising the blood pressure, then that person is more salt sensitive.
Now, the Guyton theory is one of the most recognized theories there is, but it is not
the walk-off home run answer.
There's still a lot of nuance going on here.
Theory number three isn't really much of a theory.
It's just an excuse for me to bring up the sympathetic nervous system because our nervous
system is all up in the mix of this relationship with sodium and blood pressure.
The sympathetic nervous system is in charge of our fight or flight mode, the mode that
activates when we're stressed, in danger, or highly active.
This mode is always on just in varying degrees.
Its activity is hiding when you're getting ready to skydive out of a plane, and its activity
is lessened when you're winding down with some bedside reading.
The sympathetic nervous system is the major system behind our blood pressure responses.
This study on lab rats found that after a high salt regimen, it wasn't the salt itself
that increased blood pressure, but an over-activation of the sympathetic nervous system that made
the rats more sensitive to the salt.
Another rat study, I mean take it how you want, but I could not possibly create this
video without mentioning the sympathetic nervous system, which quick tip we can directly
influence by breathing.
I always say there's a reason we are designed to control what is otherwise automatic in
breathing.
Again, not going too deep here, but I want us to get into the headspace of what all is
going into this.
There's a reason you never heard of how salt and blood pressure are connected because
how can we even explain it in just a few sentences, but there is something going on.
It just isn't as linear as 1, 2, 3, ABC.
It's more like 1, 2 percent sign X of left, down, down, right.
Now we have to ask the question, if the connection between salt and blood pressure is so not
straightforward, then why are our instructions so straightforward?
Reduce your salt intake.
With one of the most cited recommendations being the WHO, less than 2,000 milligrams
of sodium, that's 5 grams of salt.
That's about this much.
Not a salty pebble more.
That's it.
I may have an unpopular opinion here, but I don't think there's anything inherently
wrong with the prescription of less than 2,000 milligrams, however I do believe it's enormously
irresponsible for myself, the government, or anyone to dub 2,000 as the magic number.
The idea that we could fit every single body on the same less than 2,000 milligrams boat
and happily ship that salty sucker off smooth sailing down the river is ridiculous.
All right, I gotta clean up all the salt that I spilled on the floor.
The salt saga is just like running the 400 meter hurdle race.
There is barrier after barrier after barrier.
If we want to get the answers that we want, then we gotta traverse over these hurdles.
What are these hurdles?
Well, it's the research, it's kind of bad, and it's getting in the way.
Let's zoom out and understand the scope of the issue.
Blood pressure.
The goal?
Figure out if and how they're connected.
How can we go about this?
We have two options, really.
Observational studies and interventional studies.
In observational studies, we're looking at a population.
We assess their salt intake, we assess their blood pressure, and boom, we have our results.
There are different ways to go about this, and each method yielding different levels
of quality in the results.
We can do a 24-hour recall.
Hey, population of people, us scientists, are time to figure out how much sodium you
consume.
Please tell us what you've eaten over the last 24 hours.
Most of us hardly remember what we had just a few hours ago for breakfast.
Not to mention, this method only captures one day, and unless the entire population
of people is the type to sling together the same ham sandwich every single day for lunch,
then one day just won't cut it.
24-hour recall, try it.
We could do food records.
This is prone to bias, and it's hard to get a large group of people to adhere to this
method, especially if you don't have them gathered up in the laboratory.
Food records, better than 24-hour recall, but still garbage.
What about a food frequency questionnaire?
This method has similar issues as the past two, plus it's not specific enough.
So food frequency questionnaire, the best method to measure sodium in an observational study
would have to be collecting pee.
Not from just one urine sample, not from just a few urine samples over eight hours,
but it's going to have to be the gold standard of collecting multiple consecutive 24-hour
pee tests.
That's the only way to get an accurate snapshot of a person's sodium intake.
Okay, I'm being a little facetious when I call the research straight up bad, but I want
us to understand the challenge that we've been facing and continue to face.
Sodium varies way too much day to day to do anything other than multiple 24-hour pee
tests.
However, these tests are very difficult to orchestrate.
Imagine being in one of these studies and you were tasked to have every single urine
episode collected for two to three days.
When it comes to observational studies, the harder something is for scientists and the
population to carry out, the less people the study will have.
The easier it is for everyone, the more people.
So we're choosing between what we want, a high volume of folks at the expense of accuracy
or high accuracy at the expense of the amount of folks.
The American Heart Association put out an article just about how many chances there
are for a large observational study to go wrong.
What if there are participants who were instructed by their doctor to reduce sodium or they're
on blood pressure meds?
What if some folks are sick or have pre-existing conditions?
What about confounding factors like age, sex, race, or smoking?
The imbalance, too many people, too far apart in age or race, what if the researchers suck
at following up?
I mean, the list goes on and on, but now that we have a solid understanding of the plight
of observational studies, let's overview interventional.
And short interventional studies are just when the researchers do something, they intervene
with the subjects.
They typically look like this.
We split subjects up into two or more groups, we give subjects different levels of salt,
and we measure their blood pressure responses.
Interventional studies have a spectrum of quality as well, but are miles ahead of observational
studies in terms of the value that we get because of the level of control that the researchers
get.
We can be extremely picky over the exact avatar of a person we want to measure.
We can keep folks in a lab for a few days.
We can feed exact amounts of sodium.
We can randomize participants, blind them to what we're measuring.
We can have a control group to balance out results.
We have control.
Now, interventional studies aren't completely free of biases and other error, but they are
the reason that in general, the scientific community does agree that reducing sodium
can reduce blood pressure.
And that leads us perfectly into this next one.
After 120 years of measuring salt and blood pressure, what do we agree on?
Three things.
Number one, the scientific community generally agrees this is hard.
It's really hard to get the number of how much sodium.
The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, or NASM, is a non-governmental
independent organization.
The nutritional arm of this organization are the folks who come up with dietary reference
intakes.
Information the public receives on how much of stuff we should be consuming.
For example, this amount of vitamin A will cover the ground for a majority of healthy
folks.
This amount of vitamin A is probably pushing it.
When they can't come up with these exact numbers, they pull out what they call the adequate
intake number, which is used to basically say, hey, you need at least this much.
There ain't enough evidence to come up with anything else.
And you guessed it.
I looked at the sodium report and I haven't seen the words insufficient evidence repeated
more than anything I've ever read.
So they have to come up with this adequate intake number.
And in order to do this, they have to look at sodium balance.
Sodium balance.
If we can measure every molecule of sodium entering and leaving someone, we may be able
to get a good idea of how much is physiologically needed.
This is so incredibly hard to do that NASM mentioned only two studies were able to pull
it off and they said only one was rigorous enough.
In the end, NASM came up with the adequate intake number of 1500 milligrams.
But the number doesn't matter as much as why they state these numbers are so hard to come
up with.
Secretration and infradient rhythm.
What language am I speaking?
NASM pointed out these two things as another factor, not only widening the difference between
an individual and a separate individual, but the difference between an individual and himself.
Secretion refers to sodium storage in the body that isn't subject to excretion.
So in the same way that we stash our piggy banks in the top left corner of our closets,
there's emerging evidence that our body does this as well with sodium.
Infradient rhythm refers to how sodium handling in the body isn't subject to circadian rhythm.
Like our hormones are, for example.
What the body does with sodium within 24 hours may be miles away from what it will do in
the next.
Agreement number two, we're going to pull out a review published in 2020 that highlighted
areas of agreement for my own personal convenience.
There's general agreement that reducing sodium intake reduces blood pressure, especially
in people with hypertension, especially in people with hypertension.
An important note, I wanted to highlight something that was said in another review.
More studies have confirmed the benefit of reducing sodium intake in hypertensive subjects
with a high salt intake.
It is unclear whether the remaining more than 90% of the population will profit from a dietary
sodium restriction.
It would perhaps be more correct to start discussing inappropriate rather than excessive
salt intake.
Thirdly, the scientific community also generally agrees that high sodium intake is deleterious.
The review went on to say, mortality from cardiovascular disease increased at the highest
levels of sodium consumption, noting over 5,000 milligrams.
Mortality referring to the rate of death.
We want mortality to be low, and now is actually the perfect time to hop right into it.
Let's not wait a moment further.
We're going to discuss the big picture.
We're talking about salt and blood pressure.
We are using blood pressure as the risk factor, meaning an increased blood pressure equals
an increased risk.
Increased risk of what?
Cardiovascular disease.
This lives under the assumption that an increased blood pressure can eventually lead to cardiovascular
disease.
So high blood pressure isn't the problem.
Now saying it isn't a problem, but it is one of the handful of things that is indicative
of an individual who may suffer from a cardiovascular disease.
Can high sodium increase blood pressure?
Yes, we've learned that.
Does high sodium increase blood pressure in every person every time?
No, it does not.
We've learned that.
Sodium has a relationship with blood pressure.
Its relationship is not linear for everyone across the board.
Sodium is also not the only factor modulating blood pressure.
So sodium cannot be the sole reason we would develop cardiovascular disease.
Why do I bring this up?
Because we've made it all about salt.
But when we bring up the increased mortality rate of individuals consuming these levels
of salt, we have to ask, where are they getting this salt from?
450 adults, Alabama, California, and Minnesota, equal numbers of men and women from each
ethnic group of blacks, Asians, Hispanics, and whites were assessed.
They found that over 70% of the sodium consumed was from processed foods.
I've read how high salt is linked to other diseases other than cardiovascular diseases,
right?
Like stomach cancer or kidney disease.
But I mean, come on, I'd be shocked if it wasn't connected to these things considering
that high salt is coming straight from the stuff that's been taking us out the whole
time.
So, what's the total of this ingredient list?
Can you guess the food?
So ingredient lists are ordered from what's present in the food in the highest amount
to the lowest.
Sugar is the first ingredient.
Okay, so this was a bag of popcorn, but somehow popcorn ended up being the second ingredient?
How do you even pull that off?
How can knocking back stuff like this with loads of sugar, problematic oils, and miscellaneous
synthetic stuff not be linked to various diseases?
Okay, but what do we focus on sodium alone?
Well, two handfuls of this stuff will net us somewhere around 160 milligrams of sodium.
But this bag of popcorn is a pretty bad offender.
What about this?
A slice of sandwich bread.
We're looking at about 130 milligrams of sodium.
Perhaps with this we have a sausage, egg, and cheese breakfast sandwich for breakfast.
For lunch, we're having canned veggie soup with a turkey sami.
The fam had spaghetti for dinner, but we weren't that hungry, so we only had a teeny bit along
with a side salad with that hidden valley ranch.
At the end of the day, we end up somewhere around 2,695 milligrams of sodium.
This isn't an outrageous number by any means, but that's actually not the point.
Look at it this way.
Popular strawberry flavored breakfast bar, strawberry, potato chips, potato, canned tomato
sauce, tomato.
Naturally, whole foods ain't coming along with a lot of salty baggage.
From the farm to your plate, who has more input on your food?
You or the food industry?
The more responsibility over our food we relinquish up to the food industry, the more
salt our food will end up having.
Some of the saltiest of the bunch being cured meats, canned items, and bread adds up as well.
The food industry needs to add salt for a ton of reasons.
Preservation, flavor helps with coloration, and even texture for some foods.
Okay, don't get me wrong here y'all.
It's not as if salt is the reason processed food is bad.
Processed food has a lot to be desired.
The problem is the same problem America has been facing from the jump.
Too much.
Most people ingest more salt than needed, but in the western world, this could be generalized
to all minerals, vitamins, energy sources, and even water.
Too many vitamins and minerals.
What about this?
Imagine the individual going through life on willy-nilly with their nutrition, ordering
and eating out, take out, grab and go, handful it is, handful it at, leaving their food
up to the will of the industry.
Versus the nutritionally proactive individual who starts with whole foods, adding their
own salt and going from there.
The sodium intake difference between these two people would be massive.
But even so, if we analyze the individual who is consuming these processed foods, this
is the same individual who is less likely to have an exercise routine, is less likely
to have a sleep routine, is less likely to have a de-stress routine, this person is less
likely to be health conscious.
You tell me, who is more likely to develop hypertension and cardiovascular disease?
Salt isn't the problem as far as lifestyle is the problem.
Wow.
I mean, there's so much we couldn't even get to.
Potassium, which is abundant in plant food, is kind of like the biological opposite of
sodium.
I didn't even mention some of the awesome functions of sodium, how it's a major player
in our nervous system.
I kind of think of sodium as the mineral of action.
Without it, we'd be as stiff as a street light.
I'm sure I'll see a comment about the inter-salt study of 88, one of the largest international
studies ever done.
Another seminal point to the salty saga, still questions to be answered.
What about the sodium needs of a person that simply moves more?
How do my sodium needs change as my life changes in season?
You should be asking yourself, how did I get to this point in the video and not leave a
like?
Love you guys.
Thanks so much.
I hope you gained some insight and some perspective.
I'm going to get a batch out of the way.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
