 TICS Aug 2000 _  14/7/00  10:01 am  Page 299

S c h o l l   a n d   T r e m o u l e t   –   P e r c e p t u a l   c a u s a l i t y   a n d   a n i m a c y

Review

Perceptual causality and

animacy

Brian J. Scholl and Patrice D. Tremoulet

Certain simple visual displays consisting of moving 2-D geometric shapes can give rise to

percepts with high-level properties such as causality and animacy. This article reviews

recent research on such phenomena, which began with the classic work of Michotte and

of Heider and Simmel. The importance of such phenomena stems in part from the fact

that these interpretations seem to be largely perceptual in nature – to be fairly fast,

automatic, irresistible and highly stimulus driven – despite the fact that they involve

impressions typically associated with higher-level cognitive processing. This research

suggests that just as the visual system works to recover the physical structure of the

world by inferring properties such as 3-D shape, so too does it work to recover the causal

and social structure of the world by inferring properties such as causality and animacy.

Imagine viewing simple movies of the following sort:

(1) Two small squares are sitting in a line, separated by
several inches. The first square (A) moves in a straight line
until  it  reaches  the  second  square  (B),  at  which  point  A
stops moving and B starts moving along the same trajectory.
(2) Two small squares are sitting in a line, separated by
several  inches.  The  first  square  (A)  begins  moving  in  a
straight  line  towards  the  second  square  (B).  As  soon  as  A
gets close to B, B begins moving quickly away from A in a
random direction, until it is again several inches from A, at
which  point  it  stops.  A  continues  all  the  while  to  move
straight towards B’s position, wherever that is at any given
moment. This pattern repeats several times.

Objectively, all that is happening in such movies is the
kinematics described above. Perceptually, however, a strik-
ing thing happens: in the first movie, you see A cause the mo-
tion of B, and in the second movie, you see A and B as alive,
and perhaps as having certain intentional states, such as A
wanting to catch B, and B trying to escape (such movies –
and movies of all the figures in this article –  can be viewed
at  http://wjh.harvard.edu/~scholl/demos/Michotte.html).
These are examples of what have been called ‘functional re-
lations’1, wherein one perceives various properties in simple
displays  that  are  found  objectively  in  neither  the  actual
events themselves nor in their retinal projections.

Such phenomena were first studied in the early 1900s,
and later captured the attention of many psychologists with
the  publication  of  Michotte’s  book  The  Perception  of
Causality1, and of Heider and Simmel’s classical article ‘An
experimental study of apparent behavior’2. The importance
of  such  phenomena  stems  partially  from  the  fact  that  al-
though they seem to be largely perceptual in nature – to be
fairly fast, automatic, irresistible and highly stimulus-driven
– they nevertheless yield impressions such as causality and
animacy,  which  are  typically  associated  with  higher-level

cognitive processing. This research suggests that just as the
visual system works to recover the physical structure of the
world by inferring properties such as 3-D shape, so too does
it  work  to  recover  the  causal  and  social  structure  of  the
world by inferring properties such as causality and animacy.
One especially intriguing aspect of these phenomena is
how simple and spare the stimuli can be, with visual displays
containing only a few small-moving 2-D geometric shapes.
This article focuses on recent work using such displays, and
does  not  discuss  other  experiments  on  animacy  that  have
used more specialized stimuli such as faces3, hands4 or the
biological  motion  of  ‘point-light  walkers’5.  It  is  also  re-
stricted to those studies that have investigated the perception
of causality and animacy. Of course, there is also a wealth of
research on when adults and children of all ages will infer the
existence of a cause or an animate being6,7. (This distinction
between  perceived  and  inferred  causality  and  animacy  is
discussed at length in the final section of this article.)

In sum, this article discusses cases in which very simple
displays  give  rise  to  surprisingly  high-level  percepts.  That
perceptual systems can produce such high-level impressions
perhaps seems more intuitive when one considers the per-
ceptual recovery of other less exotic properties such as 3-D
structure8. Some basic visual features (e.g. local orientation)
can be recovered fairly directly, whereas others (e.g. depth)
cannot be unambiguously extracted from retinal projections
without making various other assumptions – for example,
the heuristic assumption of rigid objects that the visual sys-
tem makes in some situations in order to extract structure
from motion9. Such assumptions often appear to be hard-
wired  into  the  visual  system,  and  are  thus  implicit,  un -
reportable and distinct from higher-level cognitive interpre-
tations10.  In  such  cases,  methods  from  psychophysics  and
experimental  psychology  can  be  used  to  discover  these   
assumptions, and they can be demonstrated in salient ways

B.J. Scholl is at the
Vision Sciences
Laboratory
Department of
Psychology, Harvard
University, 33
Kirkland Street.
Cambridge, MA
02138, USA.

tel: +1 617 495 3884
fax: +1 617 495 3764
e-mail: scholl@
wjh.harvard.edu

P.D. Tremoulet is at
the Center for
Cognitive Science,
Rutgers University –
New Brunswick, 152
Freylinghuysen Road,
Piscataway, NJ
08854-8020, USA.

tel: +1 732 445 6707
fax: +1 732 445 6715
e-mail: pollyt@
ruccs.rutgers.edu

1364-6613/00/$ – see front matter © 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.     PII: S1364-6613(00)01506-0

T r e n d s   i n   C o g n i t i v e   S c i e n c e s   –   V o l .   4 ,   N o .   8 ,     A u g u s t   2 0 0 0

299

 TICS Aug 2000 _  14/7/00  10:01 am  Page 300

Review

S c h o l l   a n d   T r e m o u l e t   –   P e r c e p t u a l   c a u s a l i t y   a n d   a n i m a c y

(a)  Launching

(b)  Entraining

(c)  Launching with a temporal gap

(d)  Triggering

(e)  Launching with a spatial gap

(f)  The tool effect

Time

Fig. 1. Examples of some of Michotte’s basic demonstrations of perceptual causality. Perception of two objects, A and B (here shown
as red and green circles). (a) The launching effect. (b) The entraining effect, wherein A seems to carry B along with it. (c) The launching effect
is destroyed by adding a temporal gap between A’s and B’s motions. (d) The triggering effect, wherein B’s motion is seen as autonomous,
despite still being caused by A. (e) The launching effect is also destroyed by adding a spatial gap between A’s final position and B’s initial
position. (f) The tool effect, wherein intermediate item (gray circle) seems merely a tool by which A causes the entire motion sequence.

trends in Cognitive Sciences

by using simple schematic displays that satisfy the assump-
tions  in  the  most  minimal  way  possible.  This  is  what  the
‘kinetic depth effect’11 does for the case of computing struc-
ture from motion, for instance, and we suggest that this is
exactly  what  Michotte,  Heider  and  their  contemporary
academic descendants have done for causality and animacy.
The remainder of this article is organized into three sec-
tions. In the first, we review contemporary research that has
been conducted on perceptual causality. In the second, we
review  recent  research  on  perceptual  animacy.  Finally,  in
the  concluding  section,  we  evaluate  the  evidence  for  the
allegedly perceptual nature of such phenomena.

Perceptual causality
Foundations
The  landmark  work  on  the  perception  of  causality  was
Michotte’s book of that name, first published in French in

1946,  and  later  updated  and  translated  into  English  in
1963  (Ref. 1).  (Several  of  his  earlier  works  on  this  topic
have been translated and gathered together in a more recent
collection12.)  Michotte’s  general  strategy  was  to  show  ob-
servers  various  simple  displays  such  as  those  described  in
the  first  paragraph  of  this  article,  and  to  record  their  re-
ported percepts. The observers in Michotte’s experiments
were not well described, and appear with some exceptions
to  have  consisted  of  Michotte  himself  and  his  close  col-
leagues and students. For this and other reasons, Michotte’s
methods  have  received  much  criticism,  some  of  it  rather
vigorous and well deserved13,14, though at least partially ex-
plainable  in  terms  of  the  methodological  zeitgeist  of  the
day15,16.  Beyond  these  early  criticisms,  it  is  important  to
stress that much of the data from the experiments described
in this review result from perceptual reports, and are, in this
manner, similar to investigations of other subjective visual

300

T r e n d s   i n   C o g n i t i v e   S c i e n c e s   –   V o l .   4 ,   N o .   8 ,     A u g u s t   2 0 0 0

 TICS Aug 2000 _  14/7/00  10:01 am  Page 301

S c h o l l   a n d   T r e m o u l e t   –   P e r c e p t u a l   c a u s a l i t y   a n d   a n i m a c y

Review

phenomena, such as amodal completion
or illusory contours. Evidence that such
reports reflect perceptual processing un-
contaminated  by  later  and  higher-level
interpretations  is  discussed  in  the  final
section of this article.

(a)  Pulling

(b)  Enforced disintegration

(c)  Bursting

Nearly  all  of  Michotte’s  demon-
strations were based on variations of the
launching effect described in the opening
paragraph of this article: one small object
(A) moves until it is adjacent to another
item (B), at which point A stops and B
starts  moving.  (Throughout  this  article,
‘A’ and ‘B’ refer to these respective roles.)
Such  displays  give  rise  to  a  version  of
‘phenomenal
what  Michotte  called 
causality’  and  what  others  have  termed
‘the illusion of causality’17: a strong per-
cept that A caused B’s motion – that A
pushed B, shoved B, ‘made it go’. In such
cases,  B’s  motion  is  not  perceived  as  its
own, but rather as a simple continuation
of A’s motion: the percept is of two dis-
tinct items but of a single motion that is
transferred  between  them.  The  bulk  of
Michotte’s  demonstrations  and  most  of
the early extensions to his work consisted
of discovering the spatiotemporal param-
eters that mediate these causal percepts,
such  as  the 
items’  relative  speeds,
speed–mass  interactions8,18,  overall  path
lengths,  and  spatial  and  temporal  gaps.
Perhaps the most crucial result, however,
is simply that there are such precise con-
ditions: these percepts seem to be largely
stimulus  driven,  and  objectively  small
manipulations  to  the  displays  can  cause
the causal nature of the percepts to disap-
pear. Figure 1 portrays these basic effects
and some of the manipulations explored
by Michotte. (Note that the dynamic nature of these dis-
plays is crucial to the robust percepts, as can be seen in the
online movies.)

Several  researchers  following  Michotte  attempted  to
tone down some of his stronger claims. Michotte implied
that his effects were seen for all observers immediately, but
others  have  demonstrated  that  only  65%  to  85%  of  ob-
servers report the basic launching percept upon its first pre-
sentation13,19–21.  Similarly,  others  have  demonstrated  that
the robustness of the reports of causal percepts can be al-
tered with practice, for example by varying the number of
highly causal or highly non-causal intervening displays be-
fore the test displays22,23. However, as others have indicated,
many  such  manipulations  might  affect  response  biases
rather  than  the  actual  percepts24.  And,  as  stressed  by
White21,  such  amendments  to  Michotte’s  strong  claims
should not distract us from the existence of the phenomena
in the first place: ‘The remarkable thing…is that causal pro-
cessing  is  sufficiently  irresistible  to  occur  at  all  with  such
imperfect stimuli’.

Time

trends in Cognitive Sciences

Fig.  2. Displays  used  by  White  and  Milne  to  extend  Michotte’s  ‘catalog’  of  functional  relations27,28. 
(a) Displays that give rise to percepts of pulling. White and Milne explored the effects of several variables on this
percept, and demonstrated that: (1) strong pulling impressions are only obtained with staggered (versus simulta-
neous) motion onsets, though speed does not seem to affect the percept; (2) the duration of delay between suc-
cessive motion onsets of different items does not seem to affect the percept very much; and (3) weaker pulling per-
cepts are obtained for downward vertical motion, possibly because of gravity. They also noted that the order of
motion does not seem to be important for the existence of the pulling percept: an object is seen as ‘pulled’ as long
as any adjacent item starts moving first. (b) and (c) Displays that give rise to percepts of enforced disintegration
and bursting, respectively. For such percepts, White and Milne explored the effects of several variables such as the
speed of the initial item, the speed of the ‘fragments’ after contact and the direction and width of the arc of frag-
ment dispersal. They found that enforced disintegration percepts such as those obtained for (b) were highest when
the initial speeds were faster than the fragment speeds, and when the direction of fragment dispersal continued
the causing object’s motion and was fairly broad. For bursting, stronger percepts were obtained when the initial
speed was slower than the fragment speed, though dispersal factors did not seem to play any role.

Contemporary studies
Much of the contemporary research on perceptual causality
has attempted to generalize the basic phenomena in various
ways.  For  example,  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  the
launching  effect  replicates with  other types  of  stimuli, in-
cluding apparent motion rather than real motion17, and that
such percepts seems to be culturally universal25,26. In Morris
and Peng’s experiments25, American and Chinese observers’
percepts of launching displays did not differ, despite the fact
that  these  two  groups  had  massively  different  patterns  of
higher-level causal attribution.

Several other researchers have extended Michotte’s studies
both  by  continuing  his  exploration  of  the  mediating  spa-
tiotemporal variables, and by extending the ‘catalog’ of ‘func-
tional  relations’  to  include  other  phenomena.  For  example,
White and Milne created various simple displays that gave rise
to  the  robust  percept  that  one  object  was  pulling  another27
(conceptually  similar  to  Michotte’s  ‘traction’  experiments).
An example of such a stimulus is shown in Fig. 2a. Here, the
middle  object,  which  moves  first,  is seen  to  pull  the  others

T r e n d s   i n   C o g n i t i v e   S c i e n c e s   –   V o l .   4 ,   N o .   8 ,     A u g u s t   2 0 0 0

301

 TICS Aug 2000 _  14/7/00  10:01 am  Page 302

Review

S c h o l l   a n d   T r e m o u l e t   –   P e r c e p t u a l   c a u s a l i t y   a n d   a n i m a c y

other subjective visual phenomena such as
amodal completions or illusory contours.
Moreover,  such  effects  in  general  seem
unlikely  to  be  entirely  due  to  a  response
bias,  because  of  developmental  work
showing that the ability to perceive causal-
ity from simple motion displays emerges
before infants have learned language.

Emergence in infancy
The  most  compelling  evidence  that  per-
ceptual  causality  emerges  early  in  life
comes from the work of Alan Leslie and his
colleagues30–32.  In  his  studies,  six-month-
old infants were habituated to one of sev-
eral  short  films  based  upon  Michotte’s
launching  displays.  After  habituation,  in-
fants  found  a  reversal  of  the  film  more
interesting if they had been habituated to
launching
spatiotemporally  contiguous 
displays (see Fig. 1a) than if they had been
habituated to displays with spatial or tem-
poral gaps that degrade the causal percept
in adults (see Fig. 1c,e). Leslie argues that
the  six-month-olds  looked  longer  at  re-
versed contiguous displays (compared with
reversed displays with spatial or temporal
gaps),  because,  although  all  displays  in-
volved reversed kinematics, only the reversed contiguous dis-
play (Fig. 1a) involved an additional change in the causal roles
(i.e. which shape is the ‘hitter’ and which is the ‘hittee’). In
short,  Leslie  and  his  colleagues  showed  that  six-month-olds
perceive causality when shown launching displays similar to
those  that  produce  causal  percept  in  adults32;  later  develop-
mental studies have supported and refined this picture33–38.

Perceptual animacy
From  the  beginning,  researchers  have  emphasized  that  the
property of animacy also appears to be perceived in simple
displays2,39.  Michotte  even  suggested  that  simple  motion
cues provide the foundation for social perception in general:
‘In ordinary life, the specifying factors – gestures, facial ex-
pressions,  speech  –  are  innumerable  and  can  be  differen-
tiated by an infinity of nuances. But they are all additional
refinements  compared  with  the  key  factors,  which  are  the
simple  kinetic  structures’39.  The  studies  of  perceptual  ani-
macy  discussed  below  involve  at  least  the  perception  of  a
simple  shape’s  being  alive;  in  addition,  many  of  them  go
even further and employ displays that give rise to the per-
ception of goals (e.g. ‘trying to get over here’) and even men-
tal  states  (e.g.  ‘wanting  to  get  over  there’).  Though  there
might  be  important  gradations  of  these  types  in  animacy
percepts, they are not discussed here, and all such phenom-
ena are referred to as demonstrations of perceptual animacy.
(For a discussion of such gradations – and, in particular, one
that characterizes the goal-directedness as more primary than
the perception of a self-propelled or living element – see the
recent papers by Csibra, Gergely and colleagues40,41.)

Heider and Simmel created a film showing three geo-
metric figures (a large triangle, a small triangle and a small

Fig. 3. Some sequential ‘snapshots’ from a dynamic display of the type used by Heider and Simme to
demonstrate perceptual animacyl2. Observers perceive the items in such displays as being alive, and even as
having goals and intentional states such as desires (e.g. the large triangle might be seen as wanting to catch the
small triangle).

trends in Cognitive Sciences

along. As in the launching display, observers see multiple ob-
jects but only a single motion, which is phenomenally dupli-
cated in all of the items. Note, however, that this display does
not satisfy the requirements for launching itself: the initial ob-
ject actually moves away from the other items, and at no time
do two items ever contact each other. In a related study, White
and Milne carried out similar investigations of percepts they
termed enforced disintegration and bursting28 (see Fig. 2b,c),
similar to Michotte’s triggering percepts in launching displays.
In each display, one item travels until it contacts a group of
additional items, at which point they begin moving with vari-
ous speeds and in various directions. Subjects perceive such
displays  in  terms  of  salient  categories  such  as  bursting.  The
pattern of mediating variables here is again fairly complex, but
the striking and important finding is just that, as with launch-
ing and entraining, these additional causal percepts seem to be
salient, immediate and irresistible, despite the fact that they
involve only geometric figures on a computer screen. (Note,
though, that although these phenomena are clearly causal and
embody additional types of ‘functional relations’, they might
not count as demonstrations of phenomenal causality per se
under Michotte’s strictest definition, wherein the existence of
only a single ‘ampliated’ motion in an event is crucial.)

In  all  of  their  experiments,  White  and  Milne  used
Natsoulas’ method of rating three different statements for each
display29, which emphasize a percept of pulling, of no interac-
tion, and of items moving on their own accord. This contrasts
with the bulk of the early research extending Michotte’s stud-
ies, which involved obtaining direct perceptual reports. Both
methods allow for effects to creep in at the response bias stage,
but are essentially ways of quantifying the qualitative percep-
tual experience, as is carried out in demonstrations of many

302

T r e n d s   i n   C o g n i t i v e   S c i e n c e s   –   V o l .   4 ,   N o .   8 ,     A u g u s t   2 0 0 0

 TICS Aug 2000 _  14/7/00  10:01 am  Page 303

S c h o l l   a n d   T r e m o u l e t   –   P e r c e p t u a l   c a u s a l i t y   a n d   a n i m a c y

Review

circle) moving in the vicinity of a rectangle2 (see Fig. 3, and
the movie clip online). Although static clips of the film con-
veyed  little  information  about  the  properties  of  the  circle
and triangles, after viewing the animation observers were re-
markably  consistent  when  asked  to  describe  the  objects.
Observers attributed personality traits (e.g. shyness, being a
bully) and emotions (e.g. frustration, anger) to the geomet-
ric  figures,  regardless  of  the  instructions  they  were  given.
Heider  and  Simmel  explained  these  findings  by  asserting
that  temporal  contiguity  and  spatial  proximity  produced
phenomenal relationships among the geometric figures.

Since Heider and Simmel’s original experiment, a large
number  of  follow-up  studies  have  assessed  the  generality
and robustness of such phenomena42. Early work suggesting
that the perception of animacy is context sensitive involved
priming the subjects with emotional information43 or giving
the  moving  shapes  little  iconic  facial  expressions44.  This
work was inconclusive, however, as the priming study intro-
duced  salient  task  demands,  whereas  the  facial  expressions
probably engaged distinct specialized recognition processes.
Moreover,  others  have  demonstrated  that  the  specific  ani-
mate descriptions given to such displays are remarkably con-
sistent  across  a  wide  range  of  cultures25,26,45,  and  develop-
mental  research  has  shown  that  three-  and  four-year-olds
also  attribute  desires,  emotions  and  personalities  to  the
geometric shapes in Heider and Simmel’s animation46.

Other developmental work has revealed that children will
interpret simple geometric shapes as intentional agents based
upon  their  movement  patterns40,41,47,48.  Gergely,  Csibra  and
their colleagues, for instance, have used displays such as those
in  Fig. 4  to  show  that  relatively  simple  motion  sequences,
which  do  not  rely  upon  self-initiated  movement  to  cue  ani-
macy, can produce an impression of goal-driven behavior in
nine-month-old  infants40,41.  Another  recent  study  used  this
same paradigm to demonstrate that chimpanzees also seem to
attribute goals to the items in such displays (see Fig. 4; Ref. 49).
Similarly, Rochat and colleagues report that even three-
month-olds preferred to look at displays with two discs engag-
ing in systematic ‘social’ interaction (chasing) than at displays
showing  the  discs  moving  independently50.  It  appears  that
young  infants  distinguish  movements  which  specify  social
causality for adults from those which do not. In another study,
nine-month-olds were  habituated to stimuli containing two
non-rigidly  moving  squares,  each  modeled  after  Michotte’s
‘caterpillar’ displays (expanding and contracting squares that
yield  an  impression  of  self-produced,  animate  motion  in
adults). Infants appeared to perceive causality at a distance in
their displays – that is, the infants seemed to infer that one
square causes movement in the other – without any contact
between them51. As nine-month-olds understand that inani-
mate  objects  cannot  act  upon  one  another  from  a  distance,
this indicates that these infants must have derived an impres-
sion of animacy from the quality of the objects’ motions.

Recent research with adults also supports the hypothesis
that it is the motion kinematics and not the featural proper-
ties of the objects that are largely responsible for perceptual
animacy. For example, animacy is perceived even when the
simple ‘actors’ in an animation sequence are groups of items
rather  than  unified  shapes52.  In  a  more  direct  contrast  be-
tween  motion  information  and  spatial  properties,  it  was

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

trends in Cognitive Sciences

Fig. 4. Depictions of the displays used to demonstrate that both infants40,41 and chim-
panzees49 attribute goals to simple shapes in certain dynamic displays. In the studies by
Gergely,  Csibra  and  colleagues40,41,  infants  as  young  as  nine  months  were  familiarized  with
either the event depicted in (a), where a rectangle ‘jumps’ over a barrier on its trajectory to-
wards a circle, or the event depicted in (b), where the rectangle follows the identical trajectory
despite the barrier’s location off to the side. Following familiarization, infants were tested on
displays without a barrier: in the event depicted in (c), the rectangle now moves on a straight
linear path towards the circle; in the event depicted in (d), the rectangle continues to follow the
same curved path it followed during familiarization trials. Infants who were familiarized with
event (a) looked longer at event (d) than at event (c) during test trials, whereas no such differ-
ence  was  observed  for  infants  familiarized  to  event  (b).  The  authors  explain  this  pattern  of
results by appeal to the idea that infants interpreted event (a) in goal-directed terms, with the
rectangle trying to reach the circle via the most direct unobstructed path. Infants familiarized
with event (a) thus found event (c) to be another instance of the same goal-directed event,
whereas event (d) was perceived as more novel, despite its greater superficial similarity to the
familiarization event (a). Uller and Nichols used this same type of setup and experimental logic
(though with slightly different methods) in a looking time study with chimpanzees, and found
similar results49: the chimpanzees also appeared to attribute goals to the event depicted in (a).

found  that  a  spatially  quantized  version  of  the  original
Heider and Simmel movie (which selectively eliminated fea-
tural  properties)  hardly  affected  observers’  descriptions,
whereas  a  temporally  quantized  version  (which  selectively
eliminated motion information) resulted in a drastic reduc-
tion in reported perceptual animacy53.

Motion cues
Several researchers have attempted to discover the specific
motion cues that mediate perceptual animacy. This research

T r e n d s   i n   C o g n i t i v e   S c i e n c e s   –   V o l .   4 ,   N o .   8 ,     A u g u s t   2 0 0 0

303

 TICS Aug 2000 _  14/7/00  10:01 am  Page 304

Review

S c h o l l   a n d   T r e m o u l e t   –   P e r c e p t u a l   c a u s a l i t y   a n d   a n i m a c y

program began with Bassili, who developed five computer-
controlled  displays,  each  showing  two  circles  moving  on 
a  dark  background54.  He  discovered  that  a  temporal
contingency between the changes in direction of two circles
produced the percept of an interaction between the figures,
and that spatial contingencies influenced the perception of
intentionality.  Unfortunately,  his  subjects’  ratings  of
animacy  were  highly  variable,  suggesting  that  different
observers used different cues to perceptual animacy.

More recent research has also explored the relationship
between  the  perception  of  interaction,  intention,  and  ani-
macy. Dittrich and Lea presented adult subjects with displays
containing several randomly moving letters (distractors) and
a target letter whose movement was designed to simulate bio-
logically meaningful, intentional motion – either predatory
stalking  or  following  a  parent  to  keep  from  getting  lost55.
(The second ‘movie’ from the opening paragraph of this arti-
cle is modeled on these displays.) Dittrich and Lea varied the
number of moving elements, the directness of movement of
the distractors (maximum angle of direction change between
cycles), the speed of the distractors (maximum movement be-
tween cycles), the directness of the target (maximum angular
deviation from a perfectly ‘heat-seeking’ path towards one of
the distractors chosen as a ‘sheep’ to the target’s ‘wolf’), the
speed of the target, and the ‘relentlessness’ of the target (mini-
mum movement between cycles). After viewing each display,
subjects were asked to identify which one of the characters
‘was different from the others’, and then to rate the degree to
which  the  selected  letter  appeared  to  be  doing  something
purposeful, how much it interacted with other letters and to
what extent it simulated an animate creature.

Dittrich  and  Lea  concluded  that  perceiving  a  target’s
movement to be animate motion depended on both the de-
gree to which there appeared to be an interaction between the
target and its goal, and the impression of intentionality pro-
duced by the movement. In addition, their data indicated that
the perception of interaction depends upon the relationship
between the trajectory of the target and the trajectories of the
distractors, and that the perception of intentionality depends
upon the trajectory of the target. More specifically, their ob-
servers  reported  more  intentional  percepts  from  displays  in
which the target’s motion was more direct, and were better at
detecting the ‘target’ object when it moved faster than the
distractors. Finally, causing the target’s ‘goal’ to be invisible
impaired but did not abolish the perceptual animacy.

Stewart also set out to investigate how motion influences
the perception of animacy (discussed in Ref. 55). Her inves-
tigation  was  guided  by  a  specific  hypothesis:  observers
should  describe  an  object  as  animate  whenever  its  motion
‘violates Newtonian laws’. Technically, motions cannot vio-
late Newtonian laws (except for relativistic effects); however,
it is clear that what Stewart actually meant was that motions
that would require a moving body to have access to a hidden
energy  source  (e.g.  smooth  accelerations  or  sudden  stops)
would be perceived as animate. She tested this idea, which
we will refer to as the ‘energy violation’ hypothesis, by pre-
senting  subjects  with  several  computer-generated  displays
showing a single ball moving in the vicinity of static bars that
were intended to be interpreted as obstacles and boundaries.
Although  some  of  Stewart’s  findings  were  consistent  with

her expectations, many of the motion paths that the energy
violation  hypothesis  predicts  will  be  perceived  as  animate
were  ambiguous:  some  of  Stewart’s  subjects  saw  them  as
inanimate and some saw them as animate. Only three types
of  motion  consistently  produced  animate  percepts:  starts
from rest, changes in direction to avoid a collision and direct
movement  towards  a  goal.  As  discussed  below,  however,
such effects are clearly mediated by other contextual factors;
if this were not the case, observers should report that the first
items  in  most  launching  displays  (Fig. 1a)  look  animate,
which they do not.

In a series of follow-up experiments, Gelman and col-
leagues  replicated  and  extended  Stewart’s  findings56.  They
presented subjects with several computer-generated displays,
showing one or two small balls moving in ‘environments’ of
static  lines  and  geometric  shapes.  These  displays  varied  in
terms of the shapes of trajectories, the presence or absence of
a second ball and the type of environment. Gelman et al. re-
ported that observers favored animate interpretations in en-
vironments where the balls’ movements were consistent with
some aspect of the environment representing either an ob-
stacle or a goal. By contrast, observers favored inanimate in-
terpretations  when  balls  moved  in  ‘odd’  environments  or
when no environmental information was given. These find-
ings led Gelman and colleagues to suggest that the ability to
classify  objects  into  animates  and  inanimates  is  not  based
solely on perceptual information, but also draws upon innate
or early-developing knowledge of causal principles (a sugges-
tion  that  contrasts  with  other  conclusions,  as  is  discussed
again below). By contrast, Blythe and colleagues have argued
that a small set of motion cues can be sufficient not only to
determine whether or not a moving object is animate, but
also  to  determine  what  intention  motivated  the  object’s
movement57. They present an algorithm that uses seven mo-
tion cues to predict observers’ responses when asked to as-
sign displays to one of six intentional categories. They then
go on to suggest that people and other animals might use an
algorithm such as this to infer the intentions of moving enti-
ties. This work is important when one considers that many
other researchers have focused on the perception of inten-
tion from motion when viewing such displays40,41,54–56,58.

Cues mediating the perception of animacy in simple displays
In general, the displays used to investigate the perception of
animacy  and  the  perception  of  intentionality  have  been
longer, have had more complex trajectories and/or have had
more complex environments (which might include moving
elements) than the displays used to investigate the percep-
tion of causality. This has made it difficult to conduct a rig-
orous analysis of the mediating factors of perceptual animacy
(similar  to  the  one  conducted  by  Michotte  and  others  for
perceptual  causality).  However,  Tremoulet  and  Feldman
have recently made progress in this direction59. They created
extremely  simple  stimuli  showing  a  single  white  particle
moving across a featureless dark background (see Fig. 5 for
details). In cases where the trajectories were the same, other
factors such as the local orientation of the particles through-
out their trajectories impacted the strength of the resulting
animacy percepts – a result that refutes the notion that per-
ceiving energy violations is all there is to perceiving animacy.

304

T r e n d s   i n   C o g n i t i v e   S c i e n c e s   –   V o l .   4 ,   N o .   8 ,     A u g u s t   2 0 0 0

 TICS Aug 2000 _  14/7/00  10:01 am  Page 305

S c h o l l   a n d   T r e m o u l e t   –   P e r c e p t u a l   c a u s a l i t y   a n d   a n i m a c y

Review

The  most  important  contribution  of  Tremoulet  and
Feldman’s  recent  study  is  not  its  refutation  of  the  ‘energy
violation’ hypothesis, however, but rather its demonstration
that the combination of two extremely simple, highly percep-
tible motions (change in speed and change in direction) can
produce an impression of animacy, even when presented in a
featureless  background.  Follow-up  experiments  suggest  that
this extremely simple motion path might convey intentional-
ity despite the absence of a goal or context; if a single static dot
is added to the backgrounds of these displays, the strength of
the  animacy  percept  depends  upon  the  location  of  the  dot
(this replicates the finding of Gelman and colleagues that the
visual environment can influence the perception of animacy).
More  research  is  underway  to  investigate  how  context  and
motion interact to create an impression of animacy.

Initial evidence from cognitive neuroscience
Other very recent studies have addressed perceptual animacy
using  tools  drawn  from  cognitive  neuroscience,  and  have
begun to link such phenomena more closely to the underlying
brain structures. Heberlein and colleagues showed the original
Heider and Simmel movie to a patient with amygdala damage,
who (unlike normal observers and other brain-damaged con-
trols) did not describe them using any social or anthropomor-
phic terms60. This supports the idea that the amygdala is a cru-
cial part of the system that mediates social perception61. Happé
and Frith62 have also made a first attempt to localize perceptual
animacy  in  the  brain  using  neuroimaging  techniques.  They
conducted a PET study using these types of display, contrast-
ing  random  movement  with  goal-directed  movement 
(e.g. chasing) and intentional movement (e.g. mocking), and
found that these latter displays elicited more activity than the
random-movement  displays  in  the  tempoparietal  junction,
fusiform gyrus, occipital gyrus and medial frontal cortex.

considered  innate.  Michotte,  for  instance,  frequently  down-
played experiential effects when discussing perceptual causality,
citing as evidence the universality of the percepts, their seeming
encapsulation  from  higher  order  interpretations  (what  he
called ‘negative’ and ‘paradoxical’ cases), and the high corre-
lation between the character of the stimuli and the resulting
percepts, with ‘the distribution of response frequencies gener-
ally showing the usual pattern for psychophysical functions. In
the case of acquired meaning…the link between stimulation
and response is usually much weaker’63. Some contemporary
researchers have supported this position32,35,48,64, whereas others
have  argued  that  the  evidence  for  innateness  is  inconclu-
sive6,8,27,38. This controversy will not be reviewed here, however,
as the frequent discussion of innateness has often been an ill-
fitting stand-in for the perceptual nature of these phenomena
(for reasons discussed below). We will simply conclude that the
issue is unresolved, noting only that experiential effects might
often  be  localized  to  response  biases  (see  Schlottman  and
Anderson24 for a discussion of several subtleties), and that in
general  the  existence  of  an  innate  origin  is  quite  compatible
with a wide variety of experiential and developmental effects65.

Modular processing
Rather than focusing on innateness as a substitute for the
perceptual nature of these phenomena, we suggest that this
issue might be better characterized by appeal to the notion
of  modularity. Modules, as  discussed by Fodor66, are  spe-
cial-purpose mechanisms – parts of the mind, analogous to
organs of the body – that are characterized by restrictions on
information flow. On the one hand, a module’s processing
is encapsulated from external information, so that, for ex-
ample, learning that the Müller-Lyer illusion is an illusion
does not cause it to go away, because the visual mechanisms
that construct the percept are encapsulated from that belief.

A link between perceptual and
cognitive processing?
Having  reviewed  the  recent  empirical
work on the nature of perceptual causality
and animacy, we now address the allegedly
perceptual  nature  of  these  phenomena
more directly. As noted above, one of the
reasons that such phenomena are interest-
ing is that they both have the character of
visual percepts yet involve what are tradi-
tionally  thought  to  be  higher-level  con-
cepts.  Without  this  perceptual  nature,
these phenomena are of much less interest.
After all, it is of no great surprise that one
can conceive of some visual object as caus-
ing some action, as animate, or as anything
you  wish.  But  to  the  degree  that  such
phenomena  reflect  perceptual  processing,
their  existence  is  more  interesting:  they
suggest  that  perceptual  processes  have
more  to  do  with  domains  previously
considered to be purely cognitive.

Most  of  the  controversy  surrounding
perceptual  causality  and  animacy  has  fo-
cused on whether such processing can be

(a)

(b)

(c)

Direction
change

f   =  

Vf

V0
l = Vf

/V0

 =

Speed
change

trends in Cognitive Sciences

Fig. 5. Examples of the three particle types used in displays created by Tremoulet and Feldman to in-
vestigate the minimal conditions for perceptual animacy59. The particles’ motion paths were short and un-
complicated: initially, a particle moved in a random direction at a constant speed for 375 ms, then it simultaneously
changed both speed and direction, and continued at the new speed in the new direction for another 375 ms. Three
different particle types were compared: (a) a simple circle (the ‘dot condition’); (b) a rectangle which changed ori-
entation as it changed direction, so its principal axis was always aligned with the direction of motion (the ‘aligned’
condition); and (c) a rectangle that started out aligned with the direction of motion, but did not change orientation
as it changed direction (the ‘misaligned’ condition). Particles in (b) appeared most animate, followed by particles in
(a). In both these conditions, the impression of animacy grew stronger with increases in angle of direction change
(f)  and  increases  in  final  speed  (Vf).  By  contrast,  particles  in  (c)  did  not  look  animate  to  most  observers.
Corresponding displays from (a) and (c) (that is, displays with the same speed and direction changes) always con-
tained  precisely  the  same  motion  paths  [whereas  the  corresponding  display  from  (b)  might  have  included  a  ro-
tation]. Thus, all increases in energy contained in display in (a) were also contained in the corresponding display in
(c). However, observers rated the particles in (a) as more likely to be animate than the particles in (c). Therefore,
there must be more to inferring animacy than simply perceiving increases in energy.

T r e n d s   i n   C o g n i t i v e   S c i e n c e s   –   V o l .   4 ,   N o .   8 ,     A u g u s t   2 0 0 0

305

 TICS Aug 2000 _  14/7/00  10:01 am  Page 306

Review

S c h o l l   a n d   T r e m o u l e t   –   P e r c e p t u a l   c a u s a l i t y   a n d   a n i m a c y

On  the  other  hand,  external  processes  receive  a  module’s
output, but cannot get inside to the ‘interlevels’ of process-
ing: this can explain, for instance, why we easily recognize
objects  and  faces  without  any  insight  into  how  we  do  so.
Because of such restrictions, modules are typically fast, auto-
matic, mandatory and are often innately specified66,67. Note,
however,  that  modules  need  not  be  innate!  In  addition  to
both the fact that modules might require environmental ‘trig-
gering’ to come online and the possibility that modules might
develop  from  ‘scratch’  over  time,  based  on  experience68,
Scholl and Leslie note that there is nothing in the notion of
modularity  to  prevent  a  module  from  tuning  itself  on  the
basis of the information that does characterize its input65: the
essence  of  modularity  identifies  restrictions  on  information
flow to and from the module, but places no restrictions on
what a module does internally with the information it does
receive. (This is one point that speaks against those theorists
who argue against modularity simply on the basis of an ob-
servable instance of development38.) Modules can thus be in-
nate, acquired or some mixture thereof, and to the extent that
the notion of modularity captures the ‘perceptual’ nature of
these phenomena, debates about innateness prove irrelevant.
To  what  degree  do  phenomena  of  perceptual  causality
and animacy appear to reflect modular perceptual processing?
To begin with, these phenomena do seem to enjoy most of the
traditional  ‘symptoms’  of  modularity.  They  are  domain-
specific by definition, in that they result in specific causal and
intentional  interpretations  (i.e.  they  give  rise  to  only  a  few
qualitatively separate types of percepts). They are also entirely
visual  phenomena  (though  it  is  an  interesting  question
whether similar effects might be observable in other modal-
ities). Precisely what visual information serves as the input to
such  a  module  remains  to  be  determined.  The  results  of
Gelman  and  colleagues  discussed  above56 suggest  that  the
computation of animacy is carried out ‘not by motion alone’,
although we would argue that the additional contextual fac-
tors might still be visually (and not conceptually) derived. The
timecourse of such phenomena is very fast: phenomenologi-
cally these causal and animate percepts occur nearly instanta-
neously upon viewing the displays. They are also mandatory
in the way that most visual illusions are: to the degree that the
events  are  clearly  perceived  (perhaps  attended  and/or  fix-
ated69), the causal or animate nature of the resulting percepts
is  nearly  irresistible.  This  reflects  a  type  of  encapsulation:
despite the fact that observers know that the displays are not
really causal or animate, this knowledge does not appear to be
taken  into  account  by  the  mechanisms  that  construct  the
percepts.  Conversely,  higher-level  external  processes  do  not
seem to have access to the ‘interlevels’ of this processing: we
are  greeted  with  causal  percepts  when  viewing  launching
displays, for instance, without any ability to determine how
they  came  about.  Like  recognizing  speech  or  recognizing  a
face,  recognizing  physical  causality  in  such  situations  seems
phenomenologically just to ‘happen’ quite automatically.

Automaticity
Michotte referred to this as the ‘immediacy’ of the percepts,
and indeed he stressed most of these hallmarks of modularity
in his writings1,39,63: ‘[T]his is not just a “meaning” attributed
to the literal, step-by-step translation of a table of stimuli; they

are primitive specific impressions which arise in the perceptual
field  itself’.  More  contemporary  research  also  supports  this
view.  For  instance,  Dittrich  and  Lea  stress  the  apparently
mandatory and data-driven nature of the percepts in their dis-
plays55. They note that ‘[T]he instructions given to the sub-
jects  made  very  little  difference  to  any  dependent  measure,
while virtually all parameters of motion had some straightfor-
ward effects’, and they conclude that ‘The immediate impres-
sion of intentionality (or causality) is given by a “bottom-up”
process of selecting specific motion features’. It is important to
realize,  however,  that  this  automaticity  and  irresistibility
might often depend on clearly perceiving and perhaps attend-
ing to the event. For example, infants’ attention can be dis-
tracted  from  the  relevant  event  in  launching  displays  when
multiple featurally complex objects are used33,34,36,38.

White  stresses  the  speed  of  perceptual  causality21.  His
thesis is that all of the important processing with regard to
such stimuli integrates over less than 250 ms in a chunk at
the  ‘iconic’  stage,  and  is  therefore  ‘automatic’  rather  than
‘controlled’  (in  the  sense  of  Shiffrin  and  Schneider70).
Similarly, Premack argues that ‘the infant’s concept [of in-
tention]  is  an  automatic  reading  of  a  perceptual  input’48,
based  on  the  detection  of  self-propulsion.  Blythe  and  col-
leagues  propose  that  humans  rely  upon  a  simple  innate
heuristic  that  automatically  determines  the  intentions  of
moving  agents57;  effectively,  they  too  claim  that  observers
automatically perceive intention in motion. One remaining
problem for such claims of automaticity is the fact (described
above) that there are considerable individual differences in
the rates of reported perceptual causality and animacy upon
the  very  first  presentations  of  typical  displays.  Existing
accounts involving automaticity have failed to address such
data,  and  to  address  empirically  the  suspicion  that  such
differences are due to some subjects reporting more consid-
ered  interpretations  of  the  displays  rather  than  their
percepts. (Michotte noted, however, that even observers who
do not perceive causality upon their first encounter with a
launching  event  will  do  so  spontaneously  after  repeated
presentations, and do not require any explicit instruction1.)
Leslie has worked out the most explicit proposal for a
modular  basis  for  perceptual  causality64,71.  He  notes  that
‘To suggest that there is such a thing as a perceptual illusion
of causality is to imply that there is a rather humble percep-
tual  mechanism  operating  automatically  and  incorrigibly
upon the spatio-temporal properties of events yet producing
abstract  descriptions  of  their  causal  structure…Taking
input from lower level motion-processing, this device will
parse  submovements,  produce  higher-level  descriptions  of
the spatio-temporal properties of the event, and produce a
description of its causal structure’64. (For further details of
Leslie’s theory, see Refs 31,32,35,64,71.) Of course, many
important  unanswered  questions  remain  about  the  nature
of such a mechanism. What, for instance, is the format of
the ‘causal’ interpretation that results from such processing?
Is  such  a  mechanism  simply  wired  to  return  an  explicit
causal  description  of  the  event,  similar  in  format  to  that
which might be obtained by higher-level and more domain-
general reflection? Or, is the causal interpretation generated
in the way that an interpretation of depth might be gener-
ated, in an entirely visuospatial format?

306

T r e n d s   i n   C o g n i t i v e   S c i e n c e s   –   V o l .   4 ,   N o .   8 ,     A u g u s t   2 0 0 0

 TICS Aug 2000 _  14/7/00  10:01 am  Page 307

S c h o l l   a n d   T r e m o u l e t   –   P e r c e p t u a l   c a u s a l i t y   a n d   a n i m a c y

Review

In  one 

inference72,73. 

Some of the most direct evidence for automaticity and en-
capsulation comes from the recent work of Anne Schlottmann
and  her  colleagues,  who  have  directly  contrasted  causal
perception  and  causal 
study,
Schlottmann  and  Shanks72 studied  such  issues  in  launching
displays by testing whether factors known to affect causal in-
ference also affected causal percepts. In assessing causation be-
tween some pair of events A and B, the existence of a third
event  C  that  better  co-varies  with  B  will  steal  the  ‘judged
cause’  of  B  away  from  A.  Schlottmann  and  Shanks  imple-
mented such a situation in a launching event, where the ad-
ditional co-variate was a brief and momentary color change,
the end of which always coincided with the movement of B. B
moved on every trial following this color change, which was
also sometimes – but not always – correlated with A’s arrival.
With careful instructions distinguishing perceived and judged
causality, they found that the color change had no effect on
the perceived causality: despite the imperfect correlation, the
perceived cause of B’s movement was always the arrival of A
when it did correlate. In explicit judgments, by contrast, the
existence of the easily perceived higher correlation with color
change led to the inference that B’s motion was in fact caused
by the color change. In general, they noted that the ‘factors
that influence judgments of causality have no detectable effect
on the perception of causality in launch events’.

Conclusions
The available evidence concerning the perception of causality
and animacy is largely consistent with the view that such phe-
nomena  reflect  primarily  perceptual  and  perhaps  modular
processing, and at a minimum are very different (and can be
dissociated) from high-level cognitive judgments of the exist-
ence of causality or animacy. This view can be seen as an up-
dated version of the classical theories of such phenomena (in-
cluding Michotte’s theory), and it contrasts with many other
recent views6,8,24,38,56,74. White takes a contrasting view in a re-
cent  book,  and  argues  against  a  modular  interpretation  by
appeal to the lack of ecological validity in most of these ex-
periments6: ‘It does not seem likely that there would be an in-
built  visual  mechanism  for  perceiving  event  sequences  that
would rarely if ever be encountered in a natural, as opposed
to human-made, environment’. But such a mechanism pre-
sumably does work in naturalistic events. The situation might
be entirely analogous to less controversial processes, such as
the extraction of structure from motion. Here is a case where
the visual system appears to make hardwired and plausibly in-
nate  assumptions  about  the  world,  which  vision  scientists
have  uncovered  and  made  salient  in  simple  ‘toy’  displays,
such as the kinetic depth effect, which satisfy the built-in as-
sumptions in as minimal a way as possible. Michotte, Heider
and their contemporary academic descendants have done the
same  thing  for  causality  and  animacy:  they  have  used  ‘toy’
displays  to  eliminate  confounding  noise,  and  to  distill  the
precise  rules  that  the  visual  system  appears  to  use  when
recovering the causal and social structure of the world.

This  article  has  attempted  to  review  recent  evidence  for
what such rules might look like, and to discuss their nature and
relation to perceptual and cognitive processing. The phenom-
ena of perceptual causality and animacy might indeed reflect
some specialized perceptual processing that is not easily ‘pene-

Outstanding questions

• What is the relationship between perceptual causality and perceptual
animacy, which have been treated together in this article? Are they
mediated by the same mechanisms or by distinct mechanisms that work on
similar principles? Are they mediated by the same or separate brain areas?
Additional neuroimaging research could perhaps address these questions.

• More generally, are perceptual causality and animacy part of a larger
integrated system of social perception, or are they relatively isolated
instances of more specific perceptual heuristics?

• What is the relationship of attention to the phenomena discussed here?
Cavanagh and colleagues have recently demonstrated that attention is
necessary to perceive biological motion and other simple perceptual
events75. Is attention necessary to perceive causality and animacy? Are
causality and animacy evident in a noisy display even when attention is
otherwise distracted? To what degree will animate objects capture
attention? Similarly, might eye movements play a mediating role in the
perception of causality and animacy69? The answers to these questions
are the topic of our current research.

• More specifically, how might these phenomena be represented on the
level of object-based attention, by mechanisms such as object files or
object indexes76,77? Could such a level of representation explain the
details of the ‘launching’ percepts?

• To the degree that these phenomena appear to be modular in nature,

we might expect them to be independently disruptible by brain damage
or strokes. Are there any neuropsychological syndromes that involve such
deficits?

• Do animals other than humans also perceive causality and animacy in all
the same situations, and based on the same stimulus factors? Studies
have now begun to look at animacy in non-human primates49,78, but it
remains to be seen how much such initial results will generalize to other
species and other stimuli. One writer has suggested that only tool-
making species will evidence perceptual causality79.

• All of the phenomena discussed here occur in the visual domain. Are there

any auditory or tactile analogues of perceptual causality or animacy?

trated’ by higher-level cognition. In this sense, such phenom-
ena are of interest in that they lie at an intersection of percep-
tual and cognitive processing, where simple schematic displays
are parsed via perceptual systems in causal, animate or even in-
tentional  terms  –  properties  traditionally  associated  with
higher-level cognitive processing. The continued study of these
phenomena will help elucidate the scope of perceptual process-
ing,  and  much  work  remains  to  be  done  (see  Outstanding
questions). Indeed, rarely in experimental psychology or vision
science has such a rich set of phenomena been so understudied.
This is at least partially attributable to the technical difficulty in
the past of working with such dynamic displays, but today such
displays are trivially easy to generate, and in the near future it
should be possible to characterize comprehensively the precise
stimulus conditions that give rise to these percepts in order to
discover the perceptual ‘grammar’ of causality and animacy.

Acknowledgements

The authors contributed equally to this article and are listed

alphabetically. B.J.S. was supported by NIMH F32-MH12383-01. P.D.T. was

supported by NIH T32-MH-19975-01. For helpful conversation and

comments on earlier drafts, we thank Patrick Cavanagh, Gergely Csibra,

Jacob Feldman, Alan Leslie, Ken Nakayama, Shaun Nichols, Dan Simons

and two anonymous referees.

References

1 Michotte, A. (1946/ English transl. 1963) The Perception of Causality,

Basic Books

2 Heider, F. and Simmel, M. (1944) An experimental study of apparent

behavior. Am. J. Psychol. 57, 243–249

T r e n d s   i n   C o g n i t i v e   S c i e n c e s   –   V o l .   4 ,   N o .   8 ,     A u g u s t   2 0 0 0

307

 TICS Aug 2000 _  14/7/00  10:01 am  Page 308

Review

S c h o l l   a n d   T r e m o u l e t   –   P e r c e p t u a l   c a u s a l i t y   a n d   a n i m a c y

3 Cole, J. (1999) About Face, MIT Press

36 Oakes, L. (1994) Development of infants’ use of continuity cues in their

4 Leslie, A.M. (1984) Infant perception of a manual pick-up event. Br. J.

perception of causality. Dev. Psychol. 30, 869–879

Dev. Psychol. 2, 19–32

37 Baillargeon, R. et al. (1995) The acquisition of physical knowledge in

5 Johansson,  G.  (1973)  Visual  perception  of  biological  motion  and  a

infancy.  In  Causal  Cognition (Sperber,  D.  et  al.,  eds),  pp.  79–116,

model for its analysis. Percept. Psychophys. 14, 201–211

Clarendon Press

6 White, P.A. (1995) The Understanding of Causation and the Production

38 Cohen, L. et al. (1998) The development of infant causal perception. In

of Action, Erlbaum

Perceptual  Development:  Visual,  Auditory,  and  Speech  Perception  in

7 Gelman, R. (1990) First principles organize attention to and learning

Infancy (Slater, A., ed.), pp. 167–209, Psychology Press

about relevant data: number and the animate-inanimate distinction as

39 Michotte, A. (1950) The emotions regarded as functional connections.

examples. Cognit. Sci. 14, 79–106

In Feelings and Emotions: The Mooseheart Symposium (Reymert, M.,

8 Runeson, S. (1983) On visual perception of dynamic events. Acta Univer-

ed.),  pp.  114–125,  McGraw-Hill.  Reprinted  1991: 

In Michotte’s

sitatis Upsaliensis: Studia Psychologica Upsaliensia, Uppsala, Sweden

Experimental  Phenomenology  of  Perception (Thinès,  G.  et  al.,  eds), 

9 Ullman, S. (1979) The interpretation of structure from motion. Proc. R.

pp. 103–116, Erlbaum

Soc. London Ser. B 203, 405–426

40 Gergely, G. et al. (1995) Taking the intentional stance at 12 months of

10 Pylyshyn, Z.W. (1999) Is vision continuous with cognition? The case for

age. Cognition 56, 165–193

cognitive  impenetrability  of  visual  perception.  Behav.  Brain  Sci.

41 Csibra,  G.  et  al. (1999)  Goal  attribution  without  agency  cues:  the

22, 341–423

perception of ‘pure reason’ in infancy. Cognition 72, 237–267

11 Wallach, H. and O’Connell, D. (1953) The kinetic depth effect. J. Exp.

42 Kassin,  S.  (1982)  Heider  and  Simmel  revisited:  causal  attribution  and

Psychol. 45, 2015–2017

the animated film technique. Rev. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 3, 145–169

12 Thinès, G. et al., eds (1991) Michotte’s Experimental Phenomenology

43 Shor,  R.  (1957)  Effect  of  preinformation  upon  human  characteristics

of Perception, Erlbaum

attributed  to  animated  geometric  figures. J.  Abnorm.  Soc.  Psychol.

13 Boyle, D. (1960) A contribution to the study of phenomenal causation.

54, 124–126

Q. J. Exp. Psychol. 12, 171–179

44 Thayer, S. and Schiff, W. (1969) Stimulus factors in observer judgment

14 Joynson, R.B. (1971) Michotte’s experimental methods. Br. J. Psychol.

of  social  interaction:  facial  expression  and  motion  pattern.  Am.  J.

62, 293–302

Psychol. 82, 73–85

15 Costall,  A.  (1991)  Phenomenal  causality.  In  Michotte’s  Experimental

45 Hashimoto,  H.  (1966)  A  phenomenal  analysis  of  social  perception. 

Phenomenology of Perception (Thinès, G. et al., eds), pp. 51–64, Erlbaum

J. Child Dev. 2, 3–26

16 Montpellier, G. and Nuttin, J. (1973) A note on ‘Michotte’s experimental

46 Berry, D.S. and Springer, K. (1993) Structure, motion, and preschoolers

methods’ and ‘Michotte’s ideas’. Br. J. Psychol. 64, 287–289

perception of social causality. Ecol. Psychol. 5, 273–283

17 Gordon,  I.  et  al. (1990)  Perceived  causality  occurs  with  stroboscopic

47 Dasser,  V.  et  al.

(1989)  The  perception  of 

intention.  Science

movement of one or both stimulus elements. Perception 19, 17–20

243, 365–367

18 Hecht,  H.  (1996)  Heuristics  and  invariants  in  dynamic  event  perception:

48 Premack,  D.  (1990)  The  infant’s  theory  of  self-propelled  objects.

immunized concepts or non-statements? Psychonomic Bull. Rev. 3, 61–70

Cognition 36, 1–16

19 Beasley,  N.  (1968)  The  extent  of  individual  differences  in  the

49 Uller,  C.  and  Nichols,  S.  Goal  attribution  in  chimpanzees.  Cognition

perception of causality. Can. J. Psychol. 22, 399–407

(in press)

20 Gemelli,  A.  and  Cappellini,  A.  (1958)  The  influence  of  the  subject’s

50 Rochat,  M.  et  al. (1997)  Young  infants’  sensitivity  to  movement

attitude in perception. Acta Psychol. 14, 12–23

specifying social causality. Cognit. Dev. 12, 537–561

21 White,  P.A.  (1988)  Causal  processing:  origins  and  development.

51 Schlottman,  A.  and  Surian,  L.  (1999)  Do  9-month-olds  perceive

Psychol. Bull. 104, 36–52

causation-at-a-distance? Perception 28, 1105–1114

22 Gruber,  H.  et  al. (1957)  Effects  of  experience  on  perception  of

52 Bloom, P. and Veres, C. (1999) The perceived intentionality of groups.

causality. J. Exp. Psychol. 53, 89–93

Cognition 71, B1–B9

23 Powesland, P.F. (1959) The effect of practice upon the perception of

53 Berry, D. et al. (1992) Effects of disruption of structure and motion on

causality. Can. J. Psychol. 13, 155–168

perceptions of social causality. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 18, 237–244

24 Schlottman, A. and Anderson, N.H. (1993) An information integration

54 Bassilli, J. (1976) Temporal and spatial contingencies in the perception

approach to phenomenal causality. Mem. Cognit. 21, 785–201

of social events. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 33, 680–685

25 Morris,  M.W.  and  Peng,  K.  (1994)  Culture  and  cause:  American  and

55 Dittrich, W. and Lea, S. (1994) Visual perception of intentional motion.

Chinese  attributions  for  social  and  physical  events.  J.  Personal.  Soc.

Perception 23, 253–268

Psychol. 67, 949–971

56 Gelman,  R.  et  al.

(1995)  Distinguishing  between  animates  and

26 Rimé,  B.  et  al. (1985)  The  perception  of  interpersonal  emotions

inanimates:  not  by  motion  alone. 

In  Causal  Cognition:  A

originated by patterns of movement. Motiv. Emotion 9, 241–260

Multidisciplinary  Debate (Sperber,  D.  et  al.,  eds),  pp.  150–184,

27 White, P.A. and Milne, A. (1997) Phenomenal causality: impressions of

Clarendon Press

pulling in the visual perception of objects in motion. Am. J. Psychol.

57 Blythe,  P.  et  al. (1999)  How  motion  reveals  intention:  categorizing

110, 573–602

social 

interactions. 

In  Simple  Heuristics  That  Make  Us  Smart

28 White,  P.A.  and  Milne,  A. 

(1999) 

Impressions  of  enforced

(Gigerenzer, G. et al., eds), pp. 257–285, Oxford University Press

disintegration and bursting in the visual perception of collision events.

58 Premack, D. and Premack, A. (1995) Intention as psychological cause. In

J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 128, 499–516

Causal Cognition: A Multidisciplinary Debate (Sperber, D. et al., eds),

29 Natsoulas, T. (1961) Principles of momentum and kinetic energy in the

pp. 185–199, Clarendon Press

perception of causality. Am. J. Psychol. 74, 394–402

59 Tremoulet,  P.D.  and  Feldman,  J.  Perception  of  animacy  from  the

30 Leslie,  A.M.  (1982)  The  perception  of  causality  in  infants. Perception

motion of a single object. Perception (in press)

11, 173–186

60 Heberlein, A.S. et al. (1998) Impaired attribution of social meanings to

31 Leslie,  A.M.  (1984)  Spatiotemporal  continuity  and  the  perception  of

abstract  dynamic  geometric  patterns  following  damage  to  the

causality in infants. Perception 13, 287–305

amygdala. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 24, 1176

32 Leslie,  A.M.  and  Keeble,  S.  (1987)  Do  six-month-old  infants  perceive

61 Adolphs,  R.  et  al. (1998)  The  human  amygdala  in  social  judgment.

causality? Cognition 25, 265–288

Nature, 393, 470–474

33 Oakes,  L.  and  Cohen,  L.  (1990)  Infant  perception  of  a  causal  event.

62 Happé, F. and Frith, U. (1999) How the brain reads the mind. Neurosci.

Cognit. Dev. 5, 193–207

News 2, 16–25

34 Cohen,  L.  and  Oakes,  L.  (1993)  How  infants  perceive  a  simple  causal

63 Michotte,  A.  and  Thinès,  G.  (1963)  La  causalité  perceptive.  J.  Psych.

event. Dev. Psychol. 29, 421–432

Norm. Pathol. 60, 9–36. Translated and reprinted 1991: In Michotte’s

35 Leslie,  A.M.  (1994)  ToMM,  ToBy,  and  agency:  core  architecture  and

Experimental  Phenomenology  of  Perception (Thinès,  G.  et  al.,  eds), 

domain  specificity. 

In  Mapping  the  Mind:  Domain  Specificity 

pp. 66–87, Erlbaum

in  Cognition  and  Culture  (Hirschfield,  L.  and  Gelman,  S.,  eds), 

64 Leslie,  A.M.  (1988)  The  necessity  of  illusion.  In  Thought  Without

pp. 119–148, Cambridge University Press

Language (Weiskrantz, L., ed.), pp. 185–210, Clarendon Press

308

T r e n d s   i n   C o g n i t i v e   S c i e n c e s   –   V o l .   4 ,   N o .   8 ,     A u g u s t   2 0 0 0

 TICS Aug 2000 _  14/7/00  10:01 am  Page 309

I s l e s   a n d   W i l k i n s o n   –   I m p r i n t e d   g e n e s

Review

65 Scholl,  B.J.  and  Leslie,  A.M.  (1999)  Modularity,  development,  and

73 Schlottmann, A. (1999) Seeing it happen and knowing how it works:

‘theory of mind’. Mind Lang. 14, 131–153

how  children  understand  the  relation  between  perceptual  causality

66 Fodor, J.A. (1983) The Modularity of Mind, MIT Press

and underlying mechanism. Dev. Psychol. 35, 303–317

67 Carston,  R.  (1996)  The  architecture  of  mind:  modularity  and

74 Weir,  S.  (1978)  The  perception  of  motion:  Michotte  revisited.

modularization. In Cognitive Science: An Introduction (Green, D. et al.,

Perception 7, 247–260

eds), pp. 53–83, Blackwell

75 Cavanagh, P. et al. Attention-based visual routines: sprites. Cognition

68 Karmiloff-Smith,  A.  (1992) Beyond  Modularity:  A  Developmental

(in press)

Perspective on Cognitive Science, MIT Press

76 Scholl, B.J. and Leslie, A.M. (1999) Explaining the infant’s object concept:

69 Hindmarch, 

I.  (1973)  Eye  movements  and  the  perception  of

beyond  the  perception/cognition  dichotomy.  In  What  is  Cognitive

phenomenal causality. Psychologica Belgica 13, 17–23

Science? (Lepore, E. and Pylyshyn, Z., eds), pp. 26–73, Blackwell

70 Shiffrin, R. and Schneider, W. (1977) Controlled and automatic human

77 Leslie, A.M. et al. (1998) Indexing and the object concept: developing

information processing: II. Perceptual learning, automatic attending,

‘what’ and ‘where’ systems. Trends Cognit. Sci. 2, 10–18

and a general theory. Psychol. Rev. 84, 127–190

78 Hauser, M. (1998) A non-human primate’s expectations about object

71 Leslie, A.M. (1986) Getting development off the ground. In Modularity

motion and destination: the importance of self-propelled movement

and the Infant’s Perception of Causality (Geert, P., ed.), pp. 406–437,

and animacy. Dev. Sci. 1, 31–38

North Holland

79 Kummer, H. (1995) Causal knowledge in animals. In Causal Cognition:

72 Schlottmann,  A.  and  Shanks,  D.  (1992)  Evidence  for  a  distinction

A  Multidisciplinary  Debate (Sperber,  D.  et  al.,  eds),  pp.  26–36,

between judged and perceived causality. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. 44, 321–342

Clarendon Press

Imprinted genes, cognition

and behaviour

Anthony R. Isles and Lawrence S. Wilkinson

The idea that genes can influence behavioural predispositions and their underlying

psychological determinants is becoming increasingly tractable. In this article, recent

findings are reviewed on a special type of inheritance, related to the transmission of

traits via what have been termed ‘imprinted’ genes. In imprinted genes one allele is

silenced according to its parental origin. This results in the inheritance of traits down

the maternal or paternal line, in contrast to the more frequent mode of inheritance that is

indifferent to the parental origin of the allele. Drawing on the advances made possible by

combining the approaches of cognitive neuropsychology, behavioural neuroscience and

contemporary molecular genetics, the detailed evidence for imprinted effects on

behavioural and cognitive phenotypes is considered, focusing on findings from mental

disorders, Turner’s syndrome and experimental work in animal models. As prevailing

evolutionary theories stress an essential antagonistic role of imprinted effects, these

data might link such apparently diverse issues as neurodevelopment and the

vulnerability to mental disease with the ‘battle of the sexes’, as joined at the level of

cognitive and behavioural functioning.

Genomic imprinting refers to the silencing of one allele of

a gene according to its parental origin1. The cellular mecha-
nisms  underlying  genomic  imprinting  are  not  completely
understood but it is known that the ‘imprint mark’ occurs
during gametogenesis (the production of the sperm or egg)
and involves a parent-specific molecular tagging of one of the
alleles (Box 1). In the progeny, this leads to a selective silenc-
ing of an allele that depends on its parental origin, which in
turn, results in the parent-specific monoallelic expression of
the trait associated with that imprinted locus. The upshot of

these complex molecular events is a form of inheritance that
passes  on  traits  down  the  maternal  or  paternal  line,  via
maternal  or  paternally  expressed  genes,  in  contrast  to  the
more-frequent biallelic inheritance of traits that is indifferent
to the parental origin of the allele.

One  pervasive,  though  not  exclusive2,  argument  has  it
that the evolutionary fire driving such a mode of inheritance
is related to conflict between the sexes that arises as a result of
sexual (as opposed to asexual) reproduction. That is, to put it
simply,  while  males  and  females  need  each  other  to  effect

1364-6613/00/$ – see front matter © 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.    PII: S1364-6613(00)01504-7

T r e n d s   i n   C o g n i t i v e   S c i e n c e s   –   V o l .   4 ,   N o .   8 ,     A u g u s t   2 0 0 0

A.R. Isles and 
L.S. Wilkinson are 
at the Neurobiology
and Developmental
Genetics Programmes,
The Babraham
Institute, Babraham,
Cambridge, 
UK  CB2 4AT.

tel: + 44 1223
496474
fax: +44 1223
496028
e-mail:
lawrence.wilkinson@
bbsrc.ac.uk

309

