1136840 APAXXX10.1177/00030651221136840alan sugarmanCommentary on Solms

research-article2022

j
a
P
a

Alan Sugarman

70/6

What does NeuroscieNce offer 
PsychoaNalysis? commeNtary  
oN solms’s “revisioN of drive 
theory”

T his ambitious paper (Solms 2021) by one of the leading psycho-

analytic  researchers  and  most  prominent  modern-day  neuropsy-
choanalysts  offers  a  heuristic  opportunity  to  consider  the  relationship 
between  neuroscience  and  psychoanalysis.  Although  focusing  on  the 
concept of drives, the paper is also a manifesto designed to demonstrate 
the  broader  psychoanalytic  relevance  of  neuroscience.  Given  the  vast 
amount of research data he brings to the task, as well as his prodigious 
knowledge of Freud, Solms provides a useful template to use in evaluat-
ing what neuroscience can and cannot offer psychoanalysis.

Considering what I understand to be his two aims, I will address both 
his ideas about the concept of drive and the broader contribution of neu-
roscience to psychoanalytic theory and practice. Toward those ends, it is 
useful to review what psychoanalysis is. After all, one finds fierce polem-
ics, both on the APsaA Listserv and in the literature, about whether it is 
simply a clinical technique, many techniques, a theory, many theories, or 
a body of knowledge with many applications (see, e.g., Eagle 2021; Jaffe 
2021;  Sugarman  2021,  in  press).  Nonetheless,  many  of  us  of  a  certain 
generation were drawn to psychoanalysis because it seemed to offer the 
most elegant model of human mental functioning, one that could help us 
understand our patients and guide us in our efforts to treat them. In short, 
psychoanalysis, first and foremost, consists of a model of the mind. To be 

Training  and  Supervising  Analyst  and  Supervising  Child  and  Adolescent 
Analyst,  San  Diego  Psychychoanalytic  Center;  Clinical  Professor  of  Psychiatry, 
University of California, San Diego.

Submitted for publication September 8, 2021; accepted September 11, 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/00030651221136840

1139

A l a n   S u g a r m a n

sure,  there  are  currently  many  competing  theories  of  mind  as  psycho-
analysis embraces the notion of pluralism while we work to integrate and 
prioritize them. Meanwhile, every school of psychoanalysis in our plural-
istic world has an articulated theory of mind.

Subsumed  under  this  model  of  mind  are  three  other  models:  (1)  a 
model of development; (2) a model of pathogenesis; and (3) a model of 
mutative action. From its beginnings, psychoanalysis has been a develop-
mental psychology, as Freud strove to show how current mental function-
ing  develops  gradually  out  of  an  interaction  between  internalized 
childhood  phenomena  and  external  interactions  with  the  environment. 
This developmental process is complex and was later elaborated by his 
daughter Anna and subsequent generations of child analysts and research-
ers. Another reason making development such a crucial element in a psy-
choanalytic model of the mind is the role it plays in pathogenesis. Unlike 
descriptive  or  phenomenological  nosological  models  in  psychiatry,  the 
psychoanalytic  model  is  holistic.  Most  of  the  psychopathology  with 
which it concerns itself is understood as being on a continuum with every-
day mental functioning. That is, we do not see our patients’ problems as 
discrete  symptoms  unrelated  to  the  way  their  minds  work.  Rather,  we 
believe that they involve distortions or biases in mental functioning due 
to  various  experiences  and  phenomena  during  development  having 
impaired  these  functions  as  the  developing  mind  struggled  to  manage 
them in ways promoting subsequent development. From an ego psycho-
logical perspective, this process promotes adaptation. Flowing from this 
model is the psychoanalytic model of mutative action, which prioritizes 
helping our patients find more successful ways to manage these develop-
mental difficulties and their sequelae. Each psychoanalytic school empha-
sizes  different  mutative  approaches  based  on  its  understanding  of  the 
developmental processes that have gone awry. But all schools, regardless 
of whether they emphasize the ego psychological notion of adaptation, do 
consider  the mind’s development and its miscarriages when arriving at 
their mutative strategies.

th e   P r o b l e m  Wi t h  re d u c t i oNi s m   iN so l m s ’ s 
N e u r oPs yc h o aNa ly t i c  a P Pr o a c h

Unfortunately, the iteration of drive theory and neuropsychoanalysis that 
Solms presents in his paper says almost nothing about a model of mind or 

1140

commeNtary oN solms

development, let alone models of pathogenesis and mutative action (which 
he  promises  will  come  in  future  papers  on  clinical  applications).  This 
absence of a model of mind and its development is surprising in that he 
seems as committed to psychoanalysis being a general psychology as were 
the  original  generation  of  ego  psychologists  (e.g.,  Hartmann  1964; 
Hartmann, Kris, and Loewenstein 1964; Rapaport 1951, 1960) and others 
who were quite explicit about this goal (Loewenstein et al. 1966; Rosenblatt 
and  Thickstun  1977).  His  earlier  discussions  of  neuropsychoanalysis 
(Solms 2000, 2014) suggest that he and his colleagues view it as a compre-
hensive or  general psychology. Fisher and  Kessler (2018), for example, 
are clear about neuropsychoanalysis being a basic science of psychoanaly-
sis.  They  believe  that  neuroscience  research  can  both  demonstrate  the 
validity of psychoanalysis and help it regain prestige and a place in aca-
demia. Many (though not all) of us aspire to the same goals and maintain 
the belief that psychoanalysis must become a general psychology able to 
integrate its unique insights with those of related sciences.

Surprisingly, however, Solms leaps over cognitive and developmental 
psychology as a means to this end in his emphasis on neuroscience. Much 
of the thinking in this paper goes from neurobiology and chemistry directly 
to  mental  experience,  while  bypassing  all  that  developmental  psycholo-
gists, and child analysts influenced by Anna Freud, know and are learning 
about the mind’s development and functioning. It is puzzling that he does 
so,  given  the  criteria  he  insists  psychoanalysis  must  meet  if  it  is  to  be 
regarded as a natural science (Solms 2020). These are that it recognize (1) 
that the human infant is born with a set of innate needs and is not a blank 
slate; (2) that mental development involves creating the capacities to meet 
these needs in the world; and (3) that most of the ways humans learn to 
meet their needs are implemented unconsciously. A corollary to these cri-
teria is that pathogenesis involves failure to find successful ways to meet 
these needs. My impression from his earlier papers is that Solms would 
agree that each of these statements can be studied and proven correct or 
incorrect using the natural science methodology provided by cognitive and 
developmental psychology. I think he would agree that both of these aca-
demic fields have already contributed much useful information to psycho-
analysis. Yet they are virtually ignored in this paper.

Instead, he appears to believe, in this paper at least, that subjective, 
mental functioning can be comprehensively understood at the neurological 

1141

A l a n   S u g a r m a n

level. Thus, I would argue, the model he presents here reads as reduction-
istic. Human functioning certainly can be studied at various levels: socio-
logical, psychological, neurobiological, and so on. Each of these levels is 
important to understanding some area of human functioning. According to 
many philosophers of science, however, each level can be understood only 
with concepts and methodologies relevant to that level. To be sure, others 
think that a holistic causal model should not be logically foreclosed. But I 
do not find evidence in this paper that neuroscientific concepts can be used 
to  explain  psychological  meaning  or  phenomena.  Blass  and  Carmeli 
(2015)  make  the  similar  point  that  neuroscientific  concepts  are  relevant 
only in explaining brain functioning, not mental functioning. “It depends,” 
they write, “rather on what the person who comes to understand is seeking; 
for instance, whether he is seeking to understand how the other is thinking 
or  what  brain  functions  are  being  activated”  (p.  1563). Yet  Solms  leaps 
across levels of explanation by using terms from mathematics and physics 
like entropy, attractors, and Markov blankets. At best, these terms can be 
understood  only  as  metaphors,  but  it  is  not  clear  if  that  is  what  Solms 
intends.  They  are  perhaps  intended  to  make  his  theory  sound  scientific 
without  acknowledging  that  they  are  relevant  only  to  phenomena  other 
than those dealt with by psychoanalysis. It is important that he make clear 
whether he intends the math and physics constructs he invokes to be taken 
as metaphorical or not.

Certainly neuroscience can inform us on what underlying brain func-
tions, processes, and structures allow the psychological phenomena we 
analysts study to occur. But it remains difficult to see how, at this stage of 
development in either discipline, they will ever expand our understanding 
of  the  subjective  how’s  and  why’s  of  mental  functioning,  the  so-called 
qualia (the “what does it feel like”). Neuroscience provides only a paral-
lelism  that  demonstrates  the  correlation  between  brain  functioning  and 
subjective mental experience (Grossman and Simon 1969). But no super-
ordinate  model  of  human  functioning  has  yet  been  discovered  that  can 
encompass and integrate the neurological and psychological spheres of 
human  experience.  Even  if  one  agrees  to  define  drive  as  arising  from 
neurobiological sources, it “becomes motivational only when it is cogni-
tively represented. Without such a mediating structuring process, external 
and internal stimulation have activating but not directional effects” (Klein 
1967, p. 87). That is, drives cannot be motivating unless they are struc-
tured cognitive-affective-motor events (Klein 1976). For example, dream 

1142

commeNtary oN solms

research  finds  a  strong  correlation  between  rapid  eye  movements  and 
dreaming. But this correlation does not provide any understanding into 
the meaning of dreams (Grossman and Simon 1969).

The Absence of the Concept of Mental Representation

Interestingly, Solms’s description of emotions as elements of drives that 
motivate human functioning ignores the essential developmental and cogni-
tive concept of mental representation, the likely innate capacity that allows 
subjective experience to be encoded so that memory and learning can occur. 
Everyone’s mind can make meaning because it can represent internal and 
external reality and amalgamate them into conscious and unconscious fanta-
sies, which are a subset of the mental representations that constitute mind 
(Erreich 2015). There is a vast amount of research on the development of 
these representations, their developmental sequence, and their stability, as 
well as their impact on pathogenesis and mutative action. Developmental 
and cognitive research support clinical experience that emotions are com-
mon  components  of  self-  and  object  representations. Yet  Solms  writes  as 
though representations are not part of the psychological amalgam that makes 
each individual’s cognitive/emotional mind unique.

The Conceptual Problem of Psychic Energy

A  similar  reductionism  can  be  seen  with  his  emphasis  on  psychic 
energy. The economic model, with its reliance on the vicissitudes of psy-
chic energy, is possibly the most criticized metapsychological model in 
psychoanalysis.  Most  contemporary  ego  psychological,  relational,  and 
self psychological analysts (as well as some others) would agree that mental 
events cannot be explained in terms of psychic energy. Instead, such con-
cepts  as  bound  and  unbound  energy,  or  cathexis  and  countercathexis, 
originally served as metaphors to make our emphasis on subjective phe-
nomena  seem  more  scientific.  “It  is  hard  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that 
Freud’s theory of bound and mobile energy has little to do with a concept 
of  energy  as  used  by  the  ‘other  natural  sciences,’  but  that  it  is  really  a 
theory of MEANING in disguise” (Rycroft 1968, p. 43). Yet Solms intro-
duces the “free energy principle” to buttress his insistence that energy is 
required for systems to function, even psychological systems. “The revo-
lution I am referring to is the insight that the entire nervous system func-
tions  according  to  a  single  principle,  the  free  energy  principle,  derived 
from statistical mechanics. . . . Somatic and mental events are therefore 

1143

A l a n   S u g a r m a n

explicable in terms of a single unifying principle” (pp. 1056–1057). There 
seems little difference between his concepts of free and bound energy and 
ego psychology’s long repudiated concepts of mobile and bound energy. 
In  fact,  he  believes  that  his  research  achieves  Freud’s  desire  (1895)  to 
“represent  psychical  processes  as  quantitatively  determinate  states  of 
specifiable material particles” (p. 295) and that “now we can measure it” 
(Solms, p. 1057), a claim that seems unlikely to be substantiated. These 
assertions  appear  as  questionable  as  the  similar,  long  repudiated  ones 
from  ego  psychology  (e.g.,  Holt  1965;  Kubie  1947;  Rubenstein  1965; 
Rosenblatt and Thickstun 1970). After all, mental events involve mean-
ing, not energy, because they occur in the mind of an individual, not in a 
nervous system. A psychoanalytic model of mind should explain human 
subjectivity, not just redescribe it using neuroscientific terms and ideas 
(Sugarman 1977).

Most criticisms of the concept of psychic energy coming from ego 
psychology argue either that it is based on Freud’s outdated understand-
ing of physics or that it is not necessary or adequate to explain the mental 
phenomena to which it has been applied (Rosenblatt and Thickstun 1970; 
Rubenstein  1967).  Gill  (1967)  and  Holt  (1967),  for  example,  demon-
strated that it is unnecessary for explaining the phenomena of primary and 
secondary process, while Klein (1967) provided a conceptual model to 
explain the activating impact of motivation that does not need a concept 
of energy, particularly a theoretically inaccurate one. Likewise, concepts 
have been developed to explain mental/emotional intensity or quantita-
tive variations in subjective experience without relying on an energic con-
cept (Rosenblatt and Thickstun 1970). The same can be said for psychic 
structure and symbol formation (Wolff 1967), learning (Rosenblatt and 
Thickstun 1970), and memory (Loewald 1976; Paul 1967). Most impor-
tant, these alternative formulations use data from related academic disci-
plines  at  the  same  level  of  explanation,  primarily  cognitive  and 
developmental  psychology. They  thus  allow  the  possibility  for  psycho-
analysis  to  become  the  general  psychology  desired  by  Solms  without 
using the neuroscientific concepts he espouses.

The Problem of Anthropomorphism

This  current  rendition  of  Solms’s  neuropsychoanalytic  revision 
leaves the concept of drive open to the same criticism that Schafer (1973) 
levied against the idea of autonomous ego functions almost half a century 

1144

commeNtary oN solms

ago: “In being represented as self-activating and self-regulating, autono-
mous  ego  functions  are  being  implicitly  portrayed  as  independent,  
symbol-utilizing  minds  that  can  make  themselves  up”  (p.  166).  Just  as 
ego functions could not be minds, drives cannot be either. This conceptual 
problem  highlights  the  ways  in  which  Solms’s  neuropsychoanalytic 
model evinces many of the same problems with anthropomorphism that 
were noted with ego psychology’s constructs fifty years ago (see Gill and 
Holzman 1976; Grossman and Simon 1969; Holt 1972; Klein 1967, 1976; 
Mayman  1976;  Rosenblatt  and  Thickstun  1970;  Schafer  1976a,b; 
Sugarman  1977;  Yankelovich  and  Barrett  1970)  and  even  earlier  by 
Brierley (1944, 1951). “Psycho-analytic personology is a psychology, not 
an anatomy or physiology, of personality; it is concerned with subjective 
experience  and  the  motivation  of  behaviour”  (Brierley  1951,  p.  125). 
Using neuroscientific constructs to organize and explain internal human 
experience inevitably leads to anthropomorphism along with a mechanis-
tic,  marionette  model  of  the  person.  The  term  marionette  suggests  the 
tendency  inherent  in  nonpsychological  models  to  characterize  the  indi-
vidual as directed by forces or agencies according to principles inherent 
in those forces or agencies (Shapiro 1970).

Such models “become anthropomorphic by virtue of introducing into 
the mind different parts that have different interests, claims, and wishes, 
just as does the person himself” (Grossman and Simon 1969, p. 91). For 
example, Freud applied the notions of intention and interest to the con-
cept of instinct despite instincts being unable to have intentions or inter-
ests;  only  human  beings  can.  Solms’s  model  demonstrates  similar 
tendencies. He introduces the idea of biological self-organizing systems 
to  bridge  the  boundary  between  nonliving  systems  like  crystals,  living 
ones like cells, and sentient ones like the mind. He then goes a step further 
and asserts that all have aims and purposes (pp. 1057–1058). Finally, he 
suggests  that  all  such  systems  form  a  “Markov  blanket”  separating  the 
system from the nonsystem, thereby providing the origins of “selfhood” 
and “subjectivity.” It is as though brain cells, neuroanatomical structures, 
and neurochemical processes are capable of aims, purposes, subjectivity, 
and  a  sense  of  self.  This  poses  the  same  theoretical  difficulties  as  the 
anthropomorphic use by early ego psychologists of structural constructs 
and energic vicissitudes to explain pathogenesis and mental functioning 
(see, e.g., Fenichel 1945; Hartmann, Kris, and Loewenstein 1964).

1145

A l a n   S u g a r m a n

th e  ab s eNc e   o f  su b j e c t i v e  exPe r i eNc e   aNd 
me aNiNg   iN  a   N e u r oPs yc h o aNa ly t i c  mo d e l

In his paper, Solms writes as though mind were a biological entity, with 
neurobiologically based drives and biochemically based psychic energy 
the phenomena that make it work. Because of Solms’s explicit commit-
ment  to  Freud’s  goal  of  a  scientific  psychology  grounded  in  biology 
(1895), his paper and neuropsychoanalysis more generally minimize the 
importance  of  subjectivity  in  both  theory  and  clinical  psychoanalytic 
practice. Today most psychoanalytic schools emphasize the importance 
of subjectivity and its contribution to both everyday mental functioning 
and  the  problems  for  which  patients  seek  treatment.  Different  schools 
emphasize different subjective factors involved in the mind’s continuous 
making of meaning out of various internal and external experiences and 
phenomena;  but  all  of  them  emphasize  the  importance  of  the  mind’s 
meaning-making function in contributing to symptoms, character traits, 
and behavioral difficulties. Clinically we work to help patients become 
aware  of  their  mind—its  contents  and  processes—and  to  see  how  it  is 
both affected by and affects inner and outer reality. Becoming aware of 
one’s subjective meanings instantiated in conscious and unconscious fan-
tasies is what helps our patients change (Erreich 2015, 2017). Such self-
knowing is a psychological phenomenon and can be emphasized to place 
psychoanalysis well within the domain of scientific psychology.

For this reason, Pulver (2003) is adamant that neuroscience has no rel-
evance for the practice of clinical psychoanalysis. “If there is a single over-
arching principle that governs our behavior in the analytic situation, it is 
that we attempt to understand our patient’s individual, specific motivations, 
particularly as they are manifested in the analytic relationship, and to help 
the patient understand them. We deal, that is, with the specific contents of 
the  patient’s  mind  and  the  specific  processes  he  or  she  uses  to  regulate 
them.  Neuroscience  clarifies  the  anatomical  and  physiological  substrates 
from which these motivations arise. It may also say something about the 
general functioning of these motivations, but by its very nature it can say 
little about the meaning they have for an individual” (p. 762).

Blass and Carmeli (2015) use a clinical example provided by Solms 
and his colleagues to emphasize the seeming unawareness of the central-
ity of subjective experience by neuropsychoanalysis. This lack of aware-
ness, they argue, is dangerous for psychoanalysis. The work they critique 

1146

commeNtary oN solms

was offered by Solms and his colleagues (Yovell, Solms, and Fotopoulou 
2015)  to  support  the  clinical  utility  of  neuropsychoanalysis.  Although 
Solms promises to demonstrate in future work the clinical implications of 
his neuroscientific theory of drives, the earlier paper with his colleagues 
seems to support the complaint that he does not emphasize the essential 
role of subjectivity and meaning-making in clinical psychoanalytic prac-
tice. The clinical example of Ms. A. involves a woman who reveals early 
in treatment the strong hope that analytic psychotherapy will allow her to 
regain  her  memory  of  childhood  sexual  abuse  and  so  lay  to  rest  her 
chronic uncertainty and ambivalent feelings about important figures who 
refuse to believe it occurred. From her perspective, treatment should lift 
repression of the abuse, presumably enveloping her memory, and prove 
her belief correct. If she does not regain the memory during the treatment, 
she will be proven wrong and to have created a false memory. After two 
years of failing to gain any definitive memory either way, the therapist 
tells her that neuroscientific research demonstrates that events occurring 
during great stress may not be encoded in declarative memory. That is, 
her failure to regain the memory of the presumed abuse would not conclu-
sively  mean  that  it  had  not  occurred.  Learning  this  data  significantly 
attenuated her anxiety, guilt, and shame.

The fact that this information was “therapeutic” is certainly worthy of 
study, as one could easily imagine it making the patient even more rigidly 
anxious. But, as Blass and Carmeli point out, this sort of supportive inter-
vention simply reduced the patient’s anxiety by providing external infor-
mation  rather  than  analyzing  the  plethora  of  motives,  anxieties,  and 
conflicts making the question so important to her. To use Pulver’s terms, it 
sidestepped  the  opportunity  to  help  the  patient  understand  the  deeper, 
developmentally based meaning of her preoccupation. Given that Solms 
and his colleagues offered the vignette as an example of the role neurosci-
ence can play in clinical technique, some might conclude instead that it 
illustrates the truth of Pulver’s title: “the astonishing clinical irrelevance of 
neuroscience.” It gives the impression that Solms and his colleagues see 
analytically oriented treatment as helping the patient know her historical 
reality using logic and manifest content. They demonstrate no attempt to 
understand or address the unconscious logic and meaning of the patient’s 
belief,  particularly  why  knowing  the  “truth”  was  so  important.  Instead 
they conceptualized their task as helping her realize that she might never 
remember because of how the brain encodes traumatic memories. By not 

1147

A l a n   S u g a r m a n

considering development or the complex ways that minds function, neuro-
psychoanalysis cannot make sense of the kind of beliefs/fantasies that are 
perfectly logical to a child who does not understand how the world works 
or why certain fantasies are maintained and transformed throughout the 
developmental process. This aspect of unconscious fantasies can be under-
stood  as  involving  naive  misinterpretations  of  events  due  to  the  child’s 
limited knowledge of the world (Erreich 2003).

so l m s ’ s  re v i s i oN  o f  dr i v e  th e o r y

I will now turn to Solms’s concept of drives to consider whether his revi-
sion adds to our psychoanalytic theory of the mind, including its clinical 
utility. Despite the length of his paper, he leaves the reader unsure of the 
place he sees for drives in broader mental functioning. Our traditional use 
of the concept is to see it as a motivational construct (Klein 1976) and as 
playing a role in intrapsychic conflict. In the United States, most contem-
porary ego psychologists and conflict theorists rarely use the actual con-
cept of drive these days; instead we use the term wish, a psychological 
concept  that  involves  a  mental  representation.  Wish  is  not  an  abstract, 
biological, or mechanistic concept based on dubious ideas about eroge-
nous zones and psychic energy. This equation of drive with wish has been 
with us for some time (Holt 1976). “On the basis of psychoanalytic data 
one  can  say  the  following  about  the  drives:  They  are  generalizations 
drawn from the psychoanalytic study of wishes” (Brenner 1982, p. 38). 
Further, there are myriad wishes that contemporary analysts deal with and 
discuss in their practices, not just the limited number of drives enumer-
ated by Solms. Contemporary analysts of many persuasions beyond ego 
psychology and conflict theory (e.g., relational, self psychological, inter-
subjective) do not limit the concept to oral, anal, phallic, or oedipal drive 
derivatives  or  any  other  biologically  based  phenomena.  To  restrict  the 
concept  to  phenomena  rising  from  the  body  (brain)  leaves  out  psycho-
logical constructs like object relations, safety, holding, fantasy, mirroring, 
idealization, and so on that current models have deemed important.

In addition, the importance of internal conflict, even in theories that 
do  not  use  that  terminology,  has  been  demonstrated  by  Smith  (2003, 
2005).  Thus,  for  most  analysts,  the  interactions  among  and  conflicts 
between  subjective  phenomena  like  wishes,  anxieties,  ideals,  prohibi-
tions, and coping strategies are how we understand mental functioning. 

1148

commeNtary oN solms

Wish as a concept has little use in our theory outside its interactions with 
the other mental constructs that we call structures or functions. Overall 
mental functioning involves interactions of the drive/wish with all these 
other mental phenomena, as well as the other mental functions tradition-
ally subsumed under the concept of ego functions (cognition, affect toler-
ance and regulation, etc.).

Solms’s decision not to explain the place of drives in overall mental 
functioning  in  this  paper  reduces  their  seeming  importance.  David 
Rapaport is reported to have said that definitions are matters of strategy. 
From that perspective, the question of whether Solms’s concept of drives 
improves psychoanalytic theory rests on whether his strategy of a neuro-
scientific definition and understanding of drives improves our model of 
mental functioning. But there is nothing in the paper that demonstrates 
any  conceptual  advantage  to  defining  drives  as  he  does.  He  states  that 
drives  push  the  human  organism  (I  would  say  human  mind)  to  reduce 
uncertainty  and  make  environmental  events  more  predictable.  There  is 
nothing wrong with this psychological role for drives on the face of it. But 
what strategic advantage does it offer the psychoanalytic model of mind 
in understanding mental functioning? Making the environment more pre-
dictable is part of what traditional ego psychology has called adaptation 
(Hartmann  1958),  which  includes  conflict,  defense,  and  compromise 
solutions. And adaptation is traditionally seen as involving primarily the 
ego, not the drives. Conceptualizing adaptation as the province of an ego 
that then interacts, or conflicts, with the phenomena we usually subsume 
under the concept of drives has provided a psychoanalytic way to account 
for  both  interpersonal  and  intrapsychic  functioning,  development  and 
maturation,  and  pathogenesis.  Unless  Solms  can  demonstrate  that  his 
neurobiological  definition  of  drives  provides  broader,  deeper,  or  more 
accurate elaborations of adaptation, there is no strategic reason to adopt 
it. His choice not to do so in this paper makes it seem prudent to wait until 
he does, before we consider adopting it.

Another  aspect  of  Solms’s  definition  of  drives  that  bears  further 
examination is his emphasis on drives seeking homeostasis. This view is 
quite different from most contemporary psychoanalytic models of mind. 
Traditionally,  the  mind  is  the  psychoanalytic  construct  usually  charged 
with  creating  and  maintaining  homeostasis  between  the  competing  and 
interacting contents, functions, and structures hypothesized to constitute 
internal reality. In fact, it is by making meaning that the mind creates and 

1149

A l a n   S u g a r m a n

maintains  equilibrium  between  these  facets  of  mental  functioning. 
Traditional  ego  psychology  replaced  the  term  mind  with  the  construct 
ego,  while  self  stands  in  for  mind  in  self  psychology,  many  relational 
theories, and others (Klein 1976; Sugarman and Jaffe 1990). Regardless 
of  terminology,  most  contemporary  theories  see  the  mind  as  organized 
hierarchically with certain psychological structures/functions regulating 
subordinate  ones.  Maintaining  homeostasis  between  all  these  functions 
and input/output with the external world is complex and requires synthe-
sis.  Relegating  the  maintenance  of  homeostasis  to  a  hierarchically  ele-
vated, self-regulating psychological construct makes drive a subordinate 
concept that contributes to the unconscious internal conflicts lying at the 
motivational  heart  of  the  modern  theories  in  our  field.  Organizing  our 
clinical and observational data this way has developed over many decades. 
Important  psychological  concepts  like  selfobjects,  compromise  forma-
tions,  alpha  and  beta  functions,  paranoid  and  depressive  positions,  all 
based on a mind that seeks homeostatic equilibrium, cannot be accounted 
for  by  Solms’s  proposal  to  make  such  work  a  drive  function.  Instead, 
Solms’s revision of the drive construct, making it a neurobiological con-
cept, strips psychoanalysis of important conceptual moorings involving 
psychological,  not  biological,  phenomena.  He  offers  no  conceptually 
strategic advantage to doing so at this stage of theory building.

coNc l u s i oN

In  conclusion,  it  seems  premature  to  turn  to  neuroscience  to  bolster  the 
scientific status of psychoanalytic technique or theory. Trying to do so only 
repeats the efforts of traditional ego psychology many decades ago to make 
psychoanalysis a general psychology by using constructs and methodolo-
gies  that  were  not  psychological  (e.g.,  psychic  energy,  cathexes,  etc.).  I 
doubt  that  a  nonmechanistic  superordinate  model  integrating  neurobio-
logical and psychological levels of mental functioning is possible, but it 
should not be ruled out. Until one is developed, however, it is important 
that psychoanalysis rely on data arising from psychology to claim its place 
in  the  world  of  science.  Cognitive  and  developmental  psychology  have 
contributed a great deal of information directly relevant to psychoanalytic 
practice and theory building. And they will continue to do so.

Moreover, using neuroscience as Solms does in this paper eliminates 
many of the concepts that psychoanalysis has found useful in understanding 

1150

commeNtary oN solms

mental  functioning,  development,  pathogenesis,  and  mutative  action.  To 
date, neuropsychoanalysis has not offered concepts or models that will serve 
our field better or make it more scientific. Solms is one of many who are 
attempting to study psychoanalysis using various types of natural science 
methodologies  and  concepts  (see,  e.g.,  Leuzinger-Bohleber,  Solms,  and 
Arnold 2020). Such research indeed strengthens the scientific base of our 
field. But I do not see his neuroscientific research as one of those contribu-
tions. In saying this, it is important to differentiate the relevance of neurosci-
ence  for  psychoanalysis  from  the  ability  to  study  psychoanalysis  using 
natural science concepts and methodology. The latter is not a focus of this 
commentary. In fact, it is important to acknowledge that Solms (2020) has 
recently provided an example of how to use concepts from cognitive psy-
chology (i.e., nondeclarative memory) to study the clinical phenomenon of 
psychoanalytic  process.  Others  (Jiminez  and  Altimir  2020;  Leuzinger-
Bohleber, Kallenbach, and Schoett 2016) also agree that psychoanalytic pro-
cess can be examined within a natural science model. And Jaffe (2021) has 
shown that the importance of working through in clinical analysis can be 
understood using the cognitive concept of procedural memory. Like these 
authors, I believe that clinical psychoanalytic technique can be studied from 
a natural science perspective, while maintaining that neuroscience is not the 
appropriate source of natural science data or methodology for doing so. One 
can  respect  Solms’s  many  contributions  to  psychoanalytic  research  while 
questioning whether neuroscience can help us understand or improve our 
clinical work.

It  is  interesting,  of  course,  to  know  what  brain  structures  and  pro-
cesses  allow  the  subjective  phenomena  that  concern  psychoanalysis  to 
occur. But it remains impossible to see how that knowledge will help our 
field understand the subjective meanings and motivations we study and 
treat. One can acknowledge, for example, that certain problems that we 
treat  psychoanalytically  have  some  basis  in  brain  functioning  (i.e., 
ADHD, autism) while also remaining aware that the developing mind of 
a patient with such a brain will always make subjective meaning of the 
symptoms through the development of unconscious fantasies (Sugarman 
2019).  New  neuropsychoanalytic  data  about  such  disorders  will  not 
change  our  psychoanalytic  emphasis  on  analyzing  the  meanings  the 
patient’s  mind  has  made  of  coping  with  such  impairments.  Ultimately, 
psychoanalysis as a theory of mind, development, and technique seems 
most likely to evolve based on psychological research, not neuroscience 

1151

A l a n   S u g a r m a n

research. After all, meaning-making is a psychological, not a neurological 
phenomenon.

RefeRences

Blass, R.B., & CaRmeli, Z. (2015). Further evidence for the case against neu-
ropsychoanalysis: How Yovell, Solms, and Fotopoulou’s response to our 
critique confirms the irrelevance and harmfulness to psychoanalysis of 
the  contemporary  neuroscientific  trend.  International  Journal  of 
Psychoanalysis 96:1555–1573.

BRenneR,  C.  (1982).  The  Mind  in  Conflict.  New  York:  International 

Universities Press.

BRieRley, m. (1944). Notes on metapsychology as process theory. International 

Journal of Psychoanalysis 25:97–107.

BRieRley, m. (1951). Trends in Psychoanalysis. London: Hogarth Press.
eagle, m.n. (2021). Toward a Unified Psychoanalytic Theory: Foundation 
in a Revised and Expanded Ego Psychology. London: Routledge.
eRReiCh,  a.  (2003).  A  modest  proposal  (re)defining  unconscious  fantasy. 

Psychoanalytic Study of the Child 72:541–574.

eRReiCh, a. (2015). Unconscious fantasy as a special class of mental repre-
sentation: A contribution to a model of mind. Journal of the American 
Psychoanalytic Association 63:247–270.

eRReiCh,  a.  (2017).  Unconscious  fantasy  and  the  priming  phenomenon. 
Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association 65:195–219.
FeniChel,  O.  (1945).  The  Psychoanalytic  Theory  of  Neurosis.  New  York: 

Norton.

FisheR,  C.P.,  &  KessleR,  R.J.  (2018).  Neuropsychoanalysis.  In  Textbook  of 
Applied  Psychoanalysis,  ed.  S.  Akhtar  &  S.  Twemlow.  London: 
Routledge, pp. 115–128.

FReud,  s.  (1895).  Project  for  a  scientific  psychology.  Standard  Edition  1: 

295–397.

gill,  m.m.  (1967).  The  primary  process.  In  Motives  and  Thoughts: 
Psychoanalytic Essays in Honor of David Rapaport, ed. R.R. Holt. New 
York: International Universities Press, pp. 259–298.

gill, m.m. (1976). Metapsychology is not psychology. In Psychology versus 
Metapsychology: Psychoanalytic Essays in Memory of George S. Klein, 
ed.  M.M.  Gill  &  P.S.  Holzman.  New  York:  International  Universities 
Press, pp. 71–105.

gill, m.m., & hOlZman, P.s., eds. (1976). Psychology versus Metapsychology: 
Psychoanalytic  Essays  in  Memory  of  George  S.  Klein.  New  York: 
International Universities Press.

1152

commeNtary oN solms

gROssman, W.i., & simOn, B. (1969). Anthropomorphism: Motive, meaning, 
and  causality  in  psychoanalytic  theory.  Psychoanalytic  Study  of  the 
Child 24:78–111.

haRtmann, h. (1958). Ego Psychology and the Problem of Adaptation. New 

York: International Universities Press.

haRtmann,  h.  (1964).  Essays  on  Ego  Psychology:  Selected  Problems  in 
Psychoanalytic Theory. New York: International Universities Press.
haRtmann, h., KRis, e., & lOeWenstein, R.m. (1964). Papers on Psychoanalytic 

Psychology. New York: International Universities Press.

hOlt, R.R. (1965). A review of some of Freud’s biological assumptions and 
their influence on his theories. In Psychoanalysis and Current Biological 
Thought,  ed.  N.S.  Greenfield  &  W.C.  Lewis.  Madison:  University  of 
Wisconsin Press, pp. 93–124.

hOlt,  R.R.  (1967).  The  development  of  the  primary  process:  A  structural 
view.  In  Motives  and  Thoughts:  Psychoanalytic  Essays  in  Honor  of 
David  Rapaport,  ed.  R.R.  Holt.  New  York:  International  Universities 
Press, pp. 344–383.

hOlt,  R.R.  (1972).  Freud’s  mechanistic  and  humanistic  images  of  man. 

Psychoanalysis & Contemporary Science 1:3–24.

hOlt,  R.R. (1976). Drive or wish? A reconsideration of the psychoanalytic 
In  Psychology  versus  Metapsychology: 
theory  of  motivation. 
Psychoanalytic Essays in Memory of George S. Klein, ed. M.M. Gill & 
P.S. Holzman. New York: International Universities Press, pp. 158–197.
Klein,  g.s.  (1967).  Peremptory  ideation:  Structure  and  force  in  motivated 
ideas.  In  Motives  and  Thought:  Psychoanalytic  Essays  in  Honor  of 
David  Rapaport,  ed.  R.R.  Holt.  New  York:  International  Universities 
Press, pp. 78–130.

Klein,  g.s.  (1976).  Psychoanalytic  Theory:  An  Exploration  of  Essentials. 

New York: International Universities Press.

KuBie, l. (1947). The fallacious use of quantitative concepts in dynamic psy-

chology. Psychoanalytic Quarterly 16:507–518.

leuZingeR-BOhleBeR,  m.,  KallenBaCh,  l.,  &  sChOett,  m.J.  (2016).  Pluralistic 
approaches to the study of process and outcome in psychoanalysis: The LAC 
depression study, a case in point. Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy 30:4–22.
leuZingeR-BOhleBeR,  m.,  sOlms,  m.,  &  aRnOld,  s.e.,  eds.  (2020).  Outcome 
Research and the Future of Psychoanalysis: Clinicians and Researchers 
in Dialogue. London: Routledge.

lOeWald,  h.W.  (1976).  Perspectives  on  memory.  In  Psychology  versus 
Metapsychology: Psychoanalytic Essays in Memory of George S. Klein, 
ed.  M.M.  Gill  &  P.S.  Holzman.  New  York:  International  Universities 
Press, pp. 298–325.

1153

A l a n   S u g a r m a n

lOeWenstein,  R.m.,  neWman,  l.m.,  sChuR,  m.,  &  sOlnit,  a.J.,  eds.  (1966). 
Psychoanalysis—A  General  Psychology:  Essays  in  Honor  of  Heinz 
Hartmann. New York: International Universities Press.

mayman,  m.  (1976).  Psychoanalytic  theory  in  retrospect  and  prospect. 

Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic 40:199–210.

Paul, i.h. (1967). The concept of schema in memory theory. In Motives and 
Thought: Psychoanalytic Essays in Honor of David Rapaport, ed. R.R. 
Holt. New York: International Universities Press, pp. 218–258.

PulveR, s.e. (2003). On the astonishing clinical irrelevance of neuroscience. 
Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association 51:755–772.
RaPaPORt,  d.  (1951).  Organization  and  Pathology  of  Thought:  Selected 

Sources. New York: Columbia University Press.

RaPaPORt, d. (1960). The Structure of Psychoanalytic Theory: A Systematizing 

Attempt. New York: International Universities Press.

ROsenBlatt, a.d., & thiCKstun, J.t. (1970). A study of the concept of psychic 

energy. International Journal of Psychoanalysis 51:265–278.

ROsenBlatt, a.d., & thiCKstun, J.t. (1977). Modern Psychoanalytic Concepts 
in a General Psychology. New York: International Universities Press.
RuBenstein, B.B. (1965). Psychoanalytic theory and the mind–body problem. 
In Psychoanalysis and Current Biological Thought, ed. N.S. Greenfield 
& W.C. Lewis. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, pp. 35–56.
RuBenstein, B.B. (1967). Explanation and mere description: A metascientific 
examination of certain aspects of the psychoanalytic theory of motiva-
tion.  In  Motives  and  Thoughts:  Psychoanalytic  Essays  in  Honor  of 
David  Rapaport,  ed.  R.R.  Holt.  New  York:  International  Universities 
Press, pp. 18–77.

RyCROFt,  C.  (1968).  A  Critical  Dictionary  of  Psychoanalysis.  London: 

Thomas Nelson.

sChaFeR,  R.  (1973).  Action:  Its  place  in  psychoanalytic  theory.  Annual  of 

Psychoanalysis 1:159–196.

sChaFeR, R. (1976a). Emotion in the language of action. In Psychology versus 
Metapsychology: Psychoanalytic Essays in Memory of George S. Klein, 
ed.  M.M.  Gill  &  P.S.  Holzman.  New  York:  International  Universities 
Press, pp. 106–133.

sChaFeR, R. (1976b). A New Language for Psychoanalysis. New Haven: Yale 

University Press.

sChaFeR, R. (1983). The Analytic Attitude. New York: Basic Books.
shaPiRO,  d.  (1970).  Motivation  and  action  in  psychoanalytic  psychiatry. 

Psychiatry 33:329–343.

sOlms,  m.  (2000).  Preliminaries  for  an  integration  of  psychoanalysis  and 

neuroscience. Annual of Psychoanalysis 28:179–200.

1154

commeNtary oN solms

sOlms,  m.  (2014).  The  primary  concern  of  psychoanalysis.  Neuro- 

psychoanalysis 16:49–51.

sOlms,  m.  (2020).  The  scientific  basis  of  psychoanalysis:  Introductory 
remarks.  In  Outcome  Research  and  the  Future  of  Psychoanalysis: 
Clinicians and Researchers in Dialogue, ed. M. Leuzinger-Bohleber, M. 
Solms, & S.E. Arnold. London: Routledge, pp. 26–34.

sOlms,  m.  (2021).  Revision  of  drive  theory.  Journal  of  the  American 

Psychoanalytic Association 69:1033–1091.

sugaRman, a. (1977). Object-relations theory: A reconciliation of phenome-
nology and ego psychology. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic 41:113–
130. 

sugaRman,  a.  (2019).  The  importance  of  considering  development  when 
analyzing  patients  with  adult  ADHD:  Commentary  on  Whiteside. 
Psychoanalytic Study of the Child 72:118–130.

sugaRman,  a.  (2021).  Lee  Jaffe’s  unifying  approach  to  psychoanalysis. 
Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association 69:595–606.
sugaRman, a. (in press). Why is psychoanalytic education so conflictual? In 
Psychoanalysis at the Crossroads, ed. F. Busch. London: Routledge.
sugaRman, a., & JaFFe, l.s. (1990). Toward a developmental understanding of 
the self schema. Psychoanalysis & Contemporary Thought 13:117–138.
WOlFF, P.h. (1967). Cognitive considerations for a psychoanalytic theory of 
language acquisition. In Motives and Thoughts: Psychoanalytic Essays 
in  Honor  of  David  Rapaport,  ed.  R.R.  Holt.  New  York:  International 
Universities Press, pp. 299–343.

yanKelOviCh, d., & BaRRett, W. (1970). Ego and Instinct. New York: Random 

House.

yOvell, y., sOlms, m., & FOtOPOulOu, a. (2015). The case for neuroscience: 
Why  a  dialogue  with  neuroscience  is  necessary  but  not  sufficient  for 
psychoanalysis. International Journal of Psychoanalysis 96:1515–1553.

990 Highland Drive, Suite 104A
Solana Beach, CA 92075
Email: sugarmanalan@gmail.com

1155

