1057041 APAXXX10.1177/00030651211057041Mark solmsREVISION OF DRIVE THEORY

research-article2021

j
a
P
a

Mark Solms

69/6

Revision of DRive TheoRy

Several  deep  revisions  of  Freud’s  theory  of  the  drives  are  proposed:  
(1) Drives are conscious and are in fact the source of all consciousness. 
(2) Drive energy is equated with variational free energy and is therefore 
quantifiable in principle. (3) There are not two drives but many, seven of 
which may be described as “emotional” as opposed to “bodily” drives. 
(4) All drives are self-preservative or preservative of the species; there is 
no death drive at work in the mind. This means, at the mechanistic level, 
that all drives are homeostatic and anti-entropic. (5) The great task of 
mental development is to supplement instinctual predictions about how 
our multiple drive demands may be met and reconciled with each other. 
This work is done by learning from experience, mainly through voluntary 
behavior, which is governed by conscious feelings.

Keywords: affect, drive theory, Freudian theory, id, instincts, memory, 
neuropsychoanalysis,  neuroscience,  pleasure  principle,  repetition 
compulsion, free energy, homeostasis, self-organizing systems

P sychoanalytic  drive  theory  is  in  need  of  fundamental  revision. 

Many analysts today have not only lost confidence in Freud’s clas-
sical  conception  of  the  drives  (1915a,  1920)  but  have  abandoned  drive 
theory  altogether,  thereby  conflating  Freudian  drive  theory  with  drive 
theory per se. The price we pay for this is too great; rather than abandon 
drive theory, we must revise it.

The raison d’être of psychoanalysis was in Freud’s view to bring the 
phenomena of mental life within the purview of science; to treat the mind 
as just another part of nature. His pioneering efforts to that end were pred-
icated on the assumption that we human beings are, after all, a species of 

Director  of  Neuropsychology,  University  of  Cape  Town  and  Groote  Schuur 
Hospital;  Co-Chair, 
International  Neuropsychoanalysis  Society;  Chair  of  
Research,  International  Psychoanalytical  Association;  Science  Director,  American 
Psychoanalytic Association.

The author thanks Gyuri Fodor for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this 

paper. Submitted for publication August 26, 2020.

DOI: 10.1177/00030651211057041

1033

M a r k   S o l m s

animal.  In  this  sense,  Freud  is  rightly  described  as  a  “biologist  of  the 
mind” (Sulloway 1979).

If the mind is part of nature, then it is embodied (what else can it be?); 
and it is from this simple premise that Freudian drive theory starts. Human 
mental functions, like those of all other species, ultimately serve the evo-
lutionary imperatives of survival and reproductive success. This approach 
enabled Freud to see the obvious, shocking though it may have been to his 
Victorian contemporaries: the sexual drive plays the same fundamental 
role  in  human  psychology  that  it  does  in  animal  behavior. To  abandon 
drive theory is to abandon this insight, which is the essential connection 
between psychoanalysis and the body, and, indeed, with the life sciences 
as a whole.

Freud’s classical definition of drive (1915a) is so well known that it 

hardly needs quoting1:

“Drive” appears to us as a concept on the frontier between the mental and the 
somatic, as the psychical representative of the stimuli originating from within 
the organism and reaching the mind, as a measure of the demand made upon the 
mind  for  work  in  consequence  of  its  connection  with  the  body  [1915a,  
pp. 121–122].

All the introductory points I have just made about the embodied nature of 
mind are illustrated in this definition, but it reveals something else, too. 
The phrase “a measure of the demand made upon the mind for work” is 
also a psychophysical statement, which alludes to Freud’s first ambition, 
namely to “furnish a psychology that shall be a natural science: that is, to 
represent psychical processes as quantitatively determinate states of spec-
ifiable  material  particles,  thus  making  those  processes  perspicuous  and 
free from contradiction” (Freud 1895, p. 295). Although Freud gave up 
his attempt to represent mental processes as material ones, he never aban-
doned  the  deeper  scientific  goals  on  which  this  endeavor  was  based. 
Those goals are encapsulated in another quotation that again is so well 
known that it barely needs repeating. I am referring to the goals of the 
“Helmholtz school of medicine,” of which Freud’s revered teacher Ernst 

 1In line with the editorial policy followed in the Revised Standard Edition, I am through-
out this paper replacing Strachey’s translation of Trieb as “instinct” with “drive.” However, my 
quotations are referenced to the pagination of the original Standard Edition, since the revised 
edition is still in press.

1034

Revision of DRive TheoRy

von  Brücke  was  a  founding  member.2  The  mission  of  the  Helmholtz 
school  was  described  as  follows  by  Emil  du  Bois–Reymond,  another 
founding member, in 1842:

Brücke and I pledged a solemn oath to put into effect this truth: “No other forces 
than the common physical and chemical ones are active within the organism. In 
those cases which cannot currently be explained by these forces one has either 
to  find  the  specific  way  or  form  of  their  action  by  means  of  the  physical- 
mathematical method or to assume new forces equal in dignity to the chemical-
physical forces inherent in matter, reducible to the forces of attraction and repul-
sion” [Du Bois–Reymond 1842, p. 108].

This goal became the impetus behind Freud’s fundamental theory of 
psychoanalysis,  his  “metapsychology,”  which,  as  he  explained  at  the 
time,  was  intended  to  replace  metaphysics  (i.e.,  to  rescue  psychology 
from  philosophy  and  claim  it  for  science).3  This  is  important,  because 
Freud’s  metapsychology  has  suffered  much  the  same  fate  as  his  drive 
theory.  That  is,  many  psychoanalysts  today,  by  abandoning  Freudian 
metapsychology,  have  abandoned  any  attempt  to  cast  the  structure  and 
functions of the mind in lawful, mechanistic terms (cf. Holt 1967; Gill 
and Holzman 1976; Klein 1976; Schafer 1976). Again, in my view, the 
price  we  pay  for  this  is  too  great. There  can  be  little  doubt  that  Freud 
would have deemed it a tragedy.

The  aspect  of  Freud’s  metapsychology  that  has  been  most  roundly 
rejected is precisely the part that overlaps with his drive theory, namely, 
what  he  called  the  “economic  point  of  view.”  This  is  the  quantitative 
viewpoint mentioned both in the opening sentence of the 1895 Project, 
quoted above, and in Du Bois–Reymond’s solemn oath. It is alluded to 
also in Freud’s definition of drive as a measure of the demand for mental 
work. Although, as I have said, Freud abandoned “for the present” (1915b, 
p. 175; emphasis in original) his attempt to translate psychodynamics into 
neurophysiology (see Freud 1920, p. 60), he never abandoned his deeper 

  2In  his  Autobiographical  Study,  Freud  (1925)  wrote:  “In  Ernst  Brücke’s  physiological 
laboratory, I found rest and full satisfaction—and men, too, whom I could respect and take as 
my  models:  the  great  Brücke  himself,  and  his  assistants”  (p.  10).  In  a  postscript  to  “The 
Question of Lay Analysis,” Freud (1927) added that Brücke “carried more weight with me than 
anyone else in my whole life” (p. 253).

 3When Freud first introduced this term, he clarified that it refers to a level of explanation 
that  incorporates  both  psychological  and  biological  facts  (letter  to  Fliess.  March  10,  1898 
[Masson 1985]).

1035

M a r k   S o l m s

assumption that the mind, like everything else in nature, must be driven 
by an energy of some kind. Thus, he clung to his notion of “drive energy”; 
a  psychical  energy  that  was  capable  of  increase,  diminution,  displace-
ment, and discharge, and therefore possessed all the characteristics of a 
quantity, “though we have no means of measuring it” (Freud 1894, p. 60). 
This is the most direct example of Freud’s commitment to the ideals of 
the Helmholtz school: in cases that cannot yet be explained in terms of 
physical and chemical forces, one has “either to find the specific way or 
form of their action by means of the physical-mathematical method or to 
assume new forces equal in dignity.”

I have gained the impression, over decades of work in this field, not 
only that most psychoanalysts have rejected the notion of “drive energy” 
and the associated “economic point of view” but that many of us are posi-
tively  embarrassed  by  these  concepts.  Let  me  be  clear:  what  is  at  stake 
here  is  not  only  whether  psychoanalytic  theory  is  compatible  with  the 
basic tenets of physical science (whereby nothing can perform work with-
out using an energy to do so), but also whether we are unwittingly consign-
ing ourselves to mind/body dualism (whereby the mind exists somehow 
independently  of  the  physical  universe).4  A  far  better  approach,  in  my 
view,  is  to  do  what  Freud  expected  his  intellectual  descendants  to  do, 
which is what we do in every other science: revise and correct his basic 
concepts in line with unfolding evidence. That is my purpose here.

Since this paper carries over into psychoanalysis assumptions derived 
from  other  branches  of  knowledge,  I  must  briefly,  before  proceeding, 
address the often expressed objection that it is unpsychoanalytic or even 
antipsychoanalytic to do so (see, e.g., Blass and Carmeli 2007). When it 
comes  to  drive  theory,  this  objection  is  more  easily  dismissed  than  in 
other such matters, for the reason that Freud always acknowledged in the 

 4For Freud (1915a, pp. 121–122), as quoted above, drive was a concept “on the frontier 
between the mental and the somatic”; it was the foundation stone of his monism. This is not the 
place to enter into lengthy philosophical discussions; however, to avoid misunderstanding, let 
me clarify that metapsychological constructs (like “drive”) are functional entities that manifest 
in  both  psychological  and  physiological  phenomena  (e.g.,  feeling  states  and  their  correlated 
neurochemical  events).  Like  Freud,  I  take  the  position  of  dual-aspect  monism:  psychological 
events are no more caused by physiological ones than thunder is caused by lightning. Our goal, 
therefore, is not to reduce psychological phenomena to physiological ones, but rather to explain 
their common underlying mechanism in natural-scientific terms. This requires us to transcend 
the languages of psychology and physiology both, and to replace them with the deeper (nonphe-
nomenal) abstractions of statistical physics. As Galileo said: “The book of Nature is written in 
the language of mathematics.”

1036

Revision of DRive TheoRy

case  of  the  “frontier”  concept  of  drive  that  we  are  obliged  to  rely  on 
knowledge from other fields:

I am altogether doubtful whether any decisive pointers for the differentiation and 
classification  of  the  drives  can  be  arrived  at  on  the  basis  of  working  over  the 
psychological  material.  This  working-over  seems  rather  itself  to  call  for  the 
application to the material of definite assumptions concerning the life of the drives, 
and it would be a desirable thing if those assumptions could be taken from some 
other branch of knowledge and carried over to psychology [Freud 1915a, p. 124].

Many  other  such  statements  could  be  cited.  It  is  abundantly  clear 
from Freud’s writings on this topic that he drew heavily on the biology 
and psychophysics of his day. That is why he felt so uncertain about his 
conclusions—“it should be made quite clear that the uncertainty of our 
speculation  has  been  greatly  increased  by  the  necessity  for  borrowing 
from the science of biology”—and why he readily conceded that future 
biological findings “may be of a kind that will blow away the whole of 
our artificial structure of hypotheses” (Freud 1920, p. 60). In short, in the 
case  of  drive  theory,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  we  may,  indeed  must, 
carry over into psychoanalysis findings derived from other branches of 
knowledge.

i.   A   BRi e f   R e v i e w   o f   C lAs s iC Al   DRi v e   T h e oR

y

Freud’s  drive  theory,  well  known  to  psychoanalysts,  does  not  require 
detailed  exegesis  here.  I  will  briefly  outline  only  the  major  issues  that 
seem to need revision: (1) the fundamental mechanism of drive; (2) the 
bodily sources of drive; (3) classification of the drives; (4) the relation-
ship  between  drive  and  pleasure-unpleasure;  and  (5)  the  relationship 
between drive and conscious qualities in general. Since these points are 
discussed so frequently in Freud’s writings, I am not going to clutter my 
summary  with  detailed  bibliographic  references,  though  I  will  employ 
quotation marks wherever I use Freud’s own words. These are words he 
used many times; I will make referenced quotations only in relation to 
some specific and less familiar issues.

(1) The Fundamental Mechanism of Drive

Freud believed, from the first to the last of his writings, that the fun-
damental mechanism of drive was to discharge as rapidly as possible the 

1037

M a r k   S o l m s

excitations that impinge upon the mind from the interior of the body.5 The 
purpose of such discharge was to keep the level of the relentless somatic 
sources  of  excitation  as  low  as  possible.  Freud  linked  this  discharge 
mechanism of drive with the psychophysical notion of a “freely mobile” 
energy—the driving force of his “primary process” of mental functioning. 
His abiding model for this mechanism was that of the reflex arc. In his 
earliest writings he formulated it as a “principle of neuronal inertia,” that 
is, as the reflexive tendency of nerve cells to divest themselves of excita-
tion. In his last writings, he formulated it in terms of the “Nirvana prin-
ciple,” that is, the striving of the nervous system to rid itself of excitation 
as quickly as possible and thereby return to the quiescent state—and ulti-
mately to an inert, inorganic state. In a word, for Freud, drives were entro-
pic. That is, drives (in his first [1915a] theory, but the “death drive” only 
in his second [1920] theory; see below)6 were governed by the Second 
Law of Thermodynamics, according to which the energy in every system 
naturally dissipates. In this connection, it is evident that Freud’s distinc-
tion between “free” and “bound” states of drive energy built directly upon 
the physics of Helmholtz, who introduced the term “bound energy” into 
thermodynamics and indeed played a major role in the formulation of its 
First  Law.7  It  is  also  important  to  note  in  this  connection  that  Freud’s 
“constancy principle,” in terms of which the mental apparatus tolerates a 
tonic store of energy, which is kept as constant (and low) as possible, and 
which becomes its supply of “bound energy” (and thereby of the second-
ary  process),  is  a  compromise  between  the  primary  process  of  mental 
functioning and the “exigencies of life” (which later became the “reality 
principle”).  Freud’s  constancy  principle  was  not  a  manifestation  of  the 

 5A final word on philosophical premises: “the mind” is merely a subjective observational 
perspective upon “the body”; it is the being of the body. The scientific question arising from this 
premise is: why does it feel like something to be a human body but not to be, say, a computer? 
In  other  words,  what  does  sentient  subjectivity  do  and  how  does  it  arise? The  answer  to  this 
question, as we shall see, has everything to do with the biological function of feeling. Please 
note: my account of the mechanisms through which feeling comes about is not intended to be 
metaphorical. These are the actual, causal mechanisms of sentient subjectivity. (For the fuller 
treatment  that  this  immensely  complex  issue  requires,  see  Solms  [2021].  My  topic  here  is 
Freudian drive theory, not the mechanistic origins of selfhood.)

 6In Freud’s second drive theory, the fundamental entropic tendency of drive is represented 
in the life drives, too, by way of their “conservative” nature; that is, through their compulsive 
tendency to revert to a previous state of things (previous to the impingement of an excitation). 
See the “compulsion to repeat.”

  7“In  my  opinion  this  distinction  [between  free  and  bound  drive  energy]  represents  the 
deepest insight we have gained up to the present into the nature of nervous energy, and I do not 
see how we can avoid making it” (Freud 1915b, p. 188).

1038

Revision of DRive TheoRy

basic tendency of drives themselves, which remained an unrelenting ten-
dency toward discharge.

(2) The Bodily Sources of Drive

Freud  distinguished  between  the  “pressure,”  “aim,”  “object,”  and 
“source” of a drive. The “pressure” referred to its quantitative aspect, to 
the fact that it was a “measure” admitting of degrees. The “aim” referred 
to its basic mechanism, discussed above, which was to discharge, that is, 
to get rid of the demand. The human infant, like all animals, is equipped 
with reflexes and instincts8 that serve this purpose, but since these innate 
mechanisms cannot by themselves satisfy the exigencies of life, at least 
not in every context, they must be supplemented by learning—through 
“experiences of satisfaction.” This applies all the more to the “object” of 
a drive, which, as Freud pointed out, is its most variable aspect; the object 
of a drive is almost always specified through learning.

The “source” of every drive, even of the death drive, is the “cellular 
processes of the body.” (Freud equated the life and death drives with anab-
olism and catabolism, respectively.) In regard to the life drives and their 
sources, he placed special emphasis on mechanical stimulation of the skin 
and  other  sensory  organs,  and  in  particular  of  the  mucous  membranes. 
This applied not only to the libidinal drives but also to the self-preservative 
ones, in his first drive theory. For example, he imagined that irritation of 
the lining of the stomach and dryness of the pharynx gave rise to the drives 
of hunger and thirst, respectively. Such stimulation, according to Freud, 
resulted in the release of “chemical products,”9 including specifically sex-
ual ones. He took the view (which he called “a provisional assumption that 
we  cannot  escape  in  the  theory  of  the  drives”)  that  “excitations  of  two 
kinds arise from the somatic organs, based upon differences of a chemical 
nature. One of these kinds of excitation we describe as being specifically 
sexual, and we speak of the organ concerned as the ‘erotogenic zone’ of 
the sexual component drive arising from it” (Freud 1905, p. 168).

 8The fact that instincts satisfy drive demands demonstrates just how unfortunate it was that 
Strachey  translated  Trieb  as  “instinct.”  The  German  word  for  instinct  is  Instinkt  (see  Solms 
2018b).

 9Interestingly, Freud predicted on this basis that it might become possible in the future 
(our present) to exert a “direct influence” on the drive economy by means of psychopharmaceu-
ticals. In this connection, Freud likened mental illnesses to “toxic processes,” and he emphasised 
the similarities between the neuroses and Graves’ disease (hyperthyroidism) and Bright’s dis-
ease  (acute  or  chronic  nephritis).  Significantly,  in  this  respect  he  also  drew  attention  to  the 
libidinal  intoxication  that  is  caused  by  ingestion  of  alkaloids  like  cocaine,  something  about 
which he knew much from personal experience.

1039

M a r k   S o l m s

Thus, for example, sucking at the breast simultaneously satisfies the 
self-preservative drive of hunger and (the oral component of) the libidinal 
drive “anaclitically.” That is, the libidinal function leans upon the nutri-
tional function.10 The same applies to defecation, in the case of the anal 
component drive, which provides libidinal satisfaction while simultane-
ously meeting a self-preservative need. According to Freud, it is only in 
the process of development, and therefore through learning, that the com-
ponent libidinal drives detach themselves—and then only partially—from 
these self-preservative functions (later called “narcissistic”). In this way, 
said Freud, the libidinal component drives mature and coalesce to achieve 
“genital” sexuality, in service of the biological function of reproduction. 
This developmental ideal is, however, not always attained, in which case 
the  component  drives  are  said  to  be  “fixated”  on  pregenital  aims  and 
objects.

(3) Classification of the Drives

Freud freely admitted that he found his classification of the drives to 
be problematic. It was especially in this respect that he thought “it would 
be a desirable thing if those assumptions could be taken from some other 
branch of knowledge and carried over to psychology.” However, in the 
absence of definite guidance from the biology of his time, he felt obliged 
to formulate some provisional hypotheses.

For some reason (perhaps the injunction to “assume new forces equal 
in dignity to the chemical-physical forces inherent in matter, reducible to 
the forces of attraction and repulsion”), Freud considered it necessary to 
classify the drives on a dualistic basis.11 Clinical experience demanded a 
classification that could accommodate the ubiquity of conflict in mental 
life, but it seems obvious that this requirement does not necessarily imply 
a two-way conflict (e.g., one can be sexually aroused by an object, and 
annoyed by it, and dependent upon it (i.e., “attached” to it), all at the same 
time).12 Be that as it may, Freud initially drew a dichotomy between the 
“self-preservative”  and  “libidinal”  drives,  and  he  linked  this  with  the 

10Anlehnung, which Strachey translated as “anaclisis,” literally means “leaning-on-ness” 

(see Solms 2018b).

11“The analogy of our two basic drives extends from the sphere of living things to the pair 
of opposing forces—attraction and repulsion—which rule in the inorganic world” (Freud 1940, 
p. 149).

12Later we shall learn that these inclinations are manifestations of three different drives.

1040

Revision of DRive TheoRy

contrasting  needs  of  the  individual  and  the  species.  However,  with  his 
development of the concept of narcissism (self-love), he recognized that 
self-preservation was itself libidinally driven, and he therefore felt obliged 
to combine the libido with self-preservation under the rubric of what he 
now called the “life drives” (or “Eros”). This led him to postulate a new 
and  deeper  principle  “beyond  the  pleasure  principle”  (see  section  [4] 
below), which he called the “Nirvana principle.” This principle was the 
direct expression of entropy, that is, of the natural tendency to dissipate, 
which all living things must oppose if they are to maintain their existence. 
This fundamental entropic tendency was counteracted by the life drives, 
the aim of which was “to establish ever greater unities and to preserve 
them.”

The conflicting demands of the constructive and destructive drives 
were  said  to  operate  throughout  the  organism,  through  processes  of 
“fusion” and “de-fusion.” Thus, for example, self-preservative aggression 
(and indeed, motility in general) was conceptualized by Freud not as a 
primary disposition but rather as the product of a fusion between libido 
and the death drive, which is thereby diverted away from the subject and 
toward  objects.  The  function  of  the  self-preservative  drives  in  general 
thereby became a deflection of external threats away from the organism: 
“to  assure  that  the  organism  shall  follow  its  own  path  to  death,  and  to 
ward off any possible ways of returning to inorganic existence other than 
those which are immanent in the organism itself” (Freud 1920, p. 39).

In biological functions the two basic drives operate against each other or com-
bine with each other. Thus, the act of eating is a destruction of the object with 
the final aim of incorporating it, and the sexual act is an act of aggression with 
the purpose of the most intimate union. This concurrent and mutually opposing 
action of the two basic drives gives rise to the whole variegation of the phenom-
ena of life [Freud 1940, p. 149].

On this basis, Freud reconceptualized the development of the sexual 
function—from  oral  “cannibalism,”  through  anal-sadistic  control  and 
phallic  superiority,  to  mature  genital  love—as  the  product  of  progres-
sively more successful fusions between destructiveness and libido (i.e., 
progressive taming of our ambivalence toward objects). Falling ill was 
now  conceptualized  as  a  regression  of  this  progress—that  is,  as  drive 
de-fusion.

1041

M a r k   S o l m s

The extent to which Freud was obliged to speculate about the physi-
ology of the drives is evident from the fact that he thought epileptic sei-
zures might be a clinical expression of drive de-fusion. The same applied 
to his speculations about “germ plasm,” which were formulated before 
the discovery of DNA. The following quotation illustrates the limitations 
of the biological knowledge then available:

The id, guided by the pleasure principle—that is, by the perception of unplea-
sure—fends off [the life drives] in various ways. It does so in the first place by 
complying  as  swiftly  as  possible  with  the  demands  of  the  non-desexualized 
libido—by striving for the satisfaction of the directly sexual trends. But it does 
so  in  a  far  more  comprehensive  fashion  in  relation  to  one  particular  form  of 
satisfaction  in  which  all  component  demands  converge—by  discharge  of  the 
sexual substances, which are saturated vehicles, so to speak, of the erotic ten-
sions.13 The ejection of the sexual substances in the sexual act corresponds in a 
sense to the separation of soma and germ-plasm. This accounts for the likeness 
of the condition that follows complete sexual satisfaction to dying, and for the 
fact that death coincides with the act of copulation in some lower animals. These 
creatures die in the act of reproduction because, after Eros has been eliminated 
through the process of satisfaction, the death drive has a free hand for accom-
plishing its purposes [Freud 1923, p. 47].

(4) The Relationship between Drive and Pleasure-Unpleasure

This is trenched upon by the opening sentence of the above quota-
tion. As is well known, Freud initially postulated a direct psychophysical 
ratio  between  increasing  and  decreasing  drive  tension  on  the  one  hand 
and  unpleasure  and  pleasure  on  the  other.  (Incidentally,  it  is  curiously 
unclear  whether  this  applied  only  to  the  libidinal  drive.  It  seems  that 
Freud conceptualized the affective valencing of self-preservative needs in 
terms  of  “anaclisis”;  see  section  [2]  above.  However,  the  question  fell 
away  when  self-preservation  was  understood  as  an  expression  of  self-
love.) This conception of drive pressure in relation to pleasure-unpleasure 
makes intuitive sense, and it accordingly became the foundation of the 
“pleasure  principle,”  in  terms  of  which  animals  like  us  are  attracted  to 
pleasurable aims and objects and repelled by unpleasurable ones. (Notice, 
once  more,  the  attraction-repulsion  polarity.)  It  will  become  important 

13See section (2) above: Freud (1905, p. 213) imagined that the “the accumulation of the 
sexual substances creates and maintains sexual tension; the pressure of these products upon the 
walls of the vesicles containing them might be supposed to act as a stimulus upon a spinal cen-
tre, the condition of which would then be perceived by higher centres and would give rise in 
consciousness of the familiar sensation of tension.”

1042

Revision of DRive TheoRy

later to notice that Freud saw the pleasure-unpleasure series as a contin-
uum: the organism is compelled to seek ever more pleasure. It is only due 
to the constraining influence of the “reality principle” that this compul-
sive urge is tamed, as the ego learns to tolerate a constant store of libidinal 
energy, which characterizes the constancy principle and gives rise to the 
secondary process.

Freud soon was beset by doubts concerning this directly proportional 
ratio between drive pressure and affective valence. His canonical counter-
example was the problem of foreplay (which he explained by the theory 
of pregenital modes of satisfaction), but, more generally, it was the prob-
lem that sexual excitement itself, presumably characterized by increasing 
libidinal  pressure,  is  typically  experienced  as  pleasurable.  Freud  was 
never able to resolve this fundamental issue; he could ultimately do no 
better  than  to  suggest  that  perhaps  pleasure  and  unpleasure  correspond 
not to the absolute level of drive tension but rather to fluctuations in it 
over a given period of time. (He equated this with amplitude.) The fol-
lowing  quotation  from  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle  illustrates  the 
extent of the problem, and it also introduces another one:

Here  might  be  the  starting  point  for  fresh  investigations.  Our  consciousness 
communicates to us feelings from within not only of pleasure and unpleasure but 
also a peculiar tension which in its turn can be either pleasurable or unpleasur-
able.  Should  the  difference  between  these  feelings  enable  us  to  distinguish 
between bound and unbound processes of energy? or is the feeling of tension to 
be related to the absolute magnitude of the cathexis within a given unit of time? 
Another striking fact is that the life drives have so much more contact with our 
internal perception—emerging as breakers of the peace and constantly produc-
ing tensions whose release is felt as pleasure—while the death drives seem to do 
their  work  unobtrusively.  The  pleasure  principle  seems  actually  to  serve  the 
death drives [Freud 1920, p. 63.]

The new problem emerges with the closing sentence. In the Project, 
Freud had initially equated the pleasure principle with neuronal inertia; 
its relationship with entropy became even more clear when he equated it, 
as he did here, with the Nirvana principle. But since the Nirvana principle 
was  served  by  the  death  drive,  this  had  the  dismaying  implication  that 
pleasure was associated with satisfaction not of the life drives but of the 
death drive. That is why Freud ultimately felt obliged, as we saw in the 
previous section, to construe the pleasure associated with orgasm—a phe-
nomenon  so  closely  connected  with  reproduction  (from  the  biological 

1043

M a r k   S o l m s

standpoint) that it surely serves the purposes of life—as a deathly event. 
This is a clear indication that Freud might have taken a wrong turn, some-
where, in developing his theory of the drives.

Before moving to the relationship between drive and conscious quali-
ties  in  general,  there  is  one  last  issue  concerning  its  relationship  with 
pleasure-unpleasure  that  must  be  addressed.  Affect,  for  Freud,  is  not 
reducible to “oscillations in the tension of drive needs” alone; it is more 
complex than that. Here is his fullest definition of it:

What is an affect in the dynamic sense? It is in any case something highly com-
posite. An affect includes in the first place particular motor innervations or dis-
charges and secondly certain feelings; the latter are of two kinds—perceptions 
of the motor actions that have occurred and the direct feelings of pleasure and 
unpleasure which, as we say, give the affect its keynote. But I do not think that 
with this enumeration we have arrived at the essence of an affect. We seem to 
see deeper in the case of some affects and to recognize that the core which holds 
the combination we have described together is the repetition of some particular 
significant experience. This experience could only be a very early impression of 
a very general nature, placed in the prehistory not of the individual but of the 
species (Freud 1916–1917, p. 395).

So affect, for Freud, included an additional dimension, which he concep-
tualized under the heading “phylogenetic memory.” A pivotal example is 
“castration anxiety,” which he saw as an inherited disposition based not 
solely (and sometimes not at all) in individual experience but rather in 
prehistoric events: the repeated experience by our ancestors, over many 
generations, of an alpha male in a primal horde who castrates or tries to 
castrate  his  sons  when  they  reach  puberty  and  threaten  his  preeminent 
sexual position. According to Freud, the descendants of these sons inherit 
unconscious memories of those traumatic events, which take the form of 
what he called “primal fantasies,” which form the nucleus of the system 
Ucs. It is precisely in relation to these inherited dispositions that Freud 
used  the  word  “instinct”  (Instinkt)  rather  than  “drive”  (Trieb).  Having 
drawn attention to this aspect of affect, I will discuss it no further, pre-
cisely because it is not the expression of a drive. I will defer discussion of 
this  matter  to  a  companion  paper  titled  “Revision  of  the Theory  of  the 
Biological Origins of the Oedipus Complex” (Solms in press).

(5) The Relationship between Drive and Conscious Qualities in General

Although  Freud  (1894)  first  introduced  a  quantitative  factor  into 
mental life with reference to “quotas of affect” that cathect memory traces 

1044

Revision of DRive TheoRy

of  ideas,  just  one  year  later  (1895)  he  had  already  adopted  a  different 
view:  drive  energies—now  called  “Qη”—were  in  the  first  instance 
unconscious;  they  become  conscious  only  when  they  reach  the  “upper 
story” of the mental apparatus, the cortical system “ω” (his later system 
Cs.). Freud held to this view for the remainder of his scientific life; not 
only to the view that drive energies were unconscious in themselves but 
also that consciousness was an exclusive property of the cortex:

The process of something becoming conscious is above all linked with the per-
ceptions  which  our  sense  organs  receive  from  the  external  world.  From  the 
topographical point of view, therefore, it is a phenomenon which takes place in 
the outermost cortex of the ego. It is true that we also receive information from 
the inside of the body—the feelings, which actually exercise a more peremptory 
influence on our mental life than external perceptions; moreover, in certain cir-
cumstances the sense organs themselves transmit feelings, sensations of pain, in 
addition to the perceptions specific to them. Since, however, these sensations (as 
we call them in contrast to conscious perceptions) also emanate from the termi-
nal  organs  and  since  we  regard  all  these  as  prolongations  or  offshoots  of  the 
cortical layer, we are still able to maintain the assertion made above. The only 
distinction would be that, as regards the terminal organs of sensation and feeling, 
the  body  itself  would  take  the  place  of  the  external  world  [Freud  1940,  
pp. 161–162; emphasis added].

The  distinction  between  unconscious  drive  energies  and  conscious 
perceptions of them must not be conflated with Freud’s notion of drive as 
“a  concept  on  the  frontier  between  the  mental  and  the  somatic.”  For 
Freud,  drive  energies  operating  within  the  mind  (in  the  id  and  in  the 
unconscious parts of the ego and the superego) were unconscious in all 
their vicissitudes until they reached the superficial system Cs. Crucially, 
this  was  how  he  made  sense  of  the  fact  that  drive  demands  emanating 
from one source can become “confluent” with those from another source; 
so that, for example, sexual longing can be transformed into hunger. This 
also  explains  how  unconscious  drive  demands  can  be  misconstrued  by 
consciousness, through processes like condensation, displacement, rever-
sal of affect, and the like, as occur in the dreamwork and in defense.

The same theoretical claim, namely, that drive energies are uncon-
scious in themselves, explains why Freud insisted that affects are neces-
sarily conscious phenomena. There is no such thing as an “unconscious 
emotion.” This is because affects, for Freud, were perceptions of the pro-
cess whereby drives are discharged, so that a drive remains unconscious 

1045

M a r k   S o l m s

until it is discharged, at which point it is consciously perceived and is no 
longer a drive but an affect.14

Freud  saw  consciousness,  in  both  its  manifestations—endogenous 
affect and exogenous representation—as a perceptual process, whereby 
stimuli impinging upon a terminal organ (whether it be visceral or sen-
sory) are propagated in quantitative form to the cerebral cortex, which is 
where they are registered as “qualities.” (Accordingly, from 1917 onward, 
Freud combined the interoceptive system Cs. with the exteroceptive Pcpt. 
into a single system Pcpt.-Cs., which perceives affects on its internal sur-
face and objects on its external one.) Where, then, do the differences in 
our  conscious  qualities—both  affective  and  perceptual—spring  from? 
Freud’s answer was:

Everything points to the sense organs, whose qualities seem to be represented 
precisely by different periods [i.e., amplitudes] of neuronal motion. The sense 
organs act not only as Q-screens, like all nerve-ending apparatuses, but also as 
sieves; for they allow the stimulus through from only certain processes with a 
particular period. [Freud 1895, p. 310].

The same applied to the interoceptive terminal organs. Freud’s view 

was:

Are we to suppose that the different drives which originate in the body and oper-
ate on the mind are also to be distinguished by different qualities, and that that 
is why they behave in qualitatively different ways in mental life? This supposi-
tion does not appear to be justified; we are much more likely to find the simpler 
assumption  sufficient—that  the  drives  are  all  qualitatively  alike  and  owe  the 
effect they make only to the amount of excitation they carry, or, perhaps, in addi-
tion, to certain functions of that quantity. What distinguishes from one another 
the mental effects produced by the various drives may be traced to the difference 
in their sources [Freud 1915a, p. 123; second emphasis added].

I trust I am not alone in finding this confusing. How can the quantitative 
aspect of different drives (their voltages, as it were) coalesce during the 
passage from the terminal organs through the “lower stories” of the mind 
to the system Pcpt.-Cs., while their differential qualitative aspects (their 
“periods” or amplitudes) remain distinct?

14See Freud (1915b): “Affects and emotions correspond to processes of discharge, the final 
manifestation of which are perceived as feelings. In the present state of our knowledge of affects 
and feelings we cannot express this difference more clearly” (p. 177).

1046

Revision of DRive TheoRy

A bigger problem, however, was this:

The id, cut off from the external world, has a world of perception of its own. It 
detects  with  extraordinary  acuteness  certain  changes  in  its  interior,  especially 
oscillations  in  the  tension  of  its  drive  needs,  and  these  changes  become  con-
scious  as  feelings  in  the  pleasure–unpleasure  series.  It  is  hard  to  say,  to  be  
sure, by what means and with the help of what sensory  terminal  organs  these 
perceptions  come  about.  But  it  is  an  established  fact  that  self-perceptions— 
coenaesthetic feelings and feelings of pleasure–unpleasure—govern the passage 
of  events  in  the  id  with  despotic  force.  The  id  obeys  the  inexorable  pleasure 
principle [Freud 1940, p. 198].

If affects are by definition conscious (see above), then how can it be 
true (1) that the passage of events in the id obeys the inexorable pleasure 
principle  and  (2)  that  the  id  and  its  drives  are  unconscious?  What  is  
the point of a pleasure principle “in” the id if it does not feel it? And if the 
drives are felt as pleasure and unpleasure only when they reach the percep-
tual superficies of the ego, then the sole way for the pleasure principle to 
govern the passage of events in the id is through top-down control. But that 
is the role of the reality principle. Surely the pleasure principle involves 
bottom-up  influence?  Once  again  we  are  on  the  brink  of  theoretical  
incoherence—a good sign that we might have taken a wrong turn.

i i.   PRoPo s eD  R e v i s i o n s

One faces a dilemma when drawing on knowledge from a discipline one’s 
readers  are  not  familiar  with.  Too  much  technical  detail  can  make  the 
exegesis overwhelming, but too little can render it dogmatic. This applies 
especially to contested issues, which exist in every science, and which are 
bound to be highly specialized issues for the very reason that they repre-
sent the cutting edge of a science. The solution I adopt here is to rely on 
the conclusions (and technical terminology) of the most widely known 
and respected authorities, while acknowledging that not everyone agrees 
with  them  and  that  current  knowledge  is  by  no  means  complete.  That 
said, few would disagree that the leading neuroscientific theorists on the 
topic of drive, in the current state of the field, are Jaak Panksepp (1998), 
Donald  Pfaff  (1999,  2005),  Antonio  Damasio  (2010,  2018),  and  Karl 
Friston (2009, 2013). I will draw also on the work of Bjorn Merker (2007), 
though  he  is  less  well  known.  These  five  scientists  represent  diverse 

1047

M a r k   S o l m s

methodologies,  ranging  from  deep  brain  stimulation  to  computational 
modeling; they also represent both clinical and experimental methods, in 
both humans and other animals. As in the previous section, I am not going 
to clutter my exegesis with a plethora of references; the grounding refer-
ences just provided will have to suffice. Since I cannot possibly do justice 
to the complexity of the issues within the constraints of a journal article, 
readers  wishing  to  master  the  underlying  science  can  consult  those 
sources.  (Alternatively,  for  a  book-length  overview  of  the  technical 
issues, see Solms 2021.) I am painfully aware, however, that the account 
I am about to provide might well sound dogmatic, due to its highly con-
densed nature.

I am using letters to designate the sections in this part, rather than 
numbers, as I did in Part I, because the topics do not coincide exactly. It 
is not possible to discuss our current understanding of the fundamental 
mechanism of drive, for example, without simultaneously considering its 
relationship to pleasure-unpleasure. I will cover the following topics: (A) 
the  fundamental  mechanism  of  drive  and  its  relationship  to  pleasure-
unpleasure; (B) the relationship between drive and entropy; (C) classifi-
cation of the drives and the bodily sources of drive; (D) the relationship 
between drive and conscious qualities in general.

(A) The Fundamental Mechanism of Drive and Its Relationship to Pleasure-Unpleasure

The fundamental mechanism of drive is homeostasis. This concept was 
introduced  into  biology  by Walter  Cannon  (1926),  but  it  became  widely 
known only in the 1930s, long after Freud had formulated his basic ideas. 
Cannon’s concept should not be confused with Claude Bernard’s notion of 
a  milieu  intérieur,  which  had  more  in  common  with  Freud’s  “constancy 
principle” than with his understanding of the fundamental mechanism of 
drive. Had Freud been familiar with the concept of homeostasis, I believe, 
he would have formulated his drive theory differently, because, at a stroke, 
it solves many of the problems that bedeviled him.

Homeostasis maintains the system that it regulates within “expected” 
bounds.  Thus,  just  as  your  domestic  thermostat  drives  an  engine  that 
maintains your desired room temperature, so too the temperature control 
system of your brain works to maintain core body temperature within its 
expected  range  of  97.7–99.5  degrees  Fahrenheit.  A  crucial  difference 
between these two examples, though, is that the expected bounds of your 
body are also its viable bounds. In other words, they are crucial for the 

1048

Revision of DRive TheoRy

survival of your body as a system; unlike your home, when your body 
overshoots or undershoots its expected temperature range by too large a 
measure, it ceases to exist as a system. That is, it dies.

Deviations  from  the  expected  ranges  function  physiologically  as 
“error signals” and represent demands for work. However, not all such 
demands can be equated with “drive,” not only for the reason just men-
tioned (viz., that drives are underwritten by a biological scale of values—
that it is good for the system to survive and reproduce—while domestic 
thermostats  are  not)  but  also  because  many  such  error  signals,  even  in 
biological systems, do not represent demands upon the mind for work. To 
be clear: many homeostatic systems exist (even in the body) that are regu-
lated autonomically. There is nothing mental about them. Blood-pressure 
regulation is a clinically notorious example: you (your mind) knows noth-
ing of your body’s blood-pressure undershoots and overshoots until it is 
too late. Accordingly, unless you monitor your blood pressure artificially 
(externally), you cannot become aware of the error signals and therefore 
can do nothing to correct them. Similarly, your body obtains energy by 
metabolizing glucose from adipose tissues according to need, but no drive 
is involved in that process. The demand upon your mind to find further 
supplies in the outside world, by contrast, is a drive—in exactly the sense 
that Freud (1915a) defined it—in this case, a drive called “hunger.” To 
differentiate these two types of demand for work, the nonmental and the 
mental, I will use the terms “need” and “drive” respectively.

What characterizes the difference between a need and a drive (which 
lie on opposite sides of what Freud described as the “frontier” between 
the somatic and the mental) is well conceptualized by a term derived from 
statistical physics, happily a relatively simple one: “uncertainty.” Blood-
pressure error signals always evoke the same stereotyped response in the 
body (changes in heart rate and vasodilation or vasoconstriction). This is 
because the need to correct aberrant blood pressure is met monotonously, 
by reliable and certain measures, making it a predictable business. The 
mental work demanded by drive is required only when such stereotyped 
algorithms  (which  predict  adequate  solutions  to  error  signals  with  cer-
tainty) are not available. That is when uncertainty prevails.

Here  is  an  example  to  illustrate  what  the  crossing  of  the  somatic/
mental  frontier  entails.  Respiratory  control  is  normally  autonomic:  so 
long as the levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide in your blood stay within 
expected  viable  bounds,  you  don’t  have  to  be  aware  of  your  need  to 

1049

M a r k   S o l m s

breathe. When blood gases exceed these normal limits, however, when 
autonomic mechanisms cannot cope with an emergency situation, respi-
ratory  control  forcibly  intrudes  upon  consciousness  in  the  form  of  an 
acute feeling called “air hunger.” This is a drive.15 Unexpected blood gas 
values are an indication that volitional action is required. It is urgently 
necessary to remove an airway obstruction from your throat or to get out 
of a carbon-dioxide-filled room. At this point, the need to breathe enters 
consciousness,  via  an  inner  warning  system  that  you  experience  as 
alarm—specifically, in this case, “suffocation alarm.” Why does it enter 
consciousness? The answer is: because there is no response available that 
predicts  with  certainty  that  it  will  achieve  the  necessary  outcome.  The 
adequate  solution  remains  uncertain.  In  other  words,  choices  must  be 
made.

Choices (the defining feature of voluntary as opposed to automatic 
control) must be grounded in a value system, which determines whether 
a selected action is “good” or “bad.” (If there were no such value system, 
the behaviors would be random.) Our biological value system, as men-
tioned before, is that survival is good and death is bad. This seems to be 
the  biological  purpose  of  feeling:  it  tells  you  whether  your  actions  are 
good  or  bad  within  this  scale  of  values.  The  outcomes  of  actions  that 
enhance your chances of survival and reproductive success feel good (this 
is “pleasure”) and their opposites feel bad (this is “unpleasure”). Feelings 
register the consequences of your choices, as you make them, here and 
now. This enables you to determine, in the heat of the moment, whether 
one action is better or worse than another. In the example of air hunger, 
the  regulation  of  your  blood  gases  becomes  conscious  when  you  don’t 
possess an automatized solution to maintain your physiologically viable 
bounds.  In  your  rush  to  escape  from  a  carbon-dioxide-filled  room,  for 
instance, how do you know where to turn? You have never been in this 
situation before (in any burning building, let alone this specific one), so 
you cannot possibly predict what to do. Now you must decide whether to 
go this way or that, up or down, etc. You make such choices by feeling 
your way through the problem: the feeling of suffocation waxes or wanes, 

15The transition from glucose metabolism to hunger, just described, entails a similar transi-
tion. Core body temperature control provides another example: as your temperature rises, your 
body (not you) down-regulates it by perspiring and panting, but beyond a certain limit you feel 
too hot; then you must do something, like leave the kitchen.

1050

Revision of DRive TheoRy

Figure 1.  Feeling homeostasis: The “settling point” represents 
the organism’s viable bounds

depending on whether you are going the right way or not—that is, depend-
ing on whether the availability of oxygen increases or decreases.

So  it  seems  that  what  distinguishes  autonomic  need  from  mental 
drive is the necessity for feeling. This answers the fundamental question 
posed  earlier:  what  does  sentient  subjectivity  do?  Unpleasure  tells  the 
organism that things are getting worse (i.e., drive pressure is increasing), 
while  pleasure  tells  it  that  things  are  getting  better  (drive  pressure  is 
decreasing), in unpredicted situations, and thereby underwrites the enor-
mous adaptive advantages that a capacity for voluntary behavior bestows 
upon an organism.

This restores the simple psychophysical relationship between drive 
and pleasure-unpleasure that Freud thought he had to abandon. But please 
note: if the basic mechanism of drive is homeostasis, then the ideal state 
of the organism is not pleasure but rather satiation. “Satiation” is reached 
when viable bounds are regained; then the feeling at issue is resolved and 
it disappears from the radar of consciousness. This entire mechanism is 
illustrated in Figure 1.

Crucially, the mechanism I have just described drives not only volun-
tary behavior but also learning from experience. Learning is governed by 

1051

M a r k   S o l m s

the Law of Affect,16 which states that “if a behavior is consistently accom-
panied by pleasure it will increase, and if it is consistently accompanied 
by unpleasure it will decrease.” For example, if you are a firefighter who 
has  been  in  many  burning  buildings,  you  will  gradually  become  less 
uncertain about what to do (you will have recourse to better predictions) 
and, accordingly, you will be less overwhelmed by affect (you will have 
less need of it, since affect is felt uncertainty). This applies quite gener-
ally, of course, and not only to suffocation alarm.

Learning, on this view, is a matter of prediction. We do not learn just 
because we can; we learn because we must. We learn how to meet our 
needs in the world. Memories are about the past but they are for the future. 
They predict the future on the basis of past experience. I will return to this 
important  topic—which  introduces  the  fundamental  role  of  mental  
“representation”—in later sections. First, though, I must draw attention to 
the  implications  for  Freudian  drive  theory  of  the  simple  mechanism  I 
have just described.

The first implication is that drives are conscious, by definition. To me, 
it makes no sense to speak of hunger or thirst or suffocation alarm if you 
do not feel them. If you do not feel hungry, you are not hungry. It is true 
that the bodily needs that ultimately give rise to hunger and thirst (energy 
balance,  sodium/water  balance)  are  in  the  first  instance  monitored  and 
regulated unconsciously, but these are not the kinds of processes that Freud 
denoted by the term “the unconscious.” They remain on the bodily side of 
his frontier between the mental and the somatic. I propose that we use the 
term “nonconscious” for such nonmental processes.

I likewise propose that we define “affect” as the subjective aspect of 
“drive.” I know this is a radical departure, but I do not see how we can 
avoid it. The distinction between the two terms nevertheless remains sig-
nificant. In my view, the subjective aspect of the functioning of the men-
tal instrument defines the observational perspective on it that is adopted 
by psychoanalysis; it defines the limits (and methods) of our discipline. 
The very same things that we psychoanalysts study from the subjective 
viewpoint, including unconscious intentionality, can be studied from the 
objective  viewpoint,  as  neurobiologists  do.17  The  requirement  to  study 

16This  is  a  mischievous  rewording  of  the  behaviorist  Law  of  Effect,  which  speaks  of 
“rewards” and “punishments” but does not define what they are because it denies the existence 
of feelings (see Panksepp and Biven 2012).

17The inter-discipline of neuropsychoanalysis aims to integrate the subjective and objec-

tive perspectives.

1052

Revision of DRive TheoRy

them objectively and subjectively is illustrated by such fundamental facts 
as the following.

I have said that the basic value system of biology is that it is good to 
survive and reproduce and bad not to do so. This explains objectively why 
pleasurable  feelings  came  to  be  attached,  through  natural  selection,  to 
sexual  behaviors—and  to  orgasm  in  particular  (see  above).  However, 
these are not the values that motivate us subjectively to engage in such 
behaviors. When we have sex, we are not trying to perform our biological 
duty; on the contrary, we are frequently trying not to reproduce while hav-
ing sex. This is because what motivates us subjectively are feelings, not 
the evolutionarily conserved mechanism that explains, objectively, why 
we  have  such  feelings. This  is  not  a  semantic  point.  Confusion  on  this 
score gave rise to the mistaken belief, by Freud and a century of his fol-
lowers,  that  psychological  sexual  maturity  coincides  with  reproductive 
(heterosexual) “genitality.” This is plainly not true, as surely any psycho-
analyst can attest: it is perfectly possible to have psychologically mature 
homosexual relationships. The same erroneous assumption—namely, that 
biological  causes  must  be  psychologically  represented,  albeit  uncon-
sciously—gave rise to the mistaken belief that castration anxiety (as all 
the “primal fantasies”) arises from unconscious phylogenetic memories. 
There are no such things as inherited memories, a neurobiological impos-
sibility; but, as I have said, I will defer that topic to another paper (see 
Solms in press).

The second implication of the basic mechanism of drive is that what 
we are striving for is satiation, not pleasure. I will explain the details in 
section (C), when we reconsider the classification of the drives; for now I 
am making only the general point: pleasure predicts satiation; it tells you 
that you are heading in the right direction, but it is not the end of a drive. 
The pleasure-unpleasure series is not a continuum but an oscillator (see 
Figure 1).

Freud correctly inferred that the aim of every drive is satisfaction, but 
he  incorrectly  (I  believe)  equated  satisfaction  with  pleasure.  This  had 
many  baneful  consequences.  Not  least  of  them  was  his  assumption—
since it is clear that many compulsive human behaviors are aimed not at 
pleasure but rather at what might be termed quiescence—that there must 
be a deeper principle in mental life, “beyond the pleasure principle.” This 
became his Nirvana principle. I hope it is clear from what I have said, 

1053

M a r k   S o l m s

first, that the pleasure principle is an extension of the Nirvana principle, 
that it serves the Nirvana principle. Second, I hope it is clear that, far from 
being deathly, satiation or “nothingness” (i.e., no needs making demands 
on the mind for work) is the ideal state of all self-preservative and libidi-
nal creatures: it represents the successful outcome of work performed in 
response to drive demands.18 Third, therefore, there is no need to invoke 
the existence of a separate “death” drive that serves the Nirvana principle; 
it is served by the “life” drives and it represents their ideal state. To be 
clear, there is no need (or justification) to conclude that “the aim of all life 
is death” (Freud 1920, p. 38; his emphasis). Here, again, Freud was con-
flating psychology with biology. The individual organism does not aim 
for  death,  psychologically,  although  it  is  our  inevitable  biological 
destination.

This is not to say that the psychological phenomena that Freud associ-
ated  with  the  death  drive  do  not  exist. They  appear  to  be  of  two  kinds: 
developmental  and  pathological.  The  “repetition  compulsion”  (and  the 
developmental phenomena associated with it, which Freud drew attention 
to, such as children wanting to repeat endlessly the same games and sto-
ries) seems to me simply an expression of the compulsion to reduce uncer-
tainty  (i.e.,  to  increase  predictability)  mentioned  above—and  to  be 
elaborated further in sections (B) and (D) below—which lies at the heart 
of  “learning  from  experience.” The  pathological  phenomena  that  Freud 
drew attention to are self-destructive behaviors of various kinds: the phe-
nomena  of  malignant  narcissism,  negative  therapeutic  reactions,  addic-
tions, suicidality, and other such omnipotent mental formations. For the 
sake of brevity, since this is not a clinical paper, I will make a swift gener-
alization. What these phenomena have in common (apart from the fact that 
they are not the expressions of a natural drive, precisely because they are 
pathological) is the fact that they are attempts to achieve satiation by “short 
circuit”; that is, they are attempts to satisfy the demands made upon the 
mind for work without actually doing the work. In other words, they are 
attempts to evade the reality principle, which is indeed a dangerous (and 
potentially fatal) thing to do. These are failures of ego functioning.

18Many readers will object at this point that satiation is not the goal of all motivated behav-
ior. This is partly because the principle applies only in the long run (i.e., satiation is, on average, 
the goal of motivated behavior) but more so because I have not yet had opportunity to introduce 
the  multiple  drives  that  conflict  with  each  other,  and  that  include  a  default-mode  SEEKING 
drive, the homeostatic settling point of which is proactive engagement with uncertainty (e.g., 
with novelty).

1054

Revision of DRive TheoRy

I have space for just one brief example. In section (C) I will introduce 
an “attachment” drive called PANIC/GRIEF, the command neuromodula-
tor  of  which  is  beta  endorphin  acting  on  mu  opioid  receptors.  Like  all 
drives, PANIC/GRIEF makes demands upon the mind for work. The work 
in this case is to establish reunion with a missing caregiver. As we know, 
this can be difficult, especially for children who grow up in less than ideal 
circumstances. One way of dealing with the demand (which is felt as sepa-
ration distress) is to avoid the real-life difficulty by replacing the desired 
object with an opiate drug (e.g., morphine or heroin). In this way you can 
achieve  satiation  (psychologically:  the  removal  of  separation  distress; 
physiologically: mu opioid receptor binding) not by real reunion with the 
lost object, through mental work, but rather by short-circuiting the reality 
principle; i.e., by trying to trick or cheat it, which always ends badly. (E.g., 
heroin does not really take care of you.) This is deathly, but it is not the 
expression of a drive; it is a mechanism of defense.

(B) The Relationship between Drive and Entropy

I have said that the function of homeostasis is to maintain an organ-
ism within its viable bounds. Deviations from these bounds are entropic, 
and the mental work demanded by drives must return the animal to them. 
Hence, the work is anti-entropic. Moreover, it must be effective work.

“Entropy” is expressed in different ways in different disciplines. In 
thermodynamics it is described in terms of temperature and heat exchanges 
between a system and its environment, and in information science it is 
described  in  terms  of  information  exchanges.  Information  exchange 
entails  a  system  asking  questions  of  its  environment  and  receiving 
answers from it. (The aim of this is to reduce uncertainty; a system needs 
to ask questions only when it cannot predict an outcome with certainty.) 
The  fundamental  definition  of  entropy  in  modern  physics,  therefore, 
revolves around probability. Probability and predictability are two sides 
of the same coin. This applies both to thermodynamic exchanges and to 
information exchanges (see Jaynes 1957). The classical example is that of 
a  compressed  gas  from  a  small  cylinder  being  introduced  into  a  larger 
chamber. As the gas disperses in the chamber—which it does naturally—
entropy increases. Stated in terms of probabilities, this is because, as the 
molecules  spread  out  to  occupy  all  the  possible  positions  in  the  larger 
container, it becomes increasingly difficult to predict the location of each 
and  every  molecule.  The  probability  that  a  particular  molecule  will 

1055

M a r k   S o l m s

occupy a particular location becomes increasingly unpredictable. As the 
locations  become  increasingly  unpredictable,  more  information  is 
required to describe the microstates of the system. As a result of this, the 
overall  state  of  the  system  has  become  more  uncertain.  Information  is 
quantified in “bits” (binary digits, usually denoted by “1” and “0,” i.e., 
“yes” and “no”). This means, in the classical example, that more yes/no 
questions must be asked and answered to determine the positions of the 
molecules in the chamber; more information must flow before the position 
of each molecule can be specified.

To apply this concept from statistical physics to the biology of drive, if the 
function of a drive is to counteract entropy in a biological system, then it must 
act to minimize the information flow required to maintain its survival (i.e., it 
must reduce the number of questions that need to be asked by the system). 
Stated differently, the drive pushes the system to minimize its uncertainty, to 
render environmental events more predictable. This is not complicated; it just 
means that the drive must counteract the system’s entropic tendency to dis-
perse itself across all its possible states. Contrary to this tendency, the drive 
must restore and maintain the system’s expected states.

To achieve this, as we know, the system must perform work, and this 
work must be effective. The energy in a system that is usefully employed 
(i.e., employed in effective work) is called “bound” energy, and the energy 
that  is  not  usefully  employed  is  called  “free”  energy.  This,  too,  should 
sound familiar to you (see section [1] above). Like entropy, “free energy” is 
defined differently in different disciplines, but it always means the same 
thing, fundamentally: the energy in a system that is not currently employed 
in effective work is “free.” What this means is that if the system is going to 
survive as a system (i.e., if it is going to avoid dissipation), then the free 
energy in the system must be bound. This is the “free energy principle.”

In thermodynamics we speak of Helmholtz free energy, in chemistry 
we speak of Gibbs free energy, and in information science we speak of 
Friston free energy, also known as “variational” free energy. When Friston 
applied his free energy principle to the nervous system, he caused a revo-
lution,  the  full  effects  of  which  have  not  yet  been  felt,  at  least  not  by 
nonspecialists, but it has resulted in his having become (objectively) the 
most  influential  neuroscientist  in  the  world.19  The  revolution  I 

19The influence of scientists (the number of times their work is cited in the specialist lit-
erature) is measured by their “h-index.” At the time of writing, Friston’s index is 236. To put 
this into perspective, Einstein’s is 110, Darwin’s is 119, and Newton’s is 62. Psychoanalysts will 
be pleased to know that Freud’s is 286; so, if we reclassify Freud as a neuropsychoanalyst, he 
(rather than Friston) would be the most influential neuroscientist in the world today!

1056

Revision of DRive TheoRy

am  referring  to  is  the  insight  that  the  entire  nervous  system  functions 
according  to  a  single  principle,  the  free  energy  principle,  derived  from 
statistical  mechanics.  This  is  important  for  psychoanalysts  because  the 
laws  of  probability  apply  equally  to  physiological  and  psychological 
events. Somatic and mental events are therefore explicable in terms of a 
single unifying principle. What the free energy principle achieves, there-
fore,  is  nothing  less  than  to  render  mental  life  quantifiable,  at  least  in 
principle.20 The  ramifications  of  this  are  enormous.  For  example,  in  my 
opinion, it brings the infamous “hard problem” of consciousness into the 
purview of statistical physics (see Solms 2021). (The hard problem con-
cerns the question of how conscious states can be caused by and cause 
physical states.)

What concerns us here, though, is that Friston himself has equated his 
conception of free energy with Freud’s “drive energy,” in terms of which 
drive  energy  is  isomorphic  with  “expected  free  energy”  (see  Carhart-
Harris and Friston 2010). In other words, Friston’s free energy principle 
achieves Freud’s greatest ambition, namely, “to furnish a psychology that 
shall be a natural science: that is, to represent psychical processes as quan-
titatively determinate states of specifiable material particles, thus making 
those  processes  perspicuous  and  free  from  contradiction”  (Freud  1895,  
p. 295). You will recall that Freud thought an energy was at work in the 
mind that is capable of increase, diminution, displacement, and discharge, 
and therefore  possesses all the characteristics of  a quantity,  “though we 
have no means of measuring it” (Freud 1894, p. 60). Now we can measure 
it (for the grounding equations, see Solms and Friston 2018).

What exactly is the free energy principle? It is notoriously difficult to 
explain, so I will simplify. According to Friston, homeostasis in biology 
is an expression of an even more basic mechanism in physics, namely, a 
natural tendency toward “self-organization.” Self-organizing systems are 
intrinsically  adaptive:  they  autonomously  maintain  their  own  structural 
and functional integrity despite environmental disruptions. The principle 
of self-organization bridges the divide between nonliving systems (like 
crystals that form spontaneously in liquid) and living ones (like cells), the 

20Here are two random examples: EEG entropy values are higher in fully conscious than 
in minimally conscious than in vegetative patients (Gosseries et al. 2011); and baseline fMRI 
activation increases and decreases predictably when research participants expect more or less 
precision in sensory signals (Hesselmann et al. 2010). Precision is inverse variance, which, like 
entropy, is a constituent of free energy (as will be explained below).

1057

M a r k   S o l m s

only  difference  being  their  degree  of  dynamic  complexity.21  Self-
organizing systems can become even more complex in the face of exter-
nal  perturbations,  as  if  their  interacting  components  have  a  unified  
goal,  namely,  to  maintain  their  organized  state.  So  self-organizing  sys-
tems possess properties that Kant (1790) believed impossible: they have 
intrinsic  aims  and  purposes;  that  is,  they  are  “teleological.”  Although 
Darwin never understood it so deeply, “natural selection” is an expression 
of this tendency. Self-organizing systems arise spontaneously from pri-
mal-soup-like conditions, when the short-range interactions between their 
subsystems  become  “ergodic”—which  just  means  that  they  start  to 
occupy limited states. Such systems spontaneously evolve toward a set-
tling point, which William Ross Ashby described as an “attractor” in a 
“basin” of surrounding states. The further evolution of these systems dis-
plays some remarkable features. The first is that they acquire a “Markov 
blanket,” which is something like a surrounding membrane that separates 
the  system  (and  its  internal  states)  from  the  not-system  (its  external 
states). This is the ground-zero origin of selfhood. That is, it bestows upon 
the system a “point of view,” which is the ground-zero origin of subjectiv-
ity.  The  lawful  chains  of  influence  that  characterize  Markov  blankets 
make it impossible for the internal system to be influenced by the external 
not-system directly. The system (the “subject”) can register its environ-
ment (its “objects”) only indirectly, vicariously, via the effects that exter-
nal events have on the condition of its blanket. These conditions are called 
the  “sensory  states”22  of  the  blanket.  This  sequestered  relationship 
between the interior of the system and the outside world is what generates 
its point of view. But the sensory states of the blanket have a second func-
tion. They influence the inner workings (the “internal states”) of the sys-
tem in such a way that they cause the internal states to generate “active 

21My point here is not to equate crystals with minds, of course, but rather to note that the 
causal mechanism of self-organization preceded biological self-organization, and, indeed, gave 
rise  to  it.  (In  fact,  evolution  itself  is  an  expression  of  self-organization;  see  Friston  2013.) 
Crystals minimize their free energy in a trivial way because their nonequilibrium steady state 
has a point attractor. That is, they just arrange themselves into compact patterns and stay there, 
even when slightly disturbed. Things get far more complex when the attracting set has an itiner-
ant structure with dynamics of the sort that the human brain and mind conform to.

22Why  are  they  called  “sensory  states”  rather  than  “sensations”?  This  is  because  these 
formalisms apply to both living and nonliving systems; as stated above, they bridge the divide 
between physics and biology and, ultimately, psychology. The same applies to the “active states” 
described below, which in living systems would normally be called “actions.” Note that not all 
self-organizing  systems  (even  biological  ones)  are  conscious;  I  have  not  yet  explained  how 
conscious selfhood arises.

1058

Revision of DRive TheoRy

states” in the blanket, which then influence the external states. The exter-
nal states, in turn, as we know, influence the sensory states of the blanket. 
In this way, the consequences of the system’s actions are fed back to the 
system’s  interior. The  next  remarkable  development  is  that  the  internal 
states  come  to  display  what  can  only  be  described  as  the  ground-zero 
origin of learning. That is, the internal states of the system naturally come 
to model its external states, so that the system generates the active states 
that are most likely to preserve its structural integrity. This is the crux of 
self-organization; if the system did otherwise, it would cease to exist as a 
system. This is the ground-zero origin of intentionality. Put differently, 
the system learns a capacity for statistical inference: it acts upon the world 
in ways that have proven likely to produce the required sensory conse-
quences. For example, if the system is overheating, it acts in the manner 
most likely to achieve cooler sensory states. (For the details summarized 
in this condensed paragraph, and for an empirical demonstration of how 
self-organizing systems displaying active inference arise naturally from 
primal-soup-like conditions, see Friston 2013.)

This brings us to the crux of the matter. The difference between the 
sensory  states  that are predicted by the system’s internal states to flow 
from its active states and the sensory states that actually flow from them 
must be minimized. This difference is called “surprisal.” Put simply: the 
system must avoid surprising (unexpected) states if it is going to survive. 
This is the mechanism of homeostasis all over again. Leaving aside some 
of the mathematical complexities, free energy is thus a function of aver-
age  surprisal.  The  gap  between  the  predicted  sensory  states  of  a  self-
organizing  system  and  its  actual  states,  over  a  given  period  of  time,  is 
measured as its free energy. Because increasing free energy is an existen-
tial  threat  to  the  system,  the  system  must  minimize  the  expected  free 
energy. And this, it appears, is the fundamental mechanism of drive. Drive 
is a (quantifiable) measure of the demand made upon the system for more 
effective work.

Here  comes  the  oddest  part.  When  it  comes  to  an  information- 
processing system (like the nervous system and its mental apparatus), this 
means that the system must minimize the amount of information it requires 
from  the  environment.  If  that  sounds  counterintuitive,  remember  that  it 
just means the system must have fewer questions of its environment; in 
other words,  it must reduce its uncertainty. This, in turn, means that it 
must improve its internal model of the world—its knowledge of how to 

1059

M a r k   S o l m s

meet its needs in the world—and adjust its actions accordingly. And that, 
we now see, is the reality principle.

What  all  of  this  means,  at  bottom,  is  that  drive  pressure  (affective 
arousal)23 must be minimized, and the way we do this is by generating the 
best predictions we can as to how we might reduce the pressure by meet-
ing our needs in the world. This is the great task of learning from experi-
ence. Let me be as clear as possible, since this is so fundamental: drive is 
a measure of the expected free energy in the mind, energy that must be 
deployed in effective work, work that requires learning. Learning, in turn, 
entails improving the system’s predictive model of its self-in-the-world, 
and this is the ground-zero origin of representation.24

It  only  remains  to  say,  before  we  turn  to  the  classification  of  the 
drives and their relationship to the body, that the brain mechanisms by 
which  all  of  this  is  achieved  are  quite  well  understood.  The  “body- 
monitoring”  structures  that  register  and  regulate  homeostatic  errors  are 
located in the core brainstem and diencephalic nuclei that surround the 
central canal and lower cerebral ventricles. Perhaps not surprising is the 
fact that these nuclei are intimately connected with the brain mechanisms 
for arousal, the core ones of which are the nuclei of the reticular activat-
ing  system.25 What  would  have  surprised  Freud,  however,  is  that  these 
mechanisms, the very fount of our drives, are also the fount of conscious-
ness. Freud wrote:

What  consciousness  yields  consists  essentially  of  perceptions  of  excitations 
coming  from  the  external  world  and  of  feelings  of  pleasure  and  unpleasure 
which can only arise from within the mental apparatus; it is therefore possible to 
assign to the system Pcpt.-Cs. a position in space. It must lie on the borderline 
between  inside  and  outside;  it  must  be  turned  towards  the  external  world  and 
must envelop the other psychical systems. It will be seen that there is nothing 
daringly new in these assumptions; we have merely adopted the views on local-
ization held by cerebral anatomy, which locates the “seat” of consciousness in 

23As  Donald  Pfaff  (2005)  beautifully  explains,  increasing  arousal  is  the  same  thing  as 
increasing  information-processing;  the  more  uncertain  an  animal  is,  the  more  aroused  it 
becomes. The  converse  of  arousal,  in  a  sense,  is  habituation. Therefore,  the  essential  task  of 
mental life (of what we psychoanalysts call “ego development”) is to learn how to minimize 
arousal. This is Freud’s Nirvana principle, but it is the very opposite of deathly.

24Here I am using the term “representation” in Freud’s sense, which, let us not forget, was 

grounded in Franz Brentano’s conception of intentionality (or “aboutness”).

25These  mechanisms—the  source-nuclei  for  dopamine,  serotonin,  and  norepinephrine—
are the ones on which most current psychopharmaceuticals exert their “direct influence” on the 
drives (i.e., on affect).

1060

Revision of DRive TheoRy

the  cerebral  cortex—the  outermost,  enveloping  layer  of  the  central  organ. 
Cerebral  anatomy  has  no  need  to  consider  why,  speaking  anatomically,  con-
sciousness should be lodged on the surface of the brain instead of being safely 
housed somewhere in its inmost interior [1920, p. 24; emphasis added].

The irony is that consciousness-as-feeling is indeed safely housed in 
the  brain’s  inmost  interior.  The  system  Cs.  is  not  a  cortical  system;  it 
arises from the core of the brainstem (see section [5] above). What this 
quotation makes clear, once more, is that Freud adopted neuroanatomical 
views that have since turned out to be wrong. We are therefore obliged to 
correct  him  in  line  with  subsequent  neuroscientific  findings. As  I  have 
tried to show elsewhere (e.g., Solms 2018a), correcting metapsychology 
on this score has practical implications for our therapy. To use the termi-
nology introduced in this paper, improving our predictive model of how 
the mind functions enables us to do more effective work in it, and that in 
turn enhances the chances of survival (and reproductive fitness) of our 
discipline.  (For  more  detail  concerning  the  clinical  application  of  the 
metapsychological formulations outlined here, see Solms 2018a.)

(C) Classification of the Drives and the Bodily Sources of Drive

There is no definitive taxonomy of the drives in neurobiology today. 
This is primarily because different scientists use different classificatory 
criteria. For example, Paul Ekman (Ekman et al. 1987) uses ethological 
observations of facial expressions and associated behaviors, whereas Jaak 
Panksepp (1998) uses the experimental effects of deep brain stimulation, 
electrical  and  chemical.  Therefore,  to  pick  an  example  more  or  less  at 
random, these two scientists classify disgust differently. Ekman classifies 
it  as  a  “basic  emotion,”  whereas  Panksepp  classifies  it  as  a  “sensory 
affect.” (I will explain these terms in a moment, but note that different 
taxonomies come with different nomenclatures, which can be confusing.) 
The  important  thing  for  our  purposes  is  that  both  scientists  agree  that 
disgust exists and that it reliably displays specific physiological and psy-
chological  properties.  Taxonomies  are  artificial  constructions  that  we 
impose  upon  nature.  Perhaps,  therefore,  how  we  classify  the  drives 
doesn’t matter quite as much as how we understand them.

Here  I  will  follow  Panksepp’s  classification  and  nomenclature,  as 
they are the most widely used in affective neuroscience today. (Remember, 
though, that they are not universally accepted.)

1061

M a r k   S o l m s

Panksepp divides the drives into “bodily” and “emotional” types. He 
further divides the bodily drives into “homeostatic” and “sensory” sub-
types. These terms denote the interoceptive versus exteroceptive sources 
of  two  subtypes  of  bodily  drive.  Hunger,  thirst,  sleepiness,  and  bowel 
distention, for example, are interoceptive, whereas pain, fright, affective 
touch, and disgust are exteroceptive. I do not use Panksepp’s term for the 
interoceptive bodily drives, because, as I have explained in section (A), 
and as I shall explain further here, all drives are homeostatic. The “emo-
tional” drives are distinguished from the “bodily” ones mainly by virtue 
of the fact that they do not arise from bodily needs so much as from what 
might be called object-relational ones. That is, they arise from biological 
needs in relation to other mental agents. This makes it more difficult for 
the subject of these drives to learn how to satisfy them, mainly for the 
reason that volitional agents are less predictable than inert objects. The 
indefiniteness of such distinctions coincides with the artificiality of our 
taxonomies.  However,  it  is  this  distinction  that  makes  the  “emotional” 
drives more significant for psychoanalysts (and, indeed, for psychiatrists 
and psychotherapists in general). Because it is more difficult to learn how 
to keep a caregiver close and attentive than it is to learn how to defecate 
or to withdraw from pain, for example, our patients are far more likely to 
be troubled by their emotional than by their bodily drives. In addition, as 
we shall see, emotional drives are far more likely to conflict with each 
other than bodily drives are. This, too, makes it more difficult for us to 
learn how to master them. This does not mean that our patients never suf-
fer from unsatisfied bodily drive demands (witness sleep disorders, eating 
disorders, unexplained pain), but experience shows that these bodily ail-
ments are ultimately explicable in emotional terms. For example, it is not 
the case that patients suffering from anorexia nervosa do not know how to 
eat; rather, eating, for them, has become conflated with emotional drives 
they cannot master.

It  is  important  to  notice,  therefore,  contra  Freud  (see  section  [2] 
above), that not all drives have a bodily source. What is the bodily source 
of  longing  for  the  attentive  presence  of  an  attachment  figure,  for 
example?26

26This is not to deny that emotional drives (like attachment) serve survival and reproduc-
tive success over the long term or that they are intimately connected with bodily needs (e.g., in 
the case of attachment, see Hofer 1996). My point is that once an emotional drive (e.g., need for 
proximity of a caregiver) evolves, it exists in its own right; the need for care is not the same 
thing as the need for nourishment. This has important implications for Freud’s theory of “ana-
clisis.”

1062

Revision of DRive TheoRy

For the reasons just stated, I will say relatively little else about the 
bodily drives here, and will focus instead on the emotional ones. Before 
proceeding, however, some general principles must be outlined that apply 
to all drives. The first is that they are always associated with affects. (That 
is  why  Panksepp  speaks  of  homeostatic  and  sensory  affects;  recall  the 
distinction made in section [A] above: affects are the subjective aspect of 
drives.)  This  is  important  because  many  people  fail  to  recognise  that 
bodily states like sleepiness and the urge to defecate are both drives and 
affects, yet that is what they are. I stated in section (A) that the defining 
feature  of  every  drive  is  that  it  is  affectively  valenced;  that  is,  it  has  a 
pleasurable and an unpleasurable dimension. Hence, fatigue feels bad and 
rest feels good; a distended bowel feels bad and voiding it feels good. The 
distinction between “negative” and “positive” drives is thus a misnomer. 
Anger is a negative drive, but discharging it (e.g., successfully annihilat-
ing a rival) feels good. Fear is a negative drive, but escaping the danger 
and finding safety feels good. The second principle to notice is that each 
drive feels good and bad in its own categorical way. There are a great 
variety  of  different  pleasures  and  unpleasures.  Thus,  the  unpleasure  of 
hunger feels utterly different, qualitatively, from the unpleasure of a full 
bladder. There is a good reason for this: as explained in section (A), feelings 
are calls to action that tell us how we are doing in relation to a specific 
need. Accordingly,  eating  will  do  nothing  to  relieve  your  bladder,  and 
urinating will not satisfy your hunger. (Recall a point I made in section [2] 
about the “confluence” of drives: each drive must be satisfied in its own 
right; it makes no biological sense to say that 3/10 of thirst plus 7/10 of 
pain equals 10/20 of total drive pressure. This is why affects are—indeed, 
must be—distinguished qualitatively, as all categorical variables must be. 
This is the ground-zero origin of qualia. I will return to this important 
point below.) The third principle is that we are equipped with innate pre-
dictions as to what must be done to satisfy each drive. As I have noted, 
however,  these  reflexes  and  instincts  must  be  supplemented  through 
learning from experience. This is the main task of mental development: 
learning  how  to  satisfy  our  drives,  and  especially  the  emotional  ones, 
which are so difficult to master.

Two further general principles in relation to this revised conception 
of drive shed new light on the questions that bedeviled Freud. I will men-
tion them only briefly now and elaborate later. The first is that there are 
both  “appetitive”  and  “consummatory”  pleasures  (see  the  distinction 

1063

M a r k   S o l m s

between “wanting” and “liking” [Berridge 2003]). Had Freud known this, 
he would not have been so puzzled by foreplay and, more so, by the fact 
that sexual excitement is pleasurable. Sexual desire is appetitive; orgasm 
is consummatory. The second is that drives are aroused by both “needs” 
and “opportunities.” Sexual desire, for example, can have both internal 
and external triggers. To say this is to say the obvious, but had Freud been 
familiar with the concept of “incentive salience” he might have thought 
differently about issues like the bodily sources of drive. As I will explain 
shortly, however, the sources of our emotional drives are the “inmost inte-
rior” of the brain itself.

When it comes to the emotional drives, it turns out that seven of them 
can be reliably elicited by electrical or (specific) chemical stimulation at 
exactly the same brain sites, in all mammals, from mice to men. (Many of 
them can be evoked in birds, too, and some in all vertebrates.) Mammals 
and  birds  shared  a  common  ancestor  about  200  million  years  ago,  and 
vertebrates  evolved  about  525  million  years  ago;  that  is  how  primitive 
these drives are.

Panksepp put his terms for the drives in full capitals, to distinguish 
them from colloquial usage—that is, to indicate that he was talking about 
whole biological systems, not only the feelings. Here is a brief summary 
of the seven emotional drives (also known as the “basic emotions”).27

LUST.  One is not constantly sexually aroused. Erotic feelings enter 
consciousness only when sex is prioritized over other things, which hap-
pens in the context of fluctuating needs and opportunities (as in the case 
of all drives; for the mechanism of prioritization, see section [D] below). 
When sexual desire is prioritized, one feels it; then erotic feelings guide 
one’s voluntary actions. One pays attention to different things when one 
is  sexually  aroused  compared  to  when  one  is  fearful,  say,  and  one 
behaves  differently  too.  In  this  way,  exteroceptive  consciousness  and 
voluntary  behavior  are  determined  by  your  drive  state;  you  experience 
the  world  differently—you  literally  bring  different  experiences  upon 
your head—depending on what you are feeling. That is why, when the 
need for safety is prioritized, another drive takes over and sexual needs 
recede from consciousness.

27See  Panksepp  (1998)  for  the  empirical  findings  on  which  the  following  summary  is 
based,  and  for  the  bibliographic  references.  The  remainder  of  this  section  draws  heavily  on 
Solms (2021).

1064

Revision of DRive TheoRy

I am starting this account of the drives with LUST not only because 
it is the preeminent drive in biology, and in the history of psychoanalysis, 
but  also  because  it  is  unclear  whether  LUST  should  be  classified  as  a 
“bodily” or an “emotional” drive. Some people even doubt that sexuality 
is a need. This is an excellent example of the difference between (noncon-
scious) needs and the feelings they give rise to. As discussed in section 
(A), what motivates subjective beings is the pursuit of pleasure, not repro-
ductive success. The same applies to sweet tastes, for example; we eat 
candy  because  we  like  it,  not  because  it  contains  high  energy  supplies 
(which  is  the  evolutionary  biological  reason  why  sweet  things  taste 
good).28 That is, we are driven by feelings. Living creatures need to repro-
duce, at least on average; that is why the sexual drive became subjectively 
pleasurable, through natural selection—even though most people know 
nothing about the underlying biological mechanism, and perhaps do not 
even endorse it.

I say “on average” because not all sexual activity results in reproduc-
tion, just enough of it to keep the species going. This exemplifies a central 
principle concerning reflexes and instincts:  the limited utility of inborn 
behaviors to meet our emotional needs. This is the main reason why emo-
tional drives (as opposed to bodily ones) are so difficult to master. In sex, 
the  inborn  reflexes  and  instincts  boil  down  to  little  more  than  genital 
engorgement and lubrication, lordosis (arching the back, which makes the 
vagina available for penetration), mounting, intromission, thrusting, and 
ejaculation.  Together  with  these  reflexes,  stroking  the  clitoris  or  penis 
(which are anatomically equivalent organs) at a certain rhythm produces 
pleasurable sensations that predict the release of sexual tension, ideally 
through  orgasm,  to  satiation.29  These  involuntary  contrivances  do  not 
equip us for the difficult task of persuading other people—especially the 
particular ones we are attracted to—to comply with our desire to have sex 
with them. As already stated, the main reason why “emotional” needs are 
more difficult to meet than “bodily” ones is that they typically involve 
other agents who have needs of their own; they are not mere substances 
like food and water. To satisfy the sexual drive, therefore, we must sup-
plement  our  innate  knowledge  with  additional  skills,  acquired  through 

28But the sensory-affective pleasure in sweet tastes has nothing to do with reproduction, 
and it is not driven by LUST. As I have already said, there are many different pleasure systems 
in the brain.

29Note that once satiation is achieved, sex is no longer pleasurable.

1065

M a r k   S o l m s

learning. This fact alone explains the wide variety of sexual activities that 
we indulge in, alongside the “average” form.

Notice  that  learning  does  not  extinguish  reflexes  and  instincts;  it 
nuances, elaborates, supplements, and then overrules them—but they are 
still there. The usual neurocognitive mechanism for updating long-term 
memories  (“reconsolidation”;  see  section  [D]  below)  doesn’t  apply  to 
reflexes and instincts. That is because reflexes and instincts are not mem-
ories; they are fundamental dispositions “hard-wired” into each species 
through natural selection (see Ellis and Solms 2018).

Our range of sexual behaviors is increased further by the fact that the 
brain  circuits  for  both  female-typical  and  male-typical  LUST  exist  in 
every mammal. This is important confirmation of Freud’s notion of innate 
“bisexuality.” The  gender  that  comes  to  dominate  in  each  individual  is 
determined by various factors, centrally including genetic and intrauter-
ine ones (LeVay 1993). Psychoanalysis historically underestimated these 
latter factors. I will not go into the anatomical and chemical details here, 
except to point out that both male and female circuits arise in the hypo-
thalamus and terminate in the periaqueductal gray. In other words, like all 
the basic emotional drive circuits, they are almost entirely subcortical.

The remarks I have made already about the “sources” of the sexual 
drive may be complemented by a comment on its “objects.” Given the 
difficulties associated with persuading other people (especially preferred 
people) to have sex with us, why do we not simply satisfy the sexual drive 
through masturbation?30 The answer has everything to do with the fact 
that we have multiple emotional needs. Sexual needs must be met in con-
junction with all the other needs, such as the “attachment” needs to be 
discussed below.

SEEKING.  All  the  bodily  needs  (and,  importantly,  this  includes 
sexual ones)—which are registered by “need detectors” located mainly in 
the  medial  hypothalamus—activate  this  second  emotional  drive.31  The 

30Note in this respect that the clitoris and penis are not childish “sources” of the sexual 
drive, as Freud (1905) assumed; rather, they are its first “objects,” as he implicitly realized when 
he  developed  the  theory  of  narcissism,  via  “auto-erotism.”  The  erogenous  zones  are  only 
“sources”  of  sexuality  in  the  sense  mentioned  before,  that  is,  of  “incentive  salience.”  These 
zones  when  stimulated  represent  “opportunities”  rather  than  “needs.”  The  true  sources,  in 
Freud’s  sense,  of  LUST  are  the  hormones  and  peptides  testosterone,  estrogen,  progesterone, 
vasopressin, oxytocin, LH-RH, and CCK, and these can be aroused both by opportunities and 
by needs. The same principle applies to all the emotional drives, the homeostatic “control cen-
ter” of which, in every case, is to be found in the brain itself.

31These need detectors are the “sensory terminal organs” that Freud (1940) imagined were 

located in the interior of the body, which he assumed were “offshoots of the cortical layer.”

1066

Revision of DRive TheoRy

SEEKING  drive  behaves  in  almost  exactly  the  same  way  as  Freud’s 
“libidinal”  drive,  but  he  did  not  know  that  LUST  merely  activates  this 
drive; LUST and SEEKING are not the same thing. SEEKING generates 
energetic “foraging” behavior, accompanied by a conscious feeling state 
that may be characterized as expectancy, interest, curiosity, enthusiasm, 
or optimism. Unlike orgasm, therefore, which is accompanied by a “con-
summatory”  affect,  foraging  is  accompanied  by  an  “appetitive”  affect 
that is pleasurable in its own right. This form of pleasure motivates the 
organism to go out into the world in order to remove (or at least mini-
mize) the unpleasurable tensions generated by its other needs.

Think  of  a  dog  in  an  open  field:  no  matter  what  its  current  bodily 
needs may be, foraging propels it to engage positively with the environ-
ment, so that it might satisfy them there. Almost everything that living 
creatures  need  is  “out  there”;  then  through  foraging  they  learn,  almost 
accidentally, which things in the world satisfy each of their needs. In this 
way, through SEEKING, they encode cause-and-effect relationships and 
thus bestow value (literally, meaning) upon the world. Objects do not, of 
course, have inherent meaning; their meaning is subjectively conditioned. 
This illustrates very well how stereotyped “objectless” drives lead to indi-
vidualized learning from experience. In this respect, the critics of Freudian 
drive  theory  cited  at  the  outset  of  this  paper  drew  a  false  dichotomy 
between  our  “biologized”  metapsychology  and  a  supposedly  pure  psy-
chology of “meaning making.”

It is important to recognize that the other drives become “confluent” 
in the SEEKING drive, but not in the manner Freud thought. First, the 
other drives are not “components” of SEEKING; rather, they are triggers 
of SEEKING. That is, they exist in their own right; and SEEKING is a 
drive  of  its  own.  Second,  SEEKING  has  no  special  relationship  with 
LUST. In fact, had Freud recognized that LUST activates SEEKING just 
like  all  the  other  drives  do,  he  probably  would  not  have  described  this 
energy  as  “libidinal”  or  “erotic.”  It  is  an  all-purpose  pleasure-seeking 
(and object-seeking) drive. Third, it is incorrect to suggest that one “com-
ponent” SEEKING drive can be satisfied by another. All biological needs 
(including emotional ones) activate SEEKING, the satisfaction of which 
leads to the satisfaction of the initiating drives, depending on the oppor-
tunities a foraging animal encounters. But each of the underlying needs 
still must be met in own right, or the animal will die. Finally, LUST does not 
“lean upon” the self-preservative drives in the sense of Freud’s anaclitic 

1067

M a r k   S o l m s

mechanism;  rather,  LUST  and  the  self-preservative  drives,  combined, 
lean upon SEEKING, and SEEKING is a drive in its own right.

In this last respect, SEEKING is unique among the drives in that it 
proactively engages with uncertainty (so as to make the world more pre-
dictable, in advance, before it surprises us; surprises can be dangerous). 
This is the  origin of novelty-seeking, sensation-seeking,  and risk-taking 
behavior. Foraging makes animals (and people) explore interesting things, 
so that they know what to expect when they encounter them in the future. 
Once a dog has explored a hedge, for example, and familiarized itself with 
its contents, it will be less interested in it the next time around. Accordingly, 
SEEKING is the “default” drive. When we are not in the grip of one of the 
other “task-oriented” drives, our consciousness tends toward this general-
ized interest in the world. This is what Melanie Klein termed an “episte-
mophilic” drive. It explains why you are reading this paper.

Anatomically,  the  pathways  of  the  SEEKING  circuit  arise  from  the 
ventral tegmental area of the brainstem, from whence they course upward, 
to  the  lateral  hypothalamus,  nucleus  accumbens,  amygdala,  and  medial 
frontal cortex, and downward (like all the drives; see section [D]) to the 
periaqueductal  gray.  Chemically,  its  command  neuromodulator  is  dopa-
mine. Unlike the other reticular activating systems, dopamine activity does 
not decrease with the onset of sleep. This reveals an interesting fact about 
SEEKING: it can be aroused even during sleep, by endogenous demands 
made upon the mind for work, leading to dreams (see Solms 2000). The 
demands in question need not be bodily ones; offline default-mode memory 
consolidation, too, can result in prediction errors requiring “mental work” 
for their resolution (and it is no accident that this work entails conscious 
feeling, which punctuates the unconsciousness of sleep).

The link with dreams makes clear why excessive SEEKING leads to 
psychosis, a central mechanism of which may be the forging of too many 
cause-and-effect relations (i.e., too much “meaning making”; see Kapur 
2003).32 It is easy to see why the SEEKING drive is also deeply impli-
cated in addiction (think of cocaine33 and amphetamines, which stimulate 
SEEKING  directly);  it  is  literally  the  brain’s  “craving”  system  (see 

32Finding  too  many  cause-and-effect  relations  arises  from  excessive  SEEKING  partly 
through  an  inflated  sense  of  agency  (megalomania),  i.e.,  an  excessive  sense  of  being  able  to 
cause things.

33It is plausible that Freud’s discovery of the psychological properties of the “libidinal” 

drive was facilitated by his own experience of the effects of cocaine.

1068

Revision of DRive TheoRy

Volkow, Wise, and Baler 2017). It also plays a big part in gambling and 
other  forms  of  excessive  optimism.  Later  we  shall  see  that  SEEKING 
plays  a  pivotal  role  in  mood  disorders,  as  well.  Depression  is  the  very 
opposite of SEEKING (and of mania).

RAGE.  While  animals  engage  positively  with  the  world  through 
SEEKING, in the optimistic belief that their drives will be satisfied there, 
things  do  not  always  go  well  for  them.  Just  as  evolutionary  prehistory 
equipped  them  with  reflexes  and  instincts  that  reliably  predict  ways  to 
meet their bodily needs (including foraging), so too they are born with 
emotional behaviors that predict ways to get them out of trouble. In chal-
lenging  situations  of  universal  biological  significance,  these  instinctual 
behaviors  are  prioritized. We  animals  are  thereby  spared  the  biological 
costs of having to reinvent the wheels that enabled our ancestors to sur-
vive  and  reproduce.  Instincts  are  a  precious  inheritance. They  transmit 
innate survival skills—implicit “knowledge” of how to respond in evolu-
tionarily predicted situations—along with the feelings that guide volun-
tary actions in unpredicted ones.

When  the  RAGE  drive  is  triggered—as  it  is  by  anything  that  gets 
between an animal and the things that could satisfy its other drives—its 
consciousness is colored by feelings ranging from irritated frustration to 
blind fury. (Think of a vending machine that fails to deliver an item you 
just paid for.) But RAGE is not the only form of aggression. Affective 
neuroscientists  speak  also  of  “cold  aggression”  (mediated  by  the 
SEEKING  drive;  think  of  a  lion  chasing  a  springbok)  and  “dominance 
behavior”  (mediated  by  the  PLAY  drive,  to  be  described  below,  which 
entails a symbolic form of aggression: more bark than bite). The form that 
is  mediated  by  RAGE  is  called  “hot  aggression.”  The  reflexes  and 
instincts involved in it include piloerection, protrusion of nails, hissing, 
growling, and baring of teeth, followed by “affective attack”: lunging at 
the target of wrath and biting, kicking, or hitting it until it relents.34

Why do you feel the drive pressures that accompany such behavior? 
The answer is: the feelings tell you how you are doing, whether things are 
going well or badly for you, as you try to rid yourself of the obstacle—one 
that is often simultaneously trying to get rid of you. You sense the sweet-
ness of victory or the bitterness of defeat. This guides what you do next, 

34This is not an internal death drive directed outward; it is straightforward self-preservative 
aggression.  However,  aggression  can  be  directed  to  the  wrong  object,  and  indeed  toward  the 
self.

1069

M a r k   S o l m s

including the possibility that pain (a sensory affect that is suppressed dur-
ing affective attack) might become prioritized, thereby replacing RAGE 
and putting an end to the fight—and perhaps leading to flight.

How could this all go on automatically, without conscious evaluation? 
This question applies also to the role of affect in thinking—a topic I can 
fruitfully introduce here. As Freud taught us, thinking is “trial” action; the 
capacity  to  try  things  out  in  imagination;  a  capacity  which,  for  obvious 
biological reasons, saves lives. This capacity is not unique to humans, but 
it is particularly highly developed in us. So let me use a human example. 
Picture this situation, derived from my own experience: My headmaster is 
frustrating me, arousing feelings of irritation. The instinctual response is 
affective attack. Now I think about the potential consequences. Instead of 
lunging at him, therefore, I inhibit the instinctual action and imagine my 
range  of  alternatives;  I  feel  my  way  through  them  (“signal”  affect). 
Eventually I settle upon a satisfactory solution: when nobody is looking, I 
deflate the tires of my headmaster’s car. In this way, I reduce my RAGE 
without  suffering  dire  consequences.  This  illustrates,  once  again,  why 
innate  behavioral  stereotypes  must  be  supplemented  by  learning  from 
experience, including the imaginary form of experience called thinking. 
Patients who fail to do this are in serious trouble. When faced with real-life 
frustrations,  which  frequently  include  conflicting  needs  (in  this  case, 
RAGE vs. FEAR), instinctual solutions are not enough. But again, please 
notice:  supplementing  instinctual  responses  through  learning  does  not 
erase them. I decided not to attack my headmaster, but the inclination to 
do so remained, and would arise again in similar situations in future.

Emotions like RAGE are not “mere” feelings. Emotions play a fun-
damental role in survival and reproductive success. Imagine the conse-
quences if we didn’t stake claims on the available resources and prevent 
others from taking our share. If we couldn’t become frustrated, irritated, 
or  angry,  we  wouldn’t  be  inclined  to  fight  for  what  we  need,  in  which 
case, sooner or later, we’d be dead. It is easy to overlook the biological 
function of emotion in the civilized conditions under which we live today. 
But we have only been living like this (i.e., in permanent settlements with 
artificial  laws  regulating  social  behavior)  for  about  twelve  thousand 
years.  Civilization  is  a  very  recent  feature  of  mammalian  existence;  it 
played no part in the design of our brains.

Conscious  thinking  requires  cortex,  but  the  feelings  that  guide  it 
don’t.  The  circuit  mediating  RAGE  is  almost  entirely  subcortical,  and, 

1070

Revision of DRive TheoRy

like all the other drive circuits, it terminates in the brainstem periaqueduc-
tal gray.

FEAR.  The fight/flight dichotomy shows that affective attack is not 
always  the  best  way  to  deal  with  an  adversary.  The  contextual  factors 
separating  them  are  registered  in  the  amygdala,  which  mediates  both 
RAGE and FEAR drives.

Most mammals “know” from day one that some things are inherently 
dangerous. Newborn rodents, for example, freeze when exposed to a single 
cat hair—although they have never experienced cats and know nothing of 
their attitude to mice. It is easy to see why this is so; if each mouse had to 
learn from experience how to respond to cats, that would be the end of 
mice. (Which is probably how “castration anxiety” evolved.) This is one 
of a limited number of examples of objects that do possess intrinsic mean-
ing  for  us.  Again  we  see  the  enormous  biological  value  of  the  basic 
emotions.

We humans fear some stereotyped things—perhaps all the objects of 
the  common  phobias—and  we  avoid  them  by  the  same  instincts  and 
reflexes as other mammals do: freezing and fleeing. These behaviors are 
facilitated  by  rapid  breathing,  increased  heart  rate,  and  redirection  of 
blood from the gut to the skeletal musculature. (Hence the loss of bowel 
control associated with extreme fear.) As with other emotions, the con-
scious feeling of fear tells one whether one is heading toward or away 
from safety, and thereby guides voluntary behavior.

An interesting example is provided by the patient SM, who suffered 
from Urbach-Wiethe disease, a rare genetic condition that results in bilat-
eral  calcification  of  the  amygdala.  She  felt  no  fear.  (See  Tranel  et  al. 
[2006], who researched SM’s subjective emotionality.) I have studied a 
large number of patients like this, as there is an unusually high incidence 
of  Urbach-Wiethe  disease  in  South Africa.  I  found  their  dreams  to  be 
particularly  interesting;  they  are  short,  simple,  and  manifestly  wishful, 
like  children’s  dreams  (see  Blake  et  al.  2019).  One  of  the  patients  we 
studied, whose husband was unemployed, dreamt “My husband found a 
job; I was very happy.” Another, the mother of a disabled child, dreamt 
“My daughter could walk; I was very happy.” Another, who was too poor 
to travel, dreamt “I was on a bus, going on holiday; I was really happy.” 
Yet another, whose father had died, dreamt “I saw my father again; I was 
so happy.” These dreams are typical of Urbach-Wiethe sufferers. In light 
of the close similarity between them and the dreams of children, the role 

1071

M a r k   S o l m s

of the FEAR drive in the development of the “censorship” and the “super-
ego” are promising topics for future neuropsychoanalytic research.35

As  I  said,  we  humans  have  a  few  stereotyped  fears.  Imagine  what 
would happen if each of us had to learn from experience what happens 
when we jump off a cliff. That is why we are descended from ancestors 
who  felt  disinclined  to  try.  Those  that  did  feel  so  inclined  are  not  our 
ancestors  because  they  left  no  offspring.  We  have  every  reason  to  be 
grateful for this inheritance.

But  then  one  must  learn  what  else  to  fear.  One  learns  from  
experience—including thinking—that things other than spider bites and 
falling from dizzying heights can cause one harm. (This is a further illus-
tration of how innate drives give rise to “meaning making.”) Electrical 
sockets and the shocks they produce, for example, could not have been 
predicted by evolution, but they are just as dangerous as spiders. Also, 
one  must  learn  what  else  to  do  when  one  is  fearful,  to  supplement  the 
instinctual responses. It is not adaptive to freeze or flee from everything 
that scares you (think of anxiety disorders), just as it is not adaptive to 
attack everyone that frustrates you. It should be clear by now what role 
conscious  feelings  play  in  this  learning  process;  they  teach  us  what  is 
working and what isn’t in relation to the FEAR drive, before it’s too late, 
and thereby help us stay alive.

Fear  conditioning  reveals  important  facts  about  what  is  conscious 
and what is not. One of its special features is “single-exposure learning”; 
a child need only stick its finger into an electric socket once to prevent it 
from  ever  doing  it  again.  It  is  easy  to  see  why;  the  child  was  lucky  to 
survive the first time, so why repeat the experience? However, as with all 
the  other  biological  mechanisms  that  underwrite  emotions,  the  child 
doesn’t  know  this  in  any  representational  sense;  conditioning  just  hap-
pens automatically. This is because FEAR conditioning does not require 
the involvement of cortex. It can even occur in earliest childhood, during 
the  first  three  years,  before  the  hippocampus  (the  cortical  structure 
responsible for “declarative” memory) has matured. This is the biological 
basis of “infantile amnesia.” For this reason alone, just like the famous 
patient  HM  (who  lacked  a  hippocampus),  many  neurologically  healthy 
people fear things without consciously knowing why.

35What I have in mind here is the interesting possibility that the superego is constituted not 
only  through  projected  RAGE  but  also  by  FEAR,  directly,  which  inevitably  conflicts  with 
RAGE.

1072

Revision of DRive TheoRy

Cognitive  scientists  attribute  fear  conditioning  to  “unconscious” 
learning, but that is only because they neglect affect. It is true that many 
people are unconscious of the reasons why they fear things, but they are 
only too conscious of the associated feelings. Feeling is all that is required 
to guide voluntary behavior. This is easily demonstrated using a tachisto-
scope: if words like “murderer” and “rapist” are subliminally associated 
with face A, and “caring” and “kind” with face B, research subjects will 
feel a preference for face B when they are subsequently required to choose 
between them, even though they cannot say why. “Gut feeling” is what 
guides  this  choice,  but  feelings  easily  go  unrecognized;  so  they  are 
described cognitively by words like “guessing.”

This  explains  much  of  the  perplexity  that  surrounds  “unconscious 
emotions” both in cognitive science and in psychoanalysis. It is not the 
affects  that  are  unconscious  so  much  as  the  cognitive  things  they  are 
about. As we saw above in relation to thinking, it can certainly help to 
know what one’s feelings are about, but that insight is not essential. In 
fact, sometimes it is better not to think before one acts, not least because 
thinking takes time, and delay can be biologically dangerous (see section 
[D] below).

The same applies to fear conditioning. Once we have learned to fear 
something—especially if we do not consciously know why—the association 
is  well-nigh  irreversible. As  LeDoux  (1996)  memorably  put  it,  FEAR 
memories are “indelible.” This reveals important facts about unconscious 
memory in general, a topic to be discussed in the next section. For now I 
will mention only that “nondeclarative” (unconscious) memories are hard 
to forget, for the same reason that they’re unconscious: they entail less 
uncertainty (i.e., are more generalizable) and are therefore less subject to 
contextual revision. This is how acquired behaviors become automatized. 
Insofar as the purpose of cognition is to learn how to meet our needs in 
the world, automatization is the ideal of learning.

PANIC/GRIEF.  Separation-distress  is  different  from  FEAR.  This 
drive emerges only after we become instinctually attached to a caregiver. 
Unlike  fear  conditioning,  but  for  equally  good  biological  reasons,  this 
takes  time  (up  to  six  months):  one  instance  of  nurturant  care  is  not 
enough to determine whether someone can be relied upon forever.

Let me make explicit something that has perhaps not been made suf-
ficiently clear in this section. All these emotional drives are homeostatic. 
Thus, for example, the “expected state” of RAGE is “nothing is getting 

1073

M a r k   S o l m s

between me and the satisfaction of my needs,” that of FEAR is “nothing 
is threatening my life and limb,” and that of PANIC/GRIEF is “my care-
giver is available and attentive to me.” (These nonconscious expectations 
are  not  really  formulated  in  words,  of  course.)  Deviations  from  such 
expected states are “error signals” (i.e., affects, heading in deteriorating 
or improving directions; see Figure 1).

When mammals become separated from their attachment figures, an 
instinctual  sequence  unfolds,  starting  with  “protest”  behavior  and  fol-
lowed  by  “despair.”  The  protest  phase  is  characterized  by  feelings  of 
panic, together with distress vocalizations and search behavior. The panic 
is  frequently  combined  with  anger—“where  is  she?!”—which  evokes 
another conflict, this time between PANIC/GRIEF and RAGE. The one 
drive makes you want to keep your caregiver close to you, always and 
forever, whereas the other drive makes you want to destroy her. Guilt (a 
secondary  emotion)  is  the  typical  outcome. This  is  a  good  example  of 
how  secondary  emotions  (like  guilt,  shame,  jealousy,  and  envy)  arise. 
Unlike the basic emotions, they are learned constructs—hybrids of emo-
tion  and  cognition  (see  Barrett  2017).  Note,  then,  that  the  homeostatic 
emotions—the felt drives—under discussion here do not by any means 
exhaust the full range of human emotionality.

The despair phase of the separation-distress response is characterized 
by  feelings  of  hopelessness,  of  literally  “giving  up.” The  standard  bio-
logical explanation is that if the separated pup’s crying and searching do 
not lead quickly to reunion, then the potential costs of alerting predators 
to  its  vulnerable  state  begin  to  outweigh  the  benefits. Also,  if  the  pup 
wanders  too  far  from  home  base,  its  chances  of  being  found  when  the 
mother returns are reduced. Thus, on statistical balance, giving up (despite 
how painful it is) becomes the inherited survival strategy. This is another 
good example of how we know nothing of the biological mechanisms that 
gave rise to our instincts; all we know about are the feelings.

Here  is  a  classical  description  of  the  separation-distress  cascade  in 

human children (Bowlby 1960):

[Protest] may begin immediately or may be delayed; it lasts from a few hours to 
a week or more. During it the young child appears acutely distressed at having 
lost  his  mother  and  seeks  to  recapture  her  by  the  full  exercise  of  his  limited 
resources. He will often cry loudly, shake his cot, throw himself about, and look 
eagerly towards any sight or sound which might prove to be his missing mother. 
All his behaviour suggests strong expectation that she will return. Meanwhile he 

1074

Revision of DRive TheoRy

is apt to reject all alternative figures who offer to do things for him, though some 
children will cling desperately to a nurse.

[In  despair,  which]  succeeds  protest,  the  child’s  preoccupation  with  his 
missing mother is still evident, though his behaviour suggests increasing hope-
lessness. The  active  physical  movements  diminish  or  come  to  an  end,  and  he 
may cry monotonously or intermittently. He is withdrawn and inactive, makes 
no demands on people in the environment, and appears to be in a state of deep 
mourning [p. 90].

The latter state is of course akin to depression, which is often accom-
panied by guilt. As Freud (1917) taught us, depression (“melancholia”) is 
a  pathological  form  of  grief  (“mourning”). Accordingly,  Panksepp  and 
others  applied  his  elucidation  of  the  brain  mechanisms  of  the  PANIC/
GRIEF  drive  to  developing  new  treatments  for  mood  disorders  (see 
Yovell et al. 2016; Coenen et al. 2019). Chemically, the transition from 
“protest” to “despair” is mediated by mu and kappa opioids respectively, 
the  latter  of  which  shut  down  dopamine  (for  the  immediate  effects  of 
which, see the startling case report of Blomstedt et al. [2008], of a patient 
who fell into a suicidal depression within seconds of a source nucleus for 
dopamine being electrically suppressed). That is why depression is char-
acterized by the mirror opposite of the feelings that characterize SEEKING 
(see Solms and Panksepp 2010). GRIEF, at the level of drive theory, is 
shut-down SEEKING. By contrast, full-blast SEEKING is mania, before 
it tips into psychosis. The anatomical trajectory of the PANIC component 
of the PANIC/GRIEF circuit descends from the anterior cingulate gyrus 
to the periaqueductal gray. Mayberg et al. (2005) and Coenen et al. (2019) 
show  that  deep  brain  stimulation  of  the  PANIC  and  SEEKING  (i.e., 
inverse GRIEF) circuits can dramatically alleviate symptoms of depres-
sion, within seconds, even in the most chronic and treatment-refractory 
cases. (I am not recommending this treatment but just saying that it pro-
vides proof of concept.)

It is interesting that the mu opioid–mediated PANIC system evolved 
from the brain’s older analgesic system; the mental anguish of loss is an 
extension of the bodily mechanisms for sensory pain. (That is presumably 
why mental pain is so frequently somatized.) This is a good example of 
the  seamless  transition  that  exists  in  nature  between  lifesaving  sensory 
affects and emotional ones. There is nothing ephemeral about emotions. 
The painful feelings associated with separation and loss—coupled with 
learning from experience—play a causal role in ensuring the survival of 

1075

M a r k   S o l m s

us mammals (and birds), who need caregivers. This continues to apply 
beyond  childhood,  of  course:  the  brain  circuits  just  described  mediate 
attachment  bonds  throughout  life,  as  they  also  mediate,  sadly,  various 
forms of addiction (think of the opiate crisis). Most drugs of abuse act on 
either the PANIC or the GRIEF (shut-down SEEKING) drives. They are 
of course forms of self-medication. As we have known since Kraepelin, 
opiates are excellent (but dangerous) antidepressants.

It is important to acknowledge that Fairbairn and Bowlby, and some 
other  early  object-relational  theorists,  were  right  about  “attachment” 
being an innate drive (and instinct) entirely separate from sexuality. The 
evidence for this is now overwhelming. The only link between the LUST 
and PANIC/GRIEF drives is the one I have mentioned: namely, that they 
both must be satisfied, which means they must be reconciled with each 
other, which can be difficult. It is difficult not only because the sexual 
drive is most securely satisfied in a relationship, but also because one’s 
original attachment figure is usually one’s mother. That is why it is diffi-
cult to reconcile LUST with what Freud called “affectionate bonds.”

CARE.  This  is  the  flip  side  of  PANIC/GRIEF  attachment:  we  not 
only need loving care ourselves, but also need to look after others, espe-
cially little ones, and especially our own offspring. The so-called mater-
nal instinct exists in all mammals, but not to the same degree, because it 
is mediated by chemicals found at higher levels (on average) in females: 
estrogen,  prolactin,  progesterone,  and  oxytocin—all  of  which  rise  dra-
matically during pregnancy and childbirth. (Think of post-partum depres-
sion.) Also  noteworthy  is  the  overlap  between  the  brain  chemistry  and 
circuitry for the CARE, PANIC/GRIEF, and female-typical LUST drives. 
These facts alone readily explain why depression is so much more com-
mon (almost three times) in women than in men.

Approximately 80 percent of human females somehow know from 
childhood that it is “good” to cradle babies to the left of the body midline, 
whereas males discover this (instinctually) only after they father children 
(Pileggi,  Malcolm-Smith,  and  Solms  2015).  On  the  other  hand,  even 
completely  inexperienced  boys  usually  know  what  to  do  when  a  baby 
cries. They do not prod it with their fingers or pick it up by the foot to see 
if that helps; they just know (they innately predict) that a “good” thing to 
do is to hold it close and rock it while making soothing noises.

And yet, as every parent learns, this is not enough. Successfully rais-
ing an infant to maturity requires a lot more than instinct. Therefore, as 

1076

Revision of DRive TheoRy

with the other emotional drives, one must learn from experience (includ-
ing thinking) what to do in the myriad unpredicted situations that arise. 
As with the other drives, also, decisions in this respect are guided by feel-
ings (of care and concern) that tell us whether things are going well or 
badly. Another reason why a nurturant drive is not enough is that we do 
not feel only love toward our children, as any parent will attest. The resul-
tant  conflicts  can  be  resolved  only  through  hybrid  cognitive-emotional 
processes.

Learning  how  to  reconcile  the  various  emotional  drives  with  each 
other  in  context-dependent  ways  is  the  bedrock  of  mental  health  and 
maturity. This conclusion is more consistent with the evidence now avail-
able than the notion of “stages of libidinal development.”36 Consider sus-
tainable  romantic  partnerships,  for  example,  which  require  a  judicious 
integration of LUST with childlike PANIC/GRIEF-type attachment (think 
of the Madonna-whore syndrome), which in turn is difficult to reconcile 
with the roving SEEKING drive (think of the thrill of novelty), as well as 
the  inevitable  frustrations  that  provoke  RAGE  (hence  the  ubiquity  of 
domestic  strife),  which  in  turn  conflicts  with  the  concerns  of  nurturant 
CARE, and so on. Sustaining long-term relationships is just one example 
of  the  many  challenges  that  face  every  human  being. To  manage  these 
things—to manage life’s problems—we use feelings as our compass. It is 
feeling that guides all learning from experience, in the various forms I 
have outlined. But biology provides one further drive to help us on our 
way.

PLAY.  We need to play. This activity is not as frivolous as it appears: 
PLAY is the medium through which territories are claimed and defended, 
social  hierarchies  are  formed  (“pecking  order”),  and  in-group  and  
out-group  boundaries  are  forged  and  maintained.  I  believe  that  this  
drive, more than any other, underpins the oedipus complex (see Solms in 
press).

People are often surprised to learn that PLAY is a biological drive, 
but  all  juvenile  mammals  engage  in  vigorous  rough-and-tumble.  If 
deprived of their quota on one day, they will try to make it up the next day, 
as if by rebound. We all know what rough-and-tumble play is, though the 
form it takes varies slightly from one mammalian species to another. A 

36Thus  Freud’s  notion  of  drive  “fusion”  and  “de-fusion”  remains  serviceable,  at  least 

descriptively, if not mechanistically.

1077

M a r k   S o l m s

play  session  starts  with  an  “invitation”  posture  or  gesture;  then,  if  the 
invitation is accepted, the game is on. The one animal or child exuber-
antly chases the other, they then stop as they wrestle or tickle each other, 
taking  turns  to  be  on  top—accompanied  by  peals  of  laughter,  or  the 
equivalent vocalization depending on the species (even rats “laugh”; see 
Panksepp  2005).  Then  they  are  back  on  their  feet  again,  chasing  each 
other in the reverse direction. The associated feeling state is equally uni-
versal: it is called fun.

Children just love to play. Empirically, however, the majority of play 
episodes end in tears. This provides an important clue as to what PLAY is 
all about, biologically speaking; it is about finding the limits of what is 
socially  tolerable,  acceptable,  and  permissible. When  play  is  no  longer 
fun for a playmate, often because you are not being “fair,” the playmate 
won’t play anymore. A limit has then been reached. The marking of such 
boundaries is crucial for the formation and maintenance of stable social 
groups. And the survival of a group is important for the survival of each 
member of the group in social species such as ours.

A major criterion in this respect is dominance. In any play situation, 
one of the participants takes the lead role, and the other is submissive. 
This is fun for both parties, so long as the dominant one does not insist on 
calling the shots all the time. The acceptable ratio of turn-taking seems to 
be somewhere between 60:40 and 70:30. The “60:40 rule” states that the 
submissive playmate continues playing so long as sufficient opportunity 
is given to turn the tables.

This reveals a second function of the PLAY drive: namely, the estab-
lishment of social hierarchies. Rough-and-tumble play accordingly gives 
way (especially from puberty onward) to more organized, frankly com-
petitive games. Of course, play is not limited to games of the rough-and-
tumble  variety.  We  humans  engage  in  pretend  play,  in  which  the 
participants  try  out  different  social  roles  (e.g.,  Mother/Baby,  Teacher/
Pupil, Doctor/Patient, Cop/Robber, Cowboy/Indian, King of the Castle / 
Dirty Rascal—note the ever present hierarchies). We do not know what 
goes on in the imagination of other mammals while playing, but we may 
confidently  hypothesize  that  they  too  are  “trying  out”  different  social 
roles, and thereby learning what they can and can’t get away with.

This suggests a third biological function for PLAY. It requires us (and 
conditions us) to take account of the feelings of others. If we don’t, they 
will refuse to play with us, and then we will be deprived of the enormous 

1078

Revision of DRive TheoRy

pleasure it yields. The bully might get to keep all the toys, but he will be 
deprived of all the fun. This, it seems, is why the PLAY drive evolved 
(and why so much pleasure attaches to satisfying it): it promotes viable 
social formations. It is, in a word, a major vehicle for the development of 
empathy.37

Play episodes come to an abrupt end when they lose their “as if” quality. 
If I lock up my little sister and throw away the key, then not only have I 
broken the 60:40 rule but I also am no longer playing the game of Cops and 
Robbers; instead I am imprisoning my sister. In other words, what is govern-
ing  our  mutual  behavior  now  is  FEAR  or  RAGE  rather  than  PLAY. The 
same applies to the other games enumerated above. Playing “Doctor/Patient” 
is a game until it becomes real sex; then it is governed by LUST.

The same applies to the oedipus complex. The incest taboo ensures 
that it remains “as if”; failure to respect this limit has catastrophic conse-
quences  for  emotional  development.  Patients  who  cannot  PLAY  (i.e., 
who have not learned how to satisfy this drive effectively, as occurs in 
character  pathology  and  some  perversions,  for  example)  are  in  serious 
trouble. They also find it difficult to use psychoanalytic treatment, which 
is at bottom a form of PLAY (think of the hierarchy, the mutuality, the 
boundaries, the “as if” quality, etc).

The  fact  that  PLAY  hovers,  as  it  were,  between  all  the  other  emo-
tional drives—trying them out and learning their limits—is perhaps the 
reason it has not been possible to identify a command neuromodulator for 
it. Probably it recruits them all. Anyone who doubts that PLAY is defini-
tively a drive, though, should read Pellis and Pellis’s The Playful Brain 
(2009).

We don’t always like to recognize that humans, like other mammals, 
naturally  claim  territories  and  form  social  hierarchies  with  clear  rules. 
(The  rules  governing  primate  behavior  are  remarkably  complex.)  The 
structure  of  families,  clans,  armies,  even  nations—almost  any  social 
group—is  undeniably  hierarchical  and  territorial;  and  this  has  been  so 
throughout history. The higher the social status of an individual within the 
group, the greater the access that individual has to the resources in the 
territory the group controls. This observation is not a matter of personal 
preference; it is a matter of fact. If we do not face such facts, we cannot 

37The development of empathy is therefore by no means an automatic process, as the “mir-
ror neuron” theory might suggest. Empathy is not a reflex; it is a developmental achievement 
(see Solms 2017a).

1079

M a r k   S o l m s

begin  to  deal  with  them.  The  fact  that  emotional  drives  exist  does  not 
mean we have no control over them—that we are obliged to bow before 
“the Law of the Jungle”; but we ignore them at our peril.

It is easy to see how PLAY, in particular, gives rise to social rules. 
Rules regulate group behavior, and thereby protect us from the excesses 
of our individual drives. It is also easy to see how social rules encourage 
complex forms of communication, and how they contribute to the emer-
gence of symbolic functioning in general. The “as if” quality of play sug-
gests that it might even be the biological precursor of thinking (i.e., of 
virtual vs. real action). Some scientists also believe that dreaming is noc-
turnal PLAY, i.e., trying out the instinctual emotions in an “as if” world. 
Interestingly, in REM behavior disorder, where the motor paralysis that 
normally accompanies dreams is lost due to midbrain damage, patients 
(and  experimental  animals)  physically  enact  the  various  instinctual  
stereotypes—e.g., fleeing, freezing, predatory pouncing, affective attack. 
It cannot be without meaning that RAGE is far more common in humans 
with this condition than it is in other animals (e.g., cats). Like chimpan-
zees, humans are very aggressive creatures.

I  cannot  emphasize  enough  the  clinical  utility  of  the  information 
summarized in this section, both for psychiatric nosology and for the psy-
chodynamic formulation of individual cases. I strongly encourage readers 
to consult my paper in Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, an open-
access online journal (Solms 2018a). That paper, too, however, is just a 
summary; it does not do justice to the richness of what my colleagues and 
I have learned in several neuropsychoanalytic study groups that for more 
than six years now have been meeting around the world, discussing our 
ongoing analytic work with literally hundreds of cases. Our findings will 
be reported in due course, in a series of clinical papers (meanwhile, see 
Smith and Solms 2018).

(D) The Relationship between Drive and Conscious Qualities in General

Having  proclaimed  that  drives  are  conscious,  I  will  conclude  with 
only a brief consideration of the unconscious—since I have written exten-
sively about this topic elsewhere (Solms 2017b, 2018a, 2021). In short, I 
believe it is a mistake to conflate drives with the unconscious; the “id” 
and “the unconscious” are not the same thing (see Solms 2013).

I  have  said  that  needs  remain  unconscious  (in  some  cases,  noncon-
scious) until they become drives. Here everything pivots on the fact that we 
have various competing needs that must be prioritized. A strong clue as to 

1080

Revision of DRive TheoRy

where  the  selection  is  made  is  provided  by  the  fact  that  all  needs  (both 
bodily and emotional ones) deliver their residual error signals to the mid-
brain periaqueductal gray (PAG). The term “residual” here refers to the fact 
that we are equipped with automatic mechanisms that can meet these needs 
up to a point. These mechanisms include not only the (nonconscious) auto-
nomic  reflexes  I  have  discussed  but  also  the  (unconscious)  behavioral  
stereotypes that are acquired in the manner I will now describe.

The PAG truly is the “inmost interior” of the brain. It surrounds the 
central canal that joins the third and fourth ventricles and is an extremely 
primitive structure. Immediately adjacent to it is the tectum, which con-
tains  the  superior  and  inferior  colliculi. These,  in  turn,  contain  layered 
representations of all the sensory modalities (except smell), which regis-
ter “where things stand now” in the outside world, in a highly condensed 
form known as an attentional “saliency map.” Thus, this ancient core of 
the brainstem constantly receives information about the current internal 
conditions in the PAG (i.e., current needs) and the current external condi-
tions in the superior colliculi (i.e., current opportunities). The task of this 
region, then, which also includes the final path to motor output (the mid-
brain  locomotor  region)  is  to  make  decisions  about  “what  to  do  next.” 
That is why Merker (2007) calls it the “midbrain decision triangle.”

Panksepp calls it the primal SELF because the interface I have just 
described  is,  in  effect,  the  brain’s  meta-homeostat,  which  must  choose 
among the competing error signals arriving from all the brain’s individual 
homeostats. Needs must be prioritized because you cannot do everything 
at once (e.g., eat and sleep). The selection is made on the basis of salience: 
the most “salient” need is the one that enjoys—or demands—the greatest 
current opportunity to reduce free energy (as defined in section [B]; for 
details see Solms 2021). The prioritized need is then felt, or, to put it dif-
ferently, the “decision” emanating from the midbrain decision triangle is 
announced  in  the  form  of  a  feeling.  In  other  words,  prioritized  needs 
become drives. This has two consequences. First, the prioritized feeling is 
the one that is used to guide the next cycle of voluntary behavior; and 
second, all other current needs are relegated to automatic control—that is 
autonomic (internal) control and automatized (external) behavior.

Now  the  forebrain  kicks  in.  This  contains  the  long-term  memory 
structures  that  represent  a  self-organizing  system’s  predictive  model  of 
the world (see Figure 2). This model is arranged hierarchically, and con-
centrically, from the autonomic core (which contains innate predictions) 

1081

M a r k   S o l m s

upward  and  outward,  through  the  subcortical  forebrain  to  the  cortex 
(which contains acquired predictions). This hierarchy becomes activated 
(or,  to  use  Freud’s  terminology,  “cathected”). What  is  activated,  repre-
sented  from  long-term  memory,  is  the  expected  sensorimotor  context 
within  which  the  prioritized  drive  demand  will  be  met.  We  do  not  go 
naively  into  the  world  in  which  we  meet  our  needs;  we  enter  it  with 
expectations (predictions) based not only in reflexes and instincts but also 
in all that we have learned about how to meet our needs more effectively 
over our individual lifetimes (through learning from experience).

So an expected context is activated in the forebrain by the reticular 
activating system, which receives massive inputs from the midbrain deci-
sion  triangle.  The  forebrain  memory  traces  that  represent  the  expected 
context  are  thereby  assigned  what  computational  neuroscientists  call 
“precision” weightings and what neurophysiologists call “post-synaptic 
gain.” Precision (or gain) is a measure of uncertainty, which, as we saw 
in section (A) is isomorphic with arousal. These precision values—which 
actually determine the ensuing behavior—are assigned in two different 
ways.  Those  pertaining  to  the  automatic  behaviors  are  assigned  fixed 
weightings,  and  those  pertaining  to  the  voluntary  behaviors  (the  ones 
associated  with  the  prioritized  drive)  are  assigned  variable  ones. What 
this means is that the latter weightings are modulated on the basis of the 
unfolding  experience.  In  other  words,  they  are  palpated  by  feeling—
which generates cognitive judgments, on the basis that it is “good” when 
the precision (the uncertainty) attaching to current predictions increases 
and  “bad”  when  it  decreases.  In  other  words,  cognitively  no  less  than 
affectively,  it  is  good  when  things  turn  out  as  expected  and  bad  when 
uncertainty prevails. Increasingly or decreasingly precise predictions, in 
turn, are determined by the strength of the incoming error signals. In other 
words, increasingly strong error signals decrease confidence (precision) 
in the current prediction—which is of course bad from the viewpoint of 
the system. These error signals are then propagated inward through the 
predictive  hierarchy  and  they  adjust  the  predictions  that  gave  rise  to 
them.  This  happens  iteratively,  while  progressively  better  predictions 
damp down the error signals. Then the whole process begins again, as the 
residual errors are fed back to the midbrain decision triangle, which then 
either  maintains  or  shifts  the  currently  prioritized  need  and  associated 
actions. That, in essence, is how learning works: it entails updating of the 
predictive model on the basis of strong (i.e., precise) error signals.

1082

Revision of DRive TheoRy

Figure 2.  A simplified predictive hierarchy, extending from the 
autonomic core to the sensorimotor periphery
(Learning flows from right to left in this diagram; predictions flow in the opposite direction.)

The  constellation  of  representations  that  are  palpated  in  the  way  I 
have just described are held in short-term or “working” memory. This is 
an entirely cortical form of representation that is synonymous with cogni-
tive  consciousness  (i.e.,  perception  and  thinking).  What  is  especially 

1083

M a r k   S o l m s

interesting to psychoanalysts is the fact that memory traces activated in 
this way become labile once more; in other words, they literally dissolve 
and are memories no longer.38 This is because they are in the process of 
being updated. Neurophysiologists call this updating process “reconsoli-
dation.”  I  have  proposed  the  phrase  “predictive  work  in  progress”  to 
describe what reconsolidation does.

It is clear that reconsolidation occurs constantly at the sensorimotor 
periphery (righthand side of Figure 2); but as a prediction proves increas-
ingly reliable over time, so it slowly becomes more deeply “consolidated” 
into long-term memory. There are many reasons for this, not least of them 
being the severe capacity constraints of short-term memory, but the ulti-
mate reason is dictated by the free energy principle itself: the predictive 
model  must  be  accurate.  However,  accuracy  comes  with  complexity 
costs.  Excessive  complexity  leads  to  statistical  “overfitting”  and  many 
other  computational  and  biological  problems.  The  way  the  system 
resolves this dilemma is to consolidate predictions that prove to be accu-
rate in a wide variety of contexts (the simpler, more generalizable ones) 
ever  more  deeply  into  the  system,  ultimately  into  the  “nondeclarative” 
layers of the predictive model, and to retain only those that must be con-
textually  updated  (the  more  complex,  less  generalizable  ones)  in  the 
“declarative” layers. This is because precision modulation has everything 
to  do  with  changing  contexts.  The  cortex  specializes  in  contexts,  and 
therefore in the delay that is the downside (or one of the downsides) of 
complexity.  Thus,  nondeclarative  predictions  are  more  certain  than 
declarative ones, and they can therefore be executed automatically. That, 
I have proposed, is how “the unconscious” (as opposed to the noncon-
scious) is constituted (Solms 2017b).

Declarative (cortical) long-term predictions are “preconscious,” and 
nondeclarative (subcortical) ones are “unconscious.” The unconscious—
more certain—ones apply over a wider range of spatial and temporal con-
texts,  which  coincides  with  Freud’s  description  of  them  as  “timeless.” 
These are the predictions that can be executed automatically, in the man-
ner described above, and they behave the most like instincts. It will be 
noticed  that  fixed  precision  values  permit  what  Freud  called  “freely 
mobile” cathexis (i.e., no delay), while variable precisions that are “held 

38See Freud’s felicitous phrase “consciousness arises instead of a memory trace” (1920,  

p. 25).

1084

Revision of DRive TheoRy

in mind” (in working memory) during predictive work require what Freud 
called “bound” cathexis (see Solms 2020). This coincides with his dis-
tinction between the primary and secondary processes.

The  “repressed”  portion  of  the  unconscious  consists  of  predictions 
that were prematurely or illegitimately automatized, either because they 
were automatized before the maturation of the declarative memory sys-
tems (infantile amnesia) or because they were the child’s “solutions” to 
problems  that  proved  insoluble.  The  sexual  strivings  of  children  are  a 
good example of an insoluble problem, so their “solution” is almost inevi-
tably subject to repression. Importantly, unlike the other automatized pre-
dictions in the “descriptive” unconscious, the repressed ones give rise to 
prediction errors (negative affects; i.e., drive demands). Moreover, unlike 
declarative  predictions,  which  enjoy  updating  (reconsolidation)  when 
they  give  rise  to  such  errors—that  is,  when  they  become  salient—
repressed predictions remain “timeless.” They also display the other three 
“special characteristics of the system Ucs.” identified by Freud (1915b,  
p. 187): they show “exemption from mutual contradiction” (which is just 
another way of saying they are unrealistic and do not actually resolve the 
problem);  they  show  “replacement  of  external  by  psychical  reality” 
(which is another way of saying that the prediction is maintained regard-
less of the evidence); and they use “primary process” (i.e., freely mobile 
cathexis). It should be noted that instinctual predictions, too, are indelible, 
for  the  reason  I  have  outlined  (viz.,  they  are  not  really  memories  
and so are not subject to reconsolidation). In this sense we can say, with 
Freud,  that  instinctual  predictions  form  the  “nucleus”  of  the  dynamic 
unconscious.

Since repressed predictions inevitably produce negative affects (the 
so-called “return of the repressed”),39 the only recourse available to the 
subject in this case is “defense.” (Note, therefore, that repression is not 
synonymous  with  defense.)  Accordingly,  patients  fall  ill  when  their 
defenses fail; and our patients suffer mainly from feelings. The feelings in 
question reveal which drive demand is not being met, which is why it is 
important for psychoanalysts to acquaint themselves with the “basic emo-
tions” described above. The repressed prediction, in its turn, is repeated 
(enacted)  in  the  “transference,”  for  the  very  reason  that  it  cannot  be 

39The repressed prediction itself does not, and cannot, return (“nondeclarative” memories 

cannot be remembered, by definition); it is the affect that returns when the defense fails.

1085

M a r k   S o l m s

remembered. Since I have written elsewhere on these more clinical top-
ics, I will break off at this point (see Solms 2018b).

C o nCl u s i o n

In this paper I have proposed extensive revisions to Freud’s theory of the 
drives. The main revisions are as follows: (1) Drives are conscious; they 
are in fact the fount of all consciousness. (2) Drive energy may be equated 
with  Friston  free  energy  and  is  therefore  quantifiable  in  principle.  (3) 
There are not two drives but many, seven of which may be described as 
“emotional” as opposed to “bodily.” (4) All drives are self-preservative or 
preservative of the species; there is no death drive at work in the mind. 
That  is,  all  drives  are  homeostatic  and  therefore  anti-entropic.  (5)  The 
great task of mental development is to supplement instinctual predictions 
about how these multiple drive demands may be satisfied and reconciled 
with each other in unpredicted contexts. This work is done through learn-
ing from experience, which is governed by the Law of Affect.

Although  these  revisions  are  derived  from  neuroscientific  research 
findings, which implies that they are open to ongoing testing by neurosci-
entific  methods,  I  want  to  end  by  insisting  that  the  clinical  situation 
remains best suited to determining and refining the utility of new psycho-
analytic theories. When Freud (1915a) wrote that “working over the psy-
chological material . . . seems rather itself to call for the application to the 
material of definite assumptions concerning the life of the drives, and it 
would be a desirable thing if those assumptions could be taken from some 
other branch of knowledge and carried over to psychology” (p. 124), he 
surely  did  not  mean  that  a  psychological  working-over  of  the  material 
adds nothing to the assumptions carried over from biology. The revision 
of drive theory that I have proposed here, therefore, some years after the 
theoretical breakthrough that gave rise to it (Solms 2013), is as much a 
result of that breakthrough as it is of psychological “working over” of it 
in the clinical study groups I have mentioned.

Although this article is addressed primarily to a psychoanalytic audi-
ence, it contains insights about the lived life of the mind, obtained by the 
psychoanalytic method, that can be “carried over” in the reverse direc-
tion, back to neuroscience (see Solms 2021). As Oliver Sacks (1984) once 
said:  “Neuropsychology,  like  classical  neurology,  aims  to  be  entirely 
objective, and its great power, its advances, come from just this. But a 

1086

Revision of DRive TheoRy

living creature, and especially a human being, is first and last active—a 
subject, not an object. It is precisely the subject, the living ‘I,’ which is 
being  excluded.  Neuropsychology  is  admirable,  but  it  excludes  the 
psyche—it excludes the experiencing, active, living ‘I’” (p. 164).

ReFeRenceS

Barrett, L.F. (2017). How Emotions Are Made: The Secret Life of the Brain. 

New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

Berridge, K. (2003). Pleasures of the brain. Brain & Cognition 52:106–128.
BLaKe, Y., terBurg, d., BaLchin, r., van honK, J., & SoLmS, m. (2019). The role 

of the basolateral amygdala in dreaming Cortex 113:169–183.

BLaSS,  r.,  &  carmeLi,  Z.  (2007). The  case  against  neuropsychoanalysis:  On 
fallacies underlying psychoanalysis’ latest scientific trend and its nega-
tive  impact  on  psychoanalytic  discourse.  International  Journal  of 
Psychoanalysis 88:19–40.

BLomStedt,  P.,  hariZ,  m.i.,  LeeS,  a.,  SiLBerStein,  P.,  LimouSin,  P.,  YeLniK,  J.,  & 
agid,  Y.  (2008).  Acute  severe  depression  induced  by  intraoperative 
stimulation  of  the  substantia  nigra:  A  case  report.  Parkinsonism  & 
Related Disorders 14:253–256.

BowLBY, J. (1960). Separation anxiety. International Journal of Psychoanalysis 

41:89–113.

cannon, w.B. (1926). Physiological regulation of normal states: Some tenta-
tive postulates concerning biological homeostatics. In Jubilee Volume to 
Charles Richet. Paris: Éditions Medicales, pp. 91–93.

carhart-harriS,  r.,  &  FriSton,  K.  (2010).  The  default-mode,  ego-functions 
and  free-energy:  A  neurobiological  account  of  Freudian  ideas.  Brain 
133:1265–1283.

coenen, v.a., BewernicK, B.h., KaYSer, S., KiLian, h., BoStröm, J., greSchuS, 
S.,  hurLemann,  r.,  KLein,  m.e.,  SPanier,  S.,  SaJonZ,  B.,  urBach,  h.,  & 
SchLaePFer,  t.e.  (2019).  Superolateral  medial  forebrain  bundle  deep 
brain  stimulation  in  major  depression: A  gateway  trial.  Neuropsycho- 
pharmacology 44:1224–1232.

damaSio, a. (2010). Self Comes to Mind: Constructing the Conscious Brain. 

New York: Pantheon.

damaSio,  a.  (2018).  The  Strange  Order  of  Things:  Life,  Feeling,  and  the 

Making of Cultures. London: Penguin Random House.

du BoiS–reYmond, e., ed. (1842). Jugendbriefe von Emil Du Bois–Reymond 
an  Eduard  Hallmann,  zu  seinem  hundertsten  Geburtstag,  dem  7. 
November 1918. Berlin: Reimer, 1918.

1087

M a r k   S o l m s

eKman, P., FrieSen, w.v., o’SuLLivan, m., chan, a.Y.c., diacoYanni-tarLatZiS, 
i.,  heider,  K.g.,  KrauSe,  r.,  LecomPte,  w.a.,  Pitcairn,  t.,  &  ricci-Bicci, 
P.e.  (1987).  Universals  and  cultural  differences  in  the  judgements  of 
facial  expressions  of  emotion.  Journal  of  Personality  &  Social 
Psychology 53:712–717.

eLLiS,  g.,  &  SoLmS,  m.  (2018).  Beyond  Evolutionary  Psychology:  How  and 
Why  Neuropsychological  Modules  Arise.  Cambridge:  Cambridge 
University Press.

Freud, S. (1894). The neuro-psychoses of defence. Standard Edition 3:45–61.
Freud,  S.  (1895).  Project  for  a  scientific  psychology.  Standard  Edition 

1:295–397.

Freud, S. (1905). Three essays on the theory of sexuality. Standard Edition 

7:130–243.

Freud, S. (1915a). Instincts and their vicissitudes. Standard Edition 14:117–

140.

Freud, S. (1915b). The unconscious. Standard Edition 14:166–215.
Freud, S. (1916–1917). Introductory lecturers in psycho-analysis. Standard 

Edition 15/16.

Freud, S. (1917). Mourning and melancholia. Standard Edition 14:243–258.
Freud, S. (1920). Beyond the pleasure principle. Standard Edition 18:7–64.
Freud, S. (1923). The ego and the id. Standard Edition 19:12–66.
Freud, S. (1925). An autobiographical study. Standard Edition 20:7–70.
Freud, S. (1927). Postscript to a discussion on lay analysis. Standard Edition 

1920: 251–258.

Freud,  S.  (1940). An outline of psycho-analysis. Standard Edition 23:144–

207.

FriSton, K. (2009). The Free Energy Principle: A rough guide to the brain? 

Trends in Cognitive Sciences 13:293–301.

FriSton, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 

September 6.

giLL, m.m., & hoLZman, P.S., edS. (1976). Psychology versus Metapsychology: 
Psychoanalytic  Essays  in  Memory  of  George  S.  Klein.  New  York: 
International Universities Press.

goSSerieS, o., SchnaKerS, c., Ledoux, d., vanhaudenhuYSe, a., Bruno, m.-a., 
demertZi, a., noirhomme, Q., LehemBre, r., damS, P., goLdman, S., PeeerS, 
e., moonen, g., & LaurYS, S. (2011). Automated EEG entropy measure-
ments  in  coma,  vegetative  state/unresponsive  wakefulness  syndrome 
and minimally conscious state. Functional Neurology 26:25–30.

heSSeLmann,  g.,  Sadaghiani,  S.,  FriSton,  K.,  &  KLeinSchmidt,  a.  (2010). 
Predictive coding or evidence accumulation? False inference and neuro-
nal fluctuations. PLoS One 5(3), March 29.

1088

Revision of DRive TheoRy

hoFer, m. (1996). Multiple regulators of ultrasonic vocalization in the infant 

rat. Psychoneuroendocrinology 21:203–217.

hoLt, r., ed. (1967). Motives and Thought: Psychoanalytic Essays in Honor 

of David Rapaport. New York: International Universities Press.

JaYneS,  e.  (1957).  Information  theory  and  statistical  mechanics.  Physical 

Review 106:620–630.

Kant, i. (1790). Kritik der Urteilskraft. Kants gesammelte Schriften 5. Berlin: 

de Gruyter.

KaPur, S. (2003). Psychosis as a state of aberrant salience: A framework link-
ing  biology,  phenomenology,  and  pharmacology  in  schizophrenia. 
American Journal of Psychiatry 160:13–23.

KLein, g. (1976). Psychoanalytic Theory: An Exploration of Essentials. New 

York: International Universities Press.

Ledoux, J. (1996). The Emotional Brain. New York: Simon & Schuster.
LevaY, S. (1993). The Sexual Brain. Cambridge: MIT Press.
maSSon,  J.m.  (1985).  The  Complete  Letters  of  Sigmund  Freud  to  Wilhelm 

Fliess, 1887–1904. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

maYBerg, h., LoZano, a., voon, v., mcneeLY, h., SeminowicZ, d., hamani, c., 
SchwaLB, J., & KennedY, S. (2005). Deep brain stimulation for treatment-
resistant depression. Neuron 45:651–660.

merKer,  B.  (2007).  Consciousness  without  cerebral  cortex: A  challenge  for 
neuroscience and medicine. Behavioral & Brain Sciences 30:63–68.
PanKSePP, J. (1998). Affective Neuroscience: The Foundations of Human and 

Animal Emotions. New York: Oxford University Press.

PanKSePP,  J.  (2005).  Beyond  a  joke:  From  animal  laughter  to  human  joy? 

Science 308:62–63.

PanKSePP, J., & Biven, L. (2012). The Archaeology of Mind: Neuroevolutionary 

Origins of Human Emotions. New York: Norton.

PeLLiS, S., & PeLLiS, v. (2009). The Playful Brain: Venturing to the Limits of 

Neuroscience. Oxford: One World.

PFaFF,  d.  (1999).  Drive:  Neurobiological  and  Molecular  Mechanisms  of 

Sexual Motivation. Cambridge: MIT Press.

PFaFF,  d.  (2005).  Brain  Arousal  and  Information  Theory.  Cambridge: 

Harvard University Press.

PiLeggi, L., maLcoLm-Smith, S., & SoLmS, m. (2015). Investigating the role of 
social-affective  attachment  processes  in  cradling  bias:  The  absence  of 
cradling  bias  in  children  with  autism  spectrum  disorders.  Laterality 
20:154–170.

SacKS, o. (1984). A Leg to Stand On. New York: Simon & Schuster.
SchaFer, r. (1976). A New Language for Psychoanalysis. New Haven: Yale 

University Press.

1089

M a r k   S o l m s

Smith, r., & SoLmS, m. (2018). Examination of the hypothesis that repression 
is  premature  automatization: A  psychoanalytic  case  report  and  discus-
sion. Neuropsychoanalysis 20:47–61.

SoLmS, m. (2000). Dreaming and REM sleep are controlled by different brain 

mechanisms. Behavioral & Brain Sciences 23:843–850.
SoLmS, m. (2013). The conscious id. Neuropsychoanalysis 14:5–85.
SoLmS, m. (2017a). Empathy and the problem of other minds: A neuropsycho-
analytic  perspective  and  a  clinical  vignette.  In  Empathy:  Epistemic 
Problems and Cultural-Historical Perspectives of a Cross-Disciplinary 
Concept, ed. V. Lux & S. Weigl. London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 93–
114.

SoLmS, m. (2017b). What is “the unconscious,” and where is it located in the 
brain?  A  neuropsychoanalytic  perspective.  Annals  of  the  New  York 
Academy of Sciences 1406:90–97.

SoLmS,  m.  (2018a).  Extracts  from  the  Revised  Standard  Edition  of  Freud’s 
complete psychological works. International Journal of Psychoanalysis 
99:11–57.

SoLmS,  m.  (2018b).  The  neurobiological  underpinnings  of  psychoanalytic 
theory and therapy. Frontiers of Behavioral Neuroscience 12:294.
SoLmS, m. (2020). New project for a scientific psychology: General scheme. 

Neuropsychoanalysis 22:5–35.

SoLmS,  m.  (2021).  The  Hidden  Spring:  A  Journey  to  the  Source  of 

Consciousness. New York: Norton.

SoLmS, m. (in press). Revision of the theory of the biological origins of the 

oedipus complex. Psychoanalytic Quarterly.

SoLmS, m., & FriSton, K. (2018). How and why consciousness arises: Some 
considerations from physics and physiology. Journal of Consciousness 
Studies 25:202–238.

SoLmS, m., & PanKSePP, J. (2010). Why depression feels bad. In New Horizons 
in  the  Neuroscience  of  Consciousness,  ed.  E.  Perry,  D.  Collerton,  F. 
LeBeau, & H. Ashton. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 169–179.
SuLLowaY, F. (1979). Freud, Biologist of the Mind. New York: Basic Books.
traneL, d., guLLicKSon, g., Koch, m., & adoLPhS, r. (2006). Altered experi-
ence  of  emotion  following  bilateral  amygdala  damage.  Cognitive 
Neuropsychiatry 11:219–232.

voLKow,  n.,  wiSe,  r.,  &  BaLer,  r.  (2017).  The  dopamine  motive  system: 
Implications for drug and food addiction. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
18:741–752.

1090

Revision of DRive TheoRy

YoveLL, Y., Bar, g., maShiah, m., Baruch, Y., BriSKman, i., aSherov, J., Lotan, 
a.,  rigBi,  a.,  &  PanKSePP,  J.  (2016).  Ultra-low-dose  buprenorphine  as  a 
time-limited treatment for severe suicidal ideation: A randomized con-
trolled trial. American Journal of Psychiatry 173:491–498.

University of Cape Town
Neuroscience Institute and Psychology Department
Private Bag X3
Rondebosch, Western Cape 7701
SOUTH AFRICA
Email: mark.solms@uct.ac.za

1091

