Sectional

Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine
Section of Psychiatry
President-WILLIAM SARGANT, M.A., F.R.C.P., D.P.M.

Vol.950

[January 8, 1957]
The Brain as a Machine
By W. GREY WALTER, M.A., Sc.D.
Burden Neurological Institute, Stapleton, Bristol

THE title of this paper needs some explanation.

Physiologists are accustomed to speaking
of organs of the body with a definite article,, assuming that all such organs are essentially
similar, at least in a given species. Human brains may be an exception to this convenient
rule, since, however we may choose to describe cerebral mechanisms, we must accept the
evidence for personal variations, and these variations may be the main diagnostic character
In fact, psychiatrists and psychologists seem to
of highly evolved central nervous systems.
imply something of this nature when they consider stereotypy as a sign of mental pathology.
This is not to say that we cannot envisage any features common to all human brains but we
should realize that whatever general picture we may form of the mechanics of brain function
should include a high potentiality for individual idiosyncrasies.

The term "machine" also is liable to misinterpretation. We still tend to think of machines
as though they were simple devices to amplify or conserve human muscles but a much wider
definition is permissible and indeed essential if we are to consider more than the simplest
aspects of mental behaviour.
The problems facing brain physiologists to-day are novel from the standpoint of classical
biology, but they are not very unlike those familiar in other sciences.
It is perhaps in
meteorology that we find the closest resemblance to human neurophysiology, for in charting
and predicting weather conditions a meteorologist must take into account the operation of
a large number of interacting mechanisms, most of which are mysterious in their origin,
There are serious and well-known
though all are capable of exerting a major influence.
risks incurred when prediction is based on empiricism, as anyone may quickly learn who
plans a picnic in England in August, but many of these risks are due to the difficulty of
Fine weather does not
distinguishing between large-scale and small-scale phenomena.
Similarly,
exclude the possibility of a local thunderstorm and, in fact, may even promote it.
in the physiology of the brain a high-grade normal level of function does not exclude the
possibility of epileptic seizures; I have suggested elsewhere that the very refinement of normal
discrimination in human brains may actually increase the possibility of convulsive breakdown
(Walter, 1953).

The science of brain mechanics is at an awkward age of its development, relying still on
classical terms but attempting to explore the frontier of evolution. We are in the pre-
Newtonian age as it were, in which we can still argue amiably in terms of Cartesian vortices,
though we may feel that at any moment a theory of Gravitation may destroy and simplify
If we find the associations of the word "machine" too instrumental, we
our web of fancy.
should perhaps recall that the etymological meaning implies simply a way ofdoing something;
we should be encouraged therefore to study behaviour rather than static structure even though
we may still lack the tactical equipment for detailed analysis of complex systems.

The first question we should ask presumably is "What does the brain do?" A specific
answer is not so easy to frame. One can say plausibly that the brain does everything we can
think of, but this is of no great help in the design of an experiment nor presumably in the
examination of a patient.
If the question is differently phrased, the answer may be more
explicit. Knowing from prior information that much bodily behaviour is implemented by
interacting reflex circuits, we may legitimately enquire how complex a behaviour pattern
This enquiry yields immediate gain
can be formed by such a system of reflexive action.
for we find ourselves transported into the new kingdom of cybernetics; the physiological
reflex is an older and, I think, clearer term for what engineers call "servo" or "feedback
systems".

The cybernetic approach to this domain is both practical and powerful.

There is now
a great mass of information on the nature and action of reflex systems in flesh and metal.
The early notions of neurophysiologists are unconsciously embodied in many of them, but
are extended in some to a degree which is hard to emulate in a physiological laboratory.
Many of these intricate analyses can be demonstrated by the operation of working models,
as has been shown by Ashby (1952), MacKay (1956), Shannon (1952), Uttley (1956),
Wiener (1950) and myself.
It can easily be seen, for example, that a system with only two
reflexes can display an astonishing variety of apparently "purposeful" behaviour patterns.

OCTOBER

42

32

800

Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine
It can avoid
Such a model can easily find its way around quite a complex world.
starvation or self-destruction, it can attain its sources of nourishment and refreshment,
it displays a commendable moderation in its quest for gratification and avoidance of pain,
it can solve without difficulty the dilemma of Buridan's ass, it behaves as if it could
recognize itself as in a category different from all other structures and others of its own
kind in a related category as well. We may conclude therefore that mere complexity of
behaviour does not inevitably require more than an assembly of reflexive circuits-a
spinal cord.
Careful observation of the antics of such models reveals that elaborate though the behaviour
patterns may be-and they may be so bizarre as to deceive even a trained observer of animals
-they display no modification by experience, and such modification we must put in a different
Here again, study of model behaviour suggests that there is
class from mere complexity.
one class of adaptation still outside or below the domain of brain function; this is the type
of improvement in performance by repetition which may be, and often is, achieved by a
process no more sophisticated than the running in of a motor or the wearing out of a garment.
Modification of this type is sometimes referred to as practice. The really interesting part
of brain mechanics would seem to reside in the fine structure of that behaviour which we
usually describe as thinking and learning. We may then consider specifically, how may
Again, study of working models of learning can
human brains perform these functions?
assist us, for in their design the first article of the specification requires that they exert a power
Like an ordinary radio set, a learning instru-
of selection over the information they receive.
It must be capable of tuning itself, as it were,
ment is useless if its reception is too wide.
to selected stations. The significance of a signal is not necessarily increased by multiplication
of sources. We must therefore investigate the mechanism whereby a human brain can be
tuned-or can tune itself-to those sources of information which it can identify as "wanted".
As a first step in such a study, can we decide what the information is wanted for? We must
suppose at least that, in general, it is wanted for the survival of both the individual and the
That is, the
species, but in either case the aim is essentially statistical or- probabilistic.
justification of an aim is not necessarily logical, though a logical goal may often be considered
as a special case or part of a statistical situation.
This general notion, that the mechanics of brain function may be based on processes of
statistical selection and reflexion, seems to me one of the most powerful of recent develop-
It receives some support from the now familiar fact that logical reasoning, in the
ments.
sense of syllogistic inference, is more easily and rapidly performed by standard computing
machines than by human beings.
From the experimental standpoint, therefore, we are led to search for any part of the
reflexive machinery likely to be connected with the powers of statistical selection and co-
ordination which are suggested as essential in this hypothesis.
In many laboratories experiments are now in progress to study the details of learning in
human beings with the modem aids of electro-encephalography and similar techniques.
Although many claims have been made it still seems too early for evaluation of the results as
There is some hope, however, of identifying certain features of a learning mechar.-
a whole.
ism by specifications derived from theoretical analysis. Such considerations suggest that one
of the most important aspects of such a mechanism would be a process analogous to that
developed for automatic factories, whereby the flow of information and materials is cc-
ordinated in time so that the course of production is smooth and optimally related to the
availability of components and the desirability of the finished article.
In a special sense, therefore, in the brain as in an automatic factory, time is of the essence.
This does not mean merely that speed is of particular value, but rather that the sequence of
events must somehow be preserved and classified. As a simple example, it is important for
any creature to distinguish in some way between cause and effect, even in arbitrary terms
We must be able to decide for ourselves whether lightning causes thunder, or thunder
lightning or whether both have a common cause. Even this simple problem is not as easy
to solve as it might seem, bearing in mind the widely different rates of transmission of light
and sound in the outside world and the even more intricately variable rates of propagation
Zeus and Elec-
of nerve impulses arising from the eyes and the ears in the nervous system.
tricity are names not explanations. We should recall also that in the elementary working
models of reflexive behaviour, the provision of an autonomous scanning mechanism offered
One part
an immediate solution for many elementary paradoxes of choice and symmetry.
of our experimental work has accordingly been directed to the detailed analysis of those
brain activities which seem to maintain a regular though adaptable rhythm, in the expectation
that these may be found to be related to the mechanism of process control required for the
systematic evolution of adequate statistical behaviour.
Until recently the methods of analysis were inadequate to provide confirmation or
refutation of these hypotheses but we now have available a method for displaying and

Section of Psychiatry

801

measuring with a new order of accuracy the time and space relations of electrical events in
the brain. The methods used heretofore have depended in the main upon some form of
integration, averaging or summation to achieve the necessary degree of resolution. For
example, in the Wave Analyser introduced many years ago (Walter, 1943) the various
frequencies present in an EEG record are separated out and the abundance of each component
is then added up over a period of ten seconds so as to provide a spectrum of the brain activity
over this relatively long period. Similarly in the Toposcopic Display System first described in
1951 (Walter and Shipton, 1951), the rhythmic variations in voltage were transformed into
changes of brilliance of a scanning vector on a cluster of 22 cathode ray tubes which were
photographed in such a way as to permit summation ofregular components by superimposition
on the photographic emulsion. More recently (Shipton, 1957) the toposcopic method has been
extended and modified so as to provide a high degree of resolution with respect to time in
This has been accomplished by introducing a spiral scanning time-
each of the 22 channels.
base upon which are projected the variations in brilliance corresponding to brain activity.
The speed of this time-base can be very accurately controlled and adjusted, and since the
scale is coiled helically on the tubes the length of the exposure can be considerably prolonged.
This provides what is termed "line-to-line correlation".

In effect, the display consists of 23 concentric 'circles, each representing one complete
rotation of the cathode ray spot, of which the brilliance is modulated by the incoming
If the rotation rate is, for example, one revolution per second, then the complete tube
signal.
would be scanned in 23 seconds. At the other extreme, if the scanning rate is 23 r/s, then
the time to complete the picture would'be one second. The presentation is illustrated
diagrammatically in Fig. 1.

FIG. 1.-Diagrammatic examples of the helical-scan display system
towing the 23 concentric circles. The gaps between the circles are to
tdicate time intervals during the exposure.

s1n

FIG. 2.-A, Alpha rhythms in normal subject at rest with eyes closed.
The frequency varies from 8 3-9 6 c/s during the exposure but the phase
relations in the various regions are consistent.
B, Alpha rhythms in
another normal subject with alpha frequency at 11 -6 c/s again showing
consistent phase relations which are similar to those in Fig. 2A
although the frequency and distribution are different.

n.LA,

213

In this way records can be made either over a relatively long period with sacrifice of time
For example, if it is
resolution, or over a short period with a high degree of accuracy.
desired to investigate the time relations of an alpha rhythm at 9 c/s the scanning rate can be
set to nine revolutions per second and a device is available to lock the speed precisely to the
frequency and phase of the incoming signal in one channel, which is then regarded as fiducial.
Records obtained in this way are shown in Fig. 2, taken from two normal adult subjects.
Here it is seen that the oscillatory waveforms of the alpha rhythms are represented as a group
of black and white striped discs in the occipital region of the brain occupied by alpha activity;
each line forming the disc is one "wave", and its length and brilliance indicate the wave

802

Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine
duration and amplitude respectively; in Fig. 2A the scanning frequency varied during exposure
This was the range of variation in frequency of the alpha rhythm in the
from 8-3 to 9-6 r/s.
In each channel
fiducial channel during this exposure, which lasted just under 2i seconds.
therefore there is a record of 23 waves and the time of occurrence of each wave in all channels
In this way can be obtained
can be seen at a glance, or, if desired, carefully measured.
something approximating to an auto-correlation index for each channel and a cross-correlation
In this particular subject during this time it can be appreciated that
index between channels.
this alpha rhythm is extremely regular in frequency and phase in each channel but the phase
relations of the rhythm between channels are peculiar and intricate.

Fig. 2B shows a similar record taken from another subject whose principal alpha component
Here again there is a striking consistency
was considerably higher in frequency- 1I 6 c/s.
Furthermore, in spite of the difference in frequency
in the time relations between channels.
and distribution of the alpha activity in the two subjects, there are marked resemblances in
These records are two of a great
the phase relations between channels in both records.
many which exhibit unequivocal evidence that alpha rhythms do not occur precisely
synchronously in all regions of the brain where they appear, but the time relations of their
arrival may none the less be consistent over a period of several seconds, provided the
These records were taken during rest, the subjects'
mentality of the subject is undisturbed.
eyes were closed and they had been asked to relax mentally as much as possible.
The next point to be established is that during the exercise of the mental faculties the
consistent and coherent pattern of alpha distribution and time relations is elaborately but
characteristically disturbed; this effect is exemplified in the next figure.
In order to follow the changes in alpha pattern associated with mental activity and stimula-
tion, it has been found desirable to record at a scanning rate which is a sub-multiple of the
This means that the exposure duration can be longer, while the
rhythm to be investigated.
estimation of time relations is correspondingly less accurate. When the scanning rate
is exactly one-third of the frequency of the incoming rhythm, the records show patterns with
three arms or petals which are perfectly straight, and, if the rhythm is entirely regular, with
If, however, the
completely smooth edges. A test record of this type is shown in Fig. 3A.
frequency of the incoming signal is slightly greater than three times that of the scanning rate
Contrariwise, if the signal
the three petals curl in a counter-clockwise direction (Fig. 3B).
is slightly less than three times the frequency of the scanning rate, the petals curl clockwise
The degree of curl-which can be seen at a glance-may be measured quite
(Fig. 3c).
In such an exposure the frequency
easily and indicates the precise frequency of the signal.
of an alpha rhythm can be measured to an accuracy of 0-02 c/s (Fig. 3D).
If measurements
are made of each line, then it is possible to estimate the interval between individual waves as
well as the over-all frequency. A record such as this displays just over seventy waves
altogether, and if the activity is apparent in all channels, the total number of waves displayed
in a single photograph is slightly over 1,500. The amount of information thus displayed is
therefore very great and is certainly large enough to permit trustworthy computations of
the significance of any changes that may be observed.

3A

-

3B

C

FIG. 3.-Test records showing the resolution of the display system run at one-third signal frequency.
c, Signal at 8-8 c/s.

B, Signal at 9-2 c/s.

A, Signal at exactly three times scanning rate-9 c/s.
D, Signal at 9-03 cls.

III
)

Using this method it has been possible to demonstrate clear changes in alpha frequency
and distribution during moderate mental effort, and a series of such photographs is shown
The first exposure (A), shows the alpha distribution and frequency at rest and
in Fig. 4.
corresponds with the high speed record in Fig. 2A. During the next exposure the subject was
asked to perform a simple mental calculation; the immediate effect of the instructions was to
suppress the alpha activity in all but two channels in the right hemisphere which were
Even
connected antero-posteriorly between the central, temporal and parietal electrodes.

35

Section of Psychiatry

803

4A

4B

4c

4D

Ay.,

4C
FIG. 4.-The effect of mental activity on alpha frequency and distribution in normal subject of
Fig. 2A. The duration of each exposure was 8 seconds.

4H

A-,

in these channels the rhythm was disturbed, as is shown by the curl of the three petals; the
frequency in fact rose rapidly from 8-8 to 9-4 c/s.

The other exposures in this series show a gradual return to the resting state.

These are
consecutive exposures, the whole set corresponding to a period of nearly two minutes. The
solution to the first simple problem was given just before the third exposure, but the effect
of the mental activity long outlasted the solution itself. The effect of the second task was
much smaller and limited to the left side.
It can be seen that alpha activity gradually returned to the right hemisphere though at
a higher frequency than before, while the left hemisphere remained affected until nearly the
end of the period of observation and on this side, even when activity returned, it was still of
considerably higher frequency than on the right side.
In the last exposure but one, the right hemisphere has returned to its original frequency
and distribution, but the petals in the left hemisphere are still curling, indicating a slight but
significant discrepancy in frequency between the two sides.
In the last exposure the original
pattern is restored to an extraordinary degree of concordance.

804

Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicoine

36

TIME IN SECONDS

A

R. OCC

L.1

"1.9

11"7

115

'I

ANSWER

I

TIME IN SEOONDS

B
FIG. 5.-A, Graph of changes in the alpha frequency derived from Fig. 4. Note sustained rise in
frequency of about 0-5 c/s and final return to original frequency.
B, Alpha frequency changes in
normal subject of Fig. 2B and Fig. 6. Note abrupt frequency shifts and return to original frequency.
c, Alpha frequency changes in same subject as in A under the action of Meratran. The steady frequency
has risen by 04 c/s and the rate of change during attention is abrupt and discontinuous, but again the
frequency returns to precisely its original value.

37

-

S4 FREQUENCY

Section of Psychiatry

805

2MG. MERATRAN

9.2 CI

INST.

SUM

ANS.

SUM

A.

A.

0

20
0

09000

70

30/40_50

60

40

30

5

9-7
9-6

9.5
9-4

93

92
9-.

90

8-9

88

8-7
8-6

.

10

.

20

.

.

.
30

|

I
40

.

|
so

.

I
60

.

|
70

.

|
so

|
90

.

..

,00

.

I

rrD

TIME

FIG. 5C.

.

I

.

1,20
IN SECONDS

.

t

130

.

I
140

|
ISO

.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to exhibit these changes in alpha frequency in a more conventional manner,
a graph has been plotted (Fig. 5A) showing the rise and fall in frequency of the alpha com-
ponent in the right centro-parietal channel during this very modest mental exertion and this
is compared with the frequency change on the left side where, as already remarked, there was
initially total suppression of rhythmic activity.
The most striking general inference is, that in spite of the pronounced and sustained
alteration in frequency, the mechanism returned ultimately to precisely the same rate of
discharge as before the experiment, even to an accuracy of one part in 100.
It should
perhaps be said again that a change of this order would be quite inappreciable in a primary
It is just detectable with a wave analyser, but the interpretation of such variations
record.
in spectral distribution is inevitably ambiguous.

This set of records demonstrates that, as for example in the third exposure, a single quite
restricted region of the brain can remain rhythmically active when all the rest is de-
As a corollary, the two hemispheres, and even adjacent regions, may display
synchronized.
complete autonomy of frequency and responsiveness.

There can therefore be no question of a supreme central pacemaker as has been suggested
from time to time to account for the approximate synchrony and symmetry of spontaneous
brain rhythms; nevertheless the degree of coherence and inter-channel correlation during
rest suggests there is at times an appreciable tendency for some degree of synchrony.
This
tendency has been found to be a highly personal character and it may well be more important
in relation to mentality than measurement of average or gross frequencies, since the way in
which local rhythms fall into and out of step seems to be strictly related to the dynamic
aspects of mental effort.

From the standpoint of mentality, consideration of these subtle changes in alpha pattern
permits detailed study of the duration and extent of various types of attention and arousal.
In the subject of the foregoing illustrations simple arithmetic problems provoked an effect
lasting nearly two minutes, far longer than the time taken for the solving of the problem or
the appearance of any overt action.

Fig. 6 shows the effect of mental activity in this subject.

In the other subject, a normal adult woman, similar studies yielded quite different results.
This subject has resting alpha rhythms with a mean frequency of 11 6 c/s in the occipital
regions as shown in Fig. 2B.
There
is first a clear slowing of the activity in nearly all regions, then a return to the original frequency
on the left side, then a further deceleration only in the left central region.
Here again the
pattern of response is absolutely typical of this subject in such conditions. A curve of the
alpha changes in the right occipital region is shown in Fig. 5B. The whole character of the
curve is clearly different from that of the first subject; there are abrupt shifts of frequency in
both directions, mainly downward during periods of mental concentration.
Most of these
latter changes were associated with reduction of palmar skin resistance-psycho-galvanic
These records show particularly clearly the separation of the various alpha
reflexes.
components in terms of both frequency and distribution.
In other experiments, when this
subject was threatened with punishment for failure to solve problems, the alpha frequency

806

Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine

38

of

direction

often rose, suggesting that
alpha
the
response may be a function
of incentive quality.
For what it

is worth-
which may be little-these
two subjects are very differ-
The first,
ent in character.
sustained
who showed a
rise in alpha frequency, is
and
original,
second,
persevering;
who displayed abrupt drops
rA_
fon llosi c m rNr
i
mo11re
ireq4Uelny, is
in
ceptive, conventional and
Prratic in her wav of thinlk-
ing.

speculative
the

re-

A

B

D

C

a

these

records.

as an example

FIG. 6.-The effect of mental activitv on alpha frequencv and
A, shows the conditions
B, Immediate slowing in all regions during the period
c, Desynchronization of the two hemispheres
D, Desynchronization of the

As well as minute fluctua-
in alpha frequency,
tions
other changes can be seen
For
in
example, in the subject of
Fig. 4 an entirely new
feature arose towards the
end of the period of mental
activity. The right frontal
com-
channel
shows
ponent at about 3 c/s in the
form of a single slow curl
to the right in Fiz. 4c and
this
pInTent
later,
c
E
leaterdsthtlyscFgone4nt
E;
and en ettle t
distribution in normal subject of Fig. 2B.
to
down to
acthen s
during rest.
exactly 3 c/s (Fig. 4G). This
of instruction.
was seen only during a
particularly in the parietal region.
period of mental activity
anterior and posterior regions in both hemispheres.
and seemed to be associated
It is tempting to consider this
with the return of the alpha rhythms to their resting state.
of a restorative mechanism operating to maintain mental
feature
homeostasis.
The question naturally arises whether the fine structure of alpha responsiveness as illus-
trated in these cases is a permanent, unalterable feature of the electrical personality.
In
Even the most trivial details of the alpha
normal circumstances this seems to be the case.
patterns displayed by this means remain constant over a very narrow range in the same
subject. None the less, by the action of certain drugs these characteristic features may be
For example, the male subject of Fig. 4 was unobtrusively given
transformed or contorted.
a dose of 9 mg. of the drug Meratran, well known as an activating agent. The effect of this
is shown in the graph in Fig. 5c where the changes in the alpha frequency in the right occipital
These observations were made an hour
region are plotted on the same scale as in Fig. 5A.
after the unconscious ingestion of the drug; neither the subject nor his close associates were
ever aware that he had taken it, possibly because he was very tired at the time. The effect
There was a fairly
on the alpha rhythms is clear and unequivocal as shown in the graph.
rapid and sustained rise in mean frequency from 8-8 to just under 9-2 c/s and furthermore
when requests were made to perform mental tasks as in the previous examination, the
frequency changed abruptly and returned from time to time to its new resting level. The
peak frequency was not greatly above that recorded during the normal period, 9 65 as com-
pared with 9-45, but the general pattern of responsiveness was more irregular with sharp
It should be remarked that an alteration of this
steps superimposed upon a sustained rise.
type would be only just perceptible as a long-term effect with a wave analyser, and the abrupt
fluctuations in frequency would be quite undetectable even with this aid.
As another example of the action of drugs, the subject of Fig. 6 volunteered to take 100
During the action of the drug she reported
micrograms of the hallucinatory drug LSD 25.
vivid visual hallucinations for about four hours, but her personality remained unclouded and
In this case the effect of the drug, as
unperturbed, with only a minor persistent depression.
reported by others, was again to raise the average frequency of alpha rhythms from a mean

39

Section of Psychiatry

807

B

A

higher

patterns

of 11 -6 to 12-7, which is
considerably
than
the top frequency reached
momentarily during mental
activity in the normal state.
Apart from this clear change
in average frequency, there
is a very marked alteration
in the distribution and con-
various
cordance of the
activities.
In the normal
state illustrated in Fig. 7A,
c/s rhythm is
1I - 6
the
everywhere
synchronous
and, in fact, the details of
the various
are
remarkably similar, even as
far as the anterior frontal
regions. Under the action
of the LSD, however, the
precise frequencies are quite
different even in adjacent
For
regions
example, in the left occipi-
tal derivations, the parieto-
occipital channel shows a
clockwise
indicating
curl
that the frequency is about
12-5 c/s whereas the near-by
channel
temporo-occipital
~~~shows a counter-clockwise
curl i
FIG. 7.-The effect on alpha frequency distribution of 100 gamma
curl indicatig a frequency
A, Normal conditions
of LSD 25 in the normal subject of Fig. 6.
of about 12-8 c/s.
This
before ingestion of drug.
B, Comparison of normal alpha rhythms
effect was observed during
c, Acceleration of alpha frequency from
and flicker response.
part of the
greater
the
11-6-12-7 c/s and desynchronization of adjacent regions in the left
period of drug action and
hemisphere.
seemed to coincide with the
phase of maximum hallucination.
It does not seem unreasonable to suppose that this
degree of disintegration in a subject whose alpha rhythms are normally closely synchronized
may reflect a state of mind in which exogenous and endogenous stimuli are unusually
In Fig. 7B and D are examples of the effect of LSD 25 on the responses
dissociated.
evoked by pattern flicker in the same subject.

D, Flicker responses evoked during action of drug.

catingaf-requen

These brief sketches from a physiologist's notebook are not intended to suggest that we
are approaching anything like comprehension of the mechanics of mentality-they are
merely illustrations of the evidence already to hand that there exist in the brain mechanisms
which have that degree of order and consistency which we habitually associate with machines.
Earlier on, I pointed out the importance of "timing" in a mechanism such as we postulate
in the brain. The extreme regularity and stability of the alpha processes in the subjects we
have studied-and their subtle variations during thinking-suggest that there is here available
a mechanism for preserving and comparing the sequence of events in time. Our present
work is directed to investigating how these mechanisms operate during the course of learning
and forgetting in human subjects.
Such a study is unavoidably lengthy and elaborate, but
there is already reason to hope that within a few years we shall be able to formulate a more
detailed specification of brains as machines.

D
...

(Fig.

7c).

c

The observations reported here are the outcome of technical research and development by
my colleagues, Mr. Harold Shipton and Dr. Raymond Cooper.
It is a pleasure to acknow-
ledge my gratitude to them and also to my friends who have acted as very patient subjects
in these experiments.

REFERENCES.-ASHBY, W. R. (1952) Design for a Brain. London and New York. MACKAY,
D. M. (1956) Brit. J. Psychol., 47, 30.
Transactions of the
SHIPTON, H. W. (1957) J. Brit.
8th Conference, Josiah Macy Jr. Foundation. New York; p. 173.
lnstn. Radio Engrs. (In press.) UrTLEY, A. M. (1956) Proceedings of the 1st International Congress,
Namur. (In press.) WALTER, W. G. (1943) Electron. Engng., 16, 9. WALTER, W. G. (1953) The
Living Brain. London. WALTER, W. G., and SHIPTON, H. W. (1951) J. Brit. Instn. Radio Engrs., 2, 260.
WIENER, N. (1950) The Human Use of Human Beings.

SHANNON, C. (1952) In: Cybernetics.

Boston.

808

Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine

40

Those days are gone.

Dr. W. Ross Ashby: Until a few years ago we all thought we knew what we meant by a "machine";
our experiences with the alarm-clock and the typewriter seemed to provide an adequate basis for
considering what a machine could or could not do. As a result, we tended to expect that no machine
could do the complex and subtle things that the brain do-es. Whenever some mechanism was produced
that did something brain-like we were surprised.
To-day it is known that if any action or form of behaviour can be unambigu-
ously specified, then there is undoubtedly a mechanism that can do it. For to-day there exists a well-
defined routine by which the specification of the behaviour can be re-coded into the specification of
a machine that will produce it.
To illustrate this fact, and to make the statement a little more convincing, I have here (Dr. Ashby
demonstrated the machine to the meeting) a simple machine that can be so used to provide any
demanded behaviour, provided that the behaviour is objectively defined and that it does not exceed
I have chosen three forms of behaviour for demonstration. The
the machine's capacity in size.
machine is controlled by switches, which form its "input", and displays its behaviour on a row of
lamps, which light and go out.
The first behaviour is simply the pupillary reflex. When a switch is closed (to represent "light
shining into the eye"), the lamps light in succession from left to right, representing the movement of
one edge of the iris towards the centre. When the switch is opened, the lamps unlight in reverse
order.
A second demonstration (after change of some linkages) shows the same reflex when the contraction
Closure of the switch results in the lamps lighting across from left to right as before,
is not sustained.
but the lighting is not sustained, and one by one the lamps go back, from right to left, into the unlit
If,
state even though the switch is kept closed.
however, the switch is opened (representing "light no longer shining into the eye") and then re-closed,
the "reflex" will appear again, but again fail to be sustained.
Before the switch is closed, nothing
happens on the lamps. When the switch is closed, again nothing happens. The switch can then be
opened again (i.e. the "stimulus" removed) and still nothing happens; but later, after a definite period
od delay, the lamps light and show a characteristic (arbitrary) piece of behaviour.
These demonstrations prove nothing, but they illustrate the fact that the modem logic of mechanism
(Ashby, 1956) is able to handle questions of the relation between structure and function with a com-
pleteness impossible ten years ago.

In this example the "contraction" is sustained as long as the switch is closed.

A third demonstration showed a behaviour with "memory".

Keeping the switch closed gives no further action.

REFERENCE
ASHBY, W. R. (1956) An Introduction to Cybernetics.

London.

Dr. D. M. MacKay: I shouid like to make a general remark on the limited usefulness of conventional
quantitative mathematics in the theory of the nervous system, for I feel that Dr. Grey Walter may have
There are of course quantitative
been unduly apologetic in disclaiming an understanding of it.
questions, concerning the information-capacity of a synaptic link or of a receptor organ, for example,
to which one seeks numerical as well as qualitative answers. But I believe that the bulk of questions
of psychiatric interest are organizational ones, demanding precise expression not in numerical terms
but in the qualitative language of information-system theory.
The importance of this language lies, I think, in its ability to serve as a link between psychological
Hypotheses framed in terms of
concepts on the one hand and physiological concepts on the other.
information-flow can, in principle, have implications-and so be tested-at both the psychological
With the development of even a skeleton "information-flow-map"
and the physiological level.
of the nervous system, data expressed in the one language could begin to suggest hypotheses in the
other (MacKay, 1954), so increasing the efficiency of diagnostic tests, and by the same token refining
progressively the flow-map itself. What I am suggesting is quite different from the construction of
a working model; for to those who understand a theoretical map a model shows little, while to those
who do not, it often seems to show more than it should.
My point is that for the understanding of the general principles of such "maps" no high-powered
mathematical training is required. The concepts involved (information-flow, control, selection,
suppression, and the like) are more akin to those of administrative organization than to those of
Inevitably, the "higher reaches" of this discipline, like any other, have their sophisticated
algebra.
But I think it important to disclaim, as
techniques, and there is no royal road to their mastery.
a theorist, any suggestion that psychiatrists lacking conventional mathematical training must find
the theory of brain organization inscrutable, and must look to demronstrations by electronic "black
boxes" as a less inscrutable substitute for understanding.
REFERENCE

MACKAY, D. M. (1954) Advanc. Sci., Lond., 10, 402.

Dr. F. H. George: The importance of the models which have been discussed lies largely in their
value as research tools. They are more useful to some than to others; I myself think there is a great
Certainly they would easily include the sort of
deal to be said for the use of mathematical models.
I emphasize this only to try and avoid any false impression at
models so far built in hardware.
a time when mathematical biology is rapidly coming of age.
I would also like to emphasize that I believe that discussions on whether or not machines can
be made to think are liable to prove fruitless.

