1
0
0
2

p
e
S
5

1
v
7
2
0
9
0
1
0
/
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
:
v
i
X
r
a

A nonlocal classical perspective on
quantum electrodynamics

P. W. Morgan
30, Shelley Road,
Oxford, OX4 3EB,
England.

peter.morgan@philosophy.oxford.ac.uk

September 2nd, 2001

The ideas behind the nonlocal classical statistical ﬁeld theory model
for the quantized Klein-Gordon ﬁeld introduced in Morgan(2001, quant-
ph/0106141) are extended to accommodate quantum electrodynamics. The
anticommutation rules for the quantized Dirac spinor ﬁeld are given a classi-
cal interpretation as a relativistically covariant modiﬁcation of the minimal
coupling interaction between the classical electromagnetic ﬁeld and a classi-
cal Dirac spinor ﬁeld.

In Morgan(2001), I constructed a relativistically nonlocal classical statistical ﬁeld theory

hidden variable model for the quantized Klein-Gordon ﬁeld. Here I construct a relativistically

nonlocal classical statistical ﬁeld theory hidden variable model for quantum electrodynamics

on similar lines. Such a model should not be taken to be how the world really is, particularly

because there is certainly no immediate extension of this model to accommodate the whole of

the standard model of particle physics, but visualizability of a model is a pragmatic advantage,

at least to me.

The approach of Morgan(2001) does not yield a classically acceptable statistical ﬁeld theory

model for interaction-free fermion ﬁelds, speciﬁcally because of the anticommutation relations.

We will therefore take boson ﬁelds to be primary in pursuing a classical nonlocal model for

quantum electrodynamics, because we can construct a nonlocal classical statistical ﬁeld theory

model for the interaction-free quantized electromagnetic ﬁeld by the same methods as were

introduced in Morgan(2001). We will ﬁnd, at least for the purposes of perturbation theory, that

1

 
 
 
 
by a suitable adjustment elsewhere in the theory we can take Dirac spinor ﬁelds eﬀectively to

be boson ﬁelds.

To construct a classical electrodynamics, we construct a nonlocal classical statistical ﬁeld

theory model for the interaction-free electromagnetic ﬁeld (with a 2-point correlation function

that is the same as the particle propagator of the quantized electromagnetic ﬁeld in quantum

electrodynamics), then we introduce a classical Dirac spinor ﬁeld with a 2-point correlation

function that is the same as the particle propagator of the quantized Dirac spinor ﬁeld in quan-

tum electrodynamics (which we can do, but there will only be very distant relationships between

probability measures over classical ﬁeld values and probability measures over observables of the

quantum ﬁeld). We also introduce the same minimal coupling interaction of the Dirac spinor

ﬁeld with the electromagnetic ﬁeld as occurs in quantum electrodynamics. In such a classical

theory, we can in principle eliminate the classical Dirac spinor ﬁeld to give a system of nonlinear,

higher order equations for the electromagnetic ﬁeld alone.

The Feynman rules for perturbation expansions in this classical statistical ﬁeld theory model

are then identical in our classical electrodynamics to the Feynman rules for perturbation expan-

sions in quantum electrodynamics, except for the sign switching rules (see, for example, rule 4

in Itzykson and Zuber(1980, table 6-1, p275)): a minus sign must be introduced for every closed

fermion loop, and a minus sign must be introduced for odd permutations of external fermion

lines. These sign switching rules are the sole consequence in the Feynman rules of the anticom-

mutation properties of quantized Dirac spinor ﬁelds. Although the anticommutation is essential

in quantum ﬁeld theory to ensure relativistic signal locality in quantum ﬁeld theory (see, for

example, Weinberg(1995, pp236-238), or Streater and Wightman(1964, Theorem 4-10)), from

a classical point of view it is far more important that these sign switching rules are required

for empirical accuracy. It is reasonable to introduce such sign switching rules just to achieve

empirical accuracy.

If we consider ourselves to be constructing a nonlinear ﬁeld theory for the electromagnetic

ﬁeld, then the only classical Feynman diagrams we are really interested in have external lines

only for the electromagnetic ﬁeld, so if we can justify the ﬁrst rule, then the second rule can be

taken to be necessary for consistency. In the context of quantum ﬁeld theory, it has been taken

that the sign switching of the interaction terms is a property of the quantized Dirac spinor ﬁeld,

because anticommutation is required for relativistic signal locality even for the interaction-free

quantized Dirac spinor ﬁeld. In a classical context, however, the sign switching of the interaction

terms can be taken to be a property of the interaction terms, because there is no equivalent

2

formal requirement on interaction-free classical Dirac spinor ﬁelds (indeed, it is quite common

to refer to “exchange forces” in particle physics, which implicitly takes the sign switches to be

a property of the interaction rather than of the ﬁelds).

On this classical view, the interaction between the interaction-free classical ﬁelds is not

just the relativistically covariant minimal coupling, but is also the relativistically covariant

speciﬁcation of changes of sign in the perturbation expansion. Note that for this modiﬁed

minimal coupling we can still in principle eliminate the classical Dirac spinor ﬁeld to give a

(diﬀerent) system of nonlinear, higher order equations for the electromagnetic ﬁeld.

For empiricists and post-empiricists this description of how to get the perturbation expan-

sion empirically correct should be quite adequate, since it is entirely through perturbation

expansions that we usually take experimental results to be adequately described by quantum

electrodynamics. For others, the beautiful mathematical structure of quantum ﬁeld theory in

terms of the Wightman axioms, say, with its necessity of anticommutation rules for quantized

Dirac spinor ﬁelds, is unlikely to be supplanted by the introduction in the classical context of

the sign switching rules for the interaction just to ensure empirical adequacy. There remains

the possibility, however, that the sign switching rules may be natural in a modiﬁed or diﬀerent

classical formalism. With the availability of this type of classical model for quantum electro-

dynamics, it in any case seems reasonable enough to incorporate quantum ﬁeld theory, and

the naturalness of the sign switching rules in quantum ﬁeld theory, into classical physics. A

straightforward and conceptually conservative interpretation of quantum ﬁeld theory is possi-

ble if we think of it as no more than a particularly eﬀective calculational strategy for classical

statistical ﬁeld theory.

Bibliography

Itzykson, C., and Zuber, J.-B. (1980), Quantum Field Theory (New York: McGraw-Hill).

Morgan, P. (2001), ‘A classical perspective on nonlocality in quantum ﬁeld theory’; quant-

ph/0106141.

Streater, R. F., and Wightman, A. S. (1964), PCT, Spin and Statistics, and all that, (New

York: W. A. Benjamin).

3

Weinberg, S. (1995), The Quantum Thoery of Fields, Volume I (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-

versity Press).

4

