Spin-Mediated Consciousness: Theory, Experimental 

Studies, Further Development & Related Topics 

Huping Hu * & Maoxin Wu 

(Dated: November 7, 2007) 
Biophysics Consulting Group, 25 Lubber Street, Stony Brook, New York 11790, USA 

ABSTRACT 

A novel theory of consciousness is proposed in this paper. We postulate that consciousness is 
intrinsically  connected  to  quantum  spin  since  the  latter  is  the  origin  of  quantum  effects  in 
both Bohm and Hestenes quantum formulism and a fundamental quantum process associated 
with  the  structure  of  space-time.  That  is,  spin  is  the  “mind-pixel.”  The  unity  of  mind  is 
presumably  achieved  by  entanglement  of  the  mind-pixels.  Applying  these  ideas  to  the 
particular  structures  and  dynamics  of  the  brain,  we  have  developed  a  detailed  model  of 
quantum consciousness. Experimentally, we have contemplated from the perspective of our 
theory on the possibility of entangling the quantum entities inside the brain with those in an 
external  anaesthetic  sample  and  carried  out  experiments  toward  that  end.  We  found  that 
applying  magnetic  pulses  to  the  brain  when  a  general  anaesthetic  sample  was  placed  in 
between  caused  the  brain  to  feel  the  effect  of  said  anaesthetic  for  several  hours  after  the 
treatment as if the test subject had actually inhaled the same. The said effect is consistently 
reproducible on all subjects tested. We further found that drinking water exposed to magnetic 
pulses, laser light, microwave or even flashlight when an anaesthetic sample was placed in 
between  also  causes  consistently  reproducible  brain  effects  in  various  degrees.  Further, 
through additional experiments we have verified that the said brain effect is the consequence 
of quantum entanglement between quantum entities inside the brain and those of the chemical 
substance under study induced by the photons of the magnetic pulses or applied lights. With 
the  aids  of  high-precision  instruments,  we  have  more  recently  studied  non-local  effects  in 
simple physics system such as a liquid. We have found that the pH value, temperature and 
gravity  of  a  liquid  such  as  water  in  the  detecting  reservoirs  can  be  non-locally  affected 
through  manipulating  a  liquid  in  a remote  reservoir  quantum-entangled  with  the  former.  In 
particular,  the  pH  value  changes  in  the  same  direction  as  that  being  manipulated;  the 
temperature can change against that of local environment; and the gravity can change against 
local  gravity.  Again,  these  non-local  effects  are  all  reproducible  and  have  practical 
applications  in  many  areas.  We  suggest  that  they  are  mediated  by  quantum  entanglement 
between nuclear and/or electron spins in treated water and discuss the profound implications 
of  these  results.  To  be  more  comprehensive,  this  paper  now  also  includes,  as  appendices, 
materials on further development of the theory and related topics. 

* To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: hupinghu@quantumbrain.org 

1 

 
 
                                                 
TABLE OF CONTENT 

Part I.   

Part II.  

Part III. 

Spin-Mediated Consciousness Theory: Possible Roles of Neural  
Membrane Nuclear Spin Ensembles and Paramagnetic Oxygen       
(Page 3) 

Photon Induced Non-local Effects of General Anesthetics on the Brain 
(Page 20) 

Evidence of Non-local Chemical, Thermal and Gravitational Effects  
(Page 33) 

Appendix I 

Thinking Outside the Box I: The Essence and Implications of 
Quantum Entanglement 
(Page 56) 

Appendix  II  Thinking Outside the Box II: The Origin, Implications and   

Applications of Gravity and Its Role in Consciousness 
(Page 67) 

Appendix III  Thinking Outside the Box II: How Mind Influences  Brain Through 

Proactive Spin 
(Page 75) 

Appendix IV  Concerning Spin as Mind-pixel: How Mind Interacts with Brain  

through Electric Spin Effects 
(Page 85) 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part I.  

Spin-Mediated Consciousness Theory: Possible Roles of 

Neural Membrane Nuclear Spin Ensembles and Para-

magnetic Oxygen 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Experimentally,  tremendous  progress  has  been  made  in  neuroscience  over  the  last 
several  decades.  Theoretically,  numerous  versions  of  quantum  and  non-quantum 
consciousness  theories  have  been  proposed  over  the  recent  years  (1-8).  But,  at  this  stage 
almost all these theories are speculative and none is commonly accepted. Philosophically, the 
age-old debate about consciousness has intensified like a raging fire (9-11). However, despite 
all these efforts, what is and causes consciousness remains a deep mystery. In this paper, we 
propose a novel theory of consciousness with the hope that it would shed some light on these 
issues. 

As  further  discussed  below,  spin  is  a  very  fundamental  quantum  process  associated 
with the structure of space-time (12-14). Indeed, modern physics leads us right down to the 
microscopic  domain  of  space-time  where  various  models  of  elementary  particles  and  even 
space-time  itself  are  built  with  spinors  (15).  On  the  other  hand,  neural  membranes  are 
saturated with spin-carrying nuclei such as 1H, 13C and 31P. Indeed, both MRI and fMRI are 
based  on  the  abundance  of  1H  in  human  body.  Neural  membranes  are  matrices  of  brain 
electrical activities and play vital roles in the normal functions of a conscious brain and their 
major molecular components are phospholipids, proteins and cholesterols. Each phospholipid 
contains 1 31P, 1.8% 13C and over 60 1H its lipid chains. Similarly, neural membrane proteins 
such  as  ion  channels  and  neural  transmitter  receptors  also  contain  large  clusters  of  spin-
carrying  nuclei.  Therefore,  we  strongly  believe  that  Nature  has  utilized  quantum  spin  in 
constructing a conscious mind. 

Very  importantly,  we  believe  that  the  mechanism  of  anesthetic  action  is  closely 
related to the inner workings of consciousness. But how general anesthetics work is itself a 
150-year  old  mystery  (16,  17).  We  have  already  proposed  within  the  framework  of 
conventional  neuroscience  that  anesthetic  perturbations  of  oxygen  pathways  in  both  neural 
membranes and proteins are possibly involved in general anesthesia (17). Each O2 contains 
two  unpaired  valence  electrons  thus  is  strongly  paramagnetic  and  at  the  same  time 
chemically  reactive  as  a  bi-radical.  It  is  capable  of  producing  a  large  fluctuating  magnetic 
field  along  its  diffusing  pathway  thus  serves  as  a  natural  contrast  agent  in  MRI  (18).  The 
existence  of  unpaired  electrons  in  stable  molecules  is  very  rare  indeed.  O2  are  the  only 
paramagnetic  specie  to  be  found  in  large  quantities  in  the  brain  besides  enzyme-produced 
nitric  oxide  (NO).  In  addition,  O2  is  an  essential  component  for  energy  production  in  the 
central nervous system. 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Both  O2  and  NO,  the latter  being  a  unstable  free  radical  with  one  unpaired  electron 
and a recently discovered small neural transmitter, are well known in spin chemistry - a field 
focused on the study of free-radical mediated chemical reactions where very small magnetic 
energies can change non-equilibrium spin conversion process (19,20). Thus O2 and NO may 
serve  as  spin-catalysts  in  consciousness-related  neural  biochemical  reactions  such  as  those 
dual path reactions initiated/driven by free radicals (21). 

2. NATURE OF SPIN 

Unlike  mass  and  charge  that  enter  a  dynamic  equation  as  arbitrary  parameters,  spin 
reveals itself through the structure of the relativistic quantum equation for fermions such as 
electrons  (12).  Penrose  had  considered  early  on  that  spin  might  be  more  fundamental  than 
space-time and invented spinor and twistor algebras for a combinatorial description of space-
time geometry (13, 14). Bohm and Hiley generalized the twistor idea to Clifford algebra as a 
possible basis for describing Bohm’s implicit order (22). Recently various spin foams have 
been formulated as extensions to Penrose’s spin networks for the purpose of constructing a 
consistent theory of quantum gravity (23, 24).  

In  Hestenes’  geometric  picture,  the  zitterbewegung  associated  with  the  spin  of  the 
Dirac electron is qualitatively shown to be responsible for all known quantum effects of said 
electron and the imagery number i in the Dirac equation is said to be due to electronic spin 
(25).  Second,  in  Bohmian  mechanics  the  quantum  potential  is  responsible  for  quantum 
effects (26). Salesi and Recami has recently shown that said potential is a pure consequence 
of  “internal  motion”  associated  with  spin  evidencing  that  the  quantum  behavior  is  a  direct 
consequence of the fundamental existence of spin (27). Esposito has expanded this result by 
showing that “internal motion” is due to the spin of the particle, whatever its value (28). Very 
recently,  Bogan  has  further  expanded  these  results  by  deriving  a  spin-dependent  gauge 
transformation  between  the  Hamilton-Jacobi  equation  of  classical  mechanics  and  the  time-
dependent  Shr(cid:1)dinger  equation  of  quantum  mechanics  that  is  a  function  of  the  quantum 
potential in Bohmian mechanics (29).  Third, Kiehn has shown that the absolute square of the 
wave  function  could  be  interpreted  as  the  vorticity  distribution  of  a  viscous  compressible 
fluid that also indicates that spin is the process driving quantum effects (30). 

Many  others  have  also  study  the  nature  of  spin  from  both  classical  and  quantum- 
mechanical  perspectives  (31-33).  For  example,  Newman  showed  that  spin  might  have  a 
classical  geometric  origin.  Galiautdinov  has  considered  a  theory  of  spacetime  quanta  and 
suggested  that  spin  might  manifest  the  atomic  structure  of  space-time  (32).  Finkelstein  is 
proposing  that  spin  derives  from  a  swap  –  a  projective  permutation  operator,  and  the  two-
valued  spin  representation  from  a  deeper  2-valued  statistics  (33).  Sidharth  has  showed  that 
spin is symptomatic of the non-commutative geometry of space-time at the Compton scale of 
a  fermion  and  the  three  dimensionality  of  the  space  result  from  the  spinorial  behavior  of 
fermions (34-35). He further showed that mathematically an imaginary shift of the spacetime 
coordinate  in  the  Compton  scale  of  a  fermion  introduces  spin  ½  into  general  relativity  and 
curvature  to  the  fermion  theory  (34-35).  The  reason  why  an  imaginary  shift  is  associated 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
with spin is to be found in the quantum mechanical zitterbewegung within the Compton scale 
and  the  consequent  quantized  fractal  space-time  (34-35).  Further,  according  to  Sidharth,  a 
fermion is like a Kerr-Newman Black Hole within the Compton scale of which causality and 
locality fails (34-35). 
3. MYSTERY OF GENERAL ANESTHESIA 

There  is  no  commonly  accepted  theory  on  how  general  anesthetics  work  (16,17). 
However,  there  are  two  schools  of  thoughts  on  the  issue.  The  first  and  oldest  is  the  “lipid 
theory” which proposes that anesthetics dissolve into cell membranes and produce common 
structural perturbation resulting in depressed function of ion channels and receptors that are 
involved in brain functions (16). The second, more popular and recent theory is the “protein 
theory” which suggests that anesthetics directly interact with membrane proteins such as ion 
channels  and  receptors  that  are  involved  in  brain  functions.  But  the  protein  theory  doesn't 
seem to square well with the low affinity and diversity of the general anesthetics. There is no 
direct experimental evidence to support either theory (17). 

However,  both  theoretical  and  experimental  studies  have  shown  that  many  general 
anesthetics cause changes in membrane structures and properties at or just above the clinical 
concentrations required for anesthesia (16,36-37). Since both O2 and general anesthetics are 
hydrophobic,  we  have  proposed  within  the  framework  of  conventional  neuroscience  that 
general  anesthetic  may  cause  unconsciousness  by  perturbing  O2  pathway  in  neural 
membranes and O2-utilizing proteins, such that the availability of O2 to its sites of utilization 
is  reduced,  which  in  turn  triggers  cascading  cellular  responses  through  O2-sensing 
mechanisms, resulting in general anesthesia (17). 

We  have  also  been  asking  the  question  whether  anesthetic  perturbations  of  neural 
membranes  and oxygen  pathways themselves are the direct cause of unconsciousness. This 
conjuncture  requires  that  O2  and  neural  membranes  be  directly  involved  in  consciousness. 
Indeed,  the  low  affinity,  diversity  and  pervasiveness  of  general  anesthetics  point  us  to  this 
direction.  If  we  assume  that  consciousness  is  an  emergent  property  of  the  brain  (9)  and 
further liken consciousness to the formation of ice at 0 oC, the anesthetic action would be like 
the action of salt which prevents ice formation. 

4. NATURE OF CONSCIOSNESS 

There  is  no  coherent  view  as  to  what  is  and  causes  consciousness.  Some 
neuroscientists  would  say  that  it  is  the  connections  between  the  neurons  and  the  coherent 
firing  patterns  thereof  (2,  6).  Some  physicists  would  propose  that  it  is  connected  to  the 
measurement  problem  in  quantum  theory  and  thus  the  solution  lies  there  (1,3,5,7).  A  few 
philosophers would suggest that it is an emergent property of the complex brain (9) or a new 
kind  of  properties  and  laws  are  required  (11).  For  sure  such  disarray  has  its  historical 
reasons. Ever since Descartes promoted his dualism philosophy in the 17th Century, science 
has been for the most part steered clear from this subject until very recently. 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Philosophically,  Searle  argues  that  consciousness  is  an  emergent  biological 
phenomenon thus cannot be reduced to physical states in the brain (9). Chalmers argues that 
consciousness cannot be explained through reduction, because mind does not belong to the 
realm  of  matter  (11).  In  order  to  develop  a  consciousness  theory  based  on  this  approach, 
Chalmers  suggests  expanding  science  in  a  way  still  compatible  with  today’s  scientific 
knowledge and outlines a set of fundamental and irreducible properties to be added to space-
time, mass, charge, spin etc. and a set of laws to be added to the laws of Nature (11). Further, 
he considers that information is the key to link consciousness and the physical world. 

On the theoretical front,  there are quite a few quantum theories of mind (1,3-5,7,8). 
Among these, Penrose’s Objective Reduction (“OR”) together with Hameroff’s microtubule 
computation  is  perhaps  the  most  popular,  and  the  combination  of  the  two  produced  the 
Orchestrated  Objective  Reduction  (“Orch  OR”)  in  microtubules  (1,7,8).  According  to 
Penrose, each quantum state has its own space-time geometry, thus superposition of quantum 
states  entails  superposition  of  different  space-time  geometries  (1,7).  Under  certain 
conditions, such space-time geometric superposition would separate under its own “weight” 
through  a  non-computable  process,  which  in  turn  would  collapse  said  quantum  state 
superposition  (1,7).  Hameroff  suggested  that  such  self-organized  OR  could  occur  in 
microtubules  because  of  their  particular  structures,  thus,  born  the  Orch  OR  (8).  According 
Orch OR, each collapse of macroscopic space-time geometry superposition corresponds to a 
discrete  conscious  event  (8).  In  addition,  it  seems  that  Penrose  accepts  a  separate  mental 
world with grounding in the physical world (1,7). 

There  are  also  a  number  of  theories  based  on  conventional  neuroscience  (2,6).  Our 
view on these is that whatever the  final accepted version based on neuroscience (“classical 
physics”), it could be accepted as classically correct. The reason is that we must rely on the 
classical parts of the brain working according to conventional neuroscience to provide us the 
necessary  neural  components  and  wirings  such  as  coherent  neural  firings,  neurotransmitter 
releases  and  neural  plasticity  to  support  any  realistic  quantum  activities  of  the  brain.  The 
situation  is  much  like  that  in  quantum  computation  where  classical  components  form  the 
supporting  system  of  a  quantum  computer.  Without  these  classical  components,  quantum 
computation could not be implemented at all. 

In  comparison,  our  working  philosophy  is  that  consciousness  is  grounded  at  the 
bottom  of  physical  reality  and  emerges  from  the  collective  dynamics  of  known  physical 
candidates inside the brain. Next we ask “where” and “how.” To answer these, we take the 
reductionist  approach  both  down  to  the  end  of  physics  to  see  what  is  left  there  and  to  the 
microscopic domain of a neuron to see what may be really important for the functioning of a 
conscious  brain.  What  we  found  is  that  there  is  almost  nothing  left  at  the  end  of  physics 
except the fundamental ideas of quantized space-time and spin. On the other hand, we found 
that what may be really important in the microscopic domain of a neuron are the nuclear spin 
ensembles  and  the  fluxes  of  biologically  available  unpaired  electrons  carried  by  small 
molecules such as O2 and NO. Naturally, we draw the conclusion that quantum spin together 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
with  its  connection  to  space-time  geometry  is  needed  to  ground  consciousness  in  physical 
reality  such  that  conscious  experience  emerges  from  the  successive  collapses  of  various 
entangled neural nuclear spin states. 

Specifically,  we  try  to  answer  these  questions:  (1)  what  are  the  neural  substrates  of 
consciousness,  (2)  what  physical  processes  are  involved  in  conscious  experience,  (3)  what 
physical  and  biochemical  process  are  involved  in  connecting  consciousness  to  the  classical 
neural  networks  of  the  brain  and,  (4)  what  binding  mechanism  allows  the  mind  to  achieve 
unity. 

5. GENERAL POSTULATES 

With  above  discussions  in  mind,  we  present  the  following  Postulates:  (a) 
Consciousness  is  intrinsically  connected  to  quantum  spin;  (b)  The  mind-pixels  of  the  brain 
are  comprised  of  the  nuclear  spins  distributed  in  the  neural  membranes  and  proteins,  the 
pixel-activating agents are comprised of biologically available paramagnetic species such as 
O2 and NO, and the neural memories are comprised of all possible entangled quantum states 
of  the  mind-pixels;  (c)  Action  potential  modulations  of  nuclear  spin  interactions  input 
information  to  the  mind  pixels  and  spin  chemistry  is  the  output  circuit  to  classical  neural 
activities;  and  (d)  Consciousness  emerges  from  the  collapses  of  those  entangled  quantum 
states which are able to survive decoherence, said collapses are contextual, irreversible and 
non-computable  and  the  unity  of  consciousness  is  achieved  through  quantum  entanglement 
of the mind-pixels. 

In Postulate (a), the relationship between quantum spin and consciousness are defined 
based  on  the  fact  that  spin  is  the  origin  of  quantum  effects  in  both  Bohm  and  Hestenes 
quantum  formulism  (25,  27-29)  and  a  fundamental  quantum  process  associated  with  the 
structure  of  space-time  (12-14).  Combining  this  fundamental  idea  with  those  stated  in 
Postulates  (b),  (c)  and  (d)  allows  us  to  build  a  qualitatively  detailed  working  model  of 
consciousness as discussed later. 

In  Postulate  (b),  we  specify  that  the  nuclear  spins  in  both  neural  membranes  and 
neural proteins serve as the mind-pixels and propose that biologically available paramagnetic 
species such as O2 and NO are the mind-pixel activating agents. We also propose that neural 
memories  are  comprised  of  all  possible  entangled  quantum  states  of  mind-pixels.  This 
concept  of  memory  is  an  extension  to  the  associative  memory  in  neuroscience  as  will  be 
discussed later. 

In  Postulate  (c),  we  propose  the  input  and  output  circuits  for  the  mind-pixels.  As 
shown in a separate paper, the strength and anisotropies of nuclear spin interactions through 
J-couplings and dipolar couplings are modulated by action potentials. Thus, the neural spike 
trains can directly input information into the mind-pixels made of neural membrane nuclear 
spins.    Further,  spin  chemistry  can  serve  as  the  bridge  to  the  classical  neural  activity  since 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
biochemical  reactions  mediated  by  free  radicals  are  very  sensitive  to  small  changes  of 
magnetic energies as mentioned earlier and further discussed later (19-21). 

In  Postulate  (d),  we  propose  how  conscious  experience  emerges.  Since  there  are 
several  interpretations  of  the  measurement  problem  in  quantum  mechanics,  we  choose  to 
accept  the  collapsing  view  (1,7).  Thus,  we  adopt  a  quantum  state  collapsing  scheme  from 
which  conscious  experience  emerges  as  a  set  of  collapses  of  the  decoherence-resistant 
entangled  quantum  states.  We  further  theorize  that  the  unity  of  consciousness  is  achieved 
through quantum entanglements of these mind-pixels (5). 

6. ILLUSTRATIONS OF SPIN-MEDIATED CONSCIOUSNESS 

Overview 

Figure  1  is  a  highly  schematic  drawing  of  the  overall  picture  of  a  spin-mediated 
consciousness  model  proposed  herein.  At  the  top  of  Figure  1,  a  two-neuron  network  is 
shown.  The  connections  are  self-explanatory.  The  neural  activities  of  the  postsynaptic 
membrane  are  immediately  shown  below  the  neurons  in  Figure  1.  These  activities  include 
biochemical  reactions  immediately  following  the  release  of  neurotransmitters  into  the 
synaptic  cleft,  the  ensuing  collective  activities  of  multiple  ion  channels  and  the  action 
potentials and their propagations thereof, and other enzymatic activities. 

The  present  model  is  mainly  concerned  with  the  dynamics  of  the  nuclear  spin 
ensembles in neural membranes and proteins such as those on the dendrites and soma under 
modulations  by  action  potentials  and  activations  by  paramagnetic  species  such  as  rapidly 
tumbling and diffusing O2 and neural transmitter NO, and the connections of such dynamics 
to conscious experience. The input and out interface of the neural nuclear spin ensembles are 
schematically  shown  in  the  middle  of  Figure  1.  On  the  bottom  of  Figure  1,  what  the 
conscious  brain  perceives  is  schematically  shown.  The  neural  substrates  and  mechanism  of 
the spin-mediated consciousness are described below. 

Nuclear spin ensembles 

Figure  2  shows  side-by-side  a  typical  phospholipid  found  in  neural  membranes 
together with the diffusing O2. A similar but much complex picture can be drawn for a neural 
protein. As can be seen, each phospholipid molecule contains 1  31P, less than 1  13C (1.1%) 
and more than 60 1H on its two lipid chains. Because the small mobility of nuclei and weak 
interactions of nuclear spins with their environments, nuclear spins have long relaxation time 
after excitations (18). This property of nuclear spins is ideal for them to serve as the mind-
pixels.  Importantly,  these  nuclear  spins  can  form  various  intra/inter-molecularly  entangled 
quantum states under different external activations through J-couplings and dipolar coupling 
(38-40). 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Illustration of spin-mediated consciousness theory. The drawing is self-explanatory except 
the part dealing with conscious experience See text for detailed explanations.  

Activation Agents 

The unpaired electrons attached to the paramagnetic species such as O2 and NO can 
interact with nuclear spins through their large magnetic dipoles and collision-induced Fermi-
contact  mechanism  (41)  thus  activating  the  neural  nuclear  spin  ensembles.  Indeed,  because 
the magnetic dipole moment of an unpaired electron is 658 times larger than that of the  1H 
nucleus,  O2  and  NO  can  respectively  produce  magnetic  fields  1,316  and  658  times  larger 
than  1H  (41).  In  addition,  O2  and  NO  are  hydrophobic  small  molecules  so  their 
concentrations  in  neural  membranes  are  much  higher  than  in  aqueous  solutions  such  as 
cytoplasma  (42).  Thus,  as  they  rapidly  tumble  and  diffuse,  they  produce  microscopically 
strong and fluctuating magnetic fields. O2 are the predominant sources of internal magnetic 

9 

 
 
 
 
fields  in  neural  membranes  as  evidenced  by  the  strong  effect  of  O2  on  spin-spin  and  spin-
lattice relaxation rates (42,43). 

Figure  2.  Schematic  drawings  of  chemical  structure  (a)  and  atomic  model  (c)  of  a  typical 
phospholipid  with  diffusing  O2  in  Lewis  structure  (b)  and  atomic  model  (d)  shown  along  the  side. 
Two  unpaired  electronic  electrons  of  O2  are  shown  in  Lewis  structure  as  two  red  dots  (b).  In  the 
atomic  model,  the  white,  black,  purple  and  orange  balls  respectively  represent  hydrogen,  carbon, 
oxygen and phosphonium atoms. 1H, 13C and 31P are spin-carrying nuclei. 

Spin-mediated mechanism 

The  mechanism  of  spin-mediated  consciousness  is  concisely  stated  here  and  the 
related  issues  such  as  decoherence  effect  are  treated  in  next  subsection.  Through  action 
potential modulated nuclear spin interactions and paramagnetic O2/NO driven activations the 
nuclear spins inside neural membranes and proteins form various entangled spin states some 
of  which  survive  rapid  decoherence  through  quantum  Zeno  effects  or  in  decoherence-free 
subspaces and then collapse contextually through non-computabe and irreversible means thus 
producing  consciousness  and,  in  turn,  the  collective  spin  dynamics  associated  with  said 
collapses  have  effects  through  spin  chemistry  on  classical  neural  activities  thus  influencing 
the  classical  neural  networks  of  the  brain.  Our  proposal  calls  for  extension  of  associative 
encoding of neural memories to the dynamical structures of neural membranes and proteins. 

Therefore, according to the present theory, (a) the dynamical nuclear spin ensembles 
are the “mind-screen” with nuclear spins as its pixels, (b) the neural membranes and proteins 
are  the  mind-screen  and  memory  matrices;  and  (c)  the  fluxes  of  biologically  available 
paramagnetic  O2/NO  are  the  beam  for  pixel-activations.  Together,  they  form  the  neural 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
substrates  of  consciousness.  An  analogy  to  this  is  the  mechanism  of  liquid  crystal  display 
(LCD)  where  information-carrying  electric  voltages  applied  to  the  pixel  cells  change  the 
optical properties of the constituent molecules such that when lights pass through these cells 
their phases get rotated differently which in turn represent different information to the viewer 
of the LCD screen (44). 

Quantum coherence and decoherence 

The  decoherence  effect  which  causes  a  quantum  system  to  lose  quantum  coherence 
through interactions with its environment is a major concern for any quantum theory of the 
brain and is hotly debated (45-46). However, nuclear spins only have weak interactions with 
their  environments  thus  long  relaxation  time  after  excitation  (18).  Indeed,  there  are  both 
theoretical  and  experimental  studies  (38-40,  47-50)  indicating  the  possibility  of  large-scale 
quantum coherence with entanglement in the nuclear spin ensembles distributed in the neural 
membranes and proteins. Paradoxally, the interactions of the neural membrane nuclear spin 
ensembles  with  their  noisy  brain  environments  may  even  enhance  quantum  coherence 
through quantum Zeno effect which prevents a quantum system to evolve/decohere through 
repeated collisions with their environments (5). Further, studies show that decoherence-free 
subspaces can exist within the Hilbert space of a complex quantum system (51). 

In  a  series  of  experiments,  Khitrin  et  al  have  demonstrated  that  a  cluster  of  dipolar 
coupled to 1H nuclear spins in the molecules of a nematic liquid crystal at room temperature 
can  be  manipulated  to  achieve  long-lived  intra-molecular  quantum  coherence  with 
entanglement such that a large amount of information may be stored in said cluster (38-40). 
In particular, they have succeeded in storing at room temperature a 2D pattern consisting of 
1025  bits  of  information  in  the  proton  nuclear  spin  states  of  a  molecular  system  of  said 
nematic liquid crystal and then retrieved the same as a stack of NMR spectra (38-40). 

Second,  about  a  decade  ago  Warren  et  al  discovered  long-ranged  intermolecular 
multiple-quantum coherence in NMR spectroscopy and imaging and have since successfully 
applied  said  coherence  as  MRI  contrast  agents  (47-48).  Indeed,  they  found  that  even  the 
intermolecular dipolar couplings of the nuclear spins at distances larger than 10 microns are 
not averaged away by diffusions (47-48). 

Third,  Julsgaard  et  al  have  first  theoretically  predicted  and  then  experimentally 
demonstrated  at  room  temperature  a  long-lived  entanglement  of  two  macroscopic  spin 
ensembles  formed  by  two  caesium  gas  samples  each  of  which  contains  about  1012  atoms 
(49). The entangled spin-state can be maintained for 0.5 milliseconds and was generated via 
interactions  of  the  samples  with  a  pulse  of  light  (49).  The  state  they  demonstrated  is  not  a 
maximally  entangled  “Schrödinger  cat”  state  but  a  state  similar  to  a  two-mode  squeezed 
state; thus, it is an example of a non-maximally entangled state (49). In addition, Kun et al 
have  theoretically  predicted  a  “Schrödinger  cat”  state  to  be  found  in  highly-excited  and 
strongly-interacting many-body system (50). 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These  results  apparently  contradict  the  claim  that  there  is  no  large-scale  quantum 
coherence in the noisy brain (45). At least, this claim does not seem to apply to the nuclear 
spin ensembles in neural membranes and proteins. Further, in the case of Penrose-Hameroff 
microtubule  model  (8),  it  was  strongly  argued  by  Hagan  et  al  that  Tegmark’s  theoretical 
calculations  also  do  not  apply  there  (46).  Indeed,  even  if  we  assume  this  claim  is  true, 
consciousness  can  still  emerge  from  the  statistical  mixtures  of  coherent  and  incoherent 
quantum  states  of  the  mind  pixels,  as  long  as  we  either  accept  some  kind  of  emergence 
theory (9) or take a dualistic approach (4,11) as will be discussed again later. 

“Consciousness explained” 

The  explanation  of  consciousness  in  accordance  with  our  spin-mediated  theory  is 
schematically  shown  at  the  bottom  of  Figure  1.  The  geometry  inside  the  spinning  circle 
represents  conscious  experience  and  is  part  of  a  Penrose  tiling  (1).  It  symbolizes  that 
consciousness  emerges  from  the  non-computable  collapses  of  entangled  quantum  states  of 
the  mind-pixels  under  the  influence  of  spacetime  dynamics  schematically  shown  as  the 
spinning  circle.  The  edges  in  the  Penrose  tiling  represent  the  nuclear  spins  in  neural 
membranes  and  proteins  as  mind-pixels,  the  nodes  represent  interactions  between  these 
nuclear spins through J-couplings and dipolar couplings and the colors represent activations 
of mind-pixels by biologically available paramagnetic species such as O2 and NO. The whole 
tiling  pattern  in  Figure  1  represents  conscious  experience  and  the  underlying  spacetime 
geometry. This pattern successively evolves under repeated activations by the paramagnetic 
species representing successive collapses of the entangled quantum states of the mind-pixels 
that have survived decoherence as a stream of conscious experience. 

We  adopt  Penrose’s  long-standing  view  that  human  thought  may  involve  non-
computable processes, as Gödel's theorem of incompleteness would suggest (1,7). According 
to Gödel, any consistent system of axioms beyond a certain basic level of complexity yields 
statements  that  cannot  be  proved  or  disproved  with  said  axioms.  Yet  human  can  decide 
whether those statements are true, thus human thought cannot be reduced to a set of rules or 
computations (1,7). So where can one find non-computable process in physics? Obviously it 
cannot  be  found  in  classical  physics  because  classical  physics  is  deterministic  so,  in 
principle,  can  be  simulated  by  a  computer  (1,7).  Thus,  Penrose  reasoned  that  some  kind  of 
non-computable  quantum  process  must  be  involved  in  consciousness  and  further  suggested 
gravity-induced  reduction  (“R”)  process  of  quantum  state  superposition to  be  the  candidate  
(1,7).  One  may  recall  that,  according  to  Einstein’s  theory  of  general  relativity,  gravity  is 
space-time  geometry and, further, as we have discussed before quantum mechanical spin is 
associated  with  the  structure  of  space-time.  Therefore,  the  quantum  state  of  spin  must  be 
connected  to  the  underlying  space-time  geometry.  However,  we  still  have  the  task  of 
working  out  the  details  in  future  research.  This  will  be  especially  difficult  because  at  the 
present we do not have a satisfactory theory of quantum gravity. 

12 

 
 
 
 
Alternative approaches to consciousness 

If  we  assume  that  there  is  no  large-scale  quantum  coherence  in  the  noisy  brain 
because of decoherence (45), how can consciousness still emerge from the statistically mixed 
quantum states of the nuclear spin ensembles in neural membranes and proteins? There are 
indeed at least two ways out. The first is to adopt an emergence theory (9) and the second is 
to  take  a  dualistic  approach  (4,  11).  Here,  we  will  focus  our  discussion  on  the  dualistic 
approach. 

In  such  approach  we  can  propose  that  mind  has  its  own  independent  existence  and 
reside in a pre-space-time domain. Then, the question becomes how does mind process and 
harness  the  information  from  the  brain  so  that  it  can  have  conscious  experience?  We  can 
theorize that conscious experience emerges from those quantum states of the mind-pixels in 
the  statistical  mixtures  that  have  grabbed  the  attention  of  the  mind  through  quantum  Zeno 
effect (5) or some non-local means in pre-space-time. Indeed, the many-mind interpretation 
of quantum theory as proposed by Donald supports this type of formulation (3). Thus, in this 
scenario, mind does not depend on large quantum coherence to work. 

Furthermore,  each  nuclear  spin  is  a  quantum  bit,  each  O2  spin  triplet  is  tightly 
entangled  two-qubit  and  there  exist  coherent  and  incoherent  intra-molecular  superpositions 
of  multiple  nuclear  spins  under  external  stimulations  (38-40).  So,  it  is  plausible  that  mind 
could utilize quantum statistical computations similar to those proposed in by Castagnoli and 
Finkelstein (52). In their model, a triode network made of triplet pairs of spin ½ fermions and 
their  quantum  statistical  relations  due  to  particle  indistinguishability  was  utilized  to 
implement the computation, together with a randomly-varying magnetic field as heat bath for 
annealing  (52).  The  scheme  develops  quantum  parallelism  through  the  incoherent 
superposition of parallel computation paths (i.e., the mixtures). It replaces the superposition 
of  coherent  parallel  computation  paths  with  the  almost  indestructible  superposition  of 
different  permutations  of  identical  particles  subject  to  a  given  statistics  thus  surviving 
decoherence (52). 

Associative memory model 

We  have  proposed  that  neural  memories  are  comprised  of  all  possible  entangled 
quantum  states  of  the  nuclear  spins  inside  neural  membranes  and  proteins.  This  proposal 
calls for extension of the existing associative memory concept in neuroscience to include all 
possible  conformations  of  neural  membranes  and  proteins  in  a  single  neuron  (53).  A  few 
illustrations  are  given  here.  Figure  3  (a)  schematically  shows  a  patch  of  neural  membrane 
containing only the same phospholipids. Such a membrane is much like a blank tape. Figure 
3  (b)  shows  the  same  neural  membrane  after  cholesterols  are  added.  The  changes  in 
membrane configuration are quite noticeable (54-55). These changes can represent memory 
or information. Figure 3 (c) shows the chemical structure and atomic model of a stearic acid 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
molecule - a saturated fatty acid. Figure 3 (d) shows the chemical structure and atomic model 
of oleic acid molecule – an unsaturated fatty acid. The only difference between the two fatty 
acids  is  that  the  latter  contains  a  double  bond  in  the  middle  that  causes  its  kink  formation 
when the double bond is the cis form. When the double bond is in the trans form, the chain is 
doubly  bent  so  there  is  no  kink.  Certainly  insert  either  one  of  the  fatty  acids  into  the 
membrane  shown  in  Figure  3  (b)  would  further  increase  its  complexity  thus  information 
content.  Furthermore,  insertions  of  proteins  to  neural  membranes  also  significantly  change 
their  conformation  and  dynamics  surrounding  the  inserted  proteins  (56).  Thus,  inserting 
different proteins to neural membranes both in numbers and types can significantly increase 
the information content of the neural membranes. 

Figure  3.  Illustration  of  neural  memory.  a  shows  a  neural  membrane  containing  only  the  same 
phospholipids.  b  shows  the  neural  membrane  after  cholesterols  are  added.  c  shows  the  chemical 
structure and atomic model of a stearic acid molecule and d shows the chemical structure and atomic 
model of oleic acid molecule.  

            Input and output circuits 

We  have  suggested  that  action  potential  modulations  of  nuclear  spin  interactions 
input  information  to  the  mind  pixels  and  spin  chemistry  is  the  output  circuit  to  classical 
neural activities. With respect to the input circuit, published studies show that the dynamics 
of membrane proteins significantly  affect the dynamics of surrounding  membranes (53,56). 
Secondly, due to the very small thickness of the neural membrane (~10 nm), even the small 
voltage (~50 mV) of an action potential can create enormous oscillating electric field inside 
the  neural  membranes  that  in  turn  can  affect  the  conformations  and  dynamics  of  the 
membrane components such as phospholipid and proteins (57-58).  Indeed, the strength and 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
anisotropies  of  nuclear  spin  interactions  through  J-couplings  and  dipolar  couplings  are 
modulated by action potentials as will be shown in a separate paper. Thus, the neural spike 
trains can directly input information into the mind-pixels made of neural membrane nuclear 
spins. 

Secondly, the weak magnetic field produced collectively by all neural activities may 
also directly serve as the input. However, the magnitude of said magnetic field is only in the 
order of 10-12 Tesla (59). In comparison, O2 and NO can produce a fluctuating local magnetic 
field as high as a few Tesla according to our own calculations. Thus, the effect of said weak 
magnetic field on the dynamics of mind-pixels is probably small unless non-linear processes 
such as stochastic resonance are involved. 

Further,  we  have  already  pointed  out  earlier  that  spin  chemistry  can  serve  as  the 
output  circuit  to  classical  neural  activities  because  biochemical  reactions  mediated  by  free 
radicals  are  very  sensitive  to  small  changes  of  magnetic  energies  as  discussed  previously. 
Indeed, many biochemical reactions mediated by radical pairs and biradicals, such as those 
dual  path  radical  reactions  driven/initiated  by  NO  and  active  oxygen  species,  have  been 
found  to  be  influenced  by  the  magnetic  field  in  their  local  environment  (19,20).  Thus,  the 
functional output of the mind-pixels, being the varying local magnetic field generated by the 
dynamics  of  the  nuclear  spin  ensembles  as  mind-pixels,  can  directly  affect  classical  neural 
activities.  Further,  there  may  be  other  mechanisms  through  which  the  mind-pixels  can 
influence the classical neural activities of the brain. 

Mechanism of anesthetic action 

As  mentioned  earlier  in  this  paper,  the  mechanism  of  anesthetic  action  is  closely 
related  to  the  inner  workings  of  consciousness  (17).  We  describe  here  said  mechanism  in 
accordance  with  our  spin-mediated  theory.  Figure  4    (a)  schematically  shows  the  normal 
diffusion  of  O2  and  NO  without  anesthetics  dissolved  into  the  neural  membranes  and 
proteins.  As  these  molecules  rapidly  diffuse  through  the  membranes,  they  collide  with  the 
neural  membrane  components  and  generate  strong  and  fluctuating  internal  magnetic  fields 
thus  activating  the  nuclear  spin  ensembles  inside  these  membranes.    Figure  4  (b) 
schematically shows anesthetic perturbations of O2 and NO pathways and neural membranes 
themselves  by  anesthetic  molecules  and  the  resulting  distortion  and/or  obstruction  of  these 
pathways. Such perturbations render O2 and NO not able to perform their normal activation 
functions thus resulting in unconsciousness. 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Illustration of anesthetic action. a shows the normal diffusion of O2 
without  anesthetics  dissolved  into  neural  membranes.  b  shows  anesthetic 
perturbations of O2 pathways and neural membranes themselves. 

7. PREDICTIONS AND SUPPORTING EVIDENCE 

Several  experimentally  verifiable  predictions  can  be  drawn  from  our  spin-mediated 
consciousness  theory:  (1)  Significant  replacement  of  1H  with  2H  will  affect  or  disrupt 
consciousness;  (2)  Significant  external  disturbances  to  the  dynamics  of  the  nuclear  spin 
ensembles in neural membranes and proteins will interfere with normal conscious functions; 
(3)  Significant  drug-induced  disturbances  to  the  structure  and  dynamics  of  the  neural 
membranes and protein themselves will affect or disrupt consciousness; (4) Significant drug-
induced disturbances to the O2 pathways inside the neural membranes will diminish or block 
consciousness;  and  (5)  Significant  lack  of  O2  in  neural  membranes  will  directly  affect  or 
disrupt  consciousness  even  if  everything  else  in  the  brain  functions  normally.  Of  course, 
other predictions and inferences can also be drawn from the present theory. But we will focus 
our discussions on the above listed a few to see whether there are any experimental evidence 
supporting these predictions. 

With  respect  to  prediction  (1),  there  are  published  results  concerning  the  biological 
effects of heavy water (2H2O or D2O) that lend indirect support to our proposals (60). Indeed, 
the only observable physical and chemical difference between regular and heavy water is that 
the  latter  has  a  slightly  higher  viscosity  (60).  It  was  reported  that  rats  restricted  to  heavy 
water  (99.8%)  would  drink  it  freely  the  first  day,  then  drank  progressively  less  and  died 
within 14 days (62). It was also reported that the incremental increase of the amount of heavy 
water  in  regular  drinking  water  lengthened  the  24-hour  clock  of  the  Circadian  rhythm  in 
blind  hamsters  or  normal  hamsters  kept  in  constant  darkness  (62).  In  principle,  these 
observations can be explained as animals literally loosing their minds because of the loss of 
their  mind-pixels  due  to  gradual  2H  substitutions  of  1H  in  neural  membranes  and  proteins.  
The complication is that the higher viscosity of heavy water might have also contributed to 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
the observed effects. It is possible to design an experimental procedure to either account for 
or exclude those effects attributable to the higher viscosity. 

With respect to prediction (2), there are also quite a few published studies based on 
transcranial magnetic stimulation (“TMS”) that can be at least partially  explained based on 
our theory (63,64), although common wisdom is that TMS induces electrical currents in the 
brain, causing depolarization of cellular membranes and thereby neural activation (63). It has 
been  found  that  depending  on  the  locations  of  stimulation  TMS  affects  the  test  subject’s 
verbal  ability,  visualization  and  other  conscious  functions    (64).  According  to  our  theory, 
TMS  can  directly  affect  the  dynamics  of  nuclear  spin  ensembles  in  neural  membranes  and 
proteins  which  in  turn  result  in  altered,  diminished  and/or  disrupted  conscious  functions  of 
the brain. 

With respect to predictions (3) and (4), many general anesthetics have been found to 
disturb the structures and dynamics of neural membranes (16,36,37). Thus, the mechanism of 
their action can be interpreted, according our spin-mediated theory, as caused by their direct 
effects  on  O2  pathways  and  nuclear  spin  ensembles  inside  the  neural  membranes  and 
proteins. Our other paper contains a detailed treatment on anesthetic perturbations of oxygen 
pathways  and  membranes  themselves  (17).  Here  we  will  focus  on  one  particularly  small 
anesthetic agent, the nitrous oxide (N2O), also known as the laughing gas. Indeed, the size of 
N2O is similar to that of O2 but it does not contain unpaired electrons and is not reactive.  It 
has low polarity that makes it soluble in both water and lipid. Thus, it can be carried to the 
brain through blood stream and accumulate in the neural membranes. Inhalation of N2O will 
cause  disorientation,  euphoria,  numbness  and  ultimately  loss  of  consciousness  if  the 
inhalation dosage is high. The cellular mechanism of these actions by N2O is so far unknown 
but  seems  confined  to  postsynaptic  targets  (65).  On  the  other  hand,  its  closely  related 
“cousin” NO  contains one unpaired  electron and has been discovered as  the first small and 
highly  diffusive  neural  transmitter  produced  in  the  brain  through  enzymatic  reactions  (66). 
According  to  our  theory,  there  indeed  exist  a  natural  and  straightforward  explanation.  By 
dissolving  into  neural  membranes  in  an  inhalation-dose-dependent  fashion,  N2O  gradually 
displace O2 in the neural membranes thus diminish or disrupt the activating function of O2. 

With respect to prediction (5), it is probably very hard to deprive brain O2 and yet at 
the  same  time  require  its  neurons  to  keep  their  metabolic  functions  normal  since  O2  is  an 
essential  component  of  brain  energy  production.  However,  according  to  our  theory  in  the 
case  of  temporary-hypoxia-induced  unconsciousness  such  as  that  due  to  sudden  loss  of  air 
pressure on an airplane, the actually cause may not be the depletion of brain energy resources 
because of the lack of O2 but the direct loss of O2 as the activating agents. 

tens  of 

Now, we briefly turn our attention to the associative memory model proposed herein. 
There  are 
the  subject  of  synaptic 
plasticity/modification  (67).  The  commonly  accepted  assumption  in  neuroscience  is  that 
synaptic efficacy is both necessary and sufficient to account for learning and memory (53). 
Our associative memory model does not conflict with the synaptic efficacy view but extend it 

research  papers  on 

thousands  of 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
to  the  sub-neural  and  microscopic  domain.  Studies  show  that  neural  activities  modify  not 
only the synaptic efficacy but also the intrinsic properties of the neuron (53). 

8. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS 

Our working philosophy in this paper has been that consciousness is grounded at the 
bottom  of  physical  reality  and  emerges  from  the  collective  dynamics  of  known  physical 
candidates  inside  the  brain.  We  strongly  believe  that  quantum  spins  are  such  candidates 
because  they  are  one  of  the  most  fundamental  entities  in  modern  physics  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  neural  membranes  and  proteins  are  saturated  with  spin-carrying  nuclei.  We  have 
applied  reductionist  approaches  in  both  physics  and  neuroscience  to  reach  our  tentative 
conclusions.  However,  our  theory  as  it  stands  now  is  speculative  and  only  qualitatively 
detailed.  We  are  building  a  quantitative  model  and  the  results  will  be  reported  in  the  near 
future.  We  have  made  important  predictions  from  our  theory  and  presented  experimental 
evidence  in  support  of  the  same.  We  have  also  suggested  new  experiments  to  verify  the 
present  proposals.  Indeed,  recent  experimental  realizations  of  intra-/inter-molecular  nuclear 
spin  coherence  and  entanglement,  macroscopic  entanglement  of  spin  ensembles  and  NMR 
quantum  computation,  all  in  room  temperatures,  strongly  suggest  the  possibility  of  a  spin-
mediated mind. 

At  this  point,  one  crucial  question  the  reader  may  ask  is  how  can  we  explain  that 
cognitive functions seem in general insensitive to environmental and even medical strength 
external  magnetic  fields  such  as  those  used  in  MRI?  First,  the  strengths  of  environmental 
magnetic  fields  are  in  the  range  of  10-4  –10-6  Tesla  (68).  In  comparison,  the  internal 
fluctuating magnetic fields can be as high as several Tesla as we have estimated in a separate 
paper.  Thus,  the  internal  magnetic  fields  overshadow  the  environmental  ones.  But  the 
strengths of magnetic fields used in MRI are in the range of 0.064 to 8.0 Tesla (69) that is 
comparable to or even higher than the strengths of the internal magnetic fields. So additional 
explanations are called for. Indeed, the net magnetization of nuclear spins even by magnetic 
field  of  several  Tesla  is  only  about  a  few  ppm  at  room  temperature  (70)  which  shows  that 
even  strong  static  magnetic  fields  only  have  small  effects  on  the  thermal  dynamics  of  the 
neural nuclear spin ensembles. Third, to the extent that said spin ensembles are disturbed by 
external  magnetic  fields,  it  is  argued  that  most  of  these  disturbances  do  not  represent 
meaningful  information  to  the  brain  and,  further,  the  brain  likely  have  developed  other 
mechanisms  through  evolution  to  counter  the  effects  of  most  external  disturbances.  In  the 
cases  where  external  magnetic  disturbances  were  reported  to  have  observable  cognitive 
effects,  the  above  suggestion  provides  a  possible  basis  for  interpreting  these  effects  as  the 
results  of  said  disturbances  either  too  large  or  containing  meaningful  information  to  the 
brain. 

However, we would like to caution that even if our theory is confirmed partly or as a 
whole  by  more  experiments  it  will  only  mark  the  beginning  of  a  new  direction  towards  a 
better  understanding  of  consciousness.  There  are  so  many  questions  need  to  be  answered, 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
especially those “hard problems” (11). For example, what are the roles of the nuclear spins 
carried by different nuclei such as  1H,  13C and  31P? Do they represent different emotions or 
feeling  of  our  mind?  What  are  the  roles  of  different  biologically  available  paramagnetic 
species  such  as  O2  and  neural  transmitter  NO?    Do  they  activate  different  perceptions  of 
mind? 

In conclusion, we have proposed a novel theory of consciousness in which quantum 
spins play the central role as mind-pixels and the unity of mind is achieved by entanglement 
of  these  mind-pixels.  To  justify  such  a  choice,  we  have  shown  that  spin  is  the  origin  of 
quantum effects in both Bohm and Hestenes quantum formulism and a fundamental quantum 
process  associated  with  the  structure  of  space-time.  Applying  these  ideas  to  the  particular 
structures and dynamics of the brain, we have theorized how consciousness emerges from the 
collapse  of  the  decoherence-resistant  entangled  spin  states  via  contextual,  non-computable 
and  irreversible  processes.  We  have  suggested  that  these  entangled  spin  states  are  formed 
through action potential modulated nuclear spin interactions and paramagnetic O2/NO driven 
activations and survive rapid decoherence through quantum Zeno effects or in decoherence-
free subspaces We have further suggested that the collective spin dynamics associated with 
said  collapses  have  effects  through  spin  chemistry  on  classical  neural  activities  thus 
influencing  the  neural  networks  of  the  brain.  Our  proposals  imply  the  extension  of 
associative  encoding  of  neural  memories  to  the  dynamical  structures  of  neural  membranes 
and  proteins.  Therefore,  according  our  theory  the  neural  substrates  of  consciousness  are 
comprised of the following: (a) nuclear spin ensembles embedded in neural membranes and 
proteins  which  serve  as  the  “mind-screen”  with  nuclear  spins  as  the  pixels,  (b)  the  neural 
membranes  and  proteins  themselves  which  serve  as  the  matrices  for  the  mind-screen  and 
neural memories; and (c) the biologically available paramagnetic species such as O2 and NO 
which serve as the pixel-activating agents. 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part II. 

Photon Induced Non-local Effects of General Anesthetics 

on the Brain 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Photons  are  intrinsically  quantum  objects  and  natural  long-distance  carriers  of 
information in both classical and quantum communications (1). Since brain functions involve 
information and many experiments have shown that quantum entanglement is physically real, 
we  have  contemplated  from  the  perspective  of  our  herein  described  hypothesis  (2)  on  the 
possibility  of  entangling  the  quantum  entities  inside  the  brain  with  those  in  an  external 
anesthetic  sample  and  carried  out  experiments  toward  that  end.  Indeed,  Quantum 
entanglement  is  ubiquitous  in  the  microscopic  world  and  manifests  itself  macroscopically 
under some circumstances (3, 4). Further, quantum spins of electrons and photons have now 
been  successfully  entangled  in  various  ways  for  the  purposes  of  quantum  computation, 
memory  and  communication  (5,  6).  In  the  field  of  neuroscience,  we  have  suggested  that 
nuclear and/or electronic spins inside the brain may play important roles in certain aspects of 
brain  functions  such  as  perception  (2).  Arguably,  we  could  test  our  hypothesis  by  first 
attempting  to  entangle  these  spins  with  those  of  a  chemical  substance  such  as  a  general 
anesthetic  and  then  observing  the  resulting  brain  effects  such  attempt  may  produce,  if  any. 
Indeed,  instead  of  armchair  debate  on  how  the  suggested  experiments  might  not  work,  we 
just went ahead and carried out the experiments over the periods of more than a year. Here, 
we report our results. We point out from the outset that although it is commonly believed that 
quantum entanglement alone cannot be used to transmit classical information, the function of 
the brain may not be totally based on classical information (2). 

Here we report that applying magnetic pulses to the brain when a general anesthetic 
sample was placed in between caused the brain to feel the effect of said anesthetic for several 
hours after the treatment as if the test subject had actually inhaled the same. The said effect is 
consistently  reproducible  on  all  four  subjects  tested.  We  further  found  that  drinking  water 
exposed  to  magnetic  pulses,  laser  light,  microwave  or  even  flashlight  when  an  anesthetic 
sample was placed in between also causes consistently reproducible brain effects in various 
degrees.  We  have  in  addition  tested  several  medications  including  morphine  and  obtained 
consistently  reproducible  results.  Further,  through  additional  experiments  we  have  verified 
that  the  said  brain  effect  is  the  consequence  of  quantum  entanglement  between  quantum 
entities  inside  the  brain  and  those  of  the  chemical  substance  under  study  induced  by  the 
photons of the magnetic pulses or applied lights. We suggest that the said quantum entities 
inside  the  brain  are  nuclear  and/or  electron  spins  and  discuss  the  profound  implications  of 
these results. 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. METHODS, TEST SUBJECTS & MATERIALS 

Figure  1A  shows  a  typical  setup  for  the  first  set  of  experiments.  It  includes  a 
magnetic coil with an estimated 20W output placed at one inch above the right side of a test 
subject’s  forehead,  a  small  flat  glass-container  inserted  between  the  magnetic  coil  and  the 
forehead, and an audio system with adjustable power output and frequency spectrum controls 
connected to the magnetic coil. When music is played on the audio system, the said magnetic 
coil  produces  magnetic  pulses  with  frequencies  in  the  range  of  5Hz  to10kHz.  Experiments 
were  conducted  with  said  container  being  filled  with  different  general  anaesthetics, 
medications, or nothing/water as control, and the test subject being exposed to the magnetic 
pulses for 10min and not being told the content in the container or details of the experiments. 
The  indicators  used  to  measure  the  brain  effect  of  said  treatment  were  the  first-person 
experiences of any unusual sensations such as numbness, drowsiness and/or euphoria which 
the subject felt after the treatment and the relative degrees of these unusual sensations on a 
scale  of  10  with  0=nothing,  1=weak,  2=light  moderate,  3=moderate,  4=light  strong, 
5=strong,  6=heavily  strong,  7=very  strong,  8=intensely  strong,  9=extremely  strong  and 
10=intolerable.  The  durations  of  the  unusual  sensations  and  other  symptoms  after  the 
treatment such as nausea or headache were also recorded. 

Figure 1A. Photograph of a typical setup for the first set of experiments with a magnetic coil. 

Figure  2A  shows  a  typical  setup  for  the  second  set  of  experiments.  It  includes  the 
magnetic  coil  connected  to  the  audio  system,  a  large  flat  glass-container  filled  with  200ml 
fresh  tap  water  and  the  small  flat  glass-container  inserted  between  the  magnetic  coil  and 
larger  glass-container.  Figure  3A  shows  a  typical  setup  for  the  second  set  of  experiments 
when  a  red  laser  with  a  50mW  output  and  wavelengths  of  635nm  –  675nm  was  used.  All 
Experiments were conducted in the dark with the small flat glass-container being filled with 
different  general  anaesthetics,  medications,  or  nothing/water  as  control,  the  large  glass-
container being filled with 200ml fresh tap water and exposed to the magnetic pulses or laser 
light  for  30min  and  the  test  subject  consuming  the  treated  tap  water  but  not  being  told  the 
content  in  the  small  container  or  details  of  the  experiments.  The  indicators  used  for 
measuring  the  brain  effects  were  the  same  as  those  used  in  the  first  set  of  experiments. 
Experiments  were  also  carried  out  respectively  with  a  1200W  microwave  oven  and  a 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
flashlight powered by two size-D batteries. When the microwave oven was used, a glass tube 
containing  20ml  fresh  tap  water  was  submerged  into  a  larger  glass  tube  containing  50ml 
general  anaesthetic  and  exposed  to  microwave  radiation  for  5sec.  The  said  procedure  was 
repeated  for  multiple  times  to  collect  a  total  of  200ml  treated  tap  water  for  consumption. 
When  the  flashlight  was  used,  the  magnetic  coil  shown  in  Figure  2  was  replaced  with  the 
flashlight. 

Figure 2A. Photograph of a typical setup for the second set of experiments with a magnetic coil. 

Figure  3A.  Photograph  of a  typical  setup for the second  set  of experiments  with  a  50mW  red  laser 
device. 

To  verify  that  the  brain  effects  experienced  by  the  test  subjects  were  the 
consequences of quantum entanglement between quantum entities inside the brain and those 
in  the  chemical  substances  under  study,  the  following  additional  experiments  were  carried 
out. Figure 4A shows a typical setup of the entanglement verification experiments. The setup 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is the reverse of the setup shown in Figure 3A. In addition, the small flat glass-container with 
a  chemical  substance  or  nothing/water  as  control  was  positioned  with  an  angle  to  the 
incoming laser light to prevent reflected laser light from re-entering the large glass-container. 

Figure 4A. Photograph of a setup for the entanglement verification experiments. 

In the first set of entanglement verification experiments, the laser light from the red 
laser  first  passed  through  the  large  glass-container  with  200ml  fresh  tap  water  and  then 
through  the  small  flat  glass-container  filled  with  a  chemical  substance  or  nothing/water  as 
control located about 300cm away. After 30min of exposure to the laser light, a test subject 
consumed  the  exposed  tap  water  without  being  told  the  content  in  the  small  container  or 
details of the experiments and reported the brain effects felt for the next several hours. 

In the second set of entanglement verification experiments, 400ml fresh tap water in a 
glass-container was first exposed to the radiation of the magnetic coil for 30min or that of the 
1500W microwave oven for 2min. Then the test  subject immediately  consumed one-half of 
the water so exposed.  After 30min from the time of consumption the other half was exposed 
to magnetic pulses or laser light for 30 minutes using the setup shown in Figure 2 and Figure 
4 respectively. The test subject reported, without being told the content in the small container 
or  details  of  the  experiments,  the  brain  effects  felt  for  the  whole  period  from  the  time  of 
consumption to several hours after the exposure had stopped. 

In  the  third  set  of  entanglement  verification  experiments,  one-half  of  400ml  Poland 
Spring water with a shelve time of at least three months was immediately consumed by the 
test  subject.  After  30min  from  the  time  of  consumption  the  other  half  was  exposed  to  the 
magnetic pulses or laser light for 30min using the setup shown in Figure 2A and Figure 4A 
respectively.  Test  subject  reported,  without  being  told  the  content  in  the  small  container  or 
details  of  the  experiments,  the  brain  effects  felt  for  the  whole  period  from  the  time  of 
consumption to several hours after the exposure had stopped. 

In the fourth set of entanglement verification experiments, the test subject would take 
one-half of the 400ml fresh tap water exposed to microwave for 2min or magnetic pulses for 
30min to his/her workplace located more than 50 miles away (in one case to Beijing located 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more than 6,500 miles  away)  and consumed the  same at the workplace  at a specified time. 
After 30min from the time of consumption, the other half was exposed to magnetic pulses or 
laser light for 30min at the original location using the setup shown in Figure 2A and Figure 
4A respectively. The test subject reported the brain effects felt without being told the content 
in  the  small  container  or  details  of  the  experiments  for  the  whole  period  from  the  time  of 
consumption to several hours after the exposure had stopped. 

With respect to the test subjects, Subject A and C are respectively the first author and 
co-author of this paper and Subject B and C are respectively the father and mother of the first 
author.  All  four  test  subjects  voluntarily  consented  to  the  proposed  experiments.  To  ensure 
safety, all initial experiments were conducted on Subject A by himself.  Further, all  general 
anaesthetics  used  in  the  study  were  properly  obtained  for  research  purposes  and  all 
medications  were  either  leftover  items  originally  prescribed  to  Subject  C’s  late  mother  or 
items  available  over  the  counter.  To  achieve  proper  control,  repeating  experiments  on 
Subject A were carried out by either Subject B or C in blind settings, that is, he was not told 
whether  or  what  general  anaesthetic  or  medication  were  applied  before  the  end  of  the 
experiments. Further, all experiments on Subject B, C and D were also carried out in blind 
settings, that is, these test subjects were not told about the details of the experiments on them 
or whether or what general anaesthetic or medication were applied. 

3. RESULTS 

Table  1  summarizes  the  results  obtained  from  the  first  two  sets  of  experiments 
described above and Table 2 breakdowns the summary into each general anaesthetic studied 
plus  morphine  in  the  case  of  medications.  In  the  control  studies  for  the  first  set  of 
experiments,  all  test  subjects  did  not  feel  anything  unusual  from  the  exposure  to  magnetic 
pulses except vague or weak local sensation near the site of exposure. In contrast, all general 
anaesthetics  studied  produced  clear  and  completely  reproducible  brain  effects  in  various 
degrees and durations as if the test subjects had actually inhaled the same. These brain effects 
were first localized near the site of treatment and then spread over the whole brain and faded 
away within several hours. But residual brain effects (hangover) lingered on for more than 12 
hours  in  most  cases.  Among  the  general  anaesthetics  studied,  chloroform  and  deuterated 
chloroform  (chloroform  D)  produced  the  most  pronounced  and  potent  brain  effects  in 
strength and duration followed by isoflorance and diethyl ether. Tribromoethanol dissolved 
in  water  (1:50  by  weight)  and  ethanol  also  produced  noticeable  effects  but  they  are  not 
summarized in the table. 

As also shown in Table 1, while the test subjects did not feel anything unusual from 
consuming  the  tab  water  treated  in  the  control  experiments  with  magnetic  pulses  or  laser 
light,  all  the  general  anaesthetics  studied  produced  clear  and  completely  reproducible  brain 
effects  in  various  degrees  and  durations  respectively  similar  to  the  observations  in  the  first 
set of experiments. These effects were over the whole brain, intensified within the first half 
hour after the test subjects consumed the treated water and then faded away within the next a 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
few hours. But residual brain effects lingered on for more than 12 hours as in the first set of 
experiments.  Among  the  general  anaesthetics  studied,  again  chloroform  and  deuterated 
chloroform  produced  the  most  pronounced  and  potent  effect  in  strength  and  duration 
followed  by  isoflorance  and  diethyl  ether  as  illustrated  in  Figure  5A.  Tribromoethanol 
dissolved in water (1:50 by weight) and ethanol also produced noticeable effects but they are 
not summarized in the table. 

Table1. Summary of results obtained from the first two sets of experiments 

Table 1 

1st Set: Magn. Coil 

2nd Set: Magn. Coil       Laser Light              Flashlight              Microwave 

Test # 

 Effect 

Test # 

 Effect 

Test # 

 Effect  Test #  Effect 

Test #  Effect 

Anaesthetics 

Subject A 

13 

Yes 

16 

Yes 

22 

Yes 

Subject B 

Subject C 

Subject D 

Medications 

2 

2 

2 

Subject A 

17 

Subject B 

Subject C 

Subject D 

Control 

1 

3 

0 

Subject A 

12 

Subject B 

Subject C 

Subject D 

3 

1 

0 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

N/A 

No 

No 

No 

N/A 

2 

6 

1 

14 

1 

1 

0 

5 

0 

2 

0 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

N/A 

No 

N/A 

No 

N/A 

3 

6 

5 

16 

3 

4 

3 

11 

1 

4 

1 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

No 

No 

No 

8 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

Yes 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

Yes 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

3 

1 

1 

0 

3 

2 

1 

1 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

N/A 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0  N/A 0  N/A  1  Yes 0  N/A 1  Yes 
Subject C  1  Yes  2  Yes  3  Yes 0  N/A 1  Yes 
Subject D  1  Yes  0  N/A  2  Yes 0  N/A 0  N/A 
Chloroform D                    
Subject A  3  Yes  2  Yes  2  Yes 1  Yes    
Subject B  1  Yes  0  N/A  1  Yes 0  N/A    
Subject C  0  N/A 0  N/A  1  Yes 0  N/A    
Subject D  0  N/A 0  N/A e 0  N/A 0  N/A    
Isoflurance                     
Subject A  3  Yes  6  Yes  5  Yes 4  Yes    
Subject B  0  N/A 1  Yes  0  N/A 0  N/A    
Subject C  0  N/A 1  Yes  1  Yes 0  N/A    
Subject D  1  Yes  1  Yes  1  Yes 0  N/A    
Diethyl Ether                    
Subject A  5  N/A 6  Yes  10  Yes 1  Yes    
Subject B  1  N/A 1  Yes  1  Yes 0  N/A    
Subject C  1  N/A 3  Yes  1  Yes 0  N/A    
Subject D  0  N/A 0  N/A  2  Yes 0  N/A    
Morphine                     
Subject A  5  Yes  7  Yes  5  Yes        
Subject B  0  N/A 1  Yes  2  Yes        

Table2.  Breakdowns  of  the  summary  in  Table  1  into  each  general  anesthetic 
studied plus morphine in the case of medications. 

Table 2 

1st Set: Magn. Coil 

2nd Set: Mag. Coil        Red Laser              Flashlight            Microwave 

Test # 

 Effect 

Test # 

 Effect 

Test #  Effect 

Test #  Effect  Effect  Effect 

Chloroform 

Subject A 

2 

Yes 

2 

Yes 

5 

Yes 

2 

Yes 

3 

Yes 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

2 

Yes 

Yes 

Subject C 

Subject D 

 Other Med 

Subject A 

Subject B 

Subject C 

Subject D 

0 

0 

7 

1 

3 

0 

N/A 

N/A 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

N/A 

1 

0 

4 

0 

0 

0 

Yes 

N/A 

Yes 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

In  addition,  available  results  with  flashlight  and  microwave  as  photon  sources  are 
also summarized in Table 1 respectively. In both cases general anaesthetics studied produced 
clear and reproducible brain effects. But the brain effects produced with microwave exposure 
were much stronger than those by flashlight. 

Table  1  also  summarizes  results  obtained  with  several  medications  including 
morphine, fentanyl, oxycodone, nicotine and caffeine in first and second sets of experiments. 
We  found  that  they  all  produced  clear  and  completely  reproducible  brain  effects  such  as 
euphoria  and/or  hastened  alertness  in  various  degrees  and  durations  respectively.  For 
example,  in  the  case  of  morphine  in  the  first  set  of  experiments  the  brain  effect  was  first 
localized  near  the  site  of  treatment  and  then  spread  over  the  whole  brain  and  faded  away 
within  several  hours.  In  the  case  of  morphine  in  the  second  set  of  experiments  the  brain 
effect  was  over  the  whole  brain,  first  intensified  within  the  first  half  hour  after  the  test 
subjects  consumed  the  treated  water  and  then  faded  away  within  the  next  a  few  hours  as 
illustrated in Figure 6A. 

Figure 5A. Brain Effects of General Anaeshetics and 
Morphine

Chloroform

Chloroform D

Isoflurance

Ether

Control

Morphine

h
t
g
n
e
r
t
S
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Subject A

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6A. Brain Effect of Water Exposed to Morphine

Tab Water

Distilled Water

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

t

h
g
n
e
r
t

S
e
v
i
t

l

a
e
R

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Time after Consumption (Min.)

Comparative experiments were also conducted on Subject A and C with chloroform 
and diethyl ether by asking them to inhale the vapours of chloroform and diethyl respectively 
for 5sec and compare the brain effect felt with those in the two sets of experiments described 
above. The brain effects induced in these comparative experiments were qualitatively similar 
to those produced in various experiments described above when chloroform and diethyl ether 
were respectively used for the exposure to photons of various sources. 

Furthermore, through additional experiments we also made the following preliminary 
observations. First, the brain effects in the first set of experiments could not be induced by a 
permanent magnet in the place of the magnetic coil. Nor could these effects be produced by a 
third  magnetic  coil  placed  directly  above  the  head  of  the  test  subject  and  connected  to  a 
second magnetic coil through an amplifier with the second magnetic coil receiving magnetic 
pulses  from  a  first  magnetic  coil  after  the  said  magnetic  pulses  first  passed  through  the 
anaesthetic  sample.  That  is,  the  brain  effects  could  not  be  transmitted  through  an  electric 
wire.  Second,  in  the  second  set  of  experiments  the  water  exposed  to  magnetic  pulses,  laser 
light, microwave and flashlight when a chemical substance was present tasted about the same 
as that before the exposure. Third, heating tap water exposed to magnetic pulses or laser light 
in  the  presence  of  a  chemical  substance  diminished  the  brain  effect  of  the  said  substance. 
Fourth,  when  distilled  water  was  used  instead  of  fresh  tap  water  the  observed  brain  effects 
were markedly reduced as illustrated in Figure 6 in the case of morphine. 

Table  3  summarizes  the  results  obtained  with  the  entanglement  verification 
experiments  carried  out  so  far  with  chloroform,  deuterated  chloroform,  diethyl  ether  and 
morphine. With all four sets of experiments, clear and consistently reproducible brain effects 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were experienced by the test subjects above and beyond what were noticeable in the control 
portions of the experiments under blind settings.  

Table3.  Summary  of  the  results  obtained  with  the  entanglement  verification 
experiments carried out so far with chloroform, deuterated chloroform, diethyl 
ether and morphine. 

Table 3 

        First Set 

   Third  Set 
      Second Set                               

     Fourth Set                               

Test # 

 Effect 

Test # 

 Effect 

Test # 

 Effect 

Test # 

Effect 

Subject A 

Subject B 

Subject C 

Control 

Subject A 

Subject B 

Subject C 

8 

2 

3 

2 

0 

1 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

N/A 

No 

8 

3 

2 

8 

3 

2 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

No 

No 

3 

2 

1 

3 

2 

1 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

No 

No 

3 

1 

1 

3 

1 

1 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

No 

No 

More specifically, in the first set of entanglement verification experiments, the brain 
effects experienced by the test subjects were the same as those in which the setup shown in 
Figure  3A  was  used.  In  the  second,  third  and  fourth  sets  of  these  experiments,  all  test 
subjects did not feel anything unusual in the first half hour after consuming the first half of 
the water either exposed to microwave/magnetic pulses or just sit on the shelf for more than 
3  months.  But  within  minutes  after  the  second  half  of  the  same  water  was  exposed  to  the 
laser light or magnetic pulses in the presence of general anaesthetics, the test subjects would 
experience  clear  and  completely  reproducible  brain  effect  of  various  intensities  as  if  they 
have actually inhaled the general anaesthetic used in the exposure of the second half of the 
water. The said brain effects were over the whole brain, first intensified within minutes after 
the  exposure  began  and  persisted  for  the  duration  of  the  said  exposure  and  for  the  next 
several  hours  after  the  exposure  had  stopped.  Further,  all  other  conditions  being  the  same, 
magnetic coil produced more intense brain effects than the red laser. Furthermore, all other 
conditions  being  the  same,  the  water  exposed  to  microwave  or  magnetic  pulses  before 
consumption  produced  more  intense  brain  effects  than  water  just  sitting  on  the  shelve  for 
more than 3 months before consumption. 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. DISCUSSIONS & CONCLUSIONS 

With  respect  to  the  second,  third  and  fourth  sets  of  entanglement  verification 
experiments,  the  only  possible  explanation  for  the  brain  effects  experienced  by  the  test 
subjects  are  that  they  were  the  consequences  of  quantum  entanglement  because  the  water 
consumed by the test subjects was never directly exposed to the magnetic pulses or the laser 
lights in the presence of the chemical substances. 

There  are  other  indications  that  quantum  entanglement  was  the  cause  of  the  brain 
effects  experienced  by  the  test  subjects.  First,  the  brain  effect  inducing  mean  could  not  be 
transmitted  through  an  electrical  wire  as  already  reported  above.  Second,  the  said  inducing 
mean did not depend on the wavelengths of the photons generated. Thus, mere interactions 
among  the  photons,  a  chemical  substance  and  water  will  induce  brain  effects  after  a  test 
subject  consumes  the  water  so  interacted.  While  designing  and  conducting  the  herein 
described  experiments,  the  first  author  became  aware  of  the  claims  related  to  the  so  called 
“water memory” (7). However, since these claims were said to be non-reproducible, we do 
not wish to discuss them further here except to say that we currently do not subscribe to any 
of  the  existing  views  on  the  subject  and  readers  are  encouraged  to  read  our  recent  online 
paper on quantum entanglement (8). 

In  light  of  the  results  from  the  entanglement  verification  experiments,  we  conclude 
that  the  brain  effects  experienced  by  the  test  subjects  were  the  consequences  of  quantum 
entanglement  between  quantum  entities  inside  the  brains  and  those  of  the  chemical 
substances under study induced by the entangling photons of the magnetic pulses or applied 
lights. More specifically, the results obtained in the first set of experiments can be interpreted 
as the consequence of quantum entanglement between the quantum entities in the brain and 
those in the  chemical substances induced by the  photons of the magnetic pulses. Similarly, 
the  results  obtained  from  the  second  sets  of  experiments  can  be  explained  as  quantum 
entanglement between the quantum entities in the chemical substance and those in the water 
induced by the photons of the magnetic pulses, laser light, microwave or flashlight and the 
subsequent physical transport of the water entangled with the said chemical substance to the 
brain  after  consumption  by  the  test  subject  which,  in  turn,  produced  the  observed  brain 
effects  through  the  entanglement  of  the  quantum  entities  inside  the  brain  with  those  in  the 
consumed water. 

We  would  like  to  point  out  that  although  the  indicators  used  to  measure  the  brain 
effects  were  qualitative  and  subjective,  they  reflect  the  first-person  experiences  of  the 
qualities, intensities and durations of these effects by the test subjects since their brains were 
directly  used  as  experimental  probes.  Further,  these  effects  are  completely  reproducible 
under blind experimental settings so that possible placebo effects were excluded. However, 
as with many other important new results, replications by others are the key to independently 
confirm our results reported here. Our experiments may appear simple and even “primitive” 
but the results and implications are profound. 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
We  first  chose  general  anaesthetics  in  our  experiments  because  they  are  among  the 
most  powerful  brain-influencing  substances.  Our  expectation  was  that,  if  nuclear  and/or 
electronic spins inside the brain are involved in brain functions such as perception as recently 
hypothesized  by  us2,  the  brain  may  be  able  to  sense  the  effect  of  an  external  anaesthetic 
sample through quantum entanglement between these spins inside the brain and those of the 
said  anaesthetic  sample  induced  by  the  photons  of  the  magnetic  pulses  by  first  interacting 
with  the  nuclear  and/or  electronic  spins  inside  the  said  anaesthetic  sample,  thus  carrying 
quantum information about the anaesthetic molecules, and then interacting with the nuclear 
and/or electronic spins inside the brain. 

We  suggest  here  that  the  said  quantum  entities  inside  the  brains  are  likely  nuclear 
and/or  electronic  spins  for  the  reasons  discussed  below.  Neural  membranes  and  proteins 
contain vast numbers of nuclear spins such as 1H, 13C, 31P and 15N. These nuclear spins and 
unpaired  electronic  spins  are  the  natural  targets  of  interaction  with  the  photons  of  the 
magnetic  pulses  or  other  sources.  These  spins  form  complex  intra-  and  inter-molecular 
networks through various intra-molecular J- and dipolar couplings and both short- and long-
range intermolecular dipolar couplings. Further, nuclear spins have relatively long relaxation 
times  after  excitations  (9).  Thus,  when  a  nematic  liquid  crystal  is  irradiated  with  multi-
frequency  pulse  magnetic  fields,  its  1H  spins  can  form  long-lived  intra-molecular  quantum 
coherence  with  entanglement  for  information  storage  (10).  Long-lived  (~ 
.05  ms) 
entanglement of two macroscopic electron spin ensembles in room temperature has also been 
achieved (3). Furthermore, spin is a fundamental quantum process with intrinsic connection 
to the structure of space-time (11) and was shown to be responsible for the quantum effects 
in  both  Hestenes  and  Bohmian  quantum  mechanics  (12,  13).  Thus,  we  have  recently 
suggested that these spins could be involved in brain functions at a more fundamental level 
(2). 

Several  important  conclusions  and  implications  can  be  drawn  from  our  findings. 
First,  biologically/chemically  meaningful  information  can  be  transmitted  through  quantum 
entanglement from one place to another by photons and possibly other quantum objects such 
as electrons, atoms and even molecules. Second, both classical and quantum information can 
be transmitted between locations of arbitrary distances through quantum entanglement alone. 
Third,  instantaneous  signalling  is  physically  real  which  implies  that  Einstein's  theory  of 
relativity is in real (not just superficial) conflict with quantum theory. Fourth, brain processes 
such  as  perception  and  other  biological  processes  likely  involve  quantum  information  and 
nuclear  and/or  electronic  spins  may  play  important  roles  in  these  processes.  Further,  our 
findings provide important new insights into the essence and implications of the mysterious 
quantum  entanglement  and  clues  for  solving  the  long-standing  measurement  problem  in 
quantum theory including the roles of the observer and/or consciousness. Very importantly, 
our  findings  also  provide  a  unified  scientific  framework  for  explaining  many  paranormal 
and/or  anomalous  effects  such  as  telepathy,  telekinesis  and  homeopathy,  if  they  do  indeed 
exist,  thus  transforming  these  paranormal  and/or  anomalous  effects  into  the  domains  of 
conventional  sciences.  With  respect  applications,  our  findings  enable  various  quantum 
entanglement technologies be developed. Some of these technologies can be used to deliver 

31 

 
 
 
the  therapeutic  effects  of  many  drugs  to  various  biological  systems  such  as  human  bodies 
without physically administrating the same to the said systems. This will dramatically reduce 
waste  and  increase  productivity  because  the  same  drugs  can  be  repeatedly  used  to  deliver 
their therapeutic effects to the mass on site or from remote locations of  arbitrary distances. 
Further,  many  substances  of  nutritional  and  recreational  values  can  be  repeatedly 
administrated  to  desired  biological  systems  such  as  human  bodies  through  the  said 
technologies either on site or from remote locations. Other such technologies can be used for 
instantaneous  communications  between  remote  locations  of  arbitrary  distances  in  various 
ways. Potentially, these technologies can also be used to entangle two or more human minds 
for legitimate and beneficial purposes. 

In  addition,  several  important  conclusions  and  implications  can  be  drawn  from  our 
experimental  findings.  First,  biologically/chemically  meaningful  information  can  be 
transmitted  through  quantum  entanglement  from  one  place  to  another  by  photons  and 
possibly  other  quantum  objects  such  as  electrons,  atoms  and  even  molecules.  Second,  both 
classical  and  quantum  information  can  be  transmitted  between  locations  of  arbitrary 
distances through quantum entanglement alone. Third, instantaneous signaling is physically 
real which implies that Einstein's theory of relativity is in real (not just superficial) conflict 
with  quantum  theory.  Fourth,  brain  processes  such  as  perception  and  other  biological 
processes likely involve  quantum information and nuclear  and/or electronic spins may play 
important roles in these processes. Further, our findings provide important new insights into 
the essence and implications of the mysterious quantum entanglement and clues for solving 
the  long-standing  measurement  problem  in  quantum  theory  including  the  roles  of  the 
observer  and/or  consciousness.  Very  importantly,  our  findings  also  provide  a  unified 
scientific  framework  for  explaining  many  paranormal  and/or  anomalous  effects  such  as 
telepathy,  telekinesis  and  homeopathy,  if  they  do  indeed  exist,  thus  transforming  these 
paranormal and/or anomalous effects into the domains of conventional sciences. 

Finally, with respect applications, our experimental findings enable various quantum 
entanglement technologies be developed. Some of these technologies can be used to deliver 
the  therapeutic  effects  of  many  drugs  to  various  biological  systems  such  as  human  bodies 
without physically administrating the same to the said systems. This will dramatically reduce 
waste  and  increase  productivity  because  the  same  drugs  can  be  repeatedly  used  to  deliver 
their therapeutic effects to the mass on site or from remote locations of  arbitrary distances. 
Further,  many  substances  of  nutritional  and  recreational  values  can  be  repeatedly 
administrated  to  desired  biological  systems  such  as  human  bodies  through  the  said 
technologies either on site or from remote locations. Other such technologies can be used for 
instantaneous  communications  between  remote  locations  of  arbitrary  distances  in  various 
ways. Potentially, these technologies can also be used to entangle two or more human minds 
for legitimate and beneficial purposes. 

32 

 
 
 
 
Part III. 

Evidence of Non-local Chemical, Thermal and    

Gravitational Effects 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Scientific methods require that one conform one’s knowledge of nature to repeatable 
observations.  Thus,  it  is  unscientific  to  reject  what’s  observed  repeatedly  and  consistently. 
With  this  in  mind,  we  comment  that  quantum  entanglement  has  been  recently  shown  to  be 
physically  real  in  many  laboratories  (1,  2).  Indeed,  quantum  entanglement  is  ubiquitous  in 
the microscopic world and manifests itself macroscopically under some circumstances (1, 2). 
But  common  belief  is  that  it  alone  cannot  be  used  to  transmit  information3  nor  could  it  be 
used to produce macroscopic non-local effects. Yet we have recently found evidence of non-
local effects of chemical substances on the brain produced through it (4, 5). Indeed, spins of 
electrons, photons and nuclei have now been successfully entangled in various ways for the 
purposes of quantum computation and communication (6, 7). While our reported results are 
under independent verifications by other groups, we report here our experimental findings of 
non-local  chemical,  thermal  and  gravitational  effects  in  simple  physical  systems  such  as 
reservoirs  of  water  quantum-entangled  with  water  being  manipulated  in  a  remote  reservoir 
(4).  With  the  aids  of  high-precision  instruments,  we  have  found  that  the  pH  value, 
temperature  and  gravity  of  water  in  the  detecting  reservoirs  can  be  non-locally  affected 
through manipulating water in the remote reservoir. In particular, the pH value changes in the 
same  direction  as  that  being  manipulated;  the  temperature  can  change  against  that  of  local 
environment; and the gravity can change against local gravity. These non-local effects are all 
reproducible and can be used for non-local signaling and many other purposes. We suggest 
that  they  are  mediated  by  quantum  entanglement  between  nuclear  and/or  electron  spins  in 
treated water and discuss the profound implications of these results. 

Our  motivation  for  measuring  pH  change  of  water  in  one  reservoir,  while 
manipulating  water  in  a  remote  reservoir  quantum-entangled  with  the  former,  is  to 
investigate  whether  and  how  pH  value  in  the  water  being  measured  shifts  under  non-local 
influences.  Our  motivation  for  measuring  temperature  variation  of  water  in  one  reservoir, 
while  manipulating  water  in  a  remote  reservoir  quantum-entangled  with  the  former,  is  to 
investigate  whether  and  how  the  thermodynamics  of  water  being  measured  changes  under 
non-local influences. Our motivation for measuring gravity change of one reservoir of water, 
while  manipulating  water  in  a  remote  reservoir  quantum-entangled  with  the  former,  is  to 
investigate whether gravity is a non-local effect associated with quantum entanglement. 

The  successes  of  the  experiments  described  herein  were  achieved  with  the  aids  of 
high-precision  analytical  instruments.  They  include  an  Ohaus  Voyager  Analytical  Balance 
with capacity 210g, resolution 0.1mg, repeatability 0.1mg and sensitivity  drift 3 PPM/ºC, a 
Control  Company  traceable-calibration  digital  thermometer  with  resolution  0.001ºC  and 
repeatability  0.002ºC  near  25ºC  in  liquid  such  as  water  (estimated  from  calibration  data 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provided),  and  a  Hanna  microprocessor  pH  meter  Model  213  with  resolution  0.001  and 
repeatability  0.002.  The  other  key  apparatus  is  a  25-litre  Dewar  filled  with  liquid  nitrogen 
and positioned remotely at a desired distance which not only provided the drastic changes in 
the water being manipulated but also served as a natural Faraday cage blocking any possible 
electromagnetic  influence  between  the  water  being  measured  and  the  water  being 
manipulated.  Also  vital  to  the  success  of  the  experiments  described  herein  was  the  stable 
environment  found  in  an  underground  room  which  shields  many  external  noises  such  as 
mechanical vibration, air turbulence and large temperature change.  

2. MATERIALS & METHODS 

Quantum-entangled stock water in individual volumes of 500ml or similar quantities 
was prepared as described previously (4) which might then be split into smaller volumes or 
combined into larger ones based on needs. Briefly, in one procedure 500ml fresh tap water in 
a closed plastic reservoir was exposed to microwave radiation in a 1500W microwave oven 
for 2min and then left in room temperature for 24 hours before use.  In a  second procedure 
500ml  fresh  tap  water  in  the  closed  plastic  reservoir  was  exposed  to  audio-frequency 
radiations of a 20W magnetic coil for 30min and then left in room temperature for 24 hours 
before  use.  In  a  third  procedure,  500ml  bottled  natural  water  was  simply  left  in  room 
temperature  for  at  least  30  days  before  use.  In  a  fourth  procedure,  500ml  bottled  distilled 
water  was  simply  left  in  room  temperature  for  at  least  30  days  before  use.  It  was  found 
previously that the stock water prepared according to these procedures is quantum-entangled 
(4). 

Figure 1 shows a diagram of the key experimental setup. It includes (a) the analytical 
balance calibrated internally and stabilized in the underground room for more than one week 
before  use  and  a  tightly  closed  plastic  first-reservoir  containing  175ml  water  split  from  the 
500ml stock water which is placed on the wind-shielded pan of the balance with 1-inch white 
foam  in  between  as  insulation;  (b)  the  digital  thermometer  and  calibrated  pH  meter  placed 
into the middle of a glass second-reservoir containing 75ml water split from the 500ml stock 
water which is closed to prevent air  exchange; and (c) the 25-litre Dewar containing 15-25 
litres of liquid nitrogen which is located at a distant of 50 feet from the  underground room 
and a tightly closed plastic third-reservoir containing 250ml water split from the 500ml stock 
water to be submerged into the liquid nitrogen in the Dewar at a specified time. 

Experiments  with  the  above  first-setup  were  carried  out  as  follows:  (a)  prepare  the 
500ml quantum-entangled stock water, divide the same into 175ml, 75ml and 250ml portions 
and  put  them  into  their  respective  reservoirs  described  above;  (b)  set  up  the  experiment 
according to Figure 1 and let the instruments to stabilize for 30min before any measurements 
is taken; (c) record for 20min minute-by-minute changes of pH value and temperature of the 
water in the first-reservoir and weight of the second-reservoir with water before submerging 
the third reservoir into liquid nitrogen; (d) submerge the third-reservoir with water into liquid 
nitrogen  for  15min  or  another  desired  length  of  time  and  record  the  instrument  readings  as 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
before; and (e) take the third-reservoir out of liquid nitrogen, thaw the same in warm water 
for 30min or longer and, at the same time, record the instrument readings as before. Control 
experiments  were  carried  out  in  same  steps  with  nothing  done  to  the  water  in  the  third-
reservoir. 

In  one  variation  of  the  above  setup,  the  closed  plastic  third-reservoir  was  replaced 
with a metal container and instead of freeze-thaw treatment the water in the metal container 
was quickly heated to boiling within 4-5 minutes and then cooled in cold water. In a second 
variation  of  the  above  setup,  the  gravity  portion  of  the  experiment  was  eliminated  and  the 
water  in  the  first  and  second  reservoirs  was  combined  into  a  closed  thermal  flask  which 
prevents  heat  exchange  between  the  water  being  measured  and  its  local  environment.  In  a 
third variation of the above setup, the gravity portion of the experiment was eliminated and 
the  water  in  the  first  and  second  reservoirs  was  combined  into  a  fourth  plastic  container  in 
which 5ml concentrated HCl (30% by weight) was first added, then 20g NaOH powder was 
added and next the same water was transferred to a metal container and heated to boiling on a 
stove.  In  a  fourth  variation  of  the  above  first-setup,  the  25-litre  Dewar  containing  liquid 
nitrogen  was  replaced  by  a  large  water  tank  located  20-feet  above  the  underground  room 
which contained 200-gallon tap water sitting in room temperature for months and, instead of 
submersion, the water in the third-reservoir was poured into the large water tank the purpose 
of  which  was  to  quantum-entangle  the  poured  water  with  the  water  in  the  large  tank.  In  a 
fifth variation of the above setup, the gravity portion of the experiment was eliminated and 
the water in the first and second reservoirs was combined into a closed glass fourth-reservoir 
which  was  moved  to  a  location  more  than  50  miles  away  from  the  Dewar  for  temperature 
measurement. 

Figure 2 shows a diagram of the second experimental setup. It includes: (a) a red laser 
with a 50mW output and wavelengths 635nm – 675nm placed next and pointed to a flat glass 
first-reservoir containing 200ml tap water sitting in room temperature for more than a week 
without  air  exchange;  (b)  the  calibrated  pH  meter  and  optionally  the  digital  thermometer 
placed  into  the  middle  of  the  said  flat  glass  reservoir  which  was  closed  to  prevent  air 
exchange; and (3) a round glass second-reservoir containing 100ml concentrated HCl (30% 
by weight) to be placed 500cm away from the first-reservoir at a specified time. 

Experiments with the above second setup were carried out as follows: (a) prepare the 
200ml tap water and set up the experiment according Figure 2; turn on the laser so that the 
laser light first passes through the first-reservoir and then gets scattered on a nearby concrete 
wall,  and  let  the  instruments  to  stabilize  for  30min  before  any  measurement  is  taken;  (b) 
record for 10min. minute-by-minute changes of pH value and optionally temperature of the 
water in the first-reservoir; and (c) place the second reservoir containing 100ml HCl on the 
path  of  the  laser  light  and  at  a  distance  of  500cm  from  the  first  reservoir  and  record  for 
60min or longer instrument readings as before. Control experiments were carried out in same 
steps in the absence of HCl. 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
3. RESULTS 

Figures 3, 4 and 5 summarize the results obtained from experiments conducted with 
the key setup and one batch of quantum-entangled water which were simply bottled natural 
water with a shelf time of more than 90 days. Similar results were also obtained with water 
prepared  according  to  other  quantum  entanglement  methods  mentioned  above  and  other 
quantum-entangled liquid such as olive oil, alcohol and even Coke Cola as discussed later. 
The different distances of the Dewar from the underground room where most measurements 
were done made no noticeable differences with respect to the results obtained. 

Figure 3 shows changes of pH value of the water in the second-reservoir during the 
three  stages  of  manipulations  of  the  water  in  the  remote  third-reservoir.  As  shown,  within 
minutes  after  the  remote  third-reservoir  was  submerged  into  liquid  nitrogen,  during  which 
the temperature of water being manipulated would drop from about 25ºC to -193 ºC, the pH 
value of the water in the second reservoir steadily stopped dropping and then started rising, 
but about 20 minutes after the frozen water was taken out of liquid nitrogen and thawed in 
warm  water  the  pH  value  of  the  same  steadily  leveled  off  and  started  dropping  again.  In 
contrast, the control experiments did not show such dynamics. It is known that the pH value 
of  water  increases  as  its  temperature  goes  down  to  0ºC.  Therefore,  the  pH  value  of  water 
being  measured  goes  in  the  same  direction  as  the  remote  water  when  the  latter  is 
manipulated. The difference in pH values from control in which no freeze-thaw was done at 
the  point  of  thawing  is  about  0.010.  However,  if  the  water  being  measured  is  kept  in  a 
thermal flask to prevent heat exchange with the local environment, no effect on pH value was 
observed under freeze-thaw treatment of the remote water. Statistical analysis performed on 
data  collected  after  freezing  for  10  minutes  show  that  the  results  are  significantly  different 
under these different treatments/settings. 

Figure 4 shows temperature variations of the water in the second-reservoir during the 
three stages of manipulations of the water in the remote third-reservoir. As shown, before the 
submersion of the remote third-reservoir into liquid nitrogen the temperature of the water in 
the  second-reservoir  rose  in  small  increments  due  to,  by  design,  the  slight  temperature 
difference  between  the  local  environment  and  the  water  inside  the  second  reservoir;  but 
within about 4-5 minutes after the remote third-reservoir was submerged into liquid nitrogen, 
during which the temperature of water being manipulated would drop from about 25ºC to -
193  ºC,  the  temperature  of  the  water  in  the  second  reservoir  first  stopped  rising  and  then 
steadily  dropped  in  small  increments;  and  then  within  about  4-5  minutes  after  the  frozen 
water was taken out of liquid nitrogen and thawed in warm water the temperature of the same 
first  stopped  dropping  and  then  steadily  rose  again  in  small  increments.  In  contrast,  the 
control experiments did not show such dynamics. The temperature difference from control in 
which  no  freeze-thaw  was  done  at  the  point  of  thawing  is  about  0.05oC.  However,  if  the 
water  being  measured  is  kept  in  a  thermal  flask  to  prevent  heat  exchange  with  the  local 
environment, no dropping of temperature were observed under freeze-thaw treatment of the 
remote  water.  Statistical  analysis  performed  on  data  collected  after  freezing  for  10  minutes 
show that the results are significantly different under these different treatments/settings. 

36 

 
 
 
 
In addition, Figure 4A shows one particular example of temperature variations under 
remote  manipulation  of  water  quantum-entangled  with  water  being  measured.  In  this  case, 
the  temperature  difference  from  control  at  the  point  of  thawing  is  about  0.08oC.  Further, 
Figure  4B  shows  one  example  of  temperature  variation  of  a  different  liquid,  Coke  Cola, 
under  remote  manipulation  of  a  portion  of  the  said  liquid  quantum-entangled  with  another 
portion  being  measured.  Other  liquids  such  as  distilled  water,  olive  oil  and  alcohol  also 
showed  similar  qualitative  results  under  the  same  freeze-thaw  treatment.  Furthermore, 
preliminary  experiments  conducted  with  the  temperature  measurement  done  at  a  location 
more  than  50  miles  way  from  the  Dewar  also  show  results  similar  to  those  obtained  at 
distances of 50 and 500 feet respectively. 

Figure  5  shows  weight  variations  of  the  first-reservation  during  the  three  stages  of 
manipulation of the water in the remote third-reservoir. Before the submersion of the remote 
third-reservoir into liquid nitrogen the weight being measured drifted lower very slowly. But 
almost  immediately  after  the  remote  third-reservoir  was  submerged  into  liquid  nitrogen, 
during which the temperature and physical properties of water being manipulated drastically 
changed,  the  weight  of  the  first-reservoir  dropped  at  an  increased  rate,  and  after  the  frozen 
water  was  taken  out  the  liquid  nitrogen  and  thawed  in  warm  water  the  weight  of  the  same 
first stopped dropping and, in some cases, even rose before resuming drifting lower as further 
discussed  below.  In  contrast,  the  control  experiments  did  not  show  such  dynamics.  The 
weight difference from control in which no freeze-thaw was done at the point of thawing is 
about  2.5mg.  Statistical  analysis  performed  on  data  collected  after  freezing  for  10  minutes 
show that the results are significantly different under these different treatments/settings. 

As shown in Figure 5A, in some cases, the weight of the water being measured not 
only stopped dropping for several minutes but also rose. The signatures of freezing induced 
weight decreases and thawing induced weight increases for three different thawing times are 
very clear. In addition, Figure 5B shows one example of weight and temperature variations 
under the same remote manipulation of water quantum-entangled with water being weighed 
and measured respectively. Again, the signatures of freezing and thawing induced weight and 
temperature  decreases  and  increases  are  respectively  very  clear.  Further,  Figure  5C  shows 
another  example  of  weight  and  temperature  variations  under  another  same  remote 
manipulation  in  which  the  Dewar  was  located  about  500  feet  away  from  where  the 
measurements were taken. The general background trend of decreasing temperature was due 
to  environmental  temperature  change.  Yet  again,  the  signatures  of  freezing  and  thawing 
induced weight and temperature variations were respectively are very clear. Also, when the 
remote  water  was  quickly  heated  to  boiling  on  a  stove  instead  of  being  frozen  in  liquid 
nitrogen, a brief rise of weight in the range of about 0.5mg were repeated observed in several 
experiments conducted so far. 

Furthermore,  when  the  remote  water  was  poured  into  the  200-gallon  water  tank 
instead of being frozen in liquid nitrogen, small but noticeably increased weight losses were 
repeatedly observed in the several experiments conducted to date. More specifically, before 
mixing of the water in the remote third-reservoir with water in the water tank the measured 

37 

 
 
 
 
weight drifted lower very slowly, but within short time measured in minutes after the water 
in the remote third-reservoir was poured into the water tank, during which the water in the 
said tank got quantum-entangled with the water in the third-reservoir, the weight of the first-
reservoir  dropped  at  small  but  increased  rate  for  a  period  of  time.  In  contrast,  the  control 
experiments did not show such dynamics. 

Figure 6 shows an example of temperature variations under the respective treatments 
of adding 5ml concentrated HCl (30%) to the third reservoir, then adding 20g NaOH to the 
same and third heating the same to boiling point. The signatures of these remote treatments 
induced  temperature  changes  were  clear  and  repeatedly  observable  in  quite  a  few 
experiments conducted to date. 

Figure  7  shows  the  variations  of  pH  value  of  the  water  in  the  first  reservoir  in 
experiments done with the setup in Figure 2. As shown, in about 30 minutes after the second-
reservoir  containing 100ml concentrated  HCl (30% by  weight) was placed behind the first-
reservoir at a distance of 500cm and on the path of the laser beam, during which the water in 
the  first-reservoir  got  quantum-entangled  with  the  content  in  the  second  reservoir,  the  pH 
value  of  the  water  in  the  first-reservoir  steadily  decreased.  In  contrast,  the  control 
experiments  did  not  show  such  dynamics.  Also,  the  50mW  red  laser  did  not  affect  the 
temperature of the water in the first reservoir significantly during the whole treatment. The 
difference  in  pH  value  from  control  in  which  HCl  was  absence  is  about  0.070  after  50 
minutes of exposure to HCl. Statistical analysis performed on data collected after exposure to 
HCl  for  30  minutes  show  that  the  results  are  significantly  different  from  control.  Various 
experiments  done  with  direct  additions  of  HCl  to  the  remote  water  also  repeated  showed 
decreases in pH value in the water being measured. 

3. DISCUSSIONS & CONCLUSIONS 

With all experimental setups and their variations described herein, we have observed 
clear and reproducible non-local effects with the aids of high-precision analytical instruments 
and under well-controlled conditions. The physical observables used for measuring the non-
local effects are simple ones which can be measured with high precisions. These effects are, 
even under the most stringent statistical analysis, significantly above and beyond what were 
noticeable in the control experiments. 

Through careful analysis, we have excluded the possibility that the observed weight 
variation  was  a  secondary  local  effect  due  to  heat  loss  and/or  sensitivity  drift  of  balance 
associated  with  temperature  change  induced  by  the  remote  manipulation.  First,  during  the 
period of remote manipulation the total temperature change was less than 0.08ºC so the total 
heat loss for the 175ml water in the first-reservoir is about 60J. In contrast, the weight loss 
during  remote  manipulation  was  on  average  about  2mg  which  is  18x109J  in  energy  unit. 
Second, the first-reservoir and the pan of the balance were separated by 1-inch white foam to 
prevent  heat  transfer  to  the  analytic  balance.  Even  in  the  highly  unlikely  scenario  that  this 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
temperature change somehow affected the overall temperature of the balance, the associated 
sensitivity  drift  of  the  balance  was  about  0.03mg  which  is  10  times  smaller  than  what’s 
actually observed. In addition, Figures 5A, 5B and 5C also show several other signatures of 
remote freeze-thaw treatment as the sole cause of the observed weight variations. Therefore, 
the  observed  gravity  variation  is  a  genuine  and  direct  non-local  effect  associated  with 
quantum entanglement. However, as with many other important new results, replications by 
others are the key to independently confirm our results reported here. 

We  chose  to  use  liquid  nitrogen  in  a  large  Dewar  placed  at  a  distant  location  for 
manipulating water in our experiments because it can provide drastic changes in temperature 
and  properties  of  water  in  a  very  short  period  of  time.  Our  expectation  was  that,  if  the 
quantum entities inside the water being measured are able to sense the changes experienced 
by the quantum entities in the water being manipulated through quantum entanglement and 
further  utilize  the  information  associated  with  the  said  changes,  the  chemical,  thermal  and 
gravitational  properties  of  the  water  might  be  affected  through  quantum  entanglement 
mediated  non-local  processes  (4,  5).  The  most  logical  explanation  for  these  observed  non-
local effects is that they  are the  consequences of  non-local processes mediated by quantum 
entanglement  between  quantum  entities  in  the  water  being  measured  and  the  remote  water 
being manipulated as more specifically illustrated below. 

First, when pH value of  the water in the manipulation reservoir is high or low or is 
changing under direct manipulation such as extreme cooling or heating or addition of acidic 
or alkaline chemical, the measured pH in the detecting reservoir shifts in the same direction 
under  the  non-local  influence  of  the  water  in  the  manipulation  reservoir  mediated  through 
quantum entanglement and, under the condition that the detecting reserve is able to exchange 
energy with its local environment, as if H+ in the latter is directly available to water in the 
detecting reservoir. 

Second, when the temperature in the manipulation reservoir is extremely low or high 
or  is  changing  under  direct  manipulation  such  as  extreme  cooling  or  heating  or  addition  of 
heat-generating  and/or  property-changing  chemical  such  as  concentrated  HCl  or  NaOH 
powder, the temperature in the detecting reservoir changes in the same direction under non-
local  influence  of  the  water  in  the  manipulation  reservoir  mediated  through  quantum 
entanglement  and,  under  the  condition  that  the  detecting  reserve  is  able  to  exchange  heat 
with its local environment so that the local thermodynamic energy is conserved, as if the heat 
or  lack  of  it  in  manipulation  reservoir  is  directly  available  to  the  water  in  the  detecting 
reservoir. 

Third, when water in manipulation reservoir is manipulated though extreme cooling, 
heating  or  mixing  with  large  quantum-entangled  mass,  e.g.,  water,  such  that  the  quantum 
entanglement of the water under manipulation with its local environment changes, the weight 
of  the  water  in  the  detecting  reservoir  also  changes  under  the  non-local  influence  of  the 
manipulation  reservoir  mediated  through  quantum  entanglement  so  that,  it  is  hereby 
predicted, that the global gravitational energy/potential is conserved. 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
We  suggest  here  that  the  said  quantum  entities  inside  water  are  likely  nuclear  spins 
for the reasons discussed below. Water contains vast numbers of nuclear spins carried by 1H. 
These  spins  form  complex  intra-  and  inter-molecular  networks  through  various  intra-
molecular  J-  and  dipolar  couplings  and  both  short-  and  long-range  intermolecular  dipolar 
couplings.  Further,  nuclear  spins  have  relatively  long  relaxation  times  after  excitations  (8). 
Thus, when a nematic liquid crystal is irradiated with multi-frequency pulse magnetic fields, 
its 1H spins can form long-lived intra-molecular  quantum coherence  with entanglement for 
information  storage  (9).  Long-lived  (~  .05  ms)  entanglement  of  two  macroscopic  electron 
spin  ensembles  in  room  temperature  has  also  been  achieved1.  Furthermore,  spin  is  a 
fundamental  quantum  process  and  was  shown  to  be  responsible  for  the  quantum  effects  in 
both  Hestenes  and  Bohmian  quantum  mechanics  (10,  11).  Thus,  we  suggest  that  quantum-
entangled  nuclear  spins  and/or  electron  spins  are  likely  the  mediators  of  all  observed  non-
local effects reported here (4). 

Several  important  conclusions  and  implications  can  be  drawn  from  our  findings. 
First,  we  have  realized  non-local  signaling  using  three  different  physical  observables,  pH 
value,  temperature  and  gravity.  Second,  we  have  shown  that  the  temperature  of  water  in  a 
detecting  reservoir  quantum-entangled  with  water  in  a  remote  reservoir  can  change  against 
the temperature of its local environment when the latter is manipulated under the condition 
that  the  water  the  detecting  reservoir  is  able  to  exchange  heat  with  its  local  environment. 
Third,  we  have  also  shown  that  the  gravity  of  water  in  a  detecting  reservoir  quantum-
entangled  with  water  in  a  remote  reservoir  can  change  against  the  gravity  of  its  local 
environment  when  the  latter  was  remotely  manipulated.  Our  findings  imply  that  the 
properties of all matters can be affected non-locally through quantum entanglement mediated 
processes.  Second,  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  may  not  hold  when  two  quantum-
entangled  systems  together  with  their  respective  local  environments  are  considered  as  two 
isolated  systems  and  one  of  them  is  manipulated.  Third,  gravity  has  a  non-local  aspect 
associated with quantum entanglement thus can be non-locally manipulated through quantum 
entanglement mediated  processes.  Fourth, in quantum-entangled systems such as biological 
systems,  quantum  information  may  drive  such  systems  to  a  more  ordered  state  against  the 
disorderly effect of environmental heat. 

On  a  more  fundamental  level,  our  findings  shed  new  lights  on  the  nature  and 
characteristics of quantum entanglement and gravity, challenge the applicability of Einstein’s 
relativity  theories  in  the  quantum  domain,  provide  vital  clues  for  resolution  of  the 
measurement  problem  in  quantum  mechanics,  and  support  non-local  hidden  variable  based 
theories such as Bohmian mechanics and a non-local cosmology. 

Finally, with respect applications, our findings enable various quantum entanglement 
assisted  technologies  be  developed.  Some  of  these  technologies  can  be  used  to  manipulate 
and/or affect remotely various physical, chemical and/or biological systems including human 
bodies.  Other  such  technologies  can  be  used  for  non-local  signalling  and  communications 
between  remote  locations  of  arbitrary  distances  in  various  ways.  Potentially,  some  of  these 

40 

 
 
 
 
technologies can also be used to engineer the gravitational properties of physical matters and 
develop new types of space vehicles. 

Figure1:  Illustration  of  the  key  experimental  setup.  Several  variations  of  this  setup 
were  also  used  in  the  actual  experiments  as  described  in  the  text.  For example,  in 
one  variation,  the  manipulation  was  heating  the  water  in  the  3rd  reservoir  to  boiling 
point and then cooling it down. In a second variation, the gravity measurement was 
eliminated  and  the  manipulations  were  first  adding  5ml  concentrated  HCl  (30%)  to 
the third reservoir, then adding 20g NaOH to the same and third heating the same to 
boiling  point.  In  a  third  variation,  the  Dewar  was  located  more  than  500  feet  away 
from the site of measurement. In fourth variation, the gravity and pH measurements 
were eliminated and the temperature measurements were carried out more than 50 
miles away from the location of the Dewar. 

41 

 
 
 
Figure2: Illustration of the second experimental setup which allows the measurement 
of pH value in the presence or absence of concentrated HCl about 500cm away from 
and behind the water being measured. If no quantum entanglement is involved, the 
presence or absence of the HCl should not affect the pH value. 

pH Variation

Freeze

Thaw

Freeze-Thaw (n=5)

No Treatment (n=6)

Thermal Flask (n=2)

)

3
0
1
x
(

H
p

0

-10

-20

-30

-40

-50

-60

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Time (Minute)

Figure3:  pH variations under remote manipulations of water quantum-entangled with 
water  being  measured.  The  pH  value  at  the  starting  point  is  set  to  zero  and  the 

42 

 
 
 
 
results  shown  were  obtained  from  one  batch  of  quantum-entangled  water.  The 
difference in pH values from control in which no freeze-thaw was done at the point of 
thawing is about 0.010. However, if the water being measured was kept in a thermal 
flask to prevent energy exchange with the local environment, no effect on pH value 
was  observed  during freeze-thaw  treatment  of  remote  water.  Statistical  analysis  on 
data  collected  after  freezing  for  10  minutes  show  that  the  results  are  significantly 
different under the different treatments/settings shown.  

Freeze-Thaw (n=5)
No Treatment (n=3)
Thermal flask (n=4)

Temperature Variation

Thaw

Freeze

)

3
0
1
x
(
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

160

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Time (Minute)

Figure4:  Temperature  variations  under  remote  manipulations  of  water  quantum-
entangled with water being measured. The temperature at the starting point is set to 
zero  and  the  results  shown  were  obtained  from  one  batch  of  quantum-entangled 
water. The temperature difference from control in which no freeze-thaw was done at 
the point of thawing is about 0.05oC. However, if the water being measured is kept in 
a thermal flask to prevent heat exchange with the local environment, no dropping of 
temperature  were  observed  under  freeze-thaw  treatment.  Statistical  analysis 
performed  on  data  collected  after freezing for  10  minutes  show  that  the  results  are 
significantly different under the different treatments/settings shown. 

43 

 
 
 
 
 
Temperature Variation

Freeze

Thaw

Freeze-Thaw
No Treatment
Thermal Flask

)

3
0
1
x
(
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Time (Minute)

Figure4A:  One  particular  example  detailing  temperature  variations  under  remote 
manipulation.  The  temperature  difference  from  control  at  the  point  of  thawing  is 
about  0.08oC.  However,  if  the  water  being  measured  is  kept  in  a  thermal  flask,  no 
dropping of temperature were observed under freeze-thaw treatment. 

44 

 
 
 
 
Temperature Variation

Freeze

Thaw

Coke Cola

)

3
0
1
x
(

e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

-20

-25

-30

-35

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

Time (Minute)

Figure4B:  One  example  showing  temperature  variation  of  a  different  liquid,  Coke 
Cola,  under  remote  manipulation  of  a  portion  of  the  said  liquid  quantum-entangled 
with  another  portion  of  the  liquid  being  measured.  Other  liquids  such  as  distilled 
water,  olive  oil  and  alcohol  also  showed  similar  qualitative  results  under  the  same 
treatment. 

45 

 
   
 
 
Figure5: Weight variations under remote manipulations of water quantum-entangled 
with  water  being  weighed.  The  weight  at  the  starting  point  is  set  to  zero  and  the 
results  shown  were  obtained  from  one  batch  of  quantum-entangled  water.  The 
weight  differences  from  control  in  which  no  freeze-thaw  was  done  at  the  point  of 
thawing is about 2.5mg. In some cases, the weight of the water being weighed not 
only  briefly  stop  dropping  for  several  minutes  but  also  rose  briefly  for  several 
seconds to minutes as shown in Figure5A. Also when the remote water was quickly 
heated to boiling on a stove instead of being frozen in liquid nitrogen, a brief rise of 
weight in the range of about 0.5mg were repeated observed in one variation of the 
key setup. Further, when the remote water was poured into a 200-gallon water tank, 
small  but  noticeably  increased  weight  losses  were  also  observed  in  several 
experiments conducted to date. Statistical analysis performed on data collected after 
freezing  for  10  minutes  show  that  the  results  are  significantly  different  under  the 
different treatments/settings shown. 

46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure5A:  Examples  of  weight  variations  under  remote  manipulations  of  water 
quantum-entangled  with  water  being  weighed.  The  onset  of  increased  weight  loss 
started  either  at  the  time  of  freezing  treatment  or  slightly  later.  The  signatures  of 
thawing  induced  weight  increases  were  clear  for  the  three  different  thawing  times. 
The distances shown are the respectively distances of the Dewar to the location of 
measurement in each experiment. 

47 

 
 
 
Figure5B:  One  example  of  weight  and  temperature  variations  under  the  same 
remote  manipulation  of  water  quantum-entangled  with  water  being  weighed  and 
measured  respectively.  The  onset  of  increased  weight  loss  started  at  the  time  of 
freezing  treatment  but  the  onset  of  temperature  decrease  against  environmental 
temperature  started  a  few  minutes  later  after  freezing  treatment  started.  The 
signatures  of  thawing  induced  weight  and  temperature  increases  were  clear.  The 
distance shown is the distance of the Dewar to the location of measurement. 

48 

 
 
respectively.  The  general  background 

Figure5C:  Second  example  of  weight  and  temperature  variations  under  another 
same  remote  manipulation  of  water  quantum-entangled  with  water  being  weighed 
and  measured 
trend  of  decreasing 
temperature was due to environmental temperature change. The onset of increased 
weight  loss  started  at  the  time  of  freezing  treatment  but  the  onset  of  increased 
temperature  loss  started  a  few  minutes  later  after  freezing  treatment  started.  The 
signatures  of  thawing  at  time=45min  induced  weight  increase  and  slow  down  of 
temperature loss were again clear. The distance shown is the distance of the Dewar 
to the location of measurement. 

49 

 
 
Temperature Variation

Add HCl

Add NaOH

1st Set

Heat to Boiling

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

-20

-25

-30

-35

-40

-45

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Time (Minute)

Figure6:  An  example  of  temperature  variations  under  the  respective  treatments  of 
adding 5ml concentrated HCl (30%) to the third reservoir, then adding 20g NaOH to 
the same and third heating the same to boiling point. The signatures of these remote 
treatments  induced  temperature  changes  were  clear  and  repeatedly  observable  in 
quite  a  few  experiments  conducted  to  date.  The  general  background  trend  of  the 
temperature  first  increasing,  flattening  and  decreasing  was  due  to  environmental 
temperature change. 

50 

 
 
 
 
 
 
pH Variation

Exposure to HCl

HCl Present (n=3)

HCl Absent (n=3)

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5
-3.0
-3.5
-4.0
-4.5
-5.0
-5.5
-6.0
-6.5
-7.0
-7.5
-8.0
-8.5
-9.0
-9.5
-10.0
-10.5
-11.0
-11.5
-12.0
-12.5
-13.0

)

3

0
1
x
(

H
p

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Time (minute)

Figure7:  pH  variations  under  laser  treatment  in  the  presence  and  absence  of 
concentrated HCl with the setup in Figure 2. The pH value at the starting point is set 
to zero. The difference in pH value from control in which HCl was absence is about 
0.07  after  50  minute  of  exposure  to  HCl.  Various  experiments  done  with  direct 
additions of HCl to the remote water also repeated showed decreases in pH value in 
the  water  being  measured.  Statistical  analysis  performed  on  data  collected  after 
exposure  to  HCl  for  30  minutes  show  that  the  results  are  significant  different  from 
control.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT:  We  wish  to  thank  Yongchang  Hu  and  Cuifang  Sun  for  their 
participation  in  the  experiments  Robert  N.  Boyd  for  our  visit  to  his  place  of  research.  We 
wish  to  thank  Yongchang  Hu  for  assisting  the  authors  with  some  of  the  more  recent 
experiments and Danielle Graham for showing her research at a 2006 conference. 

51 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 

PART I 
1. Penrose, R. The Emperor’s New Mind (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989). 
2. Edelman, G. M. The Remembered Present: A Biological Theory of Consciousness (New York: 
Basic Books, 1989). 
3. Donald, M. J. Quantum theory and the brain. Proc. R.  Soc. A. 1990, 427: 43-93. 
4. Beck, F., Eccles, J. C. Quantum aspects of brain activity and the role of consciousness. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA, 1992; 89: 11357-11361. 
5. Stapp. H. P. Mind, Matter and Quantum Mechanics (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1993). 
6. Crick, F. The Astonishing Hypothesis (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1994). 
7. Penrose, R. Shadows of the Mind (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994). 
8. Hameroff, S., Penrose, R. Conscious events as orchestrated spacetime selections. J. Conscious Stud., 1996; 3: 
36-53. 
9. Searle, J. The Rediscovery of the Mind (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992). 
10. Churchland, P.S., Sejnowski, T. J. The Computational Brain, 2d. ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1993). 
11. Chalmers, D. The Conscious Mind (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996). 
12. Dirac, P. A. M. The quantum theory of the electron. Proc. R. Soc. A , 1928; 117: 610-624. 
13. Penrose, R. A spinor approach to general relativity. Ann. Phys., 1960; 10: 171. 
14. Penrose, R. Twistor algebra. J. Math. Phys., 1967; 8: 345. 
15. Budinich, P. From the geometry of pure spinors with their division algebra to fermions’s physics. 
http://www.arxiv.org/pdf/hep-th/0102049, 2002. 
16. Cantor, R. S. The lateral pressure profile in membranes: a physical mechanism of general anesthesia. 
Biochem., 1997; 36: 2339-2344. 
17. Hu, H. P., Wu, M. X. Mechanism of anesthetic action: oxygen pathway perturbation hypothesis’, Med. 
Hypotheses, 2001; 57, 619-627. 
18. Morris, P. G. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Imaging in Medicine and Biology (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1986). 
19. Nagakura, S., Hayashi, H. and Azumi, T. Dynamic Spin Chemistry (New York: Wiley, 1998). 
20. Hayashi, H. Advent of spin chemistry. RIKEN Review, 2002: 44: 7-10. 
21. Minaev, B. F. Intermolecular exchange in the system O2 + H2 as a model of spin-catalysis in radical 
recombination reaction. Theor. Experimental Chem., 1996; 32: 229. 
22. Bohm, D., Hiley, B. J. Generalisation of the twistor to Clifford algebras as a basis for geometry. Revista 
Brasilera de Fisica,, 1984; Vol. Especial Os 70, anos de Mario Schonberg, 1-26. 
23. Baez, J. C. Spin foam models. Class.Quant.Grav., 1998; 15: 1827-1858. 
24. Smolin, L. Three Roads to Quantum Gravity (New York: Basic Books, 2001). 
25. Hestenes, D. Quantum mechanics from self-interaction. Found. Physics, 1983; 15: 63-87. 
26. Bohm, D. and Hiley, B. J. The Undivided Universe (London: Routledge, 1993). 
27. Salesi, G. and Recami, E. Hydrodynamics of spinning particles. Phys. Rev. A, 1998; 57: 98. 
28. Esposito, S. On the role of spin in quantum mechanics. Found. Phys. Lett., 1999; 12: 165. 
29. Bogan, J. R. Spin: the classical to quantum connection. http://www.arxiv.org/pdf/quant-
ph/0212110, 2002. 

52 

 
 
30. Kiehn, R. M. An extension to Bohm’s quantum theory to include non-gradient potentials and the 
production of nanometer vortices. http://www22.pair.com/csdc/pdf/bohmplus.pdf, 1999. 
31. Newman, T. E. On a classical, geometric origin of magnetic moments, spin-angular momentum 
and the Dirac gyromagnetic ratio. Phys. Rev., 2002; 65D: 104005. 
32. Galiautdinov, A. A. Quantum theory of elementary process (Ph.D. Thesis). http://www.arxiv.org/pdf/hep-
th/0203263, 2002. 
33. Finkelstein, D. R. Spin, statatistics, space-time. 
http://www.physics.gatech.edu/people/faculty/finkelstein/spin_notes.pdf, 2002.  
34. Sidharth, B. G. Issues and ramifications in quantized fractal space-time: an interface with quantum 
superstrings. Chaos Solitons Fractals, 2001 12: 1449-1457. 
35. Sidharth, B. G., Chaotic Universe (New York: Nova Science, 2001). 
36. Tu, K. Effect of anesthetics on the structure of a phospholipid bilayer: molecular dynamics investigation of 
halothane in the hydrated liquid crystal phase of dipalmitoyl-phosphatylcholine. Biophys. J., 1998; 75: 2123-
2134 
37. Koubi, L. Distribution of halothane in a dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine bilayer from molecular dynamics 
calculations. Biophys. J., 2000; 78: 800-811. 
38. Khitrin, A. K.Ermakov, V. L. Spin Processor’, http://www.arxiv.org/pdf/quant-ph/0205040, 2002. 
39. Khitrin, A. K., Ermakov, V. L., Fung, B. M. Information storage using a cluster of dipolar-coupled spins. 
Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002; 360: 161-166. 
40. Khitrin, A. K.; Ermakov, V. L., Fung, B. M. NMR molecular photography. J. Chem. Phys., 2002;117, 6903-
6906. 
41. Wertz, J. E., Bolton J. R. Electron Spin Resonance: Elementary theory and practical application (New York: 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1972). 
42. Marsh, D. Polarity and permeation profiles in lipid membranes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2001; 98: 
7777–7782. 
43. Prosser, R. S., Luchette, P. A., Weterman, P. W., Rozek, A., Hancock, R. E. W. Determination of 
membrane immersion depth with O2: A high-pressure 19F NMR study. Biophys. J., 2001; 80:1406–1416. 
44. Bryan-Brown, G. P., Brown, C. V., Sage, I. C., Hui, V. C. Voltage-dependent anchoring of a nematic liquid 
crystal on a grating surface. Nature, 1998; 392: 365–367. 
45. Tegmark, M. The importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes. Phys. Rev., 2000; 61E: 4194. 
46. Hagan, S., Hameroff, S. R. and Tuszynski, J. A. Quantum computation in brain microtubules: decoherence 
and biological feasibility’, Phys. Rev. E., 2002; 65: 061901(1-10). 
47. Warren, W. S. et al. Generation of impossible correlation peaks between bulk water and biomolecules in 
solution NMR. Science, 1993; 262: 2005. 
48. Warren, W. S. et al. MR imaging contrast based on intermolecular zero-quantum coherence. Science, 1998; 
281: 274-250.  
49. Julsgaard, B., Kozhekin, A., Polzik, E. S. Experimental long-lived entanglement of two macroscopic 
objects. Nature, 2001; 413: 400-403. 
50. Kun, S. Y., et. al. Schrodinger cat states in highly-excited strongly-interacting many-body system’,  
http://www.arxiv.org/pdf/quant-ph/0205036, 2002. 
51. Lidar, D. A., Whaley, K. B. Decoherence-free subspaces and subsystems. In Irreversible Quantum 
Dynamics, Benatti , F., Floreanini, R. (Eds.), 83-120 (Springer Lecture Notes in Physics vol. 622, Berlin, 2003) 
52. Castagnoli, G., Finkelstein, D. R. Quantum statistical computation. http://www.arxiv.org/pdf/hep-
th/0111120, 2001. 

53 

 
53. Marder, E. et. al. Memory from the dynamics of intrinsic membrane currents. Proc. Natl. Sci. USA, 1996; 
93: 13481-13486. 
54. Raffy, S., Teissie, J. Control of membrane stability by cholesterol content. Biophys. J., 1999; 76: 2072-
2080. 
55. Smondyrev, A M., Berkowitz, M. L. Structure of Dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine-cholesterol bilayer at law 
and high cholesterol concentrations: molecular dynamics simulation’, Biophys. J., 1999; 77: 2075-2089. 
56. Woolf, T. B., Roux, B. Structure, energetics, and dynamics of lipid-protein interactions: A molecular 
dynamics study of the gramicidin a channel in a DMPC bilayer. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Gen., 1996; 24: 92-
114. 
57. Akinlaja, J., Sachs, F. The breakdown of cell membranes by electrical and mechanical stress. Biophys. J., 
1998; 75: 247-254. 
58. Sens, P., Isambert, H. Undulation instability of lipid membranes under electric field. 
http://www.arxiv.org/pdf/cond-mat/0106634, 2001. 
59. Wikswo, J. P. Biomagnetic sources and their models. In Advances in Biomagnetism, Williamson, S. J., et al 
(Eds) (New York: Plenum, 1990). 
60. Kushner, D. J., Baker, A, Dunstall, T. G. Pharmacological uses and perspectives of heavy water and 
denatured compound. Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol., 1999; 77: 79-88. 
61. Richter, C. P. A study of taste and smell of heavy water (99.8%) in rats. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med., 1976; 
152: 677-84. 
62. Richter, C. P. Heavy water as a tool for study of the forces that control length of period of the 24-hour clock 
of the hamster. Proc. Natl. Acad  Sci. USA, 1977; 74: 1295-1299. 
63. Limoniemi, R. J. Neuronal responses to magnetic stimulation reveal cortical reactivity and connectivity. 
NeuroReport, 1997; 8: 3537-3540. 
64. Chicurei, M. Magnetic mind games. Nature, 2002; 417: 114-116. 
65. Mennerick, S. Effect of nitrous oxide on excitatory and inhibitory synaptic transmission in Hippocampal 
cultures. J. Neurosci., 1998; 18: 9716-9726. 
66. Philippides, A., Husbands, P., and O’Shea, M. Four-dimensional neural signaling by nitric oxide: A 
computer analysis. J. Neurosci., 2000; 20: 1199-1207. 
67. Fu, Y. X., et al. Temporal specificity in the cortical plasticity of visual space representation. Science, 2002; 
296: 1999-2003. 
68. Marino, A. A. Environmental electromagnetic fields and public health. In: Foundations of Modern 
Bioelectricity Marino, A. A., (Eds.) (Marcel Dekker, New York, 1988). 
69. Shellock, F. G. Magnetic Resonance Safety Update 2002: Implants and Devices. J. Magn. Resonan. 
Imaging, 2002; 16: 485–496. 
70. Gershenfeld, N. & Chuang, I. L. Bulk spin resonance quantum computation. Science, 1997; 275: 350–356. 

PART II 
1. Julsgaard, B., Sherson, J., Cirac, J. I., Fiurasek, J. & Polzik, E. S. Experimental demonstration of quantum 
memory for light. Nature 432, 482–485 (2004). 
2. Hu, H. P., & Wu, M. X. Spin-mediated consciousness theory. Medical Hypotheses 63, 633–646 (2004). Also 
see arXiv e-print quant-ph/0208068 (2002). 
3. Julsgaard, B., Kozhekin, A. & Polzik, E. S. Experimentally long-lived entanglement of two macroscopic 
objects. Nature 413, 400–403 (2001). 

54 

 
 
4. Ghosh, S., Rosenbaum, T. F., Aeppli, G. & Coppersmith, S. N. Entangled quantum state of magnetic dipoles. 
Nature 425, 48-51 (2003). 
5. Matsukevich, D. N. & Kuzmich, A. Quantum state transfer between matter and light. Science 306, 663–666 
(2004). 
6. Chanelière,T. et al. Storage and retrieval of single photons transmitted between remote quantum memorie. 
Nature 438, 833-836 (2005). 
7. Davenas, E. et al. Human basophil degranulation triggered by very dilute antiserum against IgE. Nature 333, 
816-818 (1988). 
8. Hu, H. P., & Wu, M. X. Thinking outside the box: the essence and implications of quantum entanglement. 
Cogprints ID4581. 
9. Gershenfeld, N. & Chuang, I. L. Bulk spin resonance quantum computation. Science 275, 350–356 (1997). 
10. Khitrin, A. K., Ermakov, V. L. & Fung, B. M. Information storage using a cluster of dipolar-coupled spins. 
Chem. Phys. Lett. 360, 161–166 (2002). 
11. Dirac, P. A. M. The quantum theory of the electron. Proc. R. Soc. A 117, 610-624 (1928). 
12. Hestenes, D. Quantum mechanics from self-interaction. Found. Phys. 15, 63–78 (1983). 
13. Salesi, G. & Recami, E. Hydrodynamics of spinning particles. Phys. Rev. A 57, 98–105 (1998). 

PART III 
1. Julsgaard, B., Kozhekin, A. & Polzik, E. S. Experimentally long-lived entanglement of two macroscopic 
objects. Nature 413, 400–403 (2001). 
2. Ghosh, S., Rosenbaum, T. F., Aeppli, G. & Coppersmith, S. N. Entangled quantum state of magnetic dipoles. 
Nature 425, 48-51 (2003). 
3. Eberhard, P. Bell's theorem and the different concepts of locality. Nuovo Cimento 46B, 392-419 1978). 
4. Hu, H. P., & Wu, M. X. Nonlocal effects of chemical substances on the brain produced through quantum 
entanglement. Progress in Physics v3, 20-26 (2006); NeuroQuantology 4, 17-31 (2006). 
5. Hu, H. P., & Wu, M. X., Thinking outside the box: the essence and implications of quantum entanglement. 
Cogprints ID4581 (2005); NeuroQuantology 4, 5-16 (2006). 
6. Matsukevich, D. N. & Kuzmich, A. Quantum state transfer between matter and light. Science 306, 663–666 
(2004). 
7. Chanelière,T. et al. Storage and retrieval of single photons transmitted between remote quantum memorie. 
Nature 438, 833-836 (2005). 
8. Gershenfeld, N. & Chuang, I. L. Bulk spin resonance quantum computation. Science 275, 350–356 (1997). 
9. Khitrin, A. K., Ermakov, V. L. & Fung, B. M. Information storage using a cluster of dipolar-coupled spins. 
Chem. Phys. Lett. 360, 161–166 (2002). 
10. Hestenes, D. Quantum mechanics from self-interaction. Found. Phys. 15, 63–78 (1983). 
11. Salesi, G. & Recami, E. Hydrodynamics of spinning particles. Phys. Rev. A 57, 98–105 (1998). 

55 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX I 

(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:8)(cid:14)(cid:7)(cid:3)(cid:15)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:7)(cid:12)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:12)(cid:4)(cid:16) (cid:12)(cid:7)(cid:17) (cid:4)(cid:11)(cid:7)
(cid:3)(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:3)(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:8)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:21)(cid:7)(cid:22) (cid:9)(cid:17) (cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:9)(cid:18) (cid:7)(cid:12)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:17) (cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:12)(cid:18) (cid:12)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:7)
(cid:7)
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:8)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:11) (cid:9)(cid:12)(cid:13)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:14) (cid:2)(cid:7)
(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:17) (cid:9)(cid:18)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:7)(cid:21) (cid:22)(cid:18)(cid:12)(cid:23)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:25)(cid:7)(cid:15)(cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:7)
(cid:7)
(cid:17) (cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:1)(cid:23) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:1)(cid:7)

Many experiments have shown that quantum entanglement is physically real. In this 
paper,  we  will  discuss  its  ontological  origin,  implications  and  applications  by  thinking 
outside  the  standard  interpretations  of  quantum  mechanics.  We  argue  that  quantum 
entanglement originates from the primordial spin processes in non-spatial and non-temporal 
pre-spacetime,  implies  genuine  interconnectedness  and  inseparableness  of  once  interacting 
quantum entities, plays vital roles in biology and consciousness and, once better understood 
and  harnessed,  has  far-reaching  consequences  and  applications  in  many  fields  such  as 
medicine  and  neuroscience.  We  further  argue  that  quantum  computation  power  also 
originates from the primordial spin processes in pre-spacetime. Finally, we discuss the roles 
of quantum entanglement in spin-mediated consciousness theory. 

Key Words: Spin, Entanglement, Interconnectedness, Inseparableness 
(cid:1)

1. 

Introduction 

Quantum entanglement is ubiquitous, appears everywhere in the microscopic 
world (See, e.g., Durt, 2004; Brooks, 2005) and under some circumstances manifests 
itself  macroscopically  (Arnesen,  et  al,  2001;  Ghost  et  al,  2003  &  Julsgaard  et  al, 
2001).  Indeed,  it  is  currently  the  most  intensely  studied  subject  in  physics.  Further, 
speculations  abound  as  to  its  nature  and  implications  (See,  e.g.,  Clarke,  2004, 
Josephson,  1991  &  Radin,  2004).  There  are  many  general  and  technical  papers 
written  on  the  subject.  So  cutting  to  the  chase,  we  shall  immediately  outline  our 
propositions  on  the  subject  and  then  discuss  each  in  some  detail  with  references  to 
existing  literature  whenever  possible.  Readers  are  advised  that  our  propositions  are 
outside the mainstream physics and other authors may hold similar views on some of 
the  points  we  shall  make  in  this  paper.  We  will  also  discuss  the  roles  of  quantum 
entanglement in spin-mediated consciousness theory (Hu & Wu, 2002, 2003, 2004a-
d). 

1Corresponding author:1Huping Hu, Ph.D., J.D., Biophysics Consulting Group, 25 Lubber Street, 
Stony Brook, NY 11790, USA. E-mail: hupinghu@quantumbrain.org 

56 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
The following are our propositions about the ontological origin, implications 

and applications of quantum entanglement besides quantum computation: 

1)  It  originates  from  the  primordial  spin  processes  in  non-spatial  and  non-
temporal  pre-spacetime.  It  is  the  quantum  “glue”  holding  once  interacting 
quantum 
genuine 
interconnectedness  and  inseparableness  of  the  said  quantum  entities  and  can 
be directly sensed and utilized by the entangled quantum entities. 

pre-spacetime, 

together 

implies 

entities 

in 

2)  Thus,  it  can  influence  chemical/biochemical  reactions,  other  physical 
processes and micro- and macroscopic properties of all forms of matters, thus, 
playing  vital  roles  in  many  biological  processes  and  consciousness.  It  is  the 
genuine cause of many anomalous effects (if they do exist) in parapsychology, 
alternative medicine and other fields as some authors have already suspected 
in some cases. 

3)  Further,  it  can  be  harnessed,  tamed  and  developed  into  revolutionary 
technologies to serve the mankind in many areas such as health, medicine and 
even recreation besides the already emerging fields of quantum computation. 

2. 

The Origin and Nature of Quantum Entanglement 

Popular opinion has it that Erwin Shrödinger coined the word “entanglement” 
and  first  used  it  in  1935  in  his  article  published  in  the  Proceedings  of  Cambridge 
Philosophical  Society  (Shrödinger,  1935).  Mathematically,  Shrödinger  showed  that 
entanglement  arises  from  the  interactions  of  two  particles  through  the  evolution  of 
Shrödinger  equation  and  called  this  phenomenon  the  characteristic  trait  of  quantum 
theory  (id.).  Einstein  called  quantum  entanglement  “spooky  action  at  a  distance”  in 
the famous EPR debate (See, e.g., Einstein et al, 1935). 

Ontologically, we argue that quantum entanglement arises from the primordial 
self-referential spin processes which we had argued previously are the driving force 
behind  quantum  effects,  spacetime  dynamics  and  consciousness  (Hu  &  Wu,  2003; 
2004a).  Pictorially,  two  interacting  quantum  entities  such  as  two  electrons  get 
entangled with each other through the said spin processes by exchanging one or more 
entangling  photons  with  entangling  occurring  in  pre-spacetime.  Such  ontological 
interpretation is supported by existing literature as discussed below. 

First, Hestenes showed that in the geometric picture for the Dirac electron the 
zitterbewegung associated with the spin is responsible for all known quantum effects 
of said electron and the imagery number i in the Dirac equation is said to be due to 
electronic spin (See, e.g., Hestines, 1983). 

Second,  in  Bohmian  mechanics  the  “quantum  potential”  is  responsible  for 
quantum  effects  (Bohm  and  Hiley,  1993).  Salesi  and  Recami  (1998)  have  recently 
shown that said potential is a pure consequence of “internal motion” associated with 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
spin evidencing that the quantum behavior is a direct consequence of the fundamental 
existence of spin. Esposito (1999) has expanded this result by showing that “internal 
motion”  is  due  to  the  spin  of  the  particle,  whatever  its  value.  Bogan  (2002)  has 
further  expanded  these  results  by  deriving  a  spin-dependent  gauge  transformation 
between the Hamilton-Jacobi equation of classical mechanics and the time-dependent 
Shrödinger  equation  of  quantum  mechanics  which  is  a  function  of  the  quantum 
potential of Bohmian mechanics. 

Third, spin is a unique quantum concept often being said to have no classical 
counterpart  (See  Tomonaga,  1997)  and  associated  with  the  “internal  motion”  of  a 
point  particle.  Unlike  mass  and  charge  that  enter  a  dynamic  equation  as  arbitrary 
parameters,  spin  reveals  itself  through  the  structure  of  the  relativistic  quantum 
equation  for  fermions  that  combines  quantum  mechanics  with  special  relativity 
(Dirac,  1928).  Indeed,  many  models  of  elementary  particles  and  even  space-time 
itself are built with spinors (Budinich, 2001; Penrose, 1960 & 1967). Pauli (1927) and 
Dirac (1928) were the first to use spinors to describe the electron. Also, Kiehn (1999) 
showed that the absolute square of the wave function could be interpreted as vorticity 
distribution of a viscous compressible fluid that also indicates that spin is the process 
driving quantum mechanics. 

Therefore,  in  view  of  the  foregoing  it  could  be  said  that  the  driving  force 
behind  the  evolution  of  Shrödinger  equation  is  quantum  spin  and,  since  quantum 
entanglement  arises  from  the  evolution  of  Shrödinger  equation  the  said  spin  is  the 
genuine cause of quantum entanglement. 

What  do  we  mean  by  pre-spacetime?  Pre-spacetime  in  this  article  means  a 
non-spatial and non-temporal domain but it is not associated with an extra-dimension 
in the usual sense since there is no distance or time in such domain (See, e.g., Hu & 
Wu, 2002). We have argued before that in a dualistic approach mind resides in this 
domain and unpaired nuclear and/or electronic spins are its pixels in the reductionist 
perspective (id.). So pre-spacetime is a holistic domain located outside spacetime but 
connected  through  quantum  thread/channel  to  everywhere  in  spacetime  enabling 
quantum entanglement or Einstein’s “spooky action at a distance.” It has similarity to 
Bohm’s  concept  of  implicate  order  (Bohm  &  Hiley,  1993).  Aerts  (2004),  Clarke 
(2004) and others have also expressed the non-space view of quantum nonlocality. 

Such  a  non-spatial  and  non-temporal  pre-spacetime  is  a  “world”  beyond 
Einstein’s  relativistic  world  but  does  not  contradict  with  the  latter  since  the  latter 
deals with classical physical events occurring within spacetime. In contrast, quantum 
entanglement  occurs  within  non-spatial  and  non-temporal  domain.  Therefore, 
instantaneous signaling through quantum entanglement in pre-spacetime is possible if 
the entangled quantum entities can directly sense and/or utilize the entanglement. 

58 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
So  what  is  then  the  essence  of  quantum  entanglement?  We  propose  that 
quantum  entanglement  is  not  merely  the  correlations  of  certain  observable  physical 
parameters  in  the  process  of  measurement  but  genuine  interconnectedness  and 
inseparableness of once interacting quantum entities. It is the quantum “glue” holding 
once  interacting  quantum  entities  together  in  pre-spacetime  and  can  be  directly 
sensed  and  utilized  by  the  entangled  quantum  entities  as  further  discussed  below.  It 
can be diluted through entanglement with the environment, i.e., decoherence. 

3. 

Implications of Quantum Entanglement 

It is often said that instantaneous signaling through quantum entanglement is 
impossible  because  of  Eberhard’s  theorem  that  basically  says  that  since  local 
measurements  always  produce  random  results  no  information  can  be  sent  through 
quantum entanglement alone (Eberhard, 1978). However, there are at least two ways 
to circumvent this impossibility. The first is to assume that the statistical distribution 
can  be  modified  and  utilized  to  transmit  information.  Quite  a  few  authors  have 
expressed this view (Josephson, 1991; Stapp, 1982 & Walker, 1974) especially when 
discussing  the  roles  of  consciousness  in  parapsychology  such  as  telepathy.  The 
second is to assume that each quantum entity can directly sense and utilize quantum 
entanglement as already mentioned before. This latter view is the view we subscribe 
to and it is permissible in the Bohmian picture (Bohm & Hiley, 1993). 

The  implication  of  the  second  view  is  far-reaching.  It  means  that  quantum 
entanglement  can  influence  chemical  and  biochemical  reactions  and  other  physical 
processes.  Thus,  it  plays  vital  roles  in  many  biological  processes  and  consciousness 
and  is  the  genuine  cause  of  many  anomalous  effects,  if  they  do  exist,  in 
parapsychology,  alternative  medicine  and  other  fields  as  some  authors  have  already 
suspected  in  some  case.  It  can  affect  the  micro-  and  macroscopic  properties  of  all 
forms of matters such solid and liquid. 

For example, the results reported by Rey (2003) that heavy water and highly 
diluted  solutions  of  sodium  chloride  and  lithium  chloride  behaved  differently  in  the 
thermo- luminescence tests can be explained as the consequence of water molecules 
forming  different  hydrogen  bonds  due  to  the  entanglement  of  water  molecule  with 
sodium  chloride  or  lithium  chloride  ions  being  diluted  out  of  existence  and  its 
subsequent effect on hydrogen bond formation during freezing. Indeed, in light of the 
recent results on observable macroscopic entanglement effects (Arnesen, et al, 2001; 
Ghost et al, 2003), the explanation offered herein is most likely true. 

For a second example, the so called “memory of water” effect (Davenas, et al, 
1988),  which  is  largely  discredited  by  the  mainstream  scientists  because  of  non-
reproducibility,  can  be  explained  as  the  result  of  entanglement  of  the  substances 
being  diluted  with  water  and  then  the  subsequent  entanglement  of  water  with  the 

59 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quantum  entities  in  the  biochemical  processes  responsible  for  producing  certain 
visible or detectable result. Of course, quantum entanglement cannot directly serve as 
a  reagent  in  a  chemical  reaction  nor  can  it  be  recorded  or  transferred  through  any 
classical means such as a digital device within a computer or the telephone wire. So 
any claim of recordable or telephone -wire-transferable “chemical signal” cannot be 
attributed to quantum entanglement. 

Similarly,  the  therapeutic  effect  of  a  homeopathic  remedy,  if  it  truly  exists 
beyond  and  above  the  placebo  effect,  can  be  explained  as  the  entanglement  of  the 
substances  being  diluted  out  of  existence  through  vigorous  shaking/stirring  with  the 
diluting  solvent  and  then  the  subsequent  entanglement  of  the  solvent  with  the 
quantum  entities  involved  in  the  diseased  biological  and/or  physiological  processes 
and the effect of such entanglement on the latter processes. Indeed, there are reports 
in the existing literature exploring the use of generalized entanglement to explain the 
therapeutic ingredient in a homeopathic remedy (See, e.g., Milgrom, 2002; Wallach, 
2000 & Weingärtner, 2003). 

Further,  many  other  unconventional  healing  effects  reported  in  alternative 
medicine such as Qi Gong and other types of bioenergy healing, if they are genuine, 
can  be  explained  as  the  results  of  quantum  entanglement  between  the  quantum 
entities  involved  in  the  diseased  processes  and  the  quantum  entities  in  the  healing 
sources, such as a healthy biological entity, and the effect of the former on the latter 
processes. 

For  yet  another  example,  all  the  results  from  Princeton  Engineering 
Anomalies Research program over the last 26  years (Jahn & Dunne, 2005) can also 
be straightforwardly explained as the entanglement of the quantum entities controlled 
by  human  mind  with  the  quantum  entities  responsible  for  the  physical  processes 
capable  of  producing  modified  random  results.  By  the  same  token,  many  if  not  all 
anomalous  effects  reported  in  parapsychology  such  as  telepathy  and  those  results 
reported  by  Grinberg-  Zylberbaum  (1987)  and  the  repeaters  (For  a  summary,  see, 
Wackermann, 2005) can be simply explained as the results of quantum entanglement 
between the quantum entities capable of invoking action potentials in one person and 
those  in  a  second  person  and  the  effect  of  one  on  the  other  through  quantum 
entanglement.  Grinberg-Zylberbaum  himself  speculated 
that  his  results  had 
something to do with quantum entanglement (1994). 

4. 

The Ontological Origin of Quantum Computation Power 

It  is  said  that  the  computational  speed-up  of  a  quantum  computer  is  due  to 
quantum  entanglement  (See,  e.g.,  Steane,  2000).  However,  the  ontological  origin  of 
its  power  over  classical  computation  is  very  much  in  dispute  due  to  different 
interpretations of quantum mechanics (id.). 

60 

 
 
 
 
 
For  example,  some  argue  that,  in  terms  of  the  amount  of  information 
manipulated  in  a  given  time,  quantum  superposition/entanglement  permits  quantum 
computers  to  ``perform  many  computations  simultaneously''  which  invoke  the 
concept  of  vast  numbers  of  parallel  universes  (See,  e.g.,  Deutsch  &  Hayden,  2000; 
Deutsch,  2002).  Others  argue  that  quantum  entanglement  makes  available  types  of 
computation  process,  which,  while  not  exponentially  larger  than  classical  ones,  are 
unavailable to classical systems (See, e.g., Steane, 2000). Thus, according to Steane 
(2000), the essence of quantum computation is that it uses entanglement to generate 
and manipulate a physical representation of the correlations between logical entities, 
without the need to completely represent the logical entities themselves (id.). 

Do we have anything to add in light of our view expressed in this paper? The 
answer is “Yes.” We argue that the types of computation process made available by 
quantum  entanglement  are  the  ones  driven  by  the  primordial  spin  processes  in  the 
non-spatial  and  non-temporal  pre-sapcetime.  Or,  if  you  like,  the  power  of  quantum 
computation  over  classical  computation  originates  from  Bohm’s  implicate  order 
driven by the primordial spin processes. 

5. 

Applications of Quantum Entanglement 

Recently,  quantum  computations  have  been  achieved  in  the  laboratory  but 
they  are  implemented  in  controlled  environment  to  prevent  decoherence  through 
entanglement of the system of interests with its surrounding environment. Indeed, it is 
also often said that the reason why we don’t experience quantum entanglement in the 
macroscopic  world  is  because  of  rapid  decoherence  within  the  macroscopic  system. 
However, this view may rapidly change (See, e.g., Brooks, 2005). We are convinced 
that quantum entanglement can be harnessed, tamed and developed into revolutionary 
technologies to serve the mankind in many areas such as health, medicine and even 
recreation besides the emerging fields of quantum computation and communications. 

For  example,  once  harnessed,  quantum  entanglement  technologies  can  be 
used  to  deliver  the  therapeutic  effects  of  many  drugs  to  a  target  biological  system 
such  as  a  human  body  without  ever  physically  administrating  the  said  drugs  to  the 
said  system.  Such  technology  would  dramatically  reduce  waste  and  increase 
productivity  because  the  same  drugs  can  be  repeatedly  used  to  deliver  their 
therapeutic  effects  to  the  mass.  By  the  same  token,  many  substances  of  nutritional 
and  even  recreational  values  can  be  repeatedly  administrated  to  the  human  body 
through  the  said  technologies.  For  a  second  example,  the  harnessed  quantum 
entanglement technologies can also be used to entangle two or more human minds for 
legitimate  purposes.  Further,  the  said  technologies  can  be  used  for  instantaneous 
communications with humans sent to the outer space. 

61 

 
 
 
 
 
Are  we  delusional?  We  think  not.  We  predict  that  the  wonders  of  quantum 
entanglement  technologies  will  be  soon  widely  utilize  to  serve  the  mankind  and  a 
new paradigm of science will be born in the near future. 

6. 

Quantum Entanglement in Spin-Mediated Consciousness Theory 

Our spin-mediated consciousness theory says that quantum spin is the seat of 
consciousness and the linchpin between mind and the brain, that is, spin is the mind-
pixel  (Hu  &  Wu,  2002,  2004a-d).  The  starting  point  is  the  fact  that  spin  is  basic 
quantum  bit  ("qubit")  for  encoding  information  and,  on  the  other  hand,  neural 
membranes and proteins are saturated with nuclear spin carrying nuclei and form the 
matrices of brain electrical activities. Indeed, as discussed above, spin is embedded in 
the  microscopic  structure  of  spacetime  as  reflected  by  Dirac  equation  and  is  likely 
more  fundamental  than  spacetime  itself  as  implicated  by  Roger  Penrose’s  work.  In 
the  Hestenes  picture  the  zitterbewegung  associated  with  spin  was  shown  to  be 
responsible for the quantum effects of the fermion. Further, in the Bohm picture the 
internal  motion  associated  with  spin  has  been  shown  to  be  responsible  for  the 
quantum  potential  which,  in  turn,  is  responsible  for  quantum  effects.  Thus,  if  one 
adopts the minority quantum mind view, nuclear spins and possibly unpaired electron 
spins become natural candidates for mind-pixels (Hu & Wu, 2002; 2003; 2004a-d). 

Applying these ideas to the particular structures and dynamics of the brain, we 
have  theorized  that  human  brain  works  as  follows:  Through  action  potential 
modulated nuclear spin interactions and paramagnetic O2/NO driven activations, the 
nuclear spins inside neural membranes and proteins form various entangled quantum 
states  and,  in  turn,  the  collective  dynamics  of  the  said  entangled  quantum  states 
produces  consciousness  through  contextual,  irreversible  and  non-computable  means 
and influences the classical neural activities through spin chemistry (Hu & Wu, 2002; 
2003; 2004a-d). 

Existing  literature  supports  the  possibility  of  a  spin-mediated  consciousness. 
For example, it was shown that proton nuclear spins in nematic liquid crystal could 
achieve  long-lived  intra-molecular  quantum  coherence  with  entanglement  in  room 
temperature for information storage (Khitrin et al, 2002). Long-ranged (>10 microns) 
intermolecular  multiple-quantum  coherence  in  NMR  spectroscopy  was  discovered 
about  a  decade  ago  (Warren,  et  al  1993).  Long-lived  (>.05  milliseconds) 
entanglement  of  two  macroscopic  spin  ensembles  in  room  temperature  has  been 
achieved  recently  (Julsgaard,  et  al.  2001).  Further,  NMR  quantum  computation  in 
room temperature is reality (Gershenfeld & Chuang, 1997). 

Therefore, according to our theory, consciousness is intrinsically connected to 
the spin process and emerges from the collective dynamics of various entangled spin 
states and the unity of mind is achieved by entanglement of these mind-pixels (Hu & 
Wu,  2002;  2003;  2004a-d).  Our  theory  is  tentative  as  are  all  current  theories  about 

62 

 
 
 
 
 
 
consciousness. As with other quantum mind theories, decoherence is a major concern 
as pointed out by Tegmark (2000) but may not be insurmountable (See, e.g., Hagan, 
et.al.,  2002).  We  believe  that  the  solution  will  be  found  through  the  study  of  the 
nature of quantum entanglement. 

Indeed, our dualistic approach adopted earlier (Hu & Wu, 2002) and 
described in more detail in this paper allows mind to utilize quantum entanglement to 
achieve the unity of mind in pre-spacetime. The essential question is then how does 
mind process and harness the information from the mind-pixels which form various 
entangled spin states so that it can have conscious experience. We have argued that 
contextual, irreversible and non-computable means within pre-spacetime are utilized 
by mind to do this. Furthermore, we recognize that there may not be any large-scale 
quantum coherence in the warm and wet brain to support those quantum theories of 
mind that require macroscopic quantum effects. However, our theory does not depend 
on such a coherence to work in the dualistic approach. 

7.  

Conclusion 

In this article, we have discussed the ontological origin, implications and 
applications of quantum entanglement by thinking outside the standard interpretations 
of quantum mechanics. We have argued that quantum entanglement originates from 
the primordial self-referential spin processes in non-spatial and non-temporal pre-
spacetime, implies genuine interconnectedness and inseparableness of once 
interacting quantum entities, play vital roles in biology and consciousness and, once 
better understood and harnessed, has far-reaching consequences and applications in 
many fields such as medicine and neuroscience. It follows then that quantum 
computation power also originates from the primordial spin processes in pre-
spacetime. We have also discussed the roles of quantum entanglement in our spin-
mediated consciousness theory. 

Finally, the principle of science dictates that a scientific theory/hypothesis 

should only achieve legitimacy if it is experimentally verified. Thus, since the 
summer of 2004 to the present, we have mainly focused our efforts on the 
quantification of our theory and the designs and implementations of computer 
simulations and experiments for the verifications of the same. Important results shall 
be reported as soon as feasible. 

REFERENCES 
Aerts, D. & Aerts, S. Towards a general operational and realistic framework for quantum mechanics 
and relativity theory. In Quo Vadis Quantum Mechanics? ed. A. C. Elitzur et al. (Berlin: Springer, 
2004). 

Arnesen,  M.  C.,  Bose,  S.  &  Vedral,  V.  Natural  thermal  and  magnetic  entanglement  in  the  1D 
Heisenberg model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 017901/1-4 (2001). 

63 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Bohm, D. & Hiley, B. J. The Undivided Universe (London: Routledge, 1993). 

Bogan, J. R. Spin: the classical to quantum connection. arXiv quant-ph/0212110 (2002). 

Brooks, M. Entanglement: weirdest link. New Scientist 818: 32 (2005). 

Budinich,  P.  From  the  geometry  of  pure  spinors  with  their  division  algebra  to  fermions’s  physics. 
arXiv hep-th/0102049 (2001). 

Clarke,  C.  Quantum  mechanics,  consciousness  and  the  self.  in  Science,  Consciousness  and  Ultimate 
Reality, ed. D. Lorimer (Exeter: Imprint Academic, 2004). 

Deutsch, D. and Hayden, P. Information flow in entangled quantum systems. Proc. Royal. Soc. A456: 
1759-1774 (2000). 

Deutsch, D. The structure of the multiverse. Proc. Royal. Soc. A458: 2911-2923 (2002). 

Davenas,  E.  et  al.  Human  basophil  degranulation  triggered  by  very  dilute  antiserum  against  IgE. 
Nature 333:816-818 (1988). 

Dirac, P. A. M. The quantum theory of the electron. Proc. R. Soc. A 117: 610-624 (1928). 

Durt, T. Quantum entanglement, interaction, and the classical limit. quant-ph/0401121 (2004). 

Eberhard,  P.  Bell's  theorem  and  the  different  concepts  of  locality.  Nuovo  Cimento  46B:  392-419 
(1978). 

Einstein,  A.,  Podolsky,  B.  &  Rosen,  N.  Can  quantum-mechanical  description  of  physical  reality  be 
considered complete? Phys. Rev. 47: 777-780 (1935). 

Esposito, S. On the role of spin in quantum mechanics. Found. Phys. Lett. 12: 165 (1999). 

Gershenfeld,  N.  &  Chuang,  I.  L.  Bulk  spin  resonance  quantum  computation.  Science  275:  350–356 
(1997). 

Ghosh, S., Rosenbaum, T. F., Aeppli, G. & Coppersmith, S. N. Entangled quantum state of magnetic 
dipoles. Nature 425:48-51 (2003). 

Grinberg-Zylberbaum,  J.  &  Ramos,  J.  Patterns  of  interhemispheric  correlation  during  human 
communication. Int’l J. Neurosci. 36: 41–53 (1987). 

Grinberg-Zylberbaum,J.  et  al  The  Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen  paradox  in  the  brain:  The  transferred 
potential. Phys. Essays 7: 422–427 (1994). 

64 

 
Hameroff, S. & Penrose, R. Conscious events as orchestrated spacetime selections. J. Conscious Stud., 
3: 36-53 (1996). 

Hagan,  S,  Hameroff,  S.  R.  &  Tuszynski,  J.  A.  Quantum  computation  in  brain  microtubules: 
Decoherence and biological feasibility. Phys. Rev. E65, 061901 (2002). 

Hestenes, D. Quantum mechanics from self-interaction. Found. Physics 15: 63-87 (1983). 

Hu,  H.  &  Wu,  M.  Mechanism  of  anesthetic  action:  oxygen  pathway  perturbation  hypothesis.  Med. 
Hypotheses 57: 619-627 (2001). 

Hu, H.  & Wu, M. Spin-mediated consciousness theory: possible roles of oxygen unpaired electronic 
spins  and  neural  membrane  nuclear  spin  ensemble  in  memory  and  consciousness.  arXiv  quant-
ph/0208068 (2002). 

Hu,  H.  &  Wu,  M.  Spin  as  primordial  self-referential  process  driving  quantum  mechanics,  spacetime 
dynamics and consciousness Cogprints ID3544 (2003); NeuroQuantology 2:41-49 (2004a). 

Hu, H. & Wu, M. Spin-mediated consciousness theory: possible roles of neural membrane nuclear spin 
ensembles and paramagnetic oxygen. Med. Hypotheses 63: 633-646 (2004b). 

Hu, H. & Wu, M. Action potential modulation of neural spin networks suggests possible role of spin in 
memory and consciousness NeuroQuantology 2:309-317 (2004c). 

Hu,  H.  &  Wu,  M.  Possible  roles  of  neural  electron  spin  networks  in  memory  and  consciousness. 
Cogprints ID3544 (2004d). 

Jahn, R. G. & Dunne, B. J. The PEAR proposition. J. Sci. Exploration 19: 195–245 (2005). 

Josephson, B. D. & Pallikari-Viras, F. Biological utilisation of quantum nonlocality. Found. Phys. 21: 
197-207 (1991). 

Julsgaard,  B.,  Kozhekin,  A.  &  Polzik,  E.  S.  Experimentally  long-lived  entanglement  of  two 
macroscopic objects. Nature 413, 400–403 (2001). 

Kiehn,  R.  M.  An  extension  to  Bohm’s  quantum  theory  to  include  non-gradient  potentials  and  the 
production of nanometer vortices. http://www22.pair.com/csdc/pdf/bohmplus.pdf (1999). 

Khitrin,  A.  K.,  Ermakov,  V.  L.  &  Fung,  B.  M.  NMR  molecular  photography.  J.  Chem.  Phys.  117: 
6903-6906 (2002). 

Milgrom, L. R. Patient-practitioner-remedy (PPR) entanglement. Homeophathy 91: 239-248 (2002). 

Pauli, W. Zur quantenmechanik des magnetischen electrons. Z. Phys., 43: 601-623 (1927). 

65 

 
Penrose, R. A spinor approach to general relativity. Ann. Phys. 10: 171 (1960). 

Penrose, R. Twistor algebra.  J. Math. Phys., 8: 345 (1967). 

Radin, D. Entangled minds Shift, 5: 10–14 (2004). 

Rey, L. Thermoluminescence of ultra-high dilutions of lithium chloride and sodium chloride. Physica 
A 323: 67-74 (2003). 

Salesi, G. & Recami, E. Hydrodynamics of spinning particles. Phys. Rev. A 57: 98 (1998). 

Schrödinger,  E.  Discussion  of  probability  relations  between  separated  systems,  Proc.  Cambridge 
Philos. Soc. 31: 555 (1935). 

Stapp, H. E. Mind, Matter and Quantum Mechanics. Found. Phys. 12: 363-99 (1982). 

Tegmark,  M.  The  importance  of  quantum  decoherence  in  brain  processes.  Phys.  Rev.,  61E:  4194 
(2000). 

Tomonaga, S. The Story of Spin (Chicago: The Univ. Press of Chicago 1997). 

Wackermann,  J.  Dyadic  correlations  between  brain  functional  states:  present  facts  and  future 
perspectives. Mind and Matter 2: 105-122 (2005). 

Walach,  H.  Magic  of  signs:  a  non-local  interpretation  of  homeopathy.  Homeopathy  89:  127-140 
(2000). 

Walker,  E.  H.  Consciousness  and  Quantum  Theory.  Psychic  Exploration,  ed.  J.  White,  544-68 
(Putnam's, New York, 1974). 

Warren, W. S. et al. Generation of impossible correlation peaks between bulk water and biomolecules 
in solution NMR. Science 262: 2005 (1993). 

Weingärtner, O. What is the therapeutically active ingredient of homeopathic potencies? Homeopathy 
92: 145-151 (2003).  

66 

 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX II 

(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:8)(cid:14)(cid:7)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:15)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:23) (cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:24)(cid:7)
(cid:3)(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:3)(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:8)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:17) (cid:4)(cid:11)(cid:7)(cid:17) (cid:19) (cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:3)(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:8)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:21)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:23) (cid:17) (cid:25) (cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:26) (cid:7)(cid:17) (cid:4)(cid:11)(cid:7)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:7)
(cid:23) (cid:8)(cid:20)(cid:12)(cid:7)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:7)(cid:16) (cid:8)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:16) (cid:3)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:4)(cid:12)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:7)
(cid:7)
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:29)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:11) (cid:9)(cid:12)(cid:13)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:14) (cid:2)(cid:7)
(cid:7)
(cid:16)(cid:17) (cid:9)(cid:18)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:8)(cid:30)(cid:8)(cid:31)(cid:30)(cid:15)(cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:28)(cid:7)

(cid:7)
(cid:17) (cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:1)(cid:23) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:1)(cid:7)

Although  theories  and  speculations  abound,  there  is  no  consensus  on  the 
origin or cause of gravity. Presumably, this status of affair is due to the lack of any 
experimental  guidance.  In  this  paper,  we  will  discuss  its  ontological  origin, 
implications and potential applications by thinking outside the mainstream notions of 
general  relativity  and  quantum  gravity.  We  argue  that  gravity  originates  from  the 
primordial  spin  processes  in  non-spatial  and  non-temporal  pre-spacetime,  is  the 
instantaneous 
manifestation  of  quantum  entanglement,  and 
interconnectedness of all matters in the universe. That is, we advocate the principle of 
non-local action. To certain degree, our view is a reductionist expression of Newton’s 
instantaneous  universal  gravity  and  Mach’s  Principle  with  important  consequences. 
We  also  discuss  the  role  of  gravity  in  consciousness  from  this  new  perspective. 
Indeed, if spin is the primordial self-referential cause of everything, it should also be 
the cause of gravity. 

implies  genuine 

 Key Words: Gravity, Spin, Entanglement, Instantaneity, Interconnectedness, Consciousness 

1. 

Introduction 

This  paper  is  an  extension  of  our  earlier  papers  advocating  a  holistic  and 
unified theme of reality in which spin is the primordial self-referential process driving 
quantum  mechanics,  spacetime  dynamics  and  consciousness  (1-5).  Briefly,  we  have 
proposed  a  spin-mediated  consciousness  theory  in  which  spin  is  the  mind-pixel  (1), 
outlined a unified theme of reality based on spin (2), offered our views on the essence 
and  implications  of  quantum  entanglement  (3),  and  conducted  experiments  which 
indeed  support  our  propositions  (4-5).  In  particular,  our  experiments  show  that  (a) 

1Corresponding author:3Huping Hu, Ph.D., J.D., Biophysics Consulting Group, 25 Lubber Street, 
Stony Brook, NY 11790, USA. E-mail: hupinghu@quantumbrain.org 

67 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
biologically/chemically meaningful information can be transmitted through quantum 
entanglement; (b) both classical and quantum information can be transmitted between 
locations  of  arbitrary  distances  through  quantum  entanglement;  (c)  instantaneous 
signaling  is  physically  real;  and  (d)  brain  processes  such  as  perception  and  other 
biological  processes  likely  involve  quantum  information  and  nuclear  and/or 
electronic spins are likely play important roles in these processes. 

While our primary focus at the present is till experimental studies, we would 
like to offer our view on the origin, implications and potential applications of gravity. 
The  connection  between  quantum  entanglement  and  Newton’s  instantaneous 
universal  gravity  and  Mach’s  Principle  is  natural.  To  certain  degree,  our  view  is  a 
reductionist expression of this connection with important consequences. Readers are 
again advised that our propositions are outside mainstream physics and other authors 
may  hold  similar  views  on  some  of  the  points  we  shall  make.  Some  readers  are 
further advised to treat this paper as  an Ed-Op piece so as to avoid being offended. 
However, we are deadly serious about our propositions and put our money where our 
mouth is. 

is  assumed 

Microscopically  gravity 

to  be  fable  and  negligible  and 
macroscopically it is ubiquitous and pervasive.  It seems to penetrate everything and 
cannot  be  shielded.  However,  there  is  no  consensus  as  to  its  cause  despite  of  the 
efforts  of  many  people.  Presumably,  this  status  of  affair  is  due  to  the  lack  of  any 
experimental  guidance.  There  are  many  general  and  technical  papers  written  on  the 
subject.  So  cutting  to  the  chase,  we  shall  immediately  outline  our  propositions  and 
then  discuss  each  in  some  detail  with  reference  to  existing  literatures  whenever 
possible. Our propositions are as follows: 

4)  Gravity originates from the primordial spin processes in non-spatial and non-
temporal  pre-spacetime  and  is  the  macroscopic  manifestation  of  quantum 
entanglement. 

5)  Thus,  gravity  is  nonlocal  and  instantaneous,  as  Newton  reluctantly  assumed 
and  Mach  suggested.  It  implies  that  all  matters  in  the  universe  are 
instantaneously  interconnected  and  many  anomalous  effects  in  astronomy 
such as red shift, dark energy, dark mass and Pioneer effect may be resolved 
from this perspective. 

6)  Potentially, gravity can be harnessed, tamed and developed into revolutionary 
technologies  to  serve  the  mankind  in  many  areas  such  as  instantaneous 
communication, spacetime engineering and space travel. 

2. 

The Origin and Nature of Gravity 

The idea of instantaneous gravity is nothing new. Newton’s law of universal 
gravitation  implies  instantaneous  “action  at  a  distance”  which  he  felt  deeply 
uncomfortable  with,  but  Newton  was  not  able  to  find  a  cause  of  gravity  (6).  Later 

68 

 
 
 
 
Mach  suggested  that  "[t]he  investigator  must  feel  the  need  of...  knowledge  of  the 
immediate connections, say, of the masses of the universe…[t]here will hover before 
him as an ideal insight into the principles of the whole matter, from which accelerated 
and  inertial  motions  will  result  in  the  same  way"  (7).  Ontologically,  Mach’s  above 
suggestion is a form of holism and implies that gravity is relational and instantaneous. 

It  was  Einstein  who  fulfilled  Mach’s  “relational”  suggestion  of  gravity  by 
inventing  general  relativity  (8).  He  also  coined  the  phrase  Mach’s  principle. 
However, such fulfillment is at the sacrifice of  Mach’s “immediate connections” by 
assuming that the speed of gravity is the speed of light. Einstein’s general relativity is 
now the mainstream theory of gravity, but it is in conflict with quantum mechanics – 
the most successful theory of the 20th century which Einstein himself helped to build. 
Einstein  called  quantum  entanglement  “spooky  action  at  a  distance”  in  the  famous 
EPR debate (9). However, it seems that Einstein’s camp is on the losing side of the 
debate today  as many recent experiments have shown that quantum entanglement is 
physically  real  (e.g.,  10-11).  We  suggest  that  a  theory  of  gravity,  which  includes 
general  relativity  as  an  approximation,  be  built  from  the  properties  of  quantum 
entanglement. 

Ontologically,  we  have  argued  that  quantum  entanglement  arises  from  the 
primordial  self-referential  spin  processes  which  are  envisioned  by  us  as  the  driving 
force  behind  quantum  mechanics,  spacetime  dynamics  and  consciousness  (2). 
Pictorially, two interacting quantum entities such as two electrons get entangled with 
each  other  through  the  said  spin  processes  in  pre-spacetime.  Such  ontological 
interpretation is supported by existing literature as discussed previously (2). Here we 
focus  our  discussion  on spin  as  the  primordial  process  driving  space-time  dynamics 
including gravity. 

First,  spin  is  deeply  connected  to  the  microscopic  structure  of  spacetime  as 
reflected by the Dirac equation for Dirac spinor field representing the fermions (12). 
Indeed, Penrose (13-14) had considered early on that spin might be more fundamental 
than  spacetime  and  invented  spinor  and  twistor  algebras  for  a  combinatorial 
description of spacetime geometry. Bohm and Hiley (15) generalized the twistor idea 
to  Clifford  algebra  as  a  possible  basis  for  describing  Bohm’s  “implicit  order.” 
Recently  various  spin  foams  have  been  formulated  as  extensions  to  Penrose’s  spin 
networks for the purpose of constructing a consistent theory of quantum gravity (16). 
Many  others  have  also  study  the  nature  of  spin  from  both  classical  and  quantum- 
mechanical  perspectives.  For  example,  Newman  showed  that  spin  might  have  a 
classical  geometric  origin.  By  treating  the  real  Maxwell  Field  and  real  linearized 
Einstein equations as being embedded in complex Minkowski space, he was able to 
interpret  spin-angular  momentum  as  arising  from  a  charge  and  “mass  monopole” 
source moving along a complex world line (17). 

69 

 
 
 
 
Second, Sidharth (18-19) has discussed the nature of spin within the context 
of  quantized  fractal  spacetime  and  showed  that  spin  is  symptomatic  of  the  non-
commutative geometry of space-time at the Compton scale of a fermion and the three 
dimensionality  of  the  space  result  from  the  spinorial  behavior  of  fermions.  He 
showed  that  mathematically  an  imaginary  shift  of  the  spacetime  coordinate  in  the 
Compton scale of a fermion introduces spin ½ into general relativity and curvature to 
the fermion theory (18). The reason why an imaginary shift is associated with spin is 
to be found in the quantum mechanical zitterbewegung within the Compton scale and 
the consequent quantized fractal space-time (18). Further, according to Sidharth (19), 
a  fermion  is  like  a  Kerr-Newman  black  hole  within  the  Compton  scale  of  which 
causality and locality fails. 

Third, Burinskii has recently shown that in spite of the weakness of the local 
gravitational  field,  the  gravity  for  a  spin  ½  fermion  as  derived  using  the  classical 
Kerr-Newman Kerr solution (Kerr’s Gravity) has very strong stringy, topological and 
non-local action on the Compton distances of the fermion, polarizing the space-time 
and  electromagnetic  field  and  controlling  the  basic  quantum  properties  of  the 
fermions (20). Thus, Kerr’s Gravity may suggest possibly deep connections between 
the mass-energy relationship of matter and the quantum properties of particles (20). 

Fourth, Makhlin has recently shown that the axial field component in the spin 
connections  of  the  Dirac  spinor  field  provides  an  effective  mechanism  of  auto-
localization  of  the  Dirac  spinor  field  into  compact  objects,  presumably  representing 
the fermions, and condition that the compact objects are stable leads to the Einstein's 
field equations (21). He suggested that the physical origin of the macroscopic forces 
of  gravity  between  any  two  bodies  is  a  trend  of  the  global  Dirac  spinor  field  to 
concentrate around the microscopic domains where this field happens to be extremely 
localized (21). He further suggested that the long distance effect of the axial field is 
indistinguishable  from  the  Newton's  gravity  which  according  to  him  reveals  the 
microscopic nature of gravity and the origin of the gravitational mass (21). 

Further,  Penrose-Hameroff’s  self-organized  objective  reduction  model  of 
spacetime  geometry  (22)  also  implies  that  the  spacetime  dynamics  is  driving  by 
certain  self-referential  process.  In  addition,  Cahill’s  work  on  a  self-referentially 
limited neural-network  model of reality (23) supports the view of a primordial self-
referential network underlying reality. 

We emphasize that pre-spacetime in this article means a non-spatial and non-
temporal  domain  but  it  is  not  associated  with  an  extra-dimension  in  the usual  sense 
since there is no distance or time in such domain (2-3). So pre-spacetime is a holistic 
domain  located  outside  spacetime  but  connected  through  quantum  entanglement  to 
everywhere  in  spacetime  enabling  Newton’s  instantaneous  universal  gravity  and 
Mach’s  “immediate  connections.”  It  has  similarity  to  Bohm’s  concept  of  implicate 
order  (24)  and  other  non-local  hidden  variable  theories  (25-26).  The  said  pre-

70 

 
 
 
 
 
 
spacetime  is  a  “world”  beyond  Einstein’s  relativistic  world  through  which  quantum 
entanglement  can  be  used  to  produce  instantaneous  signaling  as  we  have 
demonstrated experimentally (4-5). 

In short, existing literatures cited above support the proposition that spin is the 
primordial  process  driving  space-time  dynamics.  Since  we  have  argued  previously 
that  quantum  entanglement  also  originates  from  the  primordial  spin  process,  it  is 
natural to link gravity to the property of quantum entanglement. Indeed, doing so will 
not only provide a cause to Newton’s instantaneous universal gravity but also realize 
Mach’s “immediate connections’ discussed above. Therefore, we propose that gravity 
originates  from  the  primordial  spin  processes  in  non-spatial  and  non-temporal  pre-
spacetime and is the macroscopic manifestation of quantum entanglement. 

3. 

Implications of Gravity from This New Perspective 

At  the  present  we  are  contemplating  a  mathematical  framework  from  which 
the  primordial  self-referential  spin  process  produces  everything  including  gravity. 
There  are  several  exiting  approaches  which  provide  some  hints  as  to  the  said 
mathematical forms. These approaches are all based non-local hidden variables, that 
is,  the  principle  of  non-local  action.  They  include  Bohmian  mechanics  (15,  24), 
Adler’s trace dynamics (25), Smolin’s stochastic approach (26) and Cahill’s process 
physics (23). 

In additions, other existing alternative approaches on gravity may also provide 
some  hints.  For  sample,  Sakharov’s  induced  gravity  is  a  well  known  alternative 
theory  of  quantum  gravity  in  which  gravity  emerges  as  a  property  of  matter  fields 
(27).  In  comparison,  we  advocate  herein  that  gravity  is  a  property  of  quantum 
entanglement. 

The  implication  of  this  new  perspective  on  gravity  is  far-reaching.  It  implies  that 
gravity  is  non-local  and  instantaneous,  as  Newton  reluctantly  assumed  and  Mach 
suggested,  all  matters  in  the  universe  are  instantaneously  interconnected  and, 
therefore, many anomalous effects in astronomy such as dark energy, dark mass and 
Pioneer  effects  may  be  resolved  from  this  perspective  and  within  a  framework  of 
non-local cosmology. 

4. 

Potential Applications of Gravity from This New Perspective 

We are convinced that gravity, as the macroscopic manifestation of quantum 

entanglement, can be harnessed, tamed and developed into revolutionary technologies 
to serve the mankind in many areas. 

For  example,  once  harnessed,  non-local  gravity  may  be  used  to  communicate 
between  locations  of  arbitrary  distances  instantaneously.  Such  technology  would 

71 

 
 
 
 
 
 
dramatically  decrease  the  communication  delay  to  spacecraft  in  outer  space.  For  a 
second example, once tamed, powerful non-local gravity may be used to engineer the 
structures of spacetime and propel a new kind of spacecraft for advanced space travel. 

Is this for real? You bet. We put our money where our mouth is and predict that the 
wonders  of  non-local  gravity  technologies  will  soon  be  widely  utilize  to  serve  the 
mankind and a new paradigm of science will be born in the near future. 

5. 

The Role of Gravity in Consciousness 

the  role  of  gravity 

As  manefestation  of  quantum  entanglement, 

in 
consciousness is to achieve binding. In our spin-mediated consciousness theory, such 
role played by gravity is not hard to see, since spin is the seat of consciousness and 
the linchpin between mind and the brain, that is, spin is the mind-pixel (1). According 
to our theory, the nuclear spins and possibly electron spins inside neural membranes 
and  proteins  form  various  entangled  quantum  states  through  action  potential 
modulated nuclear spin interactions and paramagnetic O2/NO driven activations and, 
in  turn,  the  collective  dynamics  of  the  said  entangled  quantum  states  produces 
consciousness  and  influences  the  classical  neural  activities  through  spin  chemistry 
(1). 

As  with  other  quantum  mind  theories,  decoherence  is  a  major  concern  as 
pointed out by Tegmark (28) but may not be insurmountable (29). We are convinced 
that  the  solution  lies  with  quantum  entanglement.  Indeed,  our  dualistic  approach 
adopted earlier allows mind to utilize quantum entanglement to achieve the unity of 
mind in pre-spacetime (1). The essential question is then how does mind process and 
harness the information from the mind-pixels which form various entangled states so 
that  it  can  have  conscious  experience.  We  have  argued  that  contextual,  irreversible 
and non-computable means within pre-spacetime are utilized by mind to do this. 

6. 

Conclusion 

In this paper we have discussed the ontological origin, implications and 

potential applications of gravity by thinking outside mainstream notions of general 
relativity and quantum gravity. We have proposed that gravity originates from the 
primordial self-referential spin processes in non-spatial and non-temporal pre-
spacetime, is the macroscopic manifestation of quantum entanglement, implies 
instantaneous interconnectedness of all maters in the universe and, once better 
understood and harnessed, has far-reaching consequences and applications in many 
areas such as instantaneous communication, spacetime engineering and space travel. 
We have also discussed the role of gravity in our spin-mediated consciousness theory 
from this new perspective. Finally, the principle of science dictates that a 
hypothesis/proposition should only achieve scientific legitimacy if it is 

72 

 
 
 
 
 
experimentally verified. Thus, we have designed and carried out experiments to 
verify our propositions and the results will be reported separately. 

REFERENCES 

1.  Hu,  H.  &  Wu,  M.  Spin-mediated  consciousness  theory.  arXiv  quant-ph/0208068  (2002);  Med. 
Hypotheses 63: 633-646 (2004). 

2. Hu, H. & Wu, M. Spin as primordial self-referential process driving quantum mechanics, spacetime 
dynamics and consciousness. Cogprints ID3544 (2003); NeuroQuantology 2:41-49 (2004). 

3. Hu, H. & Wu, M. Thinking outside the box: the essence and implications of quantum entanglement. 
Cogprints ID4581 (2005); NeuroQuantology 4: 5-16 (2006). 

4.  Hu,  H.  &  Wu,  M.  Photon  induced  non-local  effect  of  general  anesthetics  on  the  brain. 
NeuroQuantology 4: 17-31 (2006); Cogprints ID4783 (2006). 

5.  Hu,  H.  &  Wu.  Nonlocal  effects  of  chemical  substances  on  the  brain  produced  through  quantum 
entanglement. Progress in Physics v3: 20-26 (2006). 

6.  Isaac  Newton.  The  Principia:  Mathematical  Principles  of  Natural  Philosophy.  Translated  by 
I.Bernard  Cohen  and  Anne  Whitman.  Preceded  by  A  Guide  to  Newton's  Principia,  by  I.Bernard 
Cohen.  University  of  California  Press  1999  ISBN  0-520-08816-6  ISBN  0-520-08817-4  (Source: 
Wikipedia). 

7.  Mach,  Ernst.  The  Science  of  Mechanics;  a  Critical  and  Historical  Account  of  its  Development. 
LaSalle, IL: Open Court Pub. Co. 1960 LCCN 60010179 (Source: Wikipedia) 

8. Einstein, A. Die Feldgleichungun der Gravitation. Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften zu Berlin: 844-847 (November, 1915). 

9. Einstein, A., Podolsky, B. & Rosen, N. Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be 
considered complete? Phys. Rev. 47: 777-780 (1935). 

10.  Julsgaard,  B.,  Kozhekin,  A.  &  Polzik,  E.  S.  Experimentally  long-lived  entanglement  of  two 
macroscopic objects. Nature 413, 400–403 (2001). 

11.  Arnesen,  M.  C.,  Bose,  S.  &  Vedral,  V.  Natural  thermal  and  magnetic  entanglement  in  the  1D 
Heisenberg model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 017901/1-4 (2001). 

12. Dirac, P. A. M. The quantum theory of the electron. Proc. R. Soc. A 117: 610-624 (1928). 

13. Penrose, R. A spinor approach to general relativity. Ann. Phys. 10: 171 (1960). 

73 

 
 
14. Penrose, R. Twistor algebra.  J. Math. Phys., 8: 345 (1967). 

15.  Bohm,  D.  and  Hiley,  B.  J.  Generalisation  of  the  twistor  to  Clifford  algebras  as  a  basis  for 
geometry. Revista Brasilera de Fisica, Vol. Especial Os 70, anos de Mario Schonberg, pp. 1-26 (1984) 

16. Smolin, L. Three Roads to Quantum Gravity (New York: Basic Books 2001). 

17.  Newman,  T.  E.  On  a  classical,  geometric  origin  of  magnetic  moments,  spin-angular  momentum 
and the Dirac gyromagnetic ratio. Phys. Rev., 65D:104005 (2002). 

18. Sidharth, B. G. Issues and ramifications in quantized fractal space-time: an interface with quantum 
superstrings. Chaos Solitons Fractals, 12: 1449-1457 (2001).  

19. Sidharth, B. G. Chaotic Universe (New York: Nova Science 2001)  

20.  Burinskii,  A.  Kerr’s  gravity  as  a  quantum  gravity  on  the  Compton  level.  arXiv  gr-qc/0606035 
(2006). 

21. Makhlin, A. The Dirac field and the possible origin of gravity. arXiv hep-ph/0408105 (2004).  

22. Hameroff,  S.  & Penrose,  R. Conscious events as orchestrated spacetime selections.  J. Conscious 
Stud., 3: 36-53 (1996). 

23. Cahill, R. T. Process physics: from quantum foam to general relativity. arXiv gr-qc/0203015 
(2002). 

24. Bohm, D. and Hiley, B. J. The Undivided Universe (London: Routledge 1993). 

25. Alder, S. Statistical dynamics of global unitary invariant matrix models as pre-quantum mechanics. 
arXiv hep-th/0206120 (2002). 

26.  Smolin,  L.  Could  quantum  mechanics  be  an  approximation  to  another  theory?  arXiv.org/quant-
ph/0609109. 

27. Sakharov, A.D. Vacuum quantum fluctuations in curved space and the theory of gravitation. 

Sov.Phys.Dokl. 12:1040-1041 (1968). 

28. Tegmark, M. The importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes. Phys. Rev., 61E: 4194 
(2000). 

29.  Hagan,  S,  Hameroff,  S.  R.  &  Tuszynski,  J.  A.  Quantum  computation  in  brain  microtubules: 
Decoherence and biological feasibility. Phys. Rev. E65, 061901 (2002). 

74 

 
Thinking Outside the Box III: How Mind Influences Brain Through Proactive Spin 

APPENDIX III 

  Huping Hu & Maoxin Wu 
          (Dated : June 8, 2007) 

ABSTRACT 
Benjamin  has  written an article entitled  “Dark  Chemistry or Psychic Spin Pixel?”  which promotes a 
“dark chemistry” model of mind and discuss the spin-mediated theory. This hypothetical chemistry is 
based  on  the  hypothetical  axion  dark  matter.  Based  on  our  recent  experimental  findings,  our 
contentions  are  two-fold:  (1)  dark  matter  is  likely  the  cosmological  manifestation  of  quantum 
entanglement; and (2) the hypothetical axion dark matter is, therefore, replaceable by non-local effects 
mediated  by  the  primordial  spin  processes.  We  also  discuss  the  cause  of  apparent  dark  energy.  In 
particular,  we  explore  the  issue  how  mind  influences  the  brain  through  said  spin  processes.  Our 
thoughts  are  that  the  manifestation  of  free  will  is  intrinsically  associated  with  the  nuclear  and/or 
electron spin processes inside the varying high electric voltage environment of the neural membranes 
and proteins which likely enable the said spin processes to be “proactive,” that is, being able to utilize 
non-local  energy  (potential)  and  quantum  information  to  influence  brain  activities  through  spin 
chemistry  and  possibly  other  chemical/physical  processes  in  defiance  of  the  second  law  of 
thermodynamics. 

Key Words: dark matter, dark energy, axion, gravity, quantum entanglement, proactive spin, 
free will, consciousness 

1. 

On “Dark Chemistry” Model 

Benjamin  has  written  an  article  entitled  “Dark  Chemistry  or  Psychic  Spin 
Pixel?”  (Benjamin,  2007)  which  promotes  a  “dark  chemistry”  model  of  mind  and 
discuss  the  spin  mediated  theory  (Hu  &  Wu,  2002,  2004a  &  2004b)  and  the 
Hameroff-Penrose  model  (Hameroff  &  Penrose,  1996).  One  may  recall  that  dark 
matter  is  a  hypothetical  matter  of  unknown  composition  whose  presence  is  inferred 
from its gravitational effects on visible matter, dark energy is a hypothetical form of 
energy  that  permeates  all  of  space  and  tends  to  increase  the  apparent  rate  of 
expansion of the universe, and axion is a hypothetical elementary particle postulated 
to  resolve  the  lack  of  CP-violation  in  the  physics  of  quarks  and  gluons  (Source: 
Wikipedia).  Axion  is  a  candidate  for  dark  matter.  Benjamin’s  “dark  chemistry”  is  a 
hypothetical chemistry based on the hypothetical axion dark matter. Benjamin claims 
that his model is necessary because “quantum parameters such as spin are universal, 
while discernible mental phenomena are not[, so] a homunculus seems necessary to 
provide an adequate ontological substrate for mind, to avoid an integration of infinite 
regress” (Benjamin, 2007). 

75 

 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
Benjamin  is  commendable  for  boldly  going  where  no  one  has  gone  before. 
However,  we  are  afraid  that  Benjamin,  possibly  a  few  other  individuals,  has 
misunderstood  what  is  spin-mediated  consciousness  theory.  Our  theory  is  an 
ontological  theory  and,  in  its  dualistic  embodiment,  a  non-spatial  and  non-temporal 
pre-spacetime  (nonlocal  domain)  is  the  homunculus  (Hu  &  Wu,  2002,  2004a  & 
2004b).  Our  concept  of  spin,  being  the  primordial  self-referential  process,  is  much 
more  than  a  passive  quantum  parameter.  It  is  the  mind-pixel,  the  linchpin  between 
mind and the brain and the ultimate stop-gap of infinite regress through self-reference 
in pre-spacetime; or, as Benjamin put it, spin is “psychic” (id). It is through the self-
referential  spin  processes  that  a  conscious  being  such  as  a  human  perceives  and 
interacts  with  the  external/physical  world.  In  other  words,  spin  is  a  process  capable 
being “proactive” in the brain. To justify such view, we would like to point out that in 
both  Hestenes'  geometric  formulation  of  quantum  mechanics  (Hestenes,  1983)  and 
Bohm's  non-local  hidden  variable  formulation  it  has  been  shown  that  spin  is  solely 
responsible  for  all  the  quantum  effects  (Esposito,  1999).  Further,  although  spin  is 
universal,  the  reason  why  it  allows  the  brain  to  have  conscious  experience  and  free 
will  is  because  of  the  particular  structures  and  dynamics  of  the  brain  as  discussed 
elsewhere (Hu & Wu, 2002, 2004a & 2004b) and further below. 

As  we  understand  it,  the  gist  of  Benjamin’s  model  is  a  homunculus  or 
invisible axion body running along the visible physical body which interacts with said 
physical body through dark chemistry and serves as the host of the soul/spirit in order 
to avoid infinite regress. Further, according to Benjamin, the axion body is made of 
intransient non-electric particles and virtually  a hologram integrating the  patterns of 
information  at  various  levels.  Presumably  (we  guess),  dark  chemistry  involves  “the 
resonance  between  the  dark  and  visible  bodies  of  an  organism”  and  “dynamic 
biophoton  process  of  kindling  and  quenching  the  "potential"  of  the  [holographic] 
pattern” (Benjamin, 2007). 

We agree with Benjamin that “[m]ind and consciousness need not be mystical 
or  magical”  (Benjamin,  2007).  However,  his  “dark  chemistry”  model  is  very 
convoluted  because  it  involves  all  these  hypothetical  and/or  exotic  entities  such  as 
dark  matter,  dark  particle,  dark  body,  invisible  axion,  non-electric  particle, 
homunculus, biophoton and graviton. Someone has already commented that “I think 
that  having  learned  how  many  new  entities  are  put  here  into  play  to  explain 
consciousness, William [of] Occam would turn in his tomb” (Patlavskiy, 2007). 

In the following sections, we shall argue that Benjamin may find himself still 
in the “bright” territory instead of the “dark” side, if he is willing to do  an exercise 
with  Occam’s  razor,  cutting  out  “dark”  things  and  replacing  them  with  non-local 
effects  mediated  by  the  “psychic”  spin.  Based  on  our  recent  experimental  findings 
(Hu  &  Wu,  2006a-d;  2007a),  our  contentions  are  two-fold:  (1)  dark  matter  is  likely 
the  cosmological  manifestation  of  quantum  entanglement;  and  (2)  Benjamin’s 
hypothetical dark matter axion, therefore, is replaceable by non-local effects mediated 
by the primordial spin processes. We will also discuss the cause of dark energy and 

76 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
touch  upon  how  universe  operates  without  Big  Bang  and  speculate  what  are  Black 
Holes. 

In  particular,  we  shall  explore  the  issue  how  mind  influences  the  brain 
through  the  primordial  self-referential  spin  processes  which,  we  admit,  have  not 
addressed in detail previously. Our thoughts are that the manifestation of free will is 
intrinsically  associated  with  the  nuclear  and/or  electron  spin  processes  inside  the 
varying  high  electric  voltage  environment  of  the  neural  membranes  and  proteins 
which  likely  enable  the  said  spin  processes  to  be  “proactive,”  that  is,  being  able  to 
utilize  non-local  energy  (potential)  and  quantum  information  in  pre-spacetime 
(nonlocal  domain)  to  influence  brain  activities  through  spin  chemistry  and  possibly 
other chemical/physical processes in defiance of the second law of thermodynamics. 

2. 

The Origin of Dark Matter and Dark Energy 

Before we go on, we would like to state that Einstein is no doubt one of the 
greatest  minds  ever  lived.  He  made  monumental  contributions  to  physics  from 
explaining photoelectrical effect and Brownian motion to constructing special theory 
of  relativity,  the  famous  formula  E=mc2  and  Bose-Einstein  Statistics.  But  just 
because Einstein is  great does not mean that he was infallible as the case with EPR 
(Einstein at al, 1935) debate and his general theory of relativity (“GTR,” see Einstein, 
1915). We are all human and fallible. In any case, whatever happens, GTR is till an 
effective (approximate) theory for some parts of  the universe such  as our own solar 
system. 

With  this  being  said,  it  is  likely,  we  contend,  that  Einstein’s  GTR  is 
ontologically  invalid  because  our  experimental  results  indicate  that  gravity  is 
nonlocal  and  instantaneous  (Hu  &  Wu,  2006a-d;  2007a)  as  Newton  reluctantly 
assumed (Newton, 1999 by Cohen et al) and Mach conjectured (Mach, 1960 by Open 
Court  Pub.  Co.)  and  a  few  other  authors  argued  (e.g.,  Pope  &  Osborne,  1996). 
Besides, many experiments have shown that quantum entanglement is physically real 
(e.g.,  Aspect,  1982;  Julsgaard  et  al,  2001)  which  implies  that  Einstein’s  theories  of 
relativity are in real not imagined conflict with quantum theory. Until now, relativists 
have  been  able  to  hide  behind  the  no-signaling  “veil”  because  of  the  Eberhard 
Theorem  (Eberhard,  1978).  But  that  “veil”  has  been  pierced  and  we  must  deal  with 
reality.  We  understand  that  pointing  out  the  real  possibility  that  “the  Emperor 
(Einstein) has no clothes” as far as GTR is concerned will irritate a great number of 
scientists in the mainstream, especially those on the superstring bandwagon, and may 
eventually destroy jobs, livelihood and research grants. But we need to ask ourselves 
the soul searching question: Are we here for truth and the greater benefit of mankind 
or our self-interests? and do we want to go down in history as conniving hypocrites or 
truth-seeking  scientists?  And  so,  as  John  F.  Kennedy  would  urge,  my  fellow 
Scientists: ask not what mankind can do for you but what can you do for mankind. 

77 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We  have  proposed  in  a  previous  paper  that:  (1)  gravity  originates  from  the 
primordial  spin  processes  in  non-spatial  and  non-temporal  pre-spacetime  (nonlocal 
domain) and is the macroscopic manifestation of quantum entanglement; and (2) thus, 
gravity  is  nonlocal  and  instantaneous  which  implies  that  all  matters  in  the  universe 
are instantaneously interconnected and many anomalous effects in astronomy such as 
dark  matter,  dark  matter,  red  shift  and  Pioneer  effect  may  be  resolved  from  this 
perspective (Hu & Wu, 2007b). 

Experimentally,  we  have  found  that  the  gravity  of  water  in  a  detecting 
reservoir  quantum-entangled  with  water  in  a  remote  reservoir  can  change  when  the 
latter  was  remotely  manipulated  such  that,  it  is  hereby  predicted,  the  gravitational 
energy/potential  is  globally  conserved  (Hu  &  Wu,  2006a-d;  2007a).  We  have  also 
found that the pH value  and temperature of  water in a detecting reservoir quantum-
entangled  with  water  in  a  remote  reservoir  changes  when  the  latter  is  manipulated 
under  the  condition  that  the  water  in  the  detecting  reservoir  is  able  to  exchange 
energy  with  its  local  environment  (id).  Thus,  among  other  things  we  have  realized 
non-local  signaling  using  three  different  physical  observables  and  experimentally 
demonstrated  Newton's  instantaneous  gravity  and  Mach's  instantaneous  connection 
conjecture  and  the  relationship  between  gravity  and  quantum  entanglement.  Our 
findings  also  imply  that  the  properties  of  all  matters  can  be  affected  non-locally 
through  quantum  entanglement  mediated  processes.  Second,  the  second  law  of 
thermodynamics  may  not  hold  when  two  quantum-entangled  systems  together  with 
their respective local environments are considered as two isolated systems and one of 
them  is  manipulated.  Third,  gravity  has  a  non-local  aspect  associated  with  quantum 
entanglement  thus  can  be  non-locally  manipulated  through  quantum  entanglement 
mediated processes (id). Therefore, our findings support a non-local cosmology (Hu 
& Wu, 2007b). 

In light of these developments, we now ask the question what is the origin of 
dark  matter  and  dark  energy.  To  stray  a  bit,  we  further  “naively”  ask  the  question 
how universe operates if the Big Bang didn’t happen. Since modern Big Bang theory 
and Black Holes are based on Einstein’s GTR, there is a good chance that Big Bang 
didn’t happen and apparent Black Holes are not actually Black Holes. There are many 
technical and general papers written in these areas too numerous to mention. 

It  is  our  current  view  that  the  universe  is  regenerative:  It  probably  had  no 
beginning  and  will  have  no  ending,  but  is  constantly  and  dynamically  regenerated 
through  cosmological  processes  associated  with  the  primordial  self-referential  spin 
processes  (Hu  &  Wu,  2003  &  2004b).  These  spin  processes  have  two  aspects:  one 
aspect  is  expressive  being  associated  with  the  concept  of  differentiation,  negative 
entropy and David Bohm’s unfolding (Bohm & Hiley, 1993); the other is regressive 
being  associated  with  the  concept  of  un-differentiation,  entropy  and  David  Bohm’s 
enfolding (Id). In our view dark matter is the cosmological manifestation of quantum 
entanglement  associated  with  the  regressive  and  un-differentiating  aspect  of  the 

78 

 
 
 
 
 
primordial  self-referential  spin  process  (Hu  &  Wu,  2003  &  2004b)  but  seen  as 
additional gravity caused by invisible matter under some cosmological conditions. In 
contrast,  dark  energy  is  the  cosmological  manifestation  of  reverse  quantum 
entanglement  associated  with  the  expressive  and  differentiating  aspect  of  the 
primordial  self-referential  spin  process  but  seen  as  anti-gravity  caused  by  negative 
pressure on the cosmological scale. 

It  is  also  our  current  view  that  entropy  is  really  about  regression  and  un-
differentiation in which explicate and differentiated orders regress/un-differentiate (or 
become chaotic or random due to missing information, that is, our own ignorance due 
to  complexity)  through  spin-mediated  enfolding  (quantum  entanglement).  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  our  view  that  negative  entropy  is  really  about  expression  and 
differentiation  in  which  hidden  orders  in  pre-spacetime  become  explicate  and 
differentiated  under  the  right  conditions  through  spin-mediated  unfolding  (reverse 
quantum entanglement) in which the second law of thermodynamics does not apply. 

Besides the ever-evolving Life on earth, where can we find these expressions 
in  a  dynamic  and  regenerative  universe?  The  famous  but  controversial  Russian 
physicist N.A. Kozyrev suggested long time ago that stars, such as our own Sun, are 
machines  generating  energy  through  “active  time”  (e.g.,  Kozyrev,  2006  in  PiP) 
instead of nucleosysthesis which would died out or not exist at all if the universe had 
no  beginning.  The  energy  researcher  Harold  Aspden  has  also  for  a  long  time 
advocated  the  view  that  the  main  source  of  the  Sun’s  energy  is  not  from 
nucleosynthesis  but  the  age-old  ether  which  fills  the  vacuum  of  space  and  could  be 
converted into thermal radiation because of the  particular  composition and structure 
of  the  Sun  (e.g.,  Aspden,  2006).  Well,  one  may  not  agree  with  the  details  of  the 
Kozyrev or Aspden model, we suggest that the Sun may  well be producing thermal 
radiations  through  spin-mediated  expressive  processes  converting  nonlocal  energy 
(potential) in pre-spacetime into regular energy in spacetime. 

Further,  there  is  also  the  possibility  that  those  apparent  Black  Holes  are 
actually  the  centers  of  more  violent  regenerative  cosmological  processes  in  display. 
On  the  one  hand,  these  structures  violently  express  (unfold)  nonlocal  energy  into 
visible  matter  with  said  expressive  process  being  seen  as  dark  energy.  But,  on  the 
other hand, they also violently crush (enfold) visible matter into nonlocal energy with 
the patterns of said visible matter being seen as the symptom of a Black Hole and said 
regressive process being seen as dark matter. Of course, other authors probably have 
already expressed similar views from different angles or perspectives (See, e.g., Pope 
& Robinson, 2007). 

79 

 
 
 
 
 
3. 

How Mind Influences Brain through “Proactive” Spin 

We  will  now  explore  how  mind  influences  the  brain,  through  the  primordial 
self-referential spin processes (Hu & Wu, 2002, 2003 & 2004a&b), which, we admit, 
have  not  addressed  in  detail  previously.  All  we  have  said  was  that  the  collective 
dynamics of nuclear and/or electron spin ensembles in neural membranes and protein 
is  able  to  affect  the  neural  activities  of  the  brain  through  spin  chemistry  (Id). 
However, in order to purposefully influence neural activities inside the brain so that a 
conscious being such as a human can interact with the external world and have free 
will,  the  said  nuclear  and/or  electron  spin  ensembles  have  to  be  able  to  either  self-
organize  to  produce  free-will-enabling  emergent  property  which  cannot  be  deduced 
from  the  spin  properties  or  self-refer  to  their  primordial  origin,  the  non-spatial  and 
non-temporal  pre-spacetime  (nonlocal  domain)  which  in  a  dualistic  embodiment 
hosts the mind and is the container of nonlocal energy (potential). 

As we have discussed elsewhere, the brain is an electrically very active place 
where the electric field strengths inside the neural membranes and proteins during a 
typical action potential oscillates between -9 to +6 million volts per meter which are 
comparable  to  those  causing  electroporation  of  cell  membranes  and  dielectric 
breakdown  of  many  materials  (Hu  &  Wu,  2004c&d).  So,  these  electrical  fields  and 
their modulations through the action potentials significantly affect the conformations 
and orientations of neural membrane components such as phospholipids, cholesterols 
and proteins. Indeed, voltage-dependent ion channels perform their functions through 
electric field induced conformation changes of the constituent proteins and studies on 
the  effects  of  electric  fields  on  lipids  support  the  above  conclusion  (Id).  We  have 
shown  that  nuclear  spin  networks  in  neural  membranes  are  modulated  by  action 
potentials  through  J-coupling,  dipolar  coupling  and  chemical  shielding  tensors  and 
perturbed by microscopically strong and fluctuating internal magnetic fields produced 
largely  by  paramagnetic  oxygen  (Id).  We  have  suggested  that  these  spin  networks 
could be involved in brain functions since said modulation inputs information carried 
by  the  neural  spike  trains  into  them,  said  perturbation  activates  various  dynamics 
within them and the combination of the two likely produce stochastic resonance thus 
synchronizing said dynamics to the neural firings (Id). 

Here  we  specifically  propose  the  following:  (1)  the  varying  high  electric 
voltages, being modulated by the action potentials inside the neural membranes and 
proteins, not only are able to input information into the nuclear and/or electron spin 
ensembles  inside  them  but  also  are  able  to  change  the  characters  and  properties  of 
these spin ensembles and the pre-spacetime associated with them, making these spins 
to be “proactive;” and (2) the “proactive” spins so enabled allow the mind to utilize 
non-local  energy  (potential)  and  quantum  information  to  influence  brain  activities 
through spin chemistry and possibly other chemical/physical processes in defiance of 
the second law of thermodynamics. 

80 

 
 
 
 
What  plausible  evidence  do  we  have  to  support  our  above,  some  would  say 
“outrageous,”  proposition?  The  answer  is  that  we  indeed  do  have  some  evidence 
supporting this proposition. First, our own recent experiments as discussed earlier and 
elsewhere  shows  that  nonlcoal  signaling  and  nonlocal  effects  mediated  by  quantum 
entanglement are physically real (Hu & Wu, 2006a-d; 2007a).  Our results also imply 
that systems driven by quantum information such as our brain may defy second law 
of thermodynamics (Id). Second, the well-known placebo effect clearly indicates the 
influence of the mind over body. 

Further,  there  are  many  experimental  reports  in parapsychology  showing  the 
possibility or at least plausibility of mind’s influences over brain or matter. Of course, 
one always needs to be very careful about drawing conclusions and inferences from 
these  reports.  Just  to  mention  a  few,  the  PEAR  Lab’s  results  accumulated  over  the 
years  shows  that  mind  could  alter,  however  small,  random  number  sequences  (e.g., 
Jahn & Dunn, 2005). William Tiller has reported that under a particular circumstance 
mind  could  influence  the  pH  value  of  water  in  a  remote  location  through  an 
embedded  device  (e.g.,  Tiller,  2007).  Danielle  Graham  and  her  group  have  recently 
reported  anomalous  gravitational  and  electromagnetic  effects  of  certain  trained 
persons  during  meditations  (Graham,  2006).  Indeed,  Dean  Radin  has  documented 
many related results in his most recent book and was able to repeat and verify some 
of these results through the studies of his own group (Radin, 2006). 

In addition, in the areas of alternative energy, commonly labeled as the “back 
water”  of  energy  research  by  the  mainstream,  there  are  numerous  reports  of  excess 
heat being produced through  electrophoreses  and various plasma discharge schemes 
both in water and vacuum tubes (e.g., Graneau & Graneau, 1983; Correa & Correa, 
2004).  The  common  feature  shared  by  these  reports  is  that  somehow  under  the 
influence  of  electric  fields  or  high  electric  voltages,  excess  heat  was  claimed  to  be 
produced  from  the  vacuum  or  age-old  ether.  If  some  of  these  claims  are  true,  we 
suggest  that  the  source  of  the  excess  heat  is  the  nonlocal  energy  (potential)  in  pre-
spacetime  (nonlocal  domain)  which  under  the  particular  arrangements  in  those 
experiments  was  converted  into  regular  energy  in  spacetime  such  as  thermal 
radiation. 

5. 

Conclusion 

In this paper we have responded to Benjamin’s “dark chemistry” perspective. 

However, we have argued that his hypothetical dark matter axion is replaceable by 
non-local effects mediated by the primordial self-referential spin processes. This 
argument is based on our recent experimental findings which suggest that dark matter 
is likely the cosmological manifestation of quantum entanglement. In particular, we 
have explored the issue how mind influences the brain through the primordial self-
referential spin processes. Our current thoughts are that the manifestation of free will 
is intrinsically associated with the nuclear and/or electron spin processes inside the 

81 

 
 
 
 
 
 
varying high electric voltage environment of the neural membranes and proteins 
which likely enable the said spin processes to be “proactive,” that is, being able to 
utilize non-local energy (potential) and quantum information to influence brain 
activities through spin chemistry and possibly other chemical/physical processes in 
defiance of the second law of thermodynamics. We have also discussed what dark 
energy is and touched upon the issues of Big Bang and Black Holes and made 
“naïve” speculations about them. If anyone gets offended by these thoughts, we 
sincerely apologize. 

Finally, we cannot stress enough that “talk is cheap” and what really matter 

are what can be observed and measured experimentally. So our emphasis is still 
experimental studies and we have and will continue to “put our money where our 
mouth is” and let experimental observations and measurements to speak for 
themselves. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: We wish to thank Robert Boyd for bringing to our attention N. A. 
Kozyrev’ work in his recent group e-mail. 

(cid:23) (cid:12)(cid:21)(cid:12)(cid:23) (cid:12)(cid:4)(cid:16) (cid:12)(cid:10)(cid:7)

Aspden,H. Creation: The Physical Truth, Book Guild Publishing (Brighton, England) 2006. 

Aspect,A., Dalibard, J. & Roger, G. Experimental test of bell's inequalities using time- 
varying analyzers.  Phys. Rev. Lett. 1982; 49: 1804 - 1807. 

Benjamin, P. Dark Chemistry or Psychic Spin Pixel? NeuroQuantology, 2007; 2: 197-204 

Bohm, D. and Hiley, B. J. The Undivided Universe. London: Routledge 1993. 

Correa, P. N. & Correa, A.N. Experimental Aetheometry v1 (Akronos Pub), 2004. 

Eberhard, P. Bell's theorem and the different concepts of locality. Nuovo Cimento 1978; 46B: 
392-419. 

Einstein, A. Die Feldgleichungun der Gravitation. Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin Nov. 1915; 844-847. 

Einstein, A., Podolsky, B. & Rosen, N. Can quantum-mechanical description of physical 
reality be considered complete? Phys. Rev. 1935; 47: 777-780. 

Esposito S. On the role of spin in quantum mechanics. Found Phys Lett 1999;12:165. 

Graham, D. Experimental data demonstrating augmentation of ambient gravitational and 
geomagnetic fields. STAIF 2006. 

82 

 
 
 
 
 
Graneau, P. & Graneau, P.N. First indication of Ampere tension in solid electric condoctors. 
Phys. Lett. 1983; 97A: 253. 

Hameroff, S. & Penrose, R. Conscious events as orchestrated spacetime selections. J. 
Conscious Stud. 1996; 3: 36-53. 

Hestenes D. Quantum mechanics from self-interaction. Found Physics 1983; 15: 63-87. 

Hu, H. & Wu, M. Spin-mediated consciousness theory. arXiv 2002; quant-ph/0208068 
(2002). Also see Med. Hypotheses 2004a: 63: 633-646. 

Hu, H. & Wu, M. Spin as primordial self-referential process driving quantum mechanics, 
spacetime dynamics and consciousness. NeuroQuantology 2004b; 2:41-49. Also see 
Cogprints: ID2827 2003. 

Hu, H. & Wu, M. Action potential modulation of neural spin networks suggests possible role 
of spin in memory and consciousness. NeuroQuantology 2004c; 2:309-316. Also see 
Cogprints: ID3458 2004d. 

Hu, H. & Wu, M. Thinking outside the box: the essence and implications of quantum 
entanglement. NeuroQuantology 2006a; 4: 5-16. 

Hu, H. & Wu, M. Photon induced non-local effect of general anesthetics on the brain. 
NeuroQuantology 2006b 4: 17-31. Also see Progress in Physics 2006c; v3: 20-26. 

Hu, H. & Wu, M. Evidence of non-local physical, chemical and biological effects supports 
quantum brain. NeuroQuantology 2006d; 4: 291-306. Also see Progress in Physics 2007a; 
v2: 17-24. 

Hu, H. & Wu, M. Thinking outside the box II: the origin, implications and applications of 
gravity and its role in consciousness. NeuroQuantology 2007b; 4: 190-196. 

Jahn, R. G. & Dunne, B. J. The PEAR proposition. J. Sci. Exploration  2005; 19: 195–245. 

Julsgaard, B., Kozhekin, A. & Polzik, E. S. Experimentally long-lived entanglement of two 
macroscopic objects. Nature 2001; 413, 400–403. 

Kozyrev, N. A. Sources of Stellar Energy and the Theory of the Internal Constitution of 
Stars. Progress in Physics 2005; v3: 61-99.  

Mach, E. The Science of Mechanics; a Critical and Historical Account of its Development. 
LaSalle, IL: Open Court Pub. Co. LCCN 60010179 1960 (Source: Wikipedia) 

83 

 
Newton, I. The Principia: Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. Translated by 
I.Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman. Preceded by A Guide to Newton's Principia, by 
I.Bernard Cohen. University of California Press ISBN 0-520-08816-6 ISBN 0-520-08817-4 
1999 (Source: Wikipedia). 

Patlavskiy, S. RE: Recent criticism of jcs-online moderation. http://rgrush.com/forum/ 

Pope, N. V. & Osborne, A. D. Instantaneous and gravitational and inertial action-at-a-
distance, Phys. Essay 1995; 8: 184-197. 

Pope, R. & Robinson, M. The aesthetics of revolutionary science. 2007. See http://science-
art.com.au/artscience.htm . 

Radin, D. Entangled mind: extrasensory experiences in a quantum reality. Paraview Pocket 
Books 2006. 

Tiller, W. Psychoenergetic science: a second Copernican-scale revolution. 
http://www.tiller.org 2007. 

84 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX IV 

Concerning Spin as Mind-pixel: How Mind Interacts with Brain through 
Electric Spin Effects 

Huping Hu and Maoxin Wu 

(Dated: November 6, 2007) 

Abstract:  Electric  spin  effects  are  effects  of  electric  fields  on  the 
dynamics/motions  of  nuclear/electron  spins  and  related  phenomena. 
Since  classical  brain  activities  are  largely  electric,  we  explore  here  a 
model  of  mind-brain  interaction  within  the  framework  of  spin-
mediated  consciousness  theory  in  which  these  effects  in  the  varying 
high-voltage  electric  fields  inside  neural  membranes  and  proteins 
mediate  mind-brain  input  and  output  processes.  In  particulars,  we 
suggest  that  the  input  processes  in  said  electric  fields  are  possibly 
mediated  by  Dirac-Hestenes  electric  dipoles  and/or  spin  transverse 
forces  both  of  which  are  associated  with  the  nuclear/electronic  spin 
processes.  We  then  suggest  that  the  output  processes  (proactive  spin 
processes) in said electric fields possibly also involve Dirac-Hestenes 
electric  dipole  interactions  in  said  electric  fields  and  Dirac  negative 
energy  extraction  processes,  shown  by  Solomon,  of  nuclei/electrons 
besides  non-local  processes  driven  by  quantum  information.  We 
propose  that  these  output  processes  modulate  the  action  potentials, 
thus  influencing  the  brain,  by  affecting  the  cross-membrane  electric 
voltages  and  currents  directly  and/or  indirectly  through  changing  the 
capacitance,  conductance  and/or  battery  in  the  Hudgkin-Huxley 
model.  These  propositions  are  based  on  our  own  experimental 
findings,  further  theoretical  considerations,  and  studies  reported  by 
others in the fields of spintronics, high-energy physics and alternative 
energy research. 
(cid:7)
Key  Words:  spin;  mind-pixel;  electric  spin  effect;  spin  transverse  force; 
Dirac-Hestenes electric dipole; electric field; proactive spin(cid:7)
(cid:7)

85 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
insides 

1. Introduction 
Within  the  framework  of  spin-mediated 
consciousness  theory,  the  nuclear  and/or 
electronic  spins  are  proposed  to  be  the 
mind-pixels which interact with the brain 
through quantum effects, modulating and 
being  modulated  by  various  classical 
the  action 
brain  activities  such  as 
potentials  (Hu  &  Wu,  2002  &  2004a-d). 
Since classical brain activities are largely 
electric  and,  in  comparison,  magnetic 
fields 
the  brain  are  only 
microscopically  strong  but  fluctuating, 
we have previously discussed how action 
potentials  modulate  the  dynamics  of 
nuclear/electron spin networks inside the 
brain 
dipolar 
coupling and chemical shielding tensors, 
thus,  feeding  information  into  mind  in 
the dualistic approach (Hu & Wu, 2004 c 
&  2004d).  Further,  based  on  our  own 
experimental findings and work done by 
others,  we  have  also  discussed  on  how 
mind  might 
through 
proactive  spin  processes  enabled  by  the 
varying  high-voltage  electric 
fields 
inside  the  brain  (Hu  &  Wu,  2006a-d  & 
2007a-c). 

influence  brain 

J-coupling, 

through 

What  we  have  not  explored  in 
details so far are the electric spin effects 
which  are  the  direct  effects  of  electric 
fields  on 
the  dynamics/motions  of 
nuclear  and/or  electronic  spins  and 
related  phenomena,  and  their  possible 
roles in mind-brain interactions. 

Therefore,  we  explore  here  a 
more  specific  model  of  mind-brain 
interaction  within  aforesaid  framework 
in  which  the  said  electric  spin  effects  in 
the  varying  high-voltage  electric  fields 
inside  neural  membranes  and  proteins 
mediate  mind-brain  input  and  output 

processes. We first suggest that the input 
processes 
in  said  electric  fields  are 
possibly  mediated  by  Dirac-Hestenes 
electric  dipoles  and/or  spin  transverse 
forces both of which  are associated with 
the  nuclei/electron  spin  processes.  We 
then  suggest  that  the  output  processes 
(proactive spin processes) in said electric 
fields  possibly  involve  Dirac-Hestenes 
electric  dipole  interactions  with  in  said 
electric  fields  also  and  Dirac  negative 
energy extraction processes, as shown by 
Solomon (2006 &2007), of nuclei and/or 
electrons  besides  non-local  processes 
driven by quantum information shown by 
us.  We  suggest 
these  output 
processes modulate the action potentials, 
thus  influencing  the  brain,  by  affecting 
the cross-membrane electric voltages and 
indirectly 
directly 
currents 
capacitance, 
through 
changing 
the 
in 
conductance  and/or  battery 
Hudgkin-Huxley  model.  These  propo-
sitions 
own 
experimental findings, further theoretical 
considerations  within  the  framework  of 
spin-mediated  consciousness  theory,  and 
studies reported by others in the fields of 
spintronics,  high-energy  physics  and 
alternative energy research. 

and/or 
the 

based 

that 

our 

are 

on 

2. Dirac-Hestenes Electric Dipole 
It  has  been  long  known  that  in  an 
external  electric  field,  the  Dirac  particle 
such as an electron or nuclear sub-entity 
acts  as  if  it  has  an  imaginary  electric 
moment  |d|=ieh/4(cid:2)mc.  Dirac  was  aware 
this in 1928 and wrote that “[t]he electric 
moment,  being  a  pure  imaginary  … 
should not…appear in the model [and it] 
is  doubtful  whether  the  electric  moment 
has  any  physical  meaning  ...”  (Dirac, 
1928).  Later,  Dirac  stated  that  “these 
extra  terms  involve  some  new  physical 

86 

 
 
 
 
 
 
effects,  but  since  they  are  not  real  they 
do  not  lend  themselves  very  directly  to 
physical interpretation” (Dirac, 1983). 

see,  Hestenes,  2003). 

It  was  Hestenes  who  showed  that 
Dirac  magnetic  and  electric  dipole 
moments  have  same  origin  associated 
with  spin  and  magnetization  (For  a 
review, 
In 
Hestenes’  formulism,  magnetic  moment 
density is not directly proportional to the 
spin  but  “dually  proportional.”  The 
duality  factor  ei(cid:3)  has 
the  effect  of 
generating  an  effective  electric  dipole 
moment  for  the  Dirac  particle.  Hestenes 
commented  that  “this  seems  to  conflict 
with  experimental  evidence 
the 
electron  has  no  detectable  electric 
moment,  but  the  issue  is  subtle”  (Id). 
Other 
researchers  have  also  shown 
recently  that  the  magnetic  and  electric 
dipole moments of a fermion are closely 
related  because  they  determine  the  real 
and  imaginary  part  of  the  same  physical 
quantity  (Feng  et  al,  2001;  Graesser  & 
Thomas, 2002). 

that 

Indeed,  Silenko  has  recently  shown 
in  the  Foldy-Wouthuysen  representation 
that although the influence of the electric 
dipole  moment  on  the  Dirac  particle 
motion is negligibly small in an external 
electric  field,  it  influences  significantly 
the  spin  motion  of  the  said  particle 
(Silenko, 2006). 

In  addition,  in  the  classical  models 
of  the  Dirac  particle,  fast  oscillating 
electric  dipole  moments  also  appear 
(Rivas,  2005;  Gauthier  2006).  These 
findings coincide with earlier finding that 
a  moving  magnetic  dipole  induces  an 
electric dipole d=(v/c2)×m, where m and 
v  are  respectively  the  magnetic  moment 

is 

and the velocity of the moving spin, as a 
relativistic  effect  (Rosser,  1964).  Rivas 
(2005)  believes  that  what  is  lacking  in 
the  typical  quantum  mechanical  wave 
equation 
this  oscillating  electric 
dipole.  He  states  that  “in  general,  the 
average  value  of  this  term  in  an  electric 
field of smooth variation is zero, [but] in 
high  intensity  fields  or  in  intergranular 
areas in which the effective potentials are 
low,  but  their  gradients  could  be  very 
high,  this  average  value  should  not  be 
negligible.”  Rivas  further  showed  that 
the electric moment of the classical Dirac 
interesting 
lead 
electron 
physical effects (Id). 

could 

to 

approach 

Here  we 

specifically 

of 
theory 

propose 
(Proposition I) that in the dualistic mind-
spin-mediated 
brain 
consciousness 
interactions 
the 
the  Dirac-Hestenes  electric 
between 
dipoles  of  nuclei  and/or  electrons  with 
the  varying  high-voltage  electric  fields 
inside the neural membranes and proteins 
directly  feed  information  carried  by  the 
neural spike trains into mind through the 
varying high-voltage action potentials. 

Do  we  have  any  other  justifications 
for  Proposition  I  besides  the  points 
already  discussed  above?  The  answer, 
indeed, is “Yes.” First, even if the Dirac 
electric  dipole  is  purely  imaginary  with 
no  known  physical  consequence,  we 
argue  that  in  the  dualistic  mind-brain 
approach, it may serve as an information 
receiver  in  the  non-local  domain  where 
mind  resides  for  the  simple  reason  that 
such non-local domain is likely amicable 
to  a  description  by 
imaginary 
numbers  (See,  e.g.,  Rauscher  &  Targ, 
2001). 

the 

87 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second,  following  Hestenes  (see, 
e.g.,  2003)  and  possibly  others,  we 
strongly  believe  that  the  origin  of  the 
electric  dipole  is  intrinsically  associated 
with  a  Dirac  particle  actually  being  a 
composite  entity  with  the  un-manifested 
antiparticle 
inseparably  accompanying 
the regular particle. Since the antiparticle 
sometimes shows up in our spacetime as 
real,  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  the 
same  in  its  un-manifested  form  is  an 
active  participant  in  the  primordial  self-
referential 
driving 
quantum mechanics, spacetime dynamics 
and  consciousness  as  will  be  discussed 
elsewhere  in  due  time  (Also  see,  Hu  & 
Wu, 2003 & 2004b). 

processes 

spin 

3. Spin Transverse Force 
Recent studies in spintronics have shown 
that  an  electric  field  will  exert  a 
transverse torque/force on a moving spin 
(see,  e.g.,  Sun  et  al  2004;  Shen,  2005). 
This  is  actually  not  hard  to  understand 
since  according  to  special  theory  of 
relativity  a  moving  spin  in  an  electric 
field sees a magnetic field. 

Sun et al (2004) has shown that a 
moving  spin  is  affected  by  an  external 
electric  field  and  feels  a  force/torque  as 
m×[(v/c2)×E]  where  m  and  v  are 
respectively  the  magnetic  moment  and 
the velocity of the moving spin and E is 
the external magnetic field. 

Shen (2005) has shown that, as a 
relativistic  quantum  mechanical  effect, 
field  exerts  a 
an  external  electric 
transverse force on an electron spin 1/2 if 
the  electron  is  moving.  The  said  spin 
force,  analogue  to  the  Lorentz  for  on  an 
electron  charge  in  a  magnetic  field,  is 
perpendicular to the electric field and the 

spin motion when the spin polarization is 
projected along the electric field (Id). 

this  effect  has 

Indeed,  while  this  paper  is  been 
written, 
just  been 
successfully used in the laboratory to flip 
the spin of  an  electron in a quantum dot 
by  applying  an  oscillating  electric  field 
(Nowack, et al, 2007). The electric  field 
induces 
(Rabi 
oscillations)  between  spin-up  and  spin-
down with 90° rotations as fast as ~55 ns 
and  the  analysis  done  by  the  authors 
indicates 
the  electrically-induced 
spin transitions are mediated by the spin-
orbit interaction (Id). 

transitions 

coherent 

that 

in 

this 

illustrate 

Therefore,  we  specifically  propose 
here (Proposition II) that the interactions 
between  the  moving  nuclear/electronic 
spins  in  neural  membranes  and  proteins 
and  the  varying  high-voltage  electric 
fields there directly feed information into 
mind 
the  dualistic  mind-brain 
approach of spin mediated consciousness 
theory. 
To 

particular 
mechanism,  we  now  consider  the  spin 
transverse force exerted on a proton spin 
of  a  hydrogen  atom  connected  to  the 
carbon chain of a phosphate lipid located 
inside the neural membranes as shown in 
Figure  1.  As  the  carbon  chain  rotates  in 
parallel  to  the  intense  electric  field  E 
across the neural membranes, the vertical 
circle 
proton 
perpendicular  to  the  carbon  chain  sees  a 
magnetic  field  in  the  rotating  frame  of 
transverse 
feels 
reference 
torque/force  f  toward  the  rotating  plane. 
Quantitative 
be 
calculations 
performed in a separate paper. 

spin  moving 

shall 

thus 

in 

a 

a 

88 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other chemical and/or physical processes 
in  defiance  of 
law  of 
thermodynamics (Id). 

the  second 

and 

suggest 

With  respect  to  possible  evidence, 
that:  (1)  our  own 
we  pointed  out 
that  non-local 
experiments 
quantum 
energy/potential 
information may influence brain function 
through quantum entanglement mediated 
processes  (Hu  &  Wu,  2006a-d;  2007a); 
(2) the well-known placebo effect clearly 
indicates  the  influence  of  the  mind  over 
body;  (3)  many  experimental  reports  in 
parapsychology  indicate  the  plausibility 
of mind’s influences over brain or matter 
(e.g.,  Jahn  &  Dunn,  2005;  Tiller,  2007; 
Graham,  2006;  Radin,  2006);  and  (4)  in 
the  field  of  alternative  energy  research, 
there  are  numerous  papers  reporting 
excess  heat  being  produced 
through 
electrophoreses  and  various  plasma 
discharge  schemes  the  common  feature 
of  which  is  that  somehow  under  the 
influence  of  electric  fields  or  high 
electric  voltages,  excess  heat  was 
claimed to be produced from the vacuum 
or  age-old  ether 
(e.g.,  Graneau  & 
Graneau, 1983; Correa & Correa, 2004). 

additional  mechanism 

Here  we  suggest  possible  additional 
mechanisms  besides  what  our  own 
experiments  have  shown.  One  such 
possible 
is 
connected  to  the  Dirac-Hestenes  electric 
dipole  associated  with  nuclear/electronic 
spin.  As  Rivas  (2005)  pointed  out  that 
what 
the  quantum 
mechanical wave equation is possibly the 
oscillating  electric  dipole  which  in  high 
intensity  fields  or  in  intergranular  areas 
should  not  be  negligible 
its 
contributions  to  dynamics  of  the  Dirac 
particle. 

lacking 

in 

in 

is 

f 

transverse 
Fig.1.  Illustration  of  spin 
a 
exerted 
torque/force 
nuclear/electronic  spin  on  a  molecular 
chain  or  fragment  inside  the  neural 
membranes and proteins. 

on 

transverse 

This  spin 

torque/force 
enables the neural spike trains to directly 
the  nuclear/electronic  spin 
influence 
networks 
in  neural  membranes  and 
proteins  thus  inputting  information  into 
mind in the dualistic approach. 

4. Output Process through Proactive Spin 

Previously,  we  have  explored  how  mind 
influences  the  brain  through  primordial 
self-referential  spin  processes  (Hu  & 
Wu,  2007c).  Our  thoughts  were  that  the 
manifestation  of  free  will  is  intrinsically 
the  nuclear  and/or 
associated  with 
electron spin processes inside the varying 
high-  voltage  environment  of  the  neural 
membranes  and  proteins  which  likely 
enable  the  said  spin  processes  to  be 
proactive,  that  is,  being  able  to  utilize 
non-local energy (potential) and quantum 
information  to  influence  brain  activities 
through  spin  chemistry  and  possibly 

89 

 
 
 
 
 
is 

in 

that 

The 

complication 

the 
imaginary  dipole 
appearance  of  an 
energy 
the 
(–id.E) 
term  Hint= 
Hamiltonian  makes  it  non-hermitian  and 
the  corresponding  energy 
spectrum 
complex-valued  instead  of  real  valued. 
However,  various  studies  of  the  non-
hermitian  Hamiltotians  indicate  that  not 
only  very  interesting  novel  dynamics 
appear  due  to  non-hermiticity  (See,  e.g., 
Aguiar Pinto et al, 2003) but also certain 
classes  of  non-hermitian  Hamiltonians 
still  have  real  energy  spectra  (See,  e.g., 
Bender,  2007).  We  propose  (Proposition 
III) that these new dynamics may be just 
what  are  needed  to  enable  the  proactive 
spin process. 

the  energy  of 

Another  possible  mechanism  is 
the Dirac negative energy extraction in a 
varying  electric  field  which  has  been 
shown  to  be  theoretically  possible  by 
Solomon  (e.g.,  Solomon,  2006  &  2007). 
The  vacuum  electrons  obey  the  Dirac 
these 
equation  and 
electrons  will  change  in  response  to  an 
applied  electric  field  (Id.).  Solomon  has 
examined  the  vacuum  in  Dirac’s  hole 
theory  and  he  showed  that  it  is  possible 
to find a varying electric field for which 
the change in the energy of each vacuum 
electron  is  negative  (Id.).  Therefore, 
according  to  Solomon,  the  total  change 
in  the  energy  of  the  vacuum  state  is 
negative and this new state will have less 
energy  than  the  original  unperturbed 
vacuum state (id). 

theoretical 

Solomon’s 

results 
provide  support  to  the  claims  of  excess 
heat 
through 
electrophoreses  and  various  plasma 
discharge  schemes  (e.g.,  Graneau  & 
Graneau, 1983; Correa & Correa, 2004). 

produced 

being 

We  suspect  that  the  Dirac  negative 
energy  extraction  process  shown  by 
Solomon is connected to the dynamics of 
the  Dirac-Hestenes  electric  dipole  in  a 
varying  electric  field.  Further,  we  don’t 
think that a vacuum electron in a varying 
electric  field  can  fall  into  the  negative 
the  un-
energy  state  occupied  by 
manifested antiparticle. 

Instead,  we  propose  (Proposition 
IV)  that  in  certain  varying  external 
electric field the vacuum electron pumps 
energy  from  the  vacuum  and  release  the 
same  in  our  spacetime  in  order  to 
maintain  its  minimal  energy  state  in  the 
vacuum.  We  will  discuss  where  the 
vacuum energy comes from in a separate 
paper. 

We  further  propose  (Proposition 
V)  that  these  output  processes  modulate 
the action potentials, thus influencing the 
brain,  by  affecting  the  cross-membrane 
electric  voltages  and  currents  directly 
and/or  indirectly  through  changing  the 
capacitance,  conductance  and/or  battery 
in the Hudgkin-Huxley model. 

5. Conclusion 

Electric spin effects are effects of electric 
fields on the dynamics of nuclear and /or 
electronic  spins  and  related  phenomena. 
In  this  paper,  we  have  explored  several 
such  effects  and  their  possible  roles  in 
the  mind-brain  interactions  within  the 
framework 
mediated 
consciousness  theory.  We  have  outlined 
five propositions. In particulars, we have 
considered  a  more  specific  model  of 
mind-brain  interaction  in  which  these 
effects 
the  varying  high-voltage 
electric  fields  inside  neural  membranes 

spin 

of 

in 

90 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and  proteins  mediate  mind-brain  input 
and output processes. 

We have suggested that the input 
processes 
in  said  electric  fields  are 
possibly  mediated  by  Dirac-Hestenes 
electric  dipoles  (Proposition  I)  and/or 
spin  transverse  force/torque  (Proposition 
II) both of which are associated with the 
nuclear/electronic  spin  processes.  We 
then  suggest  that  the  output  processes 
(proactive spin processes) in said electric 
fields  possibly  also 
involve  Dirac-
Hestenes  electric  dipole  interactions  in 
said  electric  fields  (Proposition  III)  and 
Dirac 
extraction 
processes,  as  shown  by  Solomon,  of 
nuclei/electrons  (Proposition  IV) besides 
non-local  processes  driven  by  quantum 
information.  We 
proposed 
(Proposition  V) 
these  output 
processes modulate the action potentials, 
thus  influencing  the  brain,  by  affecting 
the cross-membrane electric voltages and 
(cid:7)
(cid:23) (cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:29)(cid:27)(cid:30)(cid:31)(cid:27) (cid:7)

negative 

energy 

have 

that 

directly 
currents 
through 
changing 
conductance  and/or  battery 
Hudgkin-Huxley model. 

and/or 
the 

indirectly 
capacitance, 
the 
in 

These  propositions  are  based  on 
our  own  experimental  findings,  further 
the 
theoretical  considerations  within 
framework  of 
cons-
ciousness theory, and studies reported by 
others  in  the  fields  of  spintronics,  high-
energy  physics  and  alternative  energy 
research. 

spin-mediated 

the 
Finally,  we  stress  again 
importance  of  experimental  work  and 
quantitative      calculations  and  computer 
simulations  in  order  to  verify  these 
substantial 
propositions 
and  make 
progresses.  We  have  done 
some 
preliminary  work  in  these  directions.  As 
usual,  results  will  be  reported,  when 
feasible. 

Aguiar Pinto, A C et al. Imaginary phases in two-level 

(4th edition) 1983; (Clarendon Press, Oxford, p. 265) 

Dirac, P A M. The Principles of Quantum Mechanics 

model  with  spontaneous  decay.  J.  Phys.  A:  Math. 

Gen.2003; 36: 7461-7467. 

Feng,  el  al.  Theoretical  expectations  for  the  muon's 

electric  dipole  moment.Nucl.Phys.2001;  B613:  366-

Aspden  H.  Creation:  The  Physical  Truth,  Book  Guild 

381. 

Publishing (Brighton, England) 2006. 

Gauthier  R.  The  Dirac  equation  and  the  superluminal 

Bender,  C  M.  Making  sense  of  non-hermitian 

electron model. 2006; http://superluminalquantum.org 

Hamiltonians. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2007; 70: 947-1018. 

Correa PN and Correa AN. Experimental Aetheometry 

among  electromagnetic  dipole  operators.  Phys.  Rev. 

v1 (Akronos Pub), 2004. 

2002; D65: 075012. 

Graesser,  M.  &  Thomas,  S.  Supersymmetric  relations 

Dirac, P A M. The quantum theory of the electron. 

Graham  D.  Experimental 

data 

demonstrating 

Proc. R. Soc. 1928; A 117: 610-624. 

augmentation 

of 

ambient 

gravitational 

and 

geomagnetic fields. STAIF 2006. 

91 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Graneau P & Graneau PN. First indication of Ampere 

Kozyrev  N  A.  Sources  of  Stellar  Energy  and  the 

tension  in  solid  electric  conductors.  Phys  Lett  1983; 

Theory  of  the  Internal  Constitution  of  Stars.  Progress 

97A: 253. 

in Physics 2005; v3: 61-99. 

Hestenes  D.  Spacetime  physics  with  geometric 

Nowack,  et  al.  Coherent  control  of  a  single  electron 

algebra. Am. J. Phys. 2003; 71 (6): 691-714. 

spin  with  electric  fields.  Science  Express  2007;  DOI: 

Hu H and Wu M. Spin-mediated consciousness theory. 

arXiv  2002;  quant-ph/0208068.  Also  see  Med. 

Radin D. Entangled mind: extrasensory experiences in 

Hypotheses 2004a: 63: 633-646. 

a quantum reality. Paraview Pocket Books 2006. 

10.1126/science.1148092. 

Hu  H  and  Wu  M.  Spin  as  primordial  self-referential 

Rauscher,  E  A  &  Targ,  R.  The  speed  of  thought: 

process  driving  quantum  mechanics, 

spacetime 

Investigation  of  a  complex  space-time  metric  to 

dynamics 

and 

consciousness.  NeuroQuantology 

describe psychic phenomena. J. Sci. Explor. 2001; 15: 

2004b; 2:41-49. Also see Cogprints: ID2827 2003. 

331-354. 

Hu  H  and  Wu,  M.  Action  potential  modulation  of 

Rivas  M.  Kinematical  formalism  of  elementary 

neural  spin networks  suggests  possible  role  of  spin  in 

spinning particles. arXiv 2005; physics/0509131. 

memory  and  consciousness.  NeuroQuantology  2004c; 

2:309-316. Also see Cogprints: ID3458 2004d. 

Rosser,  W  G  V.  An  introduction  to  the  theory  of 

relativity, P326. London Butterworths, Press 1964. 

Hu  H  and  Wu,  M.  Thinking  outside  the  box:  the 

essence  and  implications  of  quantum  entanglement. 

Shen, S Q. Spin transverse force on spin current in an 

NeuroQuantology 2006a; 4: 5-16. 

electric field. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005; 95: 187203. 

Hu  H  and  Wu  M.  Photon  induced  non-local  effect  of 

Silenko,  A  J.  Quantum-mechanical  description  of  the 

general  anesthetics  on  the  brain.  NeuroQuantology 

electromagnetic interaction of relativistic particles with 

2006b;  4:17-31.  Also  see  Progress  in  Physics  2006c; 

electric  and  magnetic  dipole  moments.  Russ.Phys.J. 

v3: 20-26. 

2005; 48: 788-792. 

Hu  H  and  Wu  M.  Evidence  of  non-local  physical, 

Solomon, D. Some new results concerning the vacuum 

chemical and biological effects support quantum brain. 

in Dirac Hole Theory. arXiv 2006; quant-ph/0607037. 

NeuroQuantology  2006d;  4:  291-306.  Also  see 

Progress in Physics 2007a; v2: 17-24. 

Solomon, D. Quantum states with less energy than the 

vacuum  in  Dirac  Hole  Theory.  arXiv  2007;  quant-

Hu H & Wu M. Thinking outside the box II: the origin, 

ph/0702271. 

implications and applications of gravity and its role in 

consciousness. NeuroQuantology 2007b; 5:190-196. 

Sun,  Q  F  et  al.  Spin-current-induced  electric  field.  

Phys. Rev. B 2004; 69: 054409. 

Hu  H  &  Wu  M.  How  mind  influences  brain  through 

proactive spin. NeuroQuantology 2007c; 5: 205-213. 

Jahn R G and Dunne B J. The PEAR proposition. J Sci 

Exploration 2005;19: 195–245. 

Tiller  W.  Psychoenergetic  science:  a  second 
Copernican-scale  revolution.  Accessed  2007, 
May. http://www.tiller.org  

92 

 
