NATURE 

[March  15,  1883 

new species.  The species which  he considers my  Fusus 
cur/us  is  very  different  from  the  F.  Sabini  of  Gray,  or 
the F.  togatus  and F.  Pfa.f!i  of Morch (all enumerated by 
Friele as synonyms);  and  I  regard  the last-named  three 
species  as the F.  ebur of  Morch and not as  my F.  Sarsi. 
However,  notwithstanding  any  trifling  errors, if  they  be 
errors, the work of  Herr Friele is  not only admirable and 
valuable,  but  is  imbued  with  that  scientific  merit  and 
modesty  which  are  peculiar  to  our  fellow-workers  in 
Scandinavia;  and  we  shall  look  forward  with  great 
interest  to  the continuation of his papers on  the Mollusca 
of the  Norwegian  North-Sea Expedition. 

J.  GWYN JEFFREYS 

Tables .for the  Use  o.f Students and Beginmrs in Vegetable 
Histology.  By D.  P.  Penhallow,  B.S.,  late  Professor 
of  Chemistry and  Botany  in  the  Imperial  College  of 
Agriculture, Japan. 

(Boston,  r88z.) 

THIS  little  work  by  no  means  meets  the  expectations 
which its title arouses.  The author states,  indeed,  in his 
preface that the scope  of  the work  is  purposely limited, 
but  the limits are so narrow that the work will  not  be  of 
much use  to  the student who  has  a  competent  teacher, 
and  it  will  not  be  of  any  use  to  the  beginner  who  is 
attempting  the  study of  vegetable  histology  by  himself. 
The  book  deals  simply  with  the  micro-chemistry  of 
plants ;  the  reagents  are  enumerated,  as  are  also  the 
various  substances  to  be  met with  in  the cells,  but  no 
attempt is  made to give an account of the mode of appli 
cation of the  reagents for  the detection of the  substances, 
and in certain  important  cases  (the  chloriodide  of  zinc, 
for example) the mode  of  preparation  of  the  reagent  is 
not given.  Not  a  word  is  said about  imbedding,  nor  is 
any  mention  made  of  staining.  The  general  mode  of 
treatment of  the subject  is  thoroughly  unpractical.  For 
example,  silica  is  said  to appear  in  plants  "as  a  trans 
parent  deposit "  ;  but  every  histologist  knows  that  the 
silica in a  cell-wall  can  only be  made evident  by incine 
rating with nitric acid. 

The  priority  which  the  author  claims  can  hardly  be 
granted  in  view  of  the  fact  that  Poulsen's  valuable 
"  Microchemie "  has  been  in  the  hands  of  European 
histologists  for  several  years.  The  selection  of  litera 
ture  given  at the  end  also  betrays  the  author's  want 
of  acquaintance with  his  subject, inasmuch  as  no  men 
tion 
important  works  as  Dippel's 
"Mikroskop"  and  De  Bary's  "Vergleichende  Ana 
tomic." 

is  made  of  such 

LETTERS  TO  THE  EDITOR 
[The Editor does  not hold ltimself responsible .for opinions expressed 
by his correspondents.  Neitlur  can  lze  undertake  to  return, 
or  to  corre;tond  witlz  the  writers  of,  rejected  manuscripts. 
No  notice  ts taken o.f anonymous communications. 

[The  Editor  urgently requests  correspondents  to  keep  tlzeir  letters 
as  short  as  possible.  The pressut·e  on  ltis  space  is  so  great 
that  it is  impossible  otherwise to  insure the  appearance  even 
o.f communications containin!{ interestin.l{ and novel .facts.] 

The  Matter  of  Space 
IN  his  paper  on  "The  Matter  of  Space,"  in  NATURE, 
vol.  xxvii.  p.  349,  Mr.  Charles  Morris has given us  an excellent 
exposition,  and,  as  I  believe,  in general a  perfectly correct  one, 
of  the  fundamental  laws  and  properties of  matter  and  motion. 
But as  I  have  for  some time been investigating the views  which 
he describes  with exactly  the  results  and  con-equences  at which 
he has arrived (excepting only in one material difference  to whjch 
I  will  presently  return},  a  little  outline  of  the  mathematical 
form  which  I  found  that  the  discusc;ion  of  the  subject  could 
receive, and to which it was  accordingly submitted in my examina 
tions of  its  scope and contours,  will aid  readers  of  Mr.  Morris's 
paper,  perhaps,  in  attaching  clear  ideas  to  some  of  the  ex· 
pressions  which he uses,  and in thereby discussing and estimating 
very  easily and  fairly  the  positive truth,  in  general,  or in a  few 
points, of the paper's considerations,  the just degree of reliability 

at all  events,  which the  marvellous  maze  of  internetted motions 
possesses, which he has most  tersely and graphically, and at least 
in  the  main,  as  it  appears  to  me,  correctly  and 
truthfully 
described. 

Angular  momentum,  or  (for  a  particle of  unit  mass)  the rate 
of description of sectorial areas,  is,  like  actual  energy,  a' quantity 
of  two  dimensions in  space ;  it  is  in  fact  the vector-product  of 
(or  the quadrilateral area between)  the two radii of the  particle's 
orbit and  hodograph.  Tractive momentum,  or the productofthe 
unit-particle's radius-vector and the resolved part of the particle's 
velocity along  (insteaci  of  across)  the  radius-vector,  is  equally  a 
quadratic product (but  differently estimated) of the  two foregoing 
orbit  and  hodograph radii. 
It  is not  the  rate of  description of 
an area,  like angular momentum,  but the  time-rate  of  the square 
on the  orbit-radius.  The  time-rates  of  each  of  these  momenta 
are similar to them in space-relation, and are  respectively  angular 
moment  or  twirl (of  a  force-couple)  and 
tractive  moment  or 
wrest  (of a  motor-couple).  But if  a  small  step  of  angle  is  the 
ratio of  a  circular-arc step (or of  a  small step along its  tangent) 
to  the circle's radius, this being numerical, a  twirl's work through 
this  small step of angle is  similar  in  space-relai!.on  to  the  twirl 
itself and  to its tim':!·effect,  or angular momentum. 

The  same  similitude  in  space-relation  will  exist  between  a 
wrest,  or motor-couple, and its time-effect (or tractive momentum), 
and  its  small step  of work,  if,  in  imitation of  the  practice  for  a 
twirl's  or force-couple's  action,  a  wrest's  space-step is  defined  to 
be  the  ratio  of  the  particle's step  along the radius  to  the  orbit· 
radius.  This counterpart of angle-step may be called a  traction 
step;  and  it  is  the  small  percentage  of elongation  which  the 
radius underg-oes. 
If this  construction  is  assumed,  there ensues 
from  it  a  close,  and  evidently  significant,  analogy  between  the 
time-rate of  orbit-radius square  (which  denotes at once, in space 
relation,  a  motor-couple  and  its  time- and space-effects)  and the 
lzodograph-radius square (which expresses simultaneously in space 
relation  a .force-couple  and its time- and space-effects).  Although 
the  square  of  the  hodograph-radius  signifies  the  square  of  the 
material point's velocity,  or its directed actual energy,  I  conceive 
that  the  square of  the  orbit-radius  represents  a  square  of  un 
directed velocity,  or an undirected energy of "higgledy piggledy" 
motion  of  the  material  point ;  and its time-rate is  a  horse-power 
of  the  point's  quaquaversal,  or  undirected  actual  energy. 
Viewed  in  this  light,  twirls or force-couples  and their time- and 
space-effects are all graphically synonymous  with actual  directed 
energy ;  but  wrests  or motor-couples and  their  time- and space 
effects  are  all  graphically  synonymous  with  horse-power  of  un 
directed  actual energy.  For  these  latter  quantities  Mr.  Morris 
uses  indifferently  the  various words,  "momentum,"  "heat  mo 
mentum,:'  "heat  velocity,"  " heat,''  "motor  energy,"  "heat 
energy," 
vibration," "centrifugal energy," and" centrifugal 
or motor vigour," of a  moving point ;but while  they are  all,  as  he 
rightly  opines,  convertible quantities  in their relation  to  graphic 
space, yet the theory of force-couples with which (mutato nomine) 
they are equally convertible  in  the  same  space,  teaches  us  that 
a  twirl-group falls mechanically,  according to  its association  with 
time  and  angle,  into  three  distinct  divisions,  of  an  action (the 
couple)  and  its  time- and  space-effects  (angular  momentum and 
accumulated work).  It is  so  also with the motor-couple's graphic 
space  measure,  "vigour." 
In  proper  combinations  with  time 
and  traction-ratio 1  it  becomes  either  an  action  or  a  kind  of 
momentum  or  a  form  of  work.  But  in  discussing  these  new 
quantities'  properties  two maxims of construction and interpreta· 
tion must be  kept constantly  in view. 

In the first place,  we must not expect a  motor-couple (although 
it tends to  alter  cp)  which  endows a  point with undirected horse· 
power,  to  tend to  lengthen or shorten the  point's radius-vector in 
the same way that a  force  would do. 
If by their actions  motor 
couples can in any way oppose the action of a force or force-couple, 
it  must be,  not  by exerting force  themselves,  but  by  giving  rise 
to  force  where  they  act.  Now  motor-con pies  can no  more act 
intelligibly upon a  single  point  (to  range a radius's extremities to· 
wards  or  from  each  other)  than  a  force-couple  can (to  turn  a 
radius's  two  ends round each other).  Hence motor-couples must 
produce force  in a  material point in virtue of the point's being aiJ 
aggregation of material points,  or in other words the appearance 
of force  is  a  sign of the compositeness of the material point npon 
which it acts.  Per contra,  forces  can  produce  force-couples,  or 

:r:  The  integral of  traction-ratio,) d¢ = 

=  rp;  I  identify 
with  Rankine's  "thermodynamic  function"  (for  which  he  uses  the  same 
symbol,  q;)  usually termed'' entropy"  in works  on thermodynamics. 

= 

© 1883 Nature Publishing Group

