Bayesian Analysis (2006)

1, Number 1, pp. 1{40

When Did Bayesian Inference Become
\Bayesian"?

Stephen E. Fienberg(cid:3)

Abstract. While Bayes’ theorem has a 250-year history, and the method of in-
verse probability that (cid:13)owed from it dominated statistical thinking into the twen-
tieth century, the adjective \Bayesian" was not part of the statistical lexicon until
relatively recently. This paper provides an overview of key Bayesian develop-
ments, beginning with Bayes’ posthumously published 1763 paper and continuing
up through approximately 1970, including the period of time when \Bayesian"
emerged as the label of choice for those who advocated Bayesian methods.

Keywords: Bayes’ Theorem; Classical statistical methods; Frequentist methods;
Inverse probability; Neo-Bayesian revival; Stigler’s Law of Eponymy; Subjective
probability.

1 Introduction

What’s in a name? It all depends, especially on the nature of the entity being named,
but when it comes to statistical methods, names matter a lot.

Whether the name is eponymous (as in Pearson’s chi-square statistic1, Student’s
t-test, Hotelling’s T 2 statistic, the Box-Cox transformation, the Rasch model, and the
Kaplan-Meier statistic) or \generic" (as in correlation coe(cid:14)cient or p-value) or even
whimsical (as in the jackknife2 or the bootstrap3), names in the statistical literature
often signal the adoption of new statistical ideas or shifts in the acceptability of sta-
tistical methods and approaches.4 Today statisticians speak and write about Bayesian
statistics and frequentist or classical statistical methods, and there is even a journal
of Bayesian Analysis, but few appear to know where the descriptors \Bayesian" and
\frequentist" came from or how they arose in the history of their (cid:12)eld.

This paper is about the adjective \Bayesian"5 and its adoption by the statistical
community to describe a set of inferential methods based directly on the use of Bayes’
Theorem, which is now thought of by many as an elementary result in probability
(cid:3)Department of Statistics,Cylab, and Center for Automated Learning and Discovery, Carnegie Mel-

lon University, Pittsburgh, PA, http://www.stat.cmu.edu/~fienberg

1Many authors take great pride in having an eponymous method in their lifetime, but this was

insu(cid:14)cient for Karl Pearson. See Porter (127, Chapter 1).

2Named by John Tukey after the boy scout’s trusty knife.
3Coined by Bradley Efron by reference to the tales of the adventures of Baron Munchausen, who

rescued himself from drowning in a lake by picking himself up by his own bootstraps.

4Kasner and Newman (90) noted: \We can get along without new names until, as we advance in

science, we acquire new ideas and new forms."

5Bayesian is also now used as a noun, as in a Bayesian, i.e., a person who thinks it makes sense
to treat observables as random variables and to assign probability distributions to them. Such usage
followed the adoption of \Bayesian" as an adjective.

c(cid:13) 2006 International Society for Bayesian Analysis

ba0001

2

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

theory and where probabilities are typically taken to be subjective or logical. The
paper is not about the question \Who discovered Bayes’ Theorem?," an issue related to
the emergence of statistical thinking some 250 years ago, and one evoking references to
Stigler’s Law of Eponymy6. Indeed, Stigler (158) has addressed this question himself, as
have others such as Dale (36) and Bellhouse (16). Rather, my focus is on the emergence
of the adjective \Bayesian" as associated with inferential methods in the middle of the
twentieth century to describe what has been referred to up to that point as the method
of inverse probability. Why did the change occur? To whom should the term and its
usage be attributed? What was the impact of the activities surrounding the adoption
of the adjective \Bayesian"? Why do many statisticians now refer to themselves as
Bayesian?7 These are some of the questions I plan to address. Aldrich (2) covers some
closely related territory but with a di(cid:11)erent focus and perspective.

The task of investigating the usage of names was once quite daunting, but the
recently-developed fully-searchable electronic archives such as JSTOR have made the
task of exploring word usage far simpler than it once was, at least for English language
statistical literature. Nonetheless, usage occurs in books and oral presentations, as well
as in informal professional communications, and a search for terms like \Bayesian" in
only electronic journal archives, while informative, would be unlikely to answer the key
question I want to address. Pieces of the beginning of my story have been chronicled
in di(cid:11)erent forms in the histories by Dale (36), Hald (82), Porter (126), and Stigler
(159; 161), but these otherwise wonderful sources do not answer the key question that
gives its name to the title of this paper. I began asking these questions several years ago
(e.g., see Fienberg (58)) as a result of conversations with a social historian collaborator
about the origin of methods for census adjustment. I had the good fortune to be able
to confer with several distinguished statisticians who participated in some key events
which I will describe, and their recollections (e.g., see Lindley (106)) have contributed
to the answers I provide here.

In the next two sections, I trace some of the history of Bayesian ideas, from the
time of Bayes and Laplace through to the twentieth century. In Section 4, I turn to the
developments of the (cid:12)rst half of the twentieth century, both Bayesian and otherwise,
since they set the stage for the neo-Bayesian revival. In section 5, I explain what is
known about the use of adjective \Bayesian," and I outline the dimensions of Bayesian
creativity that surrounded its emergence during a period I call the neo-Bayesian revival.
In the (cid:12)nal sections of the paper, I focus brie(cid:13)y on some of the sequelae to the neo-

6Stigler’s Law in its simplest form states that \[n]o scienti(cid:12)c discovery is named after its original
discoverer." For those who have not previously seen references to this law, it is worth noting that Stigler
proposed it in the spirit of a self-proving theorem. (156)

7A reviewer of an earlier version of this article observed that this is a decidedly English-language, and
perhaps uninteresting, question. Making adjectives out of nouns was perhaps more common in German
than in English in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, when the adjective \Bayessche"
was used; however, \der Bayesschen Satz" in Kolmogorov’s Grundbegri(cid:11)e (93, p. 36) is just a theorem
about events and not Bayesian in the sense that I use it here (c.f. Aldrich, in Earliest Known Uses of
Some of the Words of Mathematics, http://members.aol.com/je(cid:11)570/b.html). Moreover, while there
may not be much apparent di(cid:11)erence between \Bayes rule" and \Bayesian rule," the adoption of the
adjective in English occurred during a remarkable period of intellectual ferment and marked the rise of
the modern Bayesian movement in a predominantly English-language literature.

Stephen E. Fienberg

3

Bayesian revival of the 1950s and especially during the 1960s. Today, Bayesian methods
are integrated into both the fabric of statistical thinking within the (cid:12)eld of statistics
and the methodology used in a broad array of applications. The ubiquity of Bayesian
statistics is illustrated by the name of the International Society for Bayesian Analysis,
its growing membership, and its new on-line journal. But one can also see the broad
in(cid:13)uence of Bayesian thinking by a quick scan of major journals of not only statistics
but also computer science and bioinformatics, economics, medicine, and even physics,
to name speci(cid:12)c (cid:12)elds.

This paper is far from an exhaustive treatment of the subject, for that would have
taken a book. Rather, I have chosen to cite a few key contributions as part of the his-
torical development, especially as they relate to the theme of the adjective \Bayesian."
I cite many (but not all) relevant books and a small fraction of the papers that were
part of the development of Bayesian inference.

2 Bayes’ Theorem
My story begins, of course, with the Reverend Thomas Bayes,8 a nonconformist En-
glish minister whose 1763 posthumously published paper, \An Essay Towards Solving a
Problem in the Doctrine of Chances," (14) contains what is arguably the (cid:12)rst detailed
description of the theorem from elementary probability theory now associated with his
name. Bayes’ paper, which was submitted for publication by Richard Price, is remark-
ably opaque in its notation and details, and the absence of integral signs makes for
di(cid:14)cult reading to those of us who have come to expect them.

The Essay considers the problem, \Given the number of times in which an unknown
event has happened and failed: Required the chance that the probability of its happen-
ing in a single trial lies somewhere between any two degrees of probability that can
be named." [p. 376] Writing in an unpublished 1960 reading note, L.J. Savage (141)
observed: \The problem is of the kind we now associate with Bayes’s name, but it is
con(cid:12)ned from the outset to the special problem of drawing the Bayesian inference, not
about an arbitrary sort of parameter, but about a ‘degree of probability’ only." This
statement actually provides us with the (cid:12)rst clue to the title of this article; clearly in
1960, Savage was using the term \Bayesian" as we do today. And he notes what others
have subsequently: that Bayes did not actually give us a statement of Bayes’ Theorem,
either in its discrete form,

P (BijA) =

P (AjBi)P (Bi)
Pj P (AjBj)P (Bj)

;

(1)

(this came later in Laplace (96)), or in its continuous form with integration, although
he solved a special case of the latter.

In current statistical language, Bayes’ paper introduces a uniform prior distribution
on the binomial parameter,9 (cid:18), reasoning by analogy with a \billiard table" and drawing

8For biographical material on Bayes see Bellhouse (16) and Dale (37).
9Of course Bayes didn’t use the term parameter|David and Edwards (41) trace the introduction

4

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

on the form of the marginal distribution of the binomial random variable, and not on the
principle of \insu(cid:14)cient reason," as many others have claimed.10 An appendix to the
paper, written by Price, also deals with the related problem of predicting the result of
a new observation. Bellhouse (15) suggests that Price contributed more to Bayes’ essay
than others have hitherto suggested, perhaps even piecing it together from a number of
\initially seemingly unrelated results" to form a coherent whole. Both Bellhouse and
Stigler have also suggested that the famous portrait of Bayes that adorns a myriad of
publications about him and all things Bayesian may actually not be Bayes at all (see
(122))!

Stigler (158) has also explored the question of whether Bayes did indeed discover
Bayes’ Theorem, and points to paragraphs in a 1749 book by David Hartley that give a
concise description of the inverse result and attribute it to a friend, whom Stigler infers
was likely Nicholas Saunderson, but if so he apparently did not publish the details.
Hald (82) argues that the friend might actually have been Bayes and that the result was
developed before the publication of Hartley’s book. Dale (37) reproduces an undated
notebook of Bayes with a passage which he suggests comes from about 1746-1749, thus
supporting the thesis that Bayes might have been the unnamed friend of Hartley.

Would we call Bayes a \Bayesian" today? Stigler (157) argues that Bayes intended
his results in a rather more limited way than would modern Bayesians. But Stigler
also notes that Bayes’ de(cid:12)nition of probability is subjective, and a 2003 version of the
entry on Thomas Bayes in the online Wikipedia Encyclopedia entry on suggested that
we interpret it in terms of expected utility (had Bayes only understood the concept!),
and thus that Bayes’ result would make sense only to the extent to which one can bet
on its observable consequences. But perhaps it would be fairer to Bayes to see what
ideas unfolded in the two centuries following his death before probing more deeply into
how he viewed the matter! Nonetheless this commentary on Bayes raises anew the issue
of why we call Bayesian methods \Bayesian."

3 Inverse Probability From Bayes to the Twentieth Cen-

tury

Whether or not Bayes actually discovered Bayes’ Theorem, it seems clear that his work
preceded that of Pierre Simon Laplace, the eighteenth century French scientist who,
in his 1774 paper, \M(cid:19)emoire sur la Probabilit(cid:19)e des Causes par les (cid:19)Ev(cid:18)enements," gave
a much more elaborate version of the inference problem for the unknown binomial
parameter in relatively modern language and notation. Laplace also articulated, more
clearly than Bayes, his argument for the choice of a uniform prior distribution, arguing
that the posterior distribution of the parameter (cid:18) should be proportional to what we

of the term to a 1903 book by Kapteyn (89). Then in 1922 Fisher (62) reintroduced the term and the
label took hold. For modern Bayesians, parameters are simply random variables and so it is natural to
put distributions on them.

10See Stigler (157), who draws attention to this marginal distribution argument in the \Scholium"

that follows the key proposition in Bayes’ paper.

Stephen E. Fienberg

now call the likelihood of the data, i.e.,

f ((cid:18)jx1; x2; : : : ; xn) / f (x1; x2; : : : ; xnj(cid:18)):

5

(2)

We now understand that this implies that the prior distribution for (cid:18) is uniform, al-
though in general, of course, the prior may not exist. The paper also contains other
major statistical innovations, such as picking an estimate that minimizes the posterior
loss. For further details, see Stigler (160).

Laplace re(cid:12)ned and developed the \Principle" he introduced in 1774 in papers pub-
lished in 1781 and 1786, and it took on varing forms such as the \indi(cid:11)erence principle"
or what we now refer to as \Laplace’s Rule of Succession" (for obtaining the probability
of new events on the basis of past observations). But the original 1774 memoir had
far-reaching in(cid:13)uence on the adoption of Bayesian ideas in the mathematical world,
in(cid:13)uence that was unmatched by Bayes’ paper, to which it did not refer.11 Ultimately,
Laplace and others recognized Bayes’ prior claim (e.g., see Condorcet’s introduction to
Laplace’s 1781 paper, and the (cid:12)nal section of Laplace’s 1812 monograph (97), Th(cid:19)eorie
Analytique des Probabilit(cid:19)es, and the related discussion in Dale (36), p. 249). Condorcet
(33) used a form probabilistic reasoning attributed to Bayes and Laplace in his famous
work on majority voting, as did his student Lacroix (95) in his probability text.

Laplace’s introduction of the notion of \indi(cid:11)erence" as an argument in specifying
a prior distribution was (cid:12)rst in a long line of e(cid:11)orts to discover the statistical holy
grail: prior distributions re(cid:13)ecting ignorance. The search for the holy grail continues
today under a variety of names, including objective Bayes, and in response to every
method that is put forward we see papers about logical and statistical inconsistencies
or improprieties.

Another surprise to some is that Laplace’s 1774 paper does not use the term inverse
probability; the phrase came into use later. For example, De Morgan (47) wrote about
the method of inverse probability and attributed its general form to Laplace’s 1812 book
(97)|\inverse" because it involves inferring backwards from the data to the parameter
or from e(cid:11)ects to causes. The term continued in use until the mid-twentieth century.
It was only later that others argued that Laplace had not noticed that inverting the
conditioning changed the meaning of probability (c.f. the narrative in Howie (85)).

Laplace’s 1812 formulation of the large sample normal probability approximation for
the binomial parameter with a uniform (beta) prior was generalized by I.J. Bienaym(cid:19)e
(17) to linear functions of multinomial parameters, again with a uniform prior on the
multinomial. In essence, he was working with a special case of the Dirichlet prior. Heyde
and Seneta (83, pp. 97{103) give a detailed description of Bienaym(cid:19)e’s formulation and
approach in modern notation and they note that a rigorous proof of the result was
provided in the twentieth century by von Mises.12

11See Stigler (160) for a discussion of why Laplace was unaware of Bayes’ paper when he wrote this

1774 paper.

12Results similar to this one by Bienaym(cid:19)e are used today to justfy frequentist interpretations of
Bayesian interval estimates. It is in this sense that Bienaym(cid:19)e was clearly before his time, as the title
of (83) suggests.

6

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

According to Daston (38), \[B]etween 1837 and 1843 at least six authors|Sim(cid:19)eon-
Denis Poisson, Bernard Bolzano, Robert Leslie Ellis, Jacob Friedrich Fries, John Stu-
art Mill, and [Antoine Augustine] Counot|approaching the topic as mathematicians,
writing in French, German, and English, and apparently working independently made
similar distinctions between the probabilities of things and the probabilities of our be-
liefs about things." This is the distinction between what we now call objective and
subjective meanings of probability. Cournot (35), for example, sharply criticized Con-
dorcet’s and Laplace’s approach to the probabilities of causes (see Daston (38) for a
detailed discussion of what all of these authors meant by these terms). This focus on
the meaning of probability quickly spread to other countries as well. The links between
France and Russia were especially strong as Seneta (150) notes and, while the work
in Russia in(cid:13)uenced the formal development of probability in the twentieth century in
profound ways,13 it seems to have had limited impact at the time on the development
of subjective probability and related statistical methods. This is not to suggest that the
developments in probability were devoid of statistical content. For example, Bienaym(cid:19)e
in 1853 and Chebyshev in 1867, in proofs of what is most commonly know as as the
Chebyshev inequality, independently set out what could be thought of as the Method of
Moments (e.g., see Heyde and Seneta (83, pp. 121{124)). But both authors were pri-
marily interested in forms of the Law of Large Numbers and not problems of statistical
inference per se. It was Karl Pearson, decades later, who set forth the method in the
context of inferential problems and actual data. The connection of these developments
to inverse probability is, however, somewhat muddy.

Mathematicians and philosophers continued to debate the meaning of probability
throughout the remainder of the nineteenth century. For example, Boole, Venn, Chrys-
tal, and others argued that the inverse method was incompatible with objective prob-
abilities, and they also critiqued the inverse method because of its use of indi(cid:11)erence
prior distributions. But when it came to the practical application of statistical ideas for
inferential purposes, inverse probability ruled the day (c.f. Zabell (181; 182)).14 This
was largely because no one came forward with a systematic and implementable \fre-
quentist" alternative. For example, Fechner (55) studied frequency distributions and
introduced the term Kollektivmasslehre|collective|later used by von Mises in his fre-
quentist approach. But, as Sheynin (153) notes, his description was vague and general
in nature.

Thus, in retrospect, it shouldn’t be surprising to see inverse probability as the
method of choice of the great English statisticians of the turn of the century, such as
Edgeworth and Pearson. For example, Edgeworth (49) gave one of the earliest deriva-
tions of what we now know as Student’s t-distribution, the posterior distribution of the
mean (cid:22) of a normal distribution given uniform prior distributions on (cid:22) and h = (cid:27)(cid:0)1,
calling it the \subexponential" distribution. This is another instance of Stigler’s Law,
since Gosset, publishing under the pseudonym Student, gave his version of the derivation

13For example, see the discussion about the evolution of ideas in probability in Shafer and Vovk

(151).

14For example, according to Sheynin (152), Markov used a variation on an argument of Laplace to
demonstrate an early \robustness" argument with regard to prior distributions in the binomial setting.

Stephen E. Fienberg

7

in 1908 (163), without reference to Edgeworth (c.f. Stigler (155)).

Gosset’s exposition does not directly mention inverse probability, but it is reasonably
clear to anyone who reads his subsequent paper on the correlation coe(cid:14)cient, published
the same year, that this was the implicit reasoning (see Fienberg and Lazar (60)). Of
course, today we also know that the result was derived even earlier, by L(cid:127)uroth in 1876,
who also used inverse probability methods (see Pfanzagl and Sheynin (125)).

Gosset worked at Guinness Brewery in Dublin, but did the work on the t-distribution
and the correlation coe(cid:14)cient in Karl Pearson’s Statistical Laboratory at University Col-
lege London. Beginning in his Grammar of Science (123), Pearson adopted the Laplace
version of inverse probability, but he also argued for the role of experience in determining
the a priori probabilities. In Pearson (124), he again wrote about assuming \the truth
of Bayes’ Theorem," and went on to discuss the importance of past experience. This
is an approach which, when implemented decades later, came to be known as empirical
Bayes. But, as Je(cid:11)reys noted much later on when describing Pearson’s position,

[t]he anomalous feature of his work is that though he always maintained
the principle of inverse probability : : : he seldom used it in actual applica-
tions, and usually presented his results in a form that appears to identify a
probability with a frequency. (87, p. 383)

It should come as no surprise to us therefore that those like Gosset, on whom Pearson
exerted such a strong in(cid:13)uence, would use inverse probability implicitly or explicitly.
Yet later, Gosset would gladly assume the mantle of frequentist methods advocated by
R. A. Fisher, although he, like most other statisticians, found issues on which he and
Fisher disagreed quite strongly.15

4 From Inverse Probability to Frequentism and the Rise

of Subjective Probability

4.1 Frequentist Alternatives to Inverse Probability

At the time that Ronald Alymer Fisher began his studies of statistics at Cambridge in
1909, inverse probability was an integral part of the subject he learned (c.f. Edwards
(50)). Frequentist and other non-Bayesian ideas were clearly \in the air," but it is
di(cid:14)cult to know to what extent Fisher was aware of them. For example, as a student
he might have been led to read papers and books dealing with such alternatives by
his teacher, F.J.M. Stratton, but he rarely cited relevant precursors or alternatives to
his own work (see Aldrich’s (1) account of what Fisher studied). Over a period of 10
15Fienberg and Lazar (60) provide support for this interpretation of Gosset as using inverse proba-
bility. A reviewer of an earlier version of this paper has argued that Gosset was simply not clear about
these matters and that his later acceptance of Fisher’s interpretation of inference was not foreordained.
But such an argument misses the fact that there was no comprehensive statistical alternative to inverse
probability at the time Gosset wrote his 1908 papers and thus we should expect to see the role of
inverse probability in his work.

8

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

years, from 1912 to 1922, Fisher moved away from the inverse methods and towards
his own approach to inference he called the \likelihood," a concept he claimed was
distinct from probability. But Fisher’s progression in this regard was slow. Stigler
(162) has pointed out that, in an unpublished manuscript dating from 1916, Fisher
didn’t distinguish between likelihood and inverse probability with a (cid:13)at prior, even
though when he later made the distinction he claimed to have understood it at this
time. But within six years Fisher’s thinking had a broad new perspective, and his 1922
paper (62) was to revolutionize modern statistical thinking. In it, he not only introduced
likelihood and its role in producing maximum likelihood estimates, but he also gave us
the statistical notions of \su(cid:14)ciency" and \e(cid:14)ciency" and used the label \parameter,"
which was to become the object of scienti(cid:12)c inquiry (c.f. Stigler (162)). Later he moved
even further and developed his own approach to inverse reasoning which he dubbed
the \(cid:12)ducial" method (64), and went so far as to suggest that Gosset’s interpretation
of his t-distribution result was in the (cid:12)ducial spirit. Fisher also gave statistics the
formal methodology of tests of signi(cid:12)cance, especially through his 1925 book, Statistical
Methods for Research Workers (63).

Fisher’s work had a profound in(cid:13)uence on two other young statisticians working in
Pearson’s laboratory at University College London: Jerzy Neyman, a Polish statistician
whose early work focused on experiments and sample surveys, and Egon Pearson, Karl
Pearson’s son. They found Fisher’s ideas on signi(cid:12)cance tests lacking in mathematical
detail and, together, they set out to extend and \complete" what he had done. In the
process, they developed the methods of hypothesis testing and con(cid:12)dence intervals that
were to revolutionize both the theory and the application of statistics. Although Fisher
often disagreed with them caustically and vigorously both orally and in print (e.g.,
see Fienberg and Tanur (61)), some amalgam of their approaches|referred to later as
\frequentist" methods|soon supplanted inverse probability. The mathematical foun-
dation for these methods emerged from Russia and the axiomatic work of Kolmogorov
(93). The methods quickly spread to diverse areas of application, for good and for bad.
Gigerenzer et al. (69) describe the impact of these frequentist methods especially in
psychology. I would be remiss if I didn’t also mention the work of Richard von Mises
(168) on frequentist justi(cid:12)cations for probability, but his work had remarkably little
in(cid:13)uence on the course of the development of statistical methods and theory despite its
seeming importance to philosophers. In his 1941 paper on the foundations of probability
and statistics, however, von Mises (169) uses a Bayesian argument to critique the Ney-
man method of con(cid:12)dence intervals. While he suggested that what one really wanted
was the posterior distribution, the estimation challenge was saying something about it
\without having information about the prior probability," a theme he elaborated on in
von Mises (170).

The adjective \frequentist," like the adjective \Bayesian," is now widely used, but it
was uncommon in the early days of Fisher, Neyman, and Pearson. A search of JSTOR
shows that its earliest use in the main English language statistical journals occurred
in a 1936 article by Nagel (119); his focus was largely on the frequency interpretation
of probability. The adjective appeared again sporadically in philosophy and statistics
journals for the next 20 years, but the use of \frequentist" to describe statistical methods

Stephen E. Fienberg

9

gained currency in the 1950s only after \Bayesian" came into common usage, and then
it was used by Bayesians to describe non-Bayesian methods.16

Abraham Wald used Bayesian ideas and the name \Bayes" throughout his devel-
opment of statistical decision theory, albeit in a decidedly non-Bayesian or frequentist
form. Wald (172) considered \hypothetical a priori distributions" of the parameter of
interest, and in 1947 (173) he derived the \Bayes solution," but then evaluated its per-
formance with respect to the sample space. The basic idea in all of this work was that
the use of Bayesian tools led to good frequentist properties. Later literature renamed
other quantities in Wald’s 1939 paper using \Bayes" as a descriptor. Writing in 1953
as a discussant to a paper by Dennis Lindley (100), George Barnard was to remark
that \Wald helped to rescue Bayes’ theorem from the obscurity into which it had been
driven in recent years."

4.2 The Rise of Subjective Probability

Of course, inverse probability ideas did not die with the rise of likelihood methods
and tests of hypotheses. John Maynard Keynes (91) described the view of subjective
probability in the early 1920s in his Treatise on Probability, but in doing so he allowed
for the possibility that degree of belief might not be numerically measurable. While
Keynes’ bibliography ran some 25 pages and made clear that he was drawing on a
broad literature, in other senses it signaled a major break from past, in large part
because of the new literature it triggered.17
In his review of Keynes’ book, (cid:19)Emile
Borel (21) clearly identi(cid:12)ed the issues associated with the meaning of probability and
articulated what Savage was to refer to as \the earliest account of the modern concept
of personal probability known to me."18 Five years later, Frank Ramsey (132) critiqued
16The term \classical" statistics, used to describe frequentist as opposed to Bayesian methods, came
later, and perhaps it owes itself to Neyman’s 1937 paper (121), \Outline of a Theory of Statistical
Estimation Based on the Classical Theory of Probability." Neyman used the adjective \classical" to
distinguish his approach from Je(cid:11)reys’ and suggested that his approach was rooted in the traditional
approach to probability based on equally likely cases or the more formal versions developed in the
twentieth century by the French and Russian statisticians Borel, Fr(cid:19)echet, Kolmogorov, and L(cid:19)evy. In
the process he in some senses usurped the label and applied it to his approach with Egon Pearson.
This usage of \classical" in an inference context is an oxymoron, since if anything should be called
classical it should be methods descended from inverse probability. Wilks (178) used the phrase \classical
probability" in describing sampling distributions in the context of con(cid:12)dence interval calculations the
previous year in his discussion of Nagel (119), so again the use of the label applied to inference methods
was \in the air." Various authors have of course used the label \classical" to refer to methods from
the past. But what is clear from a search of JSTOR is that \classical inference," \classical statistical
inference," and \classical statistics" came into vogue in the 1950s and 1960s, especially by Bayesians to
describe non-Bayesian frequentist methodology associated with the Neyman-Pearson school. Barnett
(13) has a chapter in the (cid:12)rst edition of his comparative inference book on \classical inference."

17A reviewer criticized an earlier version of this paper as being Anglo-centric. But the literature
that we now label as Bayesian, with a few notable exceptions, became dominated by English-speaking
authors whose sources typically did not include the diverse array of references which Keynes cited.
This is not to argue that Keynes and those who followed him were not in(cid:13)uenced by the French school,
but rather that the French literature stopped far short of providing the foundation on which modern
Bayesian thinking now rests.

18See the comment in the bibliographic supplement to the paperback edition of Savage (140). A
referee has pointed to similar interpretations in Paul L(cid:19)evy’s 1925 book on probability (98), although

10

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

Keyne’s axiomatic formulation and he laid out a new approach to subjective probability
through the concept of expected utility. Both Ramsey and Keynes were in(cid:13)uenced by
their Cambridge colleague William Ernest Johnson, whose early work on the Dirichlet
priors for the multinomial is an antecedent to I.J. Good’s (77) approach for hierarchical
Bayesian inference (see the discussion in Zabell (180)).

In an \objective" inverse probability vein, Ernest Lhoste (99) published a series of
four articles comprising about 92 pages that appeared respectively in the May{August
1923 issues of the Revue D’artillerie in Paris. While some of this work was descriptive
in nature, in the second article, arguing for a form of \indi(cid:11)erence" in the spirit of
Laplace, he developed vague prior distributions that represent little or no knowledge for
the mean and variance of a normal distribution and for the probability of success for the
binomial distribution. His results and reasoning were similar to those of Je(cid:11)reys (87)
for the normal distribution and to those of Haldane for the binomial almost a decade
later. Lhoste reasons that the prior density for the standard deviation, (cid:27), should be the
same as that for its reciprocal, and he sets

f ((cid:27)) / 1=(cid:27) for (cid:27) > 0:

(3)

Thus he argues that lack of knowledge about (cid:27) should be the same as our lack of
knowledge about 1=(cid:27). This is similar to Je(cid:11)reys’ (1961, page 119) invariance principle
that states that prior information about (cid:27) should be the same as that for any power
of (cid:27). Broemeling and Broemeling (28) paraphrase Lhoste: \nothing distinguishes, a
priori, 1=(cid:27) from (cid:27); if (cid:27) is indeterminate between two values, then 1=(cid:27) will be equally
and in the same fashion indeterminate between the corresponding values of 1=(cid:27)." Thus
what we now call \Je(cid:11)reys’ prior" appears to be another instance of Stigler’s Law. In
the third article, Lhoste references Keynes (91) and makes clear that his contributions
were not occurring in total isolation.

Beginning with his 1919 paper with Dorothy Wrinch (179), Harold Je(cid:11)reys adopted
the \degree of reasonable belief" approach to probability, which was consistent with the
approach in Keynes (91) but not with the \objective" ideas of Venn and others. They
used this approach to assess the reasonableness of scienti(cid:12)c theories, and in particular
Je(cid:11)reys was focused on Eddington’s representation of relativity theory. Je(cid:11)reys’ 1931
book on Scienti(cid:12)c Inference (86) represents a continuation of the collaboration with
Wrinch, and in it he derived Gosset’s 1908 t-distribution result using inverse probability.
Actually, he worked backward and showed that it corresponded to a prior proportional
to 1=(cid:27). And in his description of the result he clearly missed the inverse probability
underpinnings of Gosset’s work.

In the early 1930s, Je(cid:11)reys engaged in a published exchange with R.A. Fisher, be-
ginning in the Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society and continuing in
In this exchange they confronted one another
the Proceedings of the Royal Society.
on the meaning of probability, and on Fisher’s (cid:12)ducial argument and Je(cid:11)reys’ inverse
probability approach. Nothing seemed to be resolved, and Je(cid:11)reys resumed his critique

it is not widely recognized today as having substantial in(cid:13)uence on the development of the subjective
school.

Stephen E. Fienberg

11

of the Fisherian ideas in his 1939 book, Theory of Probability (87). That book pro-
vides Je(cid:11)reys’ e(cid:11)ort at an axiom system for probability theory. He then laid out the
inverse probability approach of updating degrees of beliefs in propositions by use of
probability theory|in particular Bayes’|theorem, to learn from experience and data.
And he used an information-like invariance approach to derive \objective" priors that
expressed ignorance or lack of knowledge in an e(cid:11)ort to grasp the holy grail that had
eluded statisticians since the days of Laplace. His examples remain among the most
widely cited in the current \objective Bayesian" literature.

The Theory of Probabilty is a remarkable book, and it has been read and reread
by many modern Bayesians. Je(cid:11)reys also taught a course in statistics at Cambridge.
Dennis Lindley recalls (154): \Harold Je(cid:11)reys’ lectures were attended by about six of
us who had come back from the war and fancied ourselves as statisticians. That was
the (cid:12)rst time he had had to give the complete course of lectures. He was such a bad
lecturer that previously all had given him up, but we stuck at them, and very rewarding
they were."

In Italy during the 1930s, in a series of papers in Italian, Bruno de Finetti gave a
di(cid:11)erent justi(cid:12)cation for personal or subjective probability, introducing the notion of
exchangeability and the implicit role of prior distributions (see especially (42)). But
almost two decades were to pass before Savage was to build on these ideas and develop
a non-frequentist alternative to the Kolmogorov axioms, and others were to exploit the
concept of exchangeability to develop hierarchical Bayesian methods. The best known
of these papers, de Finetti (42), was subsequently reprinted several times in English
translation, e.g., in Kyburg and Smokler (94). A two-volume synthesis of his Bayesian
ideas appeared in Italian in 1970 and in English translation in 1974 and 1975 (45; 46).
These volumes and their description of de Finetti’s ideas on (cid:12)nitely additive probabilities
and non-conglomerability gave later statisticians the tools to study the implications of
the use of improper prior distributions. Exchangeability was presaged by W.E. Johnson,
who described the idea as \permutability" but did not develop it in the way that de
Finetti did.

Meanwhile, in the United States, Bayes was not forgotten. W. Edwards Deming
arranged for mimeo reprint of Bayes’ essay, which was circulated by U.S. Department
of Agriculture Graduate School during the late 1930s and early 1940s.

4.3 Statistical Developments in WWII

World War II marked a major turning point for statistics, both in Great Britain and
in the United States.19 Several di(cid:11)erent groups of statisticians were assembled to deal
with the war e(cid:11)ort, and mathematicians were recruited to carry out statistical tasks.
Wallis (176) and Barnard and Plackett (12) give excellent overviews of these activities.

19While there were statistical activities during World War II in other countries, none appear to have
in(cid:13)uenced the development of Bayesian methods in a fashion comparable to those that occurred in
Great Britain and the United States. For a discussion of statistical activities in other countries see the
overview in Fienberg (56).

12

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

Here I wish to focus on the simultaneous development of sequential analysis by Alan
Turing, George Barnard, and Abraham Wald, as well as the personal links that were
made that in(cid:13)uenced some of the later course of Bayesian statistics.

I begin with Alan Turing, best known for his codebreaking work and his later con-
tributions to computer science. I.J. Good (72), who was Turing’s statistical assistant
at Bletchley Park during WWII, has described Turing’s statistical contributions during
this period, which were primarily Bayesian. Good recalls that

[Turing] invented a Bayesian approach to sequential data analysis, using
weights of evidence (though not under that name). A weight of evidence
is the logarithm of a Bayes factor; for a Bayesian, this is the only possible
de(cid:12)nition, and the concept has been an obsession of mine ever since. : : : On
one occasion I happened to meet George Barnard during the war, in London,
and I con(cid:12)dentially [mentioned that we were using sequentially a Bayesian
method in terms of what we now call \weights of evidence" (log-factors) for
distinguishing between two hypotheses. Barnard said that, curiously enough,
in his work for the Ministry of Supply, he was using something similar.] Thus
Turing and Barnard invented sequential analysis independently of Wald. : : :
Turing developed the sequential probability ratio test, except that he gave it
a Bayesian interpretation in terms of the odds form of Bayes’ theorem. He
wanted to be able to estimate the probability of a hypothesis, allowing for the
prior probability, when information arrives piecemeal. When the odds form
of Bayes’ theorem is used, it is unnecessary to mention the Neyman{Pearson
lemma. One morning I asked Turing \Isn’t this really Bayes’ theorem?" and
he said \I suppose so." He hadn’t mentioned Bayes previously. Now, Harold
Je(cid:11)reys with Dorothy Wrinch had previously published the odds form of
Bayes’ theorem (without the odds terminology and without the sequential
aspect), and Turing might have seen their work, but probably he thought of
it independently.20

As this quote implies, Turing was doing Bayesian work in depth, and Good was learning
many of these ideas from him and later put them to work in his own research. It makes
clear that George Barnard also developed the ideas of sequential analysis and after the
war he published his results as well. In his 1946 paper (9) on the topic, he too noted the
importance of Bayes’ theorem in the general problem of sampling inspection. Following
the war, Good wrote his book Probability and the Weighing of Evidence (71) which was
an e(cid:11)ort to describe the inferential ideas that Good has used with Turing, and it was
essentially completed in 1947 although not published for another three years. At the
time, Good was unaware of de Finetti’s work.

Among the scienti(cid:12)c e(cid:11)orts to support the U.S. war e(cid:11)ort, W. Allen Wallis set up and
directed a Statistical Research Group (SRG) at Columbia University during the Second
World War. The sta(cid:11) included many mathematicians, statisticians, and economists
who subsequently became leaders in their (cid:12)eld including Milton Friedman, Frederick

20 (8, pp. 10-11) as corrected by Good in personal correspondence.

Stephen E. Fienberg

13

Mosteller, L.J. Savage, Abraham Wald, and Jacob Wolfowitz (see Wallis (176)). SRG
tackled a wide range of projects. For SRG, the idea of sequential sampling began with
a question posed by a U.S. Navy captain about two (cid:12)ring procedures that were being
tested to determine which procedure was \superior." The captain indicated that, part
way through the long test, he could often easily tell that one procedure was superior to
the other. Wallis mulled this question over with Milton Friedman for a few days, and
then they approached Abraham Wald with the problem. After a few months of work
on the problem, Wald and his research group, which included Wolfowitz, developed and
proved the theorem underlying the sequential probability ratio test, although unlike the
versions of Turing and Barnard, his did not directly involve Bayes’ Theorem. This work
was later published by Wald in 1947 in book form (174).

SRG did many other statistical tasks including work on quality control. Mosteller’s
collaboration with Savage during this period was later to in(cid:13)uence the development of
Bayesian methods. And others were quick to follow up on the work of Wald. For exam-
ple, David Blackwell credits a 1945 lecture by M.A. Girshick on sequential analysis that
turned him into a statistician. Blackwell remembers Girshick recommending sampling
\until you’ve seen enough." In the lecture, Girshick announced a theorem that Black-
well thought was false. Blackwell devised a counter example and sent it to Girshick. It
was wrong, but sending it was right. \Instead of dismissing it as the work of a crank,"
Blackwell said, \he called and invited me to lunch" (excerpted from an ASA web pro(cid:12)le
(6)). Nine years and several papers later, in 1954, the two published their Theory of
Games and Statistical Decisions (19). The book, while strongly in(cid:13)uenced by the work
of Wald and others, was still essentially frenquentist, although others such as Morris
DeGroot (48) later used ideas in it to develop the Bayesian notion of \su(cid:14)ciency" for
experiments.

Others built on the Wald approach as well. During the post war period, the Cowles
Commission at the University of Chicago had two major research thrusts that were
statistical in nature|estimation in simultaneous equations models and rational deci-
sion making (see Christ (31)). Those who worked on the latter topic included Kenneth
Arrow, Herman Cherno(cid:11), M.A. (Abe) Girshick, and Herman Rubin, and later Roy
Radner. Much of their work followed the Wald tradition, with Bayesian ideas being an
integral component, but for frequentist purposes. Rubin (137) wrote about subjective
probability ideas in several unpublished papers, as well as jointly with Arrow and Gir-
shick on decision methods (5; 70), and he gave his own version of the von Neumann
and Morgenstern axioms. Cherno(cid:11) (30), leaning in part on the work of Savage for his
foundations book, derived decision functions for minimizing maximum risk. He noted
the seeming contradiction between his results and the subjective approach: \Theorem 3
: : : suggests that one may regard postulates 1-8 as an axiomatization of the ‘principle of
insu(cid:14)cient reasoning.’ : : : Postulate 3 in particular is not compatible with a subjectivist
approach."

A similar decision-theory type of development was Robbins’ 1951 (133) paper on
compound statistical decision problems, which introduced empirical Bayesian ideas,
but from a strictly frequentist perspective. Turing had actually introduced empirical
Bayes as a method as part of his wartime work, and Good developed these ideas further

14

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

in a 1953 paper (74), although it was not until the 1960s that these ideas entered the
mainstream of Bayesian and frequentist thinking.

Quite separate from the statistical developments linked to World War II was the work
of the physicists at Los Alamos, New Mexico, and elsewhere developing the atom bomb.
But it was during this period that the ideas underlying the \Monte Carlo" method were
developed, largely through the interactions of John von Neumann, Stanislaw Ulam, and
Nicholas Metropolis (114). While we now think of one of the subsequent developments,
the Metropolis algorithm, as a cornerstone for Bayesian computations, a careful reading
of the initial paper (113) describing the method shows little or no evidence of Bayesian
methodology or thinking (see also, Metropolis (112)).

Thus we see that, as statistics entered the 1950s, the dominant ideas had become
frequentist, even though Bayes lurked in the background. As Dennis Lindley (106)
has written: \When I began studying statistics in 1943 the term ‘Bayesian’ hardly
existed; ‘Bayes’ yes, we had his theorem, but not the adjective." And I.J. (Jack) Good
(71), writing on the weighing of evidence using Bayes’ Theorem, in the third paragragh
of the preface used the phrase \subjective probability judgments," but nowhere in the
book did he use the adjective \Bayesian." He didn’t even use the phrase \Bayes factor,"
although the concept appears under the label \factor," following Turing’s suggestion to
Good in a conversation in 1940. Good (73) also introduced precursors to hierarchical
probability modeling as part of his post-WWII output.

5 The Neo-Bayesian Revival

5.1 First (?) Use of the Adjective \Bayesian"

According to David (39; 40; 41), the term \Bayesian" was (cid:12)rst used in print by R.A.
Fisher in the 1950 introduction to his 1930 paper on (cid:12)ducial inference entitled \Inverse
Probability," as reprinted in his Contributions to Mathematical Statistics (65):

This short paper to the Cambridge Philosophical Society was intended to in-
troduce the notion of \(cid:12)ducial probability," and the type of inference which
may be expressed in this measure. It opens with a discussion of the di(cid:14)cul-
ties which had arisen from attempts to extend Bayes’ theorem to problems
in which the essential information on which Bayes’ theorem is based is in
reality absent, and passes on to relate the new measure to the likelihood
function, previously introduced by the author, and to distinguish it from
the Bayesian probability a posteriori.

But in fact, as Edwards (51) notes, Fisher actually used the adjective earlier in
Contributions to Mathematical Statistics (65), in his introduction to his 1921 paper
\On the ‘probable error’ of a coe(cid:14)cient of correlation deduced from a small sample,"
which was actually not reprinted in the volume:

In the (cid:12)nal section this paper contains a discussion of the bearing of new ex-

Stephen E. Fienberg

15

act solutions of distributional problems on the nature of inductive inference.
This is of interest for comparison with the paper on \Inverse probability,"
published 1930, nine years later. In 1930 the notion of (cid:12)ducial probability
is (cid:12)rst introduced using as an example the distribution found in this paper.
In view of this later development the statement, \We can know nothing of
the probability of hypotheses or hypothetical quantities," is seen to be hasty
and erroneous, in light of the di(cid:11)erent type of argument later developed. It
will be understood, however, as referring only to the Bayesian probabilities
a posteriori.

Fisher had spent decades defending his (cid:12)ducial approach (cid:12)rst from Je(cid:11)reys and others as
distinct from inverse probability, and then from the adherents of the Neyman-Pearson
school.
Indeed his own arguments took on a more \Bayesian" (cid:13)avor (although not
subjective) as he fought against the Neyman-Peason frequentists, especially in the last
decade or so of his life. Edwards (51) gives a good over view of Fisher and Bayes’
Theorem and inverse probability.

In personal correspondence, Jack Good notes that \Bayesian" is now usually used to
refer to a whole philosophy or methodology in which subjective or logical probabilities
are used, and Fisher had a far more restricted notion in mind! But \Bayesian" is the
word Fisher chose to use, and such negative usage of the term suggests that it might
have been used similarly by others in previous oral exchanges. Similarly, Savage (138),
in his review essay of Abraham Wald’s book on decision theory (Wald (175)), notes
that \the problem of dealing with uncertainty when probability does not apply to the
unknown states of the world is unBayesian, statistical theory."

A search of JSTOR reveals no earlier usage in any of the main American and British
statistical journals. The more comprehensive (in terms of journal coverage) permuted
title index of Ross and Tukey (136) contains no use of the term in the title of articles
until the 1960s. Similarly, an electronic search of Current Index to Statistics revealed
only one \Bayesian" paper prior to the 1960s, which was also in the results of the
JSTOR search.

5.2 Bayesian Inference Becomes \Bayesian"

Clearly Fisher’s derisory remark about Bayesian methods could not be responsible for
the adoption of the term \Bayesian" and the widespread adoption of Bayesian methods
in the second half of the twentieth century. Rather, at around the same time, there was a
renewed interest in foundations and statistical decision theory, and this led to a melding
of developments surrounding the role of subjective probability and new statistical tools
for scienti(cid:12)c inference and decisionmaking.

In the United States, the clear leader of this movement was Leonard Jimmie Savage.
Savage had been part of the Columbia Statistical Group in WWII and later moved
to the University of Chicago in 1949, where he began an intense reconsideration of the
Kolmogorov approach to the axioms of probability. It was during this period that Savage

16

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

discovered the work of Bruno de Finetti. In his 1951 review of Wald’s book, Savage
(138) points to the di(cid:14)culty of the minimax approach, and he even cites de Finetti, but
not in support of the subjective approach. Savage was grappling with ideas from von
Neuman and Morgenstern (171) at the time, and he \discovered" and translated three
early papers by Borel from the 1920s on game theory for publication in Econometrica
(see (20; 22; 23)). He was also reading the work of Harold Je(cid:11)reys and Jack Good.
Good (8) recalls,

The (cid:12)rst time I met [Savage], he came to see me when I was in London. It
was in 1951 or 1952 while he was working on his book. He’d been working in
France and was visiting England brie(cid:13)y. He knew I’d written the 1950 book,
so, perhaps on his way back to the U.S., he visited my home. Jimmie and
I began corresponding after that. He pointed out an error in my very (cid:12)rst
paper on causality, when I sent him a draft. Later I saw him in Chicago. He
was remarkably well read for a person with such bad eyesight.

It was Savage’s 1954 book (140) to which Good refers that set the stage for the
neo-Bayesian revival. Thus it is surprising that not only is the term \Bayesian" absent
from the book, but also that there is only one reference to Bayes, and that in connection
with his theorem. In his (cid:12)rst seven chapters, Savage laid out with mathematical rigor
to rival that of Kolmogorov a series of axioms and theorems which could be derived
from them, leading to the constructive methodology of maximizing expected utility,
the ideas originally laid out in sketchier form by Ramsey (132) and von Neumann and
Morgenstern (171) in their 1944 book, Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. His
treatment relies heavily on ideas of personal probability from the work of Bruno de
Finetti, in particular de Finetti (42; 43).21 Savage’s treatment of Je(cid:11)reys suggests that
he did not regard his axiomatic approach as su(cid:14)ciently mathematically rigorous to merit
extended discussion and focus.22 In the second part of his book, Savage attempted to
justify the frequentist ideas of Fisher and others using his axiomatic approach, but he
later recognized the futility of such an e(cid:11)ort. Looking back to this e(cid:11)ort in 1970, Savage
(144) described his thinking in 1954: \though interested in personal probability,. . . , not
yet a personalistic Bayesian and . . . unaware of the likelihood principle." At the same
time, de Finetti (44) used the label in his paper, \La Notion de ‘Horizon Bayesien.’"23

In the mid-1950s, there was what now appears to have been an amazing con(cid:13)uence of
statisticians at the University of Chicago, in part drawn by the power and persuasiveness

21Savage and de Finetti were interacting and exchanging materials from the late 1940s onward,
and there are clear cross-references in their work. For example, de Finetti (43) in his 1950 Berkeley
symposium paper refers to an abstract of a paper presented by Savage in 1949 at the Econometric
Society meeting and, in it, Savage refers to de Finetti’s ideas, referencing de Finetti (42).

22Je(cid:11)reys had not used utility as part of his axiomatic structure, although he was aware of Ramsey’s

work when he wrote his book.

23In his review of this paper, I.J. Good (75) notes that it is \primarily an exposition of ideas previously
put forward" in de Finetti (43). In that earlier paper, de Finetti does not use the adjective \Bayesian"
but instead writes about \Bayes’ conclusions," \Bayes’ premises," \Bayes’ theory," and the \Bayes’
position." Thus the adjective had emerged in use as early as 1954 (the date when the paper was
presented) and most certainly by 1956 when Good wrote his review.

Stephen E. Fienberg

17

of Savage. The faculty at the time included Harry Roberts and David Wallace; Morris
(Morrie) DeGroot and Roy Radner were graduate students working with Savage as
well. Among the visitors to the department during 1954-1955 were Dennis Lindley and
Frederick Mosteller. Mosteller had worked with Savage in SRG at Columbia during
WWII, and his 1948 paper on pooling data (115) was in the empirical Bayesian spirit,
although it used frequentist criteria. He also did pioneering work with Nogee (116) on
experimental measurement of utility. In 1952, Savage visited Cambridge, where Lindley
was a member of the faculty. John Pratt came the next year:

I was at Chicago from September 1955 to June 1957. Jimmie’s book had
come out a year or two before, and I decided to read it. I sent him a note
about misprints and such, on which he wrote replies. I have it, but it has
no date. I got hung up on the de Finetti conjecture (p. 40) for a couple of
weeks, but I read the rest of the book too. I had read and understood the
result in Blackwell and Girshick,24 but I think it stayed in another part of
my brain, or maybe I didn’t take it as meaning you should actually assess
probabilities in principle. So perhaps it was Jimmie’s book that made me
realize how serious the whole matter is. (Pratt, personal communication)

My point here is that considerable prior interaction set the stage for the arrival of
these individuals at the University of Chicago, and that Savage was the intellectual
draw.
It was during this period that Savage himself moved much closer to a fully
subjective Bayesian position, and soon thereafter and continuing over the next decade,
the adjective \Bayesian" began to appear in papers and books by all of these individuals,
e.g., see Savage (143) and the classic expository article by Edwards, Lindman, and
Savage (52). But Savage wrote about \Bayesian ideas" in a 1958 letter25 to Dennis
Lindley in connection with comments on a draft of Lindley (104).

A second and seemingly independent activity began a few years later at the Harvard
Business School when Howard Rai(cid:11)a joined forces with Robert Schlaifer to work on
a Bayesian response to the frequentist theory of exponential family distributions, and
they developed the notion of conjugate priors for this family. Rai(cid:11)a was trained in the
traditional mathematical statistics mold and his 1957 book with Luce (110), Games
and Decisions, relied on the more traditional formulation of game theory.26 Schlaifer
was trained as a classical historian, and, according to Rai(cid:11)a (see the interview with
Fienberg (59)), when he was asked to teach statistics, \he read Fisher, Neyman and
Pearson|not Wald and not Savage|and he concluded that standard statistical peda-
gogy did not address the main problem of a businessman: how to make decisions under
uncertainty. Not knowing anything about the subjective/objective philosophical divide,
24\Blackwell and Girshick’s 1954 book, Theory of Games and Statistical Decisions, a centrepiece of
my graduate education, contains a complete and rigorous argument but presents it almost incidentally,
in the midst of objectivistic exotica, and the clincher appears only in an exercise with no interpretation."
Pratt (129) referring to Theorem 4.3.1 in Section 4.3 and Problem 4.3.1 from Blackwell and Girshick
(19).

25Wallis (177, p. 21) quotes from this letter.
26Bayes appeared, but not yet in full Bayesian form. For example, on p. 312 they de(cid:12)ned Bayes

formula and on p. 313 they formulated the \Bayes decision rule against the a priori distribution."

18

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

he threw away the books and invented Bayesian decision theory from scratch." In their
collaboration, Rai(cid:11)a and Schlaifer gave Bayesian de(cid:12)nitions to frequentist notions such
as \su(cid:14)ciency," which they said should come from the posterior distribution,27 and they
adapted Fisher’s and Je(cid:11)reys’ de(cid:12)nitions of likelihood, noting the primary relevance of
that part they called the \likelihood kernel." How did they come to use the adjective
\Bayesian" to describe their approach? Rai(cid:11)a (59) has suggested that it was natural for
Schlaifer to adopt the label \Bayesian" in a positive sense to describe his approach to
probability reasoning and statistical methods. Schlaifer’s (147) 1959 introductory prob-
ability and statistics text not only uses the term but also advocates the use of Bayesian
principles for business decisions.28 By the time their classic book, Applied Statistical
Decision Theory, appeared in 1961 (131), the label \Bayesian" showed up throughout,
beginning with the preface. Shortly thereafter, John Pratt moved from Harvard’s De-
partment of Statistics to the Harvard Business School and joined in this e(cid:11)ort with a
number of Rai(cid:11)a and Schlaifer’s students and former students who had been trained as
thorough Bayesians.

As I noted, shortly after these activities at Chicago and Harvard in the mid-1950s,
\Bayesian" became the adjective of choice for both the proponents and the opponents of
Bayesian methodology. As noted above, I.J. Good (cid:12)rst used the term in a 1956 review of
a paper by de Finetti (44) in Mathematical Reviews. But he began to use the label quite
regularly after that, e.g., see Good (76), where he also introduced the phrase \Bayes
factor," and of course his important 1965 book (77). Lindley’s (cid:12)rst \Bayesian" papers
appeared in 1957 and 1958 (101; 102; 104), but like Savage his full acceptance of the
Bayesian philosophy took many years to accomplish. Even in his two-volume 1965 text
(105), Lindley focused on (cid:12)nding Bayesian solutions that resembled frequentist ones.

Savage likewise in(cid:13)uenced many others. David Blackwell’s pioneering work with
Girshick brought him close to Bayesian ideas, but \Jimmie convinced me that the Bayes
approach is absolutely the right way to do statistical inference," he has observed (6).

So how did Bayesian inference become \Bayesian"? Lindley (106) suggests,

Wald : : : had proved that the only decisions worth considering, technically
the admissible solutions, were obtained by placing a probability distribution
on the parameters about which a decision was to be made, and then using
Bayes’ theorem. Moreover he called them Bayes solutions, using Bayes as
an adjective, and although he did not use the term, it is but a short step to
the proper adjectival form, Bayesian.

While the adjective (cid:12)rst appears to have been used pejoratively, a small handful of
statisticians embraced the notion of \Bayesian" to describe methods that revived inverse
probability and imbued them with new methods and new mathematical foundations.

27An earlier such de(cid:12)nition of Bayesian su(cid:14)ciency is due to Kolmogorov (92).
28Savage (140), in the preface to the 1971 paperback edition of his book, refers to Schaifer’s book
and notes :\This is a welcome opportunity to say that his ideas were developed wholly independently
of the present book, and indeed of other personalistic literature. They are in full harmony with the
ideas in this book but are more down to earth and less spellbound by tradition.

Stephen E. Fienberg

19

Savage, Rai(cid:11)a, and Schlaifer did not invent the eponym but, far more than Wald, their
enthusiasm for and development of a new foundation for Bayesian methods encouraged
others to adopt them and to use the Bayesian name.

In his 1958 paper, Good wrote the following:

By a neo-Bayesian or neo/Bayes-Laplace philosophy we mean one that makes
use of inverse probabilities, with or without utilities, but without necessarily
using Bayes’ postulate of equiprobable or uniform initial distributions, and
with explicit emphasis on the use of probability judgments in the form of
inequalities. (76, p. 803)

Thus it seems apt to describe the 1950s as the era of the neo-Bayesian revival. But
in many ways it took until 1962, and the publication of Allan Birnbaum’s paper (18)
on the likelihood principle as well as the \Savage volume" on Foundations of Statistical
Inference (143), for the neo-Bayesian revival to become complete. The Savage volume
was developed from a presentation Jimmie Savage gave in London in 1959 and included
prepared discussions by Maurice Bartlett, George Barnard, David Cox, Egon Pearson,
and C.A.B. Smith, and a more informal exchange that also included I.J. Good, Dennis
Lindley, and others. Savage’s introductory essay introduced many of the themes of
modern Bayesian analysis including the role of the likelihood principle and the principle
of \precise measurement" explored further in Edwards, Lindman and Savage (52). The
Birnbaum paper was based on a special American Statistical Association discussion
meeting held in late 1961, and its discussants included Savage, Barnard, Box, Good,
Lindley, Pratt, and Dempster. In particular, Savage noted

I think that I, myself, came to : : : Bayesian statistics : : : seriously only
through recognition of the likelihood principle; and it took me a year or
: : : I can’t know what everyone else will do,
two to make the transition.
but I suspect that once the likelihood principle is widely recognized, people
will not long stop at that halfway house but will go forward and accept the
implications of personalistic probability for statistics. (18, p. 307)

Of course not all of the Birnbaum discussants were in agreement, either with him or
with Savage. Irwin Bross, for example expressed his view that

the basic themes of this paper were well-known to Fisher, Neyman, Egon
Pearson and others well back in the 1920’s. But these men realized, as the
author doesn’t, that the concepts cannot be used for scienti(cid:12)c reporting. So,
they went on to develop con(cid:12)dence intervals in the 1930s : : : The author
here proposes to push the clock back 45 years, but at least this puts him
ahead of the Bayesians, who would like to turn the clock back 150 years.
(18, p. 310)

Lindley (107) recalls,

20

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

Savage [told] a good story about the [likelihood] principle. When he was (cid:12)rst
told it by George Barnard, he expressed surprise that anyone as brilliant as
George could say something so ridiculous. Later he came to wonder how
anyone could deny something so obviously correct.

The neo-Bayesian revival fused this renewed emphasis on the likelihood principle with
Bayes’ Theorem and subjective probability as the mechanisms for achieving inferential
coherence (c.f. Lindley (108)).

5.3 Departmental Homes for Statistics and the Neo-Bayesian Revival

Until the twentieth century, there were few university departments organized around
separate disciplines, be they substantive or methodological, and when they began to
emerge, there were few in statistics. The principal early exceptions were the enterprise
led by Karl Pearson at University College London, founded shortly after the turn of
the century, and the Statistics Laboratory at Iowa State College (now University),
founded in the early 1930s. Nonetheless there were numerous chairs held by important
(cid:12)gures in probability and statistics throughout this period, such as A.A. Chuprov in St.
Petersburg, although these did not lead to the institutionalization of statistics outside
of mathematics or economics.

Later in the U.S., Columbia University, George Washington University, the Univer-
sity of North Carolina, and North Carolina State University began separate depart-
ments. One can trace the growth of the identity of statistics as a separate identi(cid:12)able
discipline to the 1920s and 1930s and even 1940s, with the growing in(cid:13)uence of Fisher
and others. Nonetheless, even the creation of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics in
the 1930s occurred at a time when most American statisticians resided in mathematics
departments. Thus it should not be thought of as remarkable that most of those who
contributed to the early developments of the evolution of Bayesian thinking were not
necessarily identi(cid:12)able as statisticians but rather as economists, mathematicians, scien-
tists in the broadest of senses (e.g., Laplace and Gauss), philosophers, and physicists.

The institutionalization of statistics in the form of the creation of separate depart-
ments of statistics in the U.S. occurred after World War II, largely in the 1950s and
1960s, just at the time of the neo-Bayesian revival. For example, the department at
Stanford was created in 1948, and a number of the new faculty had direct or indirect
ties to the activities chronicled above. The department at the University of Chicago was
created in 1949 (initially as a Committee), and was chaired by Jimmie Savage during
the key years of the neo-Bayesian revival. Fred Mosteller, who was a visitor at Chicago
in 1954-1955, returned to Harvard and was the (cid:12)rst chair of the department there when
it was created in 1957. George Box helped establish the department at the University
of Wisconsin in 1960 and was soon joined by others of the Bayesian persuasion such
as Irwin Guttman and George Tiao. Frank Anscombe, who worked on an alternative
axiomatic treatment of subjective utility with Aumann (4), came to Yale in 1963 to
help found its department and was joined by Jimmie Savage in 1964. Morrie DeGroot
helped found the department at Carnegie Mellon in the mid 1960s. Not surprisingly,

Stephen E. Fienberg

21

all of these departments contributed to the neo-Bayesian revival and its aftermath;
and without such homes, the revival may not have (cid:13)ourished and spawned the modern
Bayesian school of statistics.

Nonetheless, the dominant philosophy in statistics departments in the United States
remained frequentist for several decades, largely through the in(cid:13)uence of Neyman and
his University of California Berkeley colleagues and Fisher’s enduring impact on the
statistics departments associated with applications in agriculture in U.S. land grant
institutions.

5.4 Philosophical Linkages to Subjective Probability and the Bayesian

Philosophy

There was a separate strain of intellectual activity on the foundations of probability
that occurred more in philosophy than in statistics during the period from 1920 to
1960, only some of which I have mentioned. Since my story of the neo-Bayesian revival
and the establishment of the \Bayesian" paradigm was largely built around those with
close ties to mathematics and statistics, I did not give due credit to the developments
in philosophy, some of which were in(cid:13)uential to the Bayesian evolution. Rather than
attempting to provide a complete chronicle of these developments, I will give a brief
overview and mention some of the key (cid:12)gures.

It is not accidental that many of the key (cid:12)gures in the rise of subjective probability
in the twentieth century were at Cambridge University and working in philosophy or
on mathematical foundations linked to it.29 While some of their interactions remain a
matter of speculation, others are well documented. Richard Braithwaite, who posthu-
mously edited Ramsey’s papers in the form of a book, was Ramsey’s contemporary at
Cambridge and introduced him to Keynes in 1921, and they were all in(cid:13)uenced, as
I noted earlier, by W.E. Johnson. Je(cid:11)eys also interacted with Keynes and others at
Cambridge. And Turing, Good, Barnard, and Lindley all (cid:12)t within the legacy of this
Cambridge tradition.

Despite Ramsey’s rejection of Keynes’ ideas on logical probabilities, they were later
taken up by Rudolph Carnap, who made it the basis of the inductive logic published in
1950 in his Logical Foundations of Probability (29). Carnap, who was born in Germany
and became part of the Vienna Circle of logical positivism before moving to the U.S.
in the mid 1930s, was at the University of Chicago from 1936 to 1952. Savage (139)
reviewed Carnap’s book, expressing dissatisfaction with his treatment and noting that
de Finetti (whom Carnap did not cite) had a more suitable approach. Carnap nonethe-
less in(cid:13)uenced many philosphers to adopt a Bayesian perspective, for example Richard
Je(cid:11)rey. von Mises, who was trained in mathematics and physics in Vienna, was drawn
into probability and statistics by his association with the Viennese Circle as well.

Ernest Nagel, who came to the U.S. at age 10 from Bohemia, wrote extensively on

29It is also interesting but perhaps coincidental that two earlier statisticans in this story, Karl Pearson
and R.A. Fisher, were students at Cambrdge, and Fisher returned there in 1943 as professor of genetics.

22

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

the meaning of probability and, as noted above, was an advocate of the frequentist
interpretation, (e.g., see his 1938 book (120)). Among his students at Columbia in the
early 1950s were Henry Kyburg, Isaac Levi, and Patrick Suppes, all of whom wrote
on the topic of subjective probability and had substantial contact with statisticians
worrying about foundational issues. Suppes joined the faculty at Stanford University,
where he interacted with Blackwell, Girshick, and Rubin, and he presented a paper on
subjective probability and utility in decision-making at the 1955 Berkeley Symposium,
published in 1956 (164). This paper presents an axiomatic treatment related to|but
somewhat di(cid:11)erent from|Savage’s, and is notable in the present context because Suppes
uses the adjective \Bayesian" once, in the discussion, thus supporting the notion that
it was during this period that the term moved into usage by adherents to the subjective
philosophy.30 Suppes went on to make further contributions to the foundations of
inference and measurement, e.g., in his collaboration with Luce, Krantz, and Tversky,
and from 1960 onward had a cross-appointment in the Department of Statistics at
Stanford.

Clearly there were direct and indirect contributions of many of these philosophers to
the neo-Bayesian revival and its aftermath, but none except perhaps for Suppes seemed
to be involved with the pivotal events that made Bayesian inference \Bayesian."

5.5 The Stimulus of Fisher and Fiducial Inference

Fisher’s in(cid:13)uence on the neo-Bayesian revival is not simply through his initial use of
the adjective \Bayesian." Following the publication of his 1956 book (66) on scienti(cid:12)c
inference,31 many statisticians attempted to make sense of his (cid:12)ducial argument, es-
pecially his treatment of the Behrens-Fisher problem. 32 This was deemed by many
to be especially problematic because of his apparent need to integrate with respect to
the distribution of incidental parameters, a problem tailor-made for Bayesian methods.
Especially notable were the e(cid:11)orts of John Tukey, who devoted his 1958 IMS Wald
Lectures to the topic.33

Fisher’s 1956 book (66) also discussed the use of (cid:12)ducial probability as input to
Bayes’ Theorem. This leads to the type of inconsistency identi(cid:12)ed by Lindley (103),
and which was in part was the basis for earlier correspondence with Fisher to which

30Suppes recalls interactions with Herman Rubin during this period, especially in connection with
the results in Savage and in Blackwell and Girshick, but not where the adjective \Bayesian" came from.
31As of July 5, 2005, the Oxford English Dictionary Online attributes the (cid:12)rst usage of the adjective
to Fisher’s 1956 book and the heading \Bayesian prediction"! Unpublished personal correspondence
between I.J. Good and Dennis Lindley from 1994 suggests that they were the sources for this reference.
32The Behrens-Fisher problem deals with making inferences about the di(cid:11)erence between two normal

means when the variances are unequal.

33These lectures were not published, but Volume VI of Tukey’s Collected Works (166) includes the
handout as well as a closely related unpublished paper from the previous year (167). In these Tukey
covers much territory, with a special focus on the Fieller-Creasy and Behrens-Fisher problems and
suggests the relevance of group invariance arguments later expounded by Fraser. The only reference
to Bayesian alternatives comes indirectly with mention of Lindley (103), a paper which focuses on
equivalence between (cid:12)ducial and Bayesian solutions with uniform priors, with \Bayesian" being used
throughout an an adjective.

Stephen E. Fienberg

23

Fisher replied: \. . . I have to thank you for some material you have written connected
with my new book. I did not, of course expect you to approve of the latter, since it is
evident that we speak somewhat di(cid:11)erent languages, and perhaps you will not expect
me to understand what you mean by the ‘relationship between (cid:12)ducial probability and
Bayes’ theorem’."34

Despite R.A. Fisher’s death in 1962, (cid:12)ducial inference remained alive through the
1960s, especially in the work of Don Fraser (67) and his students, although it slowly
morphed into \structural inference." Jack Good (8) has reminded us that over the
years many thought that Fisher’s \(cid:12)ducial argument was a failed attempt to arrive
at a posterior degree of belief without mentioning a prior.
(Harold Je(cid:11)reys pointed
out what priors would patch up the argument.)" Similar remarks were made by others
throughout the 1960s and 1970s, see e.g., Anscombe (3). Jimmie Savage (142) remarked
that the Fisherian (cid:12)ducial school’s approach was \a bold attempt to make the Bayesian
omelet without breaking the Bayesian eggs," a phrase that has been much repeated
subsequently when others have used parts of the Bayesian approach without a full
reliance on the speci(cid:12)cation of prior distributions and Bayesian updating. Seidenfeld
(149) explores the link between Fisher’s (cid:12)ducial argument and Bayesian methods and
points out that there are examples where the (cid:12)ducial argument relies \on the sample
space of possible observations to locate its Bayesian model," a property shared by many
of the objective Bayesian methods for generating non-informative prior distributions.
Barnard (11) in exploring some of these issues concludes that Fisher was not a Bayesian
in the main current sense of the word.

6 Bayesian Inference Comes of Age in the 1960s

Bayesian statistics grew following the decade of the neo-Bayesian revival, both in terms
of numbers of papers and numbers of authors. Here I chronicle a few of the major
developments, but in doing so I omit reference to a large number of Bayesian authors
who, like the present author, contributed to the literature.

Spurred on by their interactions when Mosteller visited Chicago in the mid-1950s,
Fred Mosteller and David Wallace began a major collaboration to investigate who wrote
the disputed Federalist papers. The Federalist papers were written mainly by Hamilton
and Madison to help convince Americans to ratify the constitution in the 1780s. The
authorship of most of the papers was clearly identi(cid:12)able, but historians had been unable
to establish whether a small number of them had been written by Hamilton or Madison.
The work began in the summer of 1959 and, encouraged by Savage, they set to work
on what was to become the (cid:12)rst serious large-scale Bayesian empirical investigation
involving heavy use of computers. Mosteller and Wallace produced posterior odds for
each of the disputed papers, and in the process they reclaimed what we now know as
Laplace’s approximation for posterior densities. The work culminated in a 1963 paper
(117), and their landmark 1964 book (118), which has since been reissued in an updated

34Letter dated January 14, 1957, available at

http://www.library.adelaide.edu.au/digitised/(cid:12)sher/corres/lindley/index.html.

24

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

second edition.

Beginning around 1960 and running for about (cid:12)ve years, Howard Rai(cid:11)a and Robert
Schlaifer ran a weekly seminar, the Decision Under Uncertainty seminar at the Harvard
Business School. The seminar reported mostly on research in progress, and I remember
attending these stimulating Monday afternoon gatherings as a (cid:12)rst year graduate stu-
dent in the Department of Statistics at Harvard in 1964. The next year, George Box
and George Tiao spent their sabbatical leaves at the Harvard Business School, and Box
lectured on Bayesian methods for time series from notes that became the Box-Jenkins
ARIMA book (24). Box and Tiao had been working on their adaptation of Je(cid:11)reys’
method for choosing prior distributions and their Bayesian approach to robustness (25),
which culminated in their 1973 Bayesian book (26). Another major project from the
HBS seminar and the related research e(cid:11)orts was the Pratt, Rai(cid:11)a, and Schlai(cid:11)er book
on Statistical Decision Theory (130), whose 1965 \preliminary" version became a stan-
dard reference for those Bayesians lucky enough to have acquired a copy, even though
it was not completed for another three decades.

Starting with the 1962 American Congressional election, John Tukey and others,
working for the NBC television network, developed methodology to analyze early re-
turns as they (cid:13)owed in on election night. Projections were updated regularly as new
data arrived. Decisions had to be made very quickly (to \beat" the other networks),
but there was an extremely high premium on making the correct call on the winner.
The statistical team had access to powerful computers in a laboratory owned by RCA,
NBC’s parent company. David Brillinger (27) notes that Tukey described the work as
\the best education in real-time statistics that anybody could have." Data of several
types were available: past history (at various levels, e.g., county), results of polls preced-
ing the election, political scientists’ predictions, partial county returns (cid:13)owing in during
the evening, and complete results for selected precincts. The data of the analyses were,
in many cases, \swings" (Republican percent minus Democratic percent) from sets of
base values derived from past results and from political scientists’ opinions. Project-
ing turnout for locations with low partial returns turned out to be more di(cid:14)cult than
projecting swings at lower levels of geography. The \improved" estimates that Tukey
developed and programmed, with the collaboration of David Brillinger and David Wal-
lace, were a form of empirical Bayes, where the past results were used to construct the
prior distribution, much in the spirit of Bayesian analysis envisioned by Karl Pearson.
Tukey often spoke of \borrowing strength" in this regard. The underlying model was
in fact hierarchical Bayesian in structure and involved (cid:12)nite population structures, and
the variance estimates, developed on a di(cid:11)erent basis by Brillinger and Wallace, were
just as important as the point estimates. These tools were used with various re(cid:12)ne-
ments in elections from 1962 up through 1978. NBC stopped involving Tukey after the
election of 1980 and relied instead on exit polls. Brillinger (27) notes that: \Tukey’s
attitude to release of the techniques developed is worth commenting on. On various
occasions members of his \team" were asked to give talks and write papers describing
the work. When Tukey’s permission was sought, his remark was invariably that it was
\too soon" and that the techniques were \proprietary" to RCA (the parent company
for NBC)." In the 1970s, some essentially similar results appeared, but were published

Stephen E. Fienberg

25

by Alastair Scott and Fred Smith (148) and not members of the NBC team.35 Dennis
Lindley and Adrian Smith (109) presented related results for hierarchical modeling in
the normal linear model. Thus there is no published record of this earlier large-scale
Bayesian hierarchical modeling work.

As I noted earlier, Robbins published his (cid:12)rst paper on empirical Bayesian methods
in 1951. He continued to develop these ideas in two later papers published in 1956 and
1961 (134; 135), but this work remained frequentist in nature. Jack Good (74) and
Toulmin (81) implemented a Bayesian version of empirical Bayes for a speci(cid:12)c problem,
following up on ideas suggested during World War II by Turing, e.g., see Good’s intro-
duction to a reprinting of Robbins’ 1956 paper (80). During the same period of time,
Charles Stein demonstrated the inadmissibility of the usual estimate of the multivariate
normal mean and showed how to get improved estimates from approximate Bayesian ar-
guments where sample quantities were used to estimate prior distribution parameters.
Efron and Morris (54) used the name empirical Bayes to describe variations on the
methodology of Stein, and over the years their approach has come close to integration
with fully Bayesian methods because of links to hierarchical models, especially in the
case of exponential family distributions. But recent work using the voluminous data
associated with microarrays in genetics has revived interest in Robbins’ earlier instan-
tiation of empirical Bayes with nonparametric estimation of the prior distribution.

In 1960, Dennis Lindley moved to a professorship at University College in Aberys-
twyth, Wales, where he built a Bayesian group. Several years later he moved again to
University College London, where, in very short order, he established a strong Bayesian
department that was to radically change the face of Bayesian work in the United King-
dom and far beyond. Jimmie Savage moved, (cid:12)rst to the University of Michigan and
then to Yale University, and continued to exert strong in(cid:13)uence on the thinking of both
colleagues and students (e.g., see the comments in Kadane (88)). His remarkable 1970
Fisher lecture, published posthumously six years later through the editorial e(cid:11)orts of
John Pratt (145), kept a spellbound audience focused on Fisher’s contributions to statis-
tics and Savage’s view of them for well beyond the allotted time for the session. And
Jack Good moved from England to the United States, but worked largely in isolation
from other Bayesians.

Shortly after Savage came to Michigan, Ward Edwards, who had done work on sub-
jective expected utility, and one of his graduate students, Harold Lindman, developed
the (cid:12)rst accessible nontechnical exposition about the robustness of Bayesian speci(cid:12)ca-
tions relative to the prior, in their citation classic 1963 paper (52). Around this time
Edwards began an annual series of Bayesian research conferences primarily for psycholo-
gists which have continued to the present day (the 42nd one was held in January, 2004).
Savage attended some of the early meetings.

35 Alastair Scott was David Wallace’s Ph.D. student at the University of Chicago from 1962 to 1965
but according to Scott they never discussed these ideas, I presume in keeping with Tukey’s notion that
they were proprietary! David Brillinger and Scott were colleagues at the London School of Economics
while these ideas were gestating and was aware of the Scott-Smith work. But he too was constrained
from saying anything because of Tukey.

26

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

At the National Institutes of Health (NIH), Jerry Corn(cid:12)eld became interested in
Bayesian ideas during the late 1950s. He was a discussant of Birnbaum (18) and was, at
the time, highly supportive of the likelihood approach. Around this time he was engaged
in foundational discussions with Jimmie Savage, and he visited Michigan in the early
1960s to give a talk on his own developing ideas about Bayesian inference, partly to help
formulate his thinking, but also to meet with Savage. Seymour Geisser joined Corn(cid:12)eld
at NIH and often had luncheon conversations about Bayesian ideas (see Christensen
and Johnson (32)). These led to their joint 1962 paper (68) on the multivariate normal
distribution, where they contrasted Bayesian methods with improper priors to (cid:12)ducial
solutions attributable to Fisher. Later Geisser was one of the discussants (along with
Hartley, Kempthorne, and Herman Rubin) of Corn(cid:12)eld’s 1969 paper (34) in which he led
the reader step by step along the path that compelled him to be a Bayesian (condition,
recognizable subsets, betting, and the meaning of probability) along with a report on
a serious epidemiological application. Both continued to stress Bayesian ideas through
the remainders of their careers, with Geisser stressing the importance of observables (in
the tradition of de Finetti) and predictive inference.

During the 1950s, a casualty actuary, Arthur Bailey (7), wrote about the link be-
tween what was then known as credibility theory and \the Laplace generalization of
Bayes’ rule"|i.e., credibility theory added informative prior distributions.
In 1964,
Mayerson (111) made the connection with Rai(cid:11)a and Schlai(cid:11)er’s work on conjugate
prior distributions. This then led to subsequent Bayesian work on credibility theory,
most notably by H. B(cid:127)ulmann and by W.S. Jewell who wrote on the link to exponential
family theory. As an interesting side note, de Finetti, who was professor of actuarial
science in Rome, participated in a number of international conferences during the 1950s
and 1960s but seemed not to be involved directly in any of the discussions regarding
credibility theory and Bayesian statistics.

Arnold Zellner recalls participating in the early 1960s in a University of Wisconsin
seminar devoted to the reading of Je(cid:11)reys’ book, along with George Box, Mervyn Stone
(as a visitor), Irwin Guttman, George Tiao, and others. He then collaborated with
George Tiao (165), and when he moved to the University of Chicago, he continued to
advocate the use of Bayesian ideas in econometrics and extended the work of Je(cid:11)reys
on the generation of \non-informative" invariant priors, especially in his 1971 book
(183). It was during this period that Zellner (cid:12)rst organized the semi-annual NBER-
NSF Seminar on Bayesian Inference in Econometrics and Statistics at the University of
Chicago. Before long, statistics groups at other universities also hosted the seminar, and
for almost two decades it was a major locus for the presentation of Bayesian research.

7 The Modern Bayesian Era

In this paper, I have attempted to give an overview of key Bayesian developments,
beginning in England with Bayes’ posthumously published 1763 paper, emerging in
France soon thereafter with Laplace, and spreading to other parts of Europe in the
nineteenth century. But the rise of subjective probability in the twentieth century

Stephen E. Fienberg

27

and the statistical e(cid:11)orts related to it occurred largely in England and then later in
the U.S., with notable exceptions such as the contributions of de Finetti. Activities
surrounding World War II had a profound in(cid:13)uence on probability and statistics, not
only in terms of the emigration of a number of key (cid:12)gures from Europe to the U.S. (e.g.,
Carnap, Neyman, von Mises, von Neumann, Wald) but also in terms of the impact
that the application of statistics had on the development of mathematical statistics
and foundations. The work during the 1950s, a period which I have called the neo-
Bayesian revival when \Bayesian" emerged as the label of choice for those who advocated
Bayesian methods, was dominated by statisticians in the U.S. and England, as were the
developments of the 1960s. The blossoming of the Bayesian approach around the world
in the three decades that followed is rooted in this history.

In some ways, this paper (cid:12)lls in a number of Bayesian details to my earlier overview
of the history of statistics (57), and it also brings that history forward by a couple of
decades, at least in part. For an overview of some recent research in Bayesian methods
and foundations see the 2004 special issue of Statistical Science.

A major focal point in the development of Bayesian statistics since the early 1970s
has been the quadrennial Valencia Symposium on Bayesian Statistics organized by Jose
Bernardo, the proceedings of which have set a high standard for Bayesian publications.
The introduction of Monte Carlo Markov chain methods to the Bayesian world in the
late 1980s made possible computations that others had only dreamed of two decades
earlier, when the work on the Federalist papers or election predictions was viewed as
a Herculean feat. Bayesian methods have spread rapidly into areas of application and
have been championed by practicing scientists, e.g., in computer science and machine
learning. In 1992, both the International Society for Bayesian Analysis and the Bayesian
Statistical Science Section of the American Statistical Association were founded (and
since then have held many successful meetings), and ISBA has just launched the online
statistical journal in which this article appears. And the quest for the holy grail of a
method for deriving \objective" non-informative priors to express ignorance continues
to the present day, aided in part by a continuing series of workshops on the topic.

Over the period since the neo-Bayesian revival, many have looked for syntheses of
Bayesian and non-Bayesian ideas and methods, e.g., see Lindley (105), Pratt (128) and
Good (78) for early examples, as well as the many recent contributions by Jim Berger
and his collaborators. Moreover, the unity of statistics has become a theme of many
papers, beginning as early as George Barnard’s 1971 presidential address to the Royal
Statistical Society (10) and continuing to the present day with Bradley Efron’s 2004
presidential address to the American Statistical Association (53).

These developments clearly are not all attributable to the use of the adjective
\Bayesian." But they have meant that more and more statisticians and users of statis-
tics have an interest in the origin of the label that describes the ideas and methods upon
which they rely.

28

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

8 Some Sources

Many of the papers cited here are available from online electronic archives such as those
maintained by JSTOR, and from online web resources of a handful of technical pub-
lishers. The collections edited by Kyburg and Smokler are especially valuable sources.
The (cid:12)rst edition of their book includes an excerpt from Venn, a translation of Borel
(21), Ramsey (132), a translation of de Finetti (42), a paper by Koopman, and Savage
(142). The second edition includes an overlapping and updated set of papers including
later ones by de Finetti, Good and Savage. Several of the classic books from the crucial
period of the 1950s referenced here are still in print in special paperback editions, and
several papers cited here have been reprinted in Good (79) and Savage (146). The col-
lection edited by Heyde and Seneta (84) contains excellent succinct biographies of many
of the historical (cid:12)gures mentioned here, but none of the key (cid:12)gures in the neo-Bayesian
revival, as the collection covers only those born prior to the twentieth century.

Bibliography

[1] Aldrich, J. (1997). \R.A. Fisher and the Making of Maximum Likelihood 1912{

1922." Statistical Science, 12: 162{176. 7

[2] | (2002). \How Likelihood and Identi(cid:12)cation Went Bayesian." International

Statistical Review, 70. 2

[3] Anscombe, F. J. (1961). \Bayesian Statistics." American Statistician, 15: 21{24.

23

[4] Anscombe, F. J. and Aumann, R. J. (1963). \A De(cid:12)nition of Subjective Proba-

bility." Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 34: 199{205. 20

[5] Arrow, K. J., Girshick, M. A., , and Rubin, H. (1949). \‘Bayes and Minimax
Solutions of Sequential Decision Problems." Econometrica, 17: 213{244. 13

[6] Association, A. S. (2003). \David Blackwell. Go Bayes!" Amstat News, 6{7. 13,

18

[7] Bailey, A. L. (1950). \Credibility Procedures, Laplace’s Generalization of Bayes’
Rule and the Combination of Collateral Knowledge with Observed Data." In
Proceedings of the Casualty Actuarial Society, volume 37, 7{23. 26

[8] Banks, D. L. (1996). \A Conversation with I.J. Good." Statistical Science, 11:

1{19. 12, 16, 23

[9] Barnard, G. A. (1946). \Sequential Tests in Industrial Statistics." Supplement

to the Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 8: 1{26. 12

[10] | (1972). \The Unity of Statistics." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,

Series A, 135: 1{15. 27

Stephen E. Fienberg

29

[11] | (1987). \R. A. Fisher|A True Bayesian?" International Statistical Review,

55: 183{189. 23

[12] Barnard, G. A. and Plackett, R. L. (1985). \Statistics in the United Kingdom,
1939{45." In Atkinson, A. C. and Fienberg, S. E. (eds.), A Celebration of Statis-
tics: The ISI Centenary Volume, 31{56. New York: Springer-Verlag. 11

[13] Barnett, V. (1973). Comparative Statistical Inference. Wiley. 9

[14] Bayes, T. (1763). \An Essay Towards Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of
Chances." Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 53: 370{
418. 3

[15] Bellhouse, D. R. (2002). \On Some Recently Discovered Manuscripts of Thomas

Bayes." Historia Mathematica, 29: 383{394. 4

[16] | (2004). \The Reverend Thomas Bayes FRS: A Biography to Celebrate the
Tercentenary of his Birth (with discussion)." Statistical Science, 3{43. 2, 3

[17] Bienaym(cid:19)e, I. (1838). \M(cid:19)emoire sur la Probabilit(cid:19)e des R(cid:19)esultats Moyens des Ob-
servations; D(cid:19)emonstration Directe de la R(cid:18)egle de Laplace." M(cid:19)em. Pres. Acad.
Roy. Sci. Inst. France, 5: 513{558. 5

[18] Birnbaum, A. (1962). \On the Foundations of Statistical Inference (with discus-
sion)." Journal of the American Statistical Association, 57: 269{326. 19, 26

[19] Blackwell, D. and Girshick, M. A. (1954). Theory of Games and Statistical Deci-

sions. Wiley. 13, 17

[20] Borel, E. (1921).

\La Th(cid:19)eorie du Jeu et les (cid:19)Equations Int(cid:19)egrales (cid:18)a Noyau
Sym(cid:19)etrique." Comptes Rendus de l’Acad(cid:19)emie des Sciences, 173: 1304{1308.
Translated by L. J. Savage as \The Theory of Play and Integral Equations with
Skew Symmetric Kernels." Econometrica, 21, 97{100. 16

[21] | (1924). \ (cid:18)A Propos d’un Trait(cid:19)e de Probabilit(cid:19)es." Revue Philosophique, 98:
321{336. Translated as \A Propos of a Treatise on Probability." In Kyburg, H.
E. and Smokler, H. E., eds. (1964). Studies in Subjective Probability. Wiley, New
York, 45{60. 9, 28

[22] | (1924). \Sur lex Jeux o(cid:18)u Interviennent L’hasard et L’habilet(cid:19)e des Joueurs." In

Th(cid:19)eorie des Probabilit(cid:19)es, 204{224. Librairie Scienti(cid:12)que, J. Herman. 16

[23] | (1927). \Sur les Syst(cid:18)emes de Formes Lin(cid:19)eaires (cid:18)a D(cid:19)eterminant Sym(cid:19)etrique
Gauche et la Th(cid:19)eorie G(cid:19)enerale du Jeu. from Alg(cid:18)ebre et Calcul des Probabilit(cid:19)es."
Comptes Rendus de l’Acad(cid:19)emie des Sciences, 173: 52{53. 16

[24] Box, G. E. P. and Jenkins, G. M. (1970). Time Series Analysis: Forecasting and

Control. Holden-Day. 24

[25] Box, G. E. P. and Tiao, G. C. (1961). \A Further Look at Robustness Via Bayes’

Theorem." Biometrika, 49: 419{432. 24

30

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

[26] | (1973). Bayesian Inference in Statistical Analysis. Addison-Wesley. 24

[27] Brillinger, D. A. (2002). \John W. Tukey: His Life and Professional Contribu-

tions." Annals of Statistics, 30: 1535{1575. 24

[28] Broemeling, L. and Broemeling, A. (2003). \Studies in the History of Prob-
ability and Statistics: XLVIII. The Bayesian Contributions of Ernest Lhoste."
Biometrika, 90: 728{731. 10

[29] Carnap, R. (1950). Logical Foundations of Probability. University of Chicago

Press. 21

[30] Cherno(cid:11), H. (1954). \Rational Selection of Decision Functions." Econometrica,

22: 422{443. 13

[31] Christ, C. F. (1994). \The Cowles Commission’s Contributions to Econometrics

at Chicago, 1939-1955." Journal of Economic Literature, 32: 30{59. 13

[32] Christensen, R. and Johnson, W. (2004). \Conversation with Seymour Geisser."

Statistical Science. 26

[33] Condorcet, M.-J.-A.-N. d. C. (1785). Essai sur L’application de L’analyse (cid:18)a la
Probabilit(cid:19)e des D(cid:19)ecisions Rendues (cid:18)a la Pluraltt(cid:19)e des Voix. Imprimerie Royale. 5

[34] Corn(cid:12)eld, J. (1969). \The Bayesian Outlook and Its Application (with discus-

sion)." Biometrics, 25: 617{657. 26

[35] Cournot, A. A. (1984). Exposition de la Theorie des Chances et des Probabilit(cid:19)es..

Librairie J. Vrin. 6

[36] Dale, A. I. (1999). A History of Inverse Probability from Thomas Bayes to Karl

Pearson. Springer-Verlag. 2, 5, 37

[37] | (2003). Most Honourable Remembrance: The Life and Work of Thomas Bayes.

Springer-Verlag. 3, 4

[38] Daston, L. (1994). \How Probabilities Came to be Objective and Subjective."

Historia Mathematica, 21: 330{344. 6

[39] David, H. A. (1995). \First (?) Occurrence of Common Terms in Mathematical

Statistics." American Statistician, 49: 121{133. 14

[40] | (1998). \First (?) Occurrence of Common Terms in Probability and Statistics
{ A Second List, with Corrections." American Statistician, 52: 36{40. 14

[41] | (2001). \Appendix B." In David, H. A. and Edwards, A. W. F. (eds.), Anno-

tated Readings in the History of Statistics. Springer-Verlag. 3, 14

Stephen E. Fienberg

31

[42] de Finetti, B. (1937). \La Pr(cid:19)evision: Ses Lois Logiques, Ses Sources Subjectives."
Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincar(cid:19)e, 7: 1{68. Translated as \Foresight: Its Logical
Laws, Its Subjective Sources," in Kyburg, H. E. and Smokler, H. E. eds., (1964).
Studies in Subjective Probability. Wiley, New York, 91{158. (Corrections appear
in (de Finetti, 1972, p. xvii)). 11, 16, 28

[43] | (1951). \Recent Suggestions for the Reconciliation of Theories of Probability."
In Proceedings of the Second Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics
and Probability, volume 1, 217{225. Berkeley: University of California Press. 16

[44] | (1955). \La Notion de ‘Horizon Bayesien.’." In Thone, G. (ed.), Colloque Sur

l’Analyse Statistique, Bruxelles, 57{71. Paris: Li(cid:18)ege and Masson & Cie. 16, 18

[45] | (1974). Theory of Probability, volume I. Wiley. 11

[46] | (1975). Theory of Probability, volume II. Wiley. 11

[47] De Morgan, A. (1837). \Review of Laplace’s Th(cid:19)eorie Analytique des Probabilit(cid:19)es.

(3rd Edition)." Dublin Review, 2, 3: 338{354, 237{248. 5

[48] DeGroot, M. A. (1970). Optimal Statistical Decisions. McGraw-Hill. 13

[49] Edgeworth, F. Y. (1883). \The Method of Least Squares." Philosophical Maga-

zine, 5th series, 34: 190{204. 6

[50] Edwards, A. W. F. (1997). \What Did Fisher Mean by ‘Inverse Probability’ in

1912{1922?" Statistical Science, 12: 177{184. 7

[51] | (2004). \Comment on Bellhouse, David R. ‘The Reverend Thomas Bayes FRS:
A Biography to Celebrate the Tercentenary of his Birth’." Statistical Science, 19:
34{37. 14, 15

[52] Edwards, W., Lindman, H., and Savage, L. J. (1963). \Bayesian Statistical In-
ference for Psychological Research." Psychological Review, 70: 193{242. 17, 19,
25

[53] Efron, B. (2005). \Bayesians, Frequentists, and Scientists." Journal of the Amer-

ican Statistical Association, 100. 27

[54] Efron, B. and Morris, C. (1973). \Stein’s Estimation Rule and its Competitors|
An Empirical Bayes Approach." Journal of the American Statistical Association,
68: 117{130. 25

[55] Fechner, G. T. (1897). Kollektivmasslehre. Engelmann. 6

[56] Fienberg, S. E. (1985). \Statistics Developments in World War II: An Interna-
tional Perspective." In Atkinson, A. C. and Fienberg, S. E. (eds.), A Celebration
of Statistics: The ISI Centenary Volume, 25{30. Springer-Verlag. 11

[57] | (1992). \A Brief History of Statistics in Three and One-half Chapters: A

Review Essay." Statistical Science, 7: 208{225. 27

32

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

[58] | (1999). \‘Statistics in the Social World,’ a review of The Politics of Large
Numbers: A History of Statistical Reasoning, by Alain Desrosi(cid:18)eres." Science, 283:
2025. 2

[59] | (2005). \Interview with Howard Rai(cid:11)a." Statistical Science. 17, 18

[60] Fienberg, S. E. and Lazar, N. (2001).

\William Sealy Gosset: 1876-1937."
In Heyde, C. and Seneta, E. (eds.), Statisticians of the Centuries. New York:
Springer-Verlag. 7

[61] Fienberg, S. E. and Tanur, J. M. (1996). \Reconsidering the Fundamental Contri-
butions of Fisher and Neyman on Experimentation and Sampling." International
Statistical Review, 64: 237{253. 8

[62] Fisher, R. A. (1922). \On the Mathematical Foundations of Theoretical Statis-
tics." Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series A, 222:
309{368. 4, 8

[63] | (1925). Statistical Methods for Research Workers. Oliver and Boyd. 8

[64] | (1930). \‘Inverse Probability." Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical

Society, 26: 528{535. 8

[65] | (1950). Contributions to Mathematical Statistics. Wiley. 14

[66] | (1956). Statistical Methods and Scienti(cid:12)c Inference. Oliver and Boyd. 22

[67] Fraser, D. A. S. (1968). The Structure of Inference. Wiley. 23

[68] Geisser, S. and Corn(cid:12)eld, J. (1963). \Posterior Distributions for Multivariate
Normal Parameters." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 25: 368{
376. 26

[69] Gigerenzer, G., Swijtink, Z., Porter, T., Daston, L., Beatty, J., , and Kr(cid:127)uger,
L. (1989). The Empire of Chance: How Probability Changed Everyday Life.
Cambridge University Press. 8

[70] Girshick, M. A. and Rubin, H. (1952). \A Bayes Approach to a Quality Control

Model." Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 23: 114{125. 13

[71] Good, I. (1950). Probability and the Weighing of Evidence. Charles Gri(cid:14)n. 12,

14

[72] | (1979). \Studies in the History of Probability and Statistics: XXXVII. Turing’s

Statistical Work in World War II." Biometrika, 66: 393{396. 12

[73] Good, I. J. (1952). \Rational Decisions." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,

Series B, 14: 107{114. 14

[74] | (1953). \The Population Frequencies of Species and the Estimation of Popu-

lation Parameters." Biometrika, 40: 237{264. 14, 25

Stephen E. Fienberg

33

[75] | (1956). \Review of B. de Finetti (1954)." Mathematical Reviews, 17: 633. 16

[76] | (1958). \Signi(cid:12)cance Tests in Parallel and in Series." Journal of the American

Statistical Association, 53: 799{813. 18, 19

[77] | (1965). The Estimation of Probabilities. The M.I.T. Press. 10, 18

[78] | (1976). \The Bayesian In(cid:13)uence, or How to Sweep Subjectivism Under the
Carpet." In Hooker, C. A. and Harper, W. (eds.), Foundations of Probability
Theory, Statistical Inference, and Statistical Theories of Science, volume 2, 125{
174. Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel. 27

[79] | (1983). Good Thinking: The Foundations of Probability and its Applications.

University of Minnesota Press. 28

[80] | (1992). \Introduction to Robbins (1955), An Empirical Bayes Approach to
Statistics." In Johnson, N. L. and Kotz, S. (eds.), Breakthroughs in Statistics,
Vol. I: Foundations and Basic Theory, 379{387. Springer-Verlag. This is in fact
an introduction to Robbin’s 1956 paper (134). 25

[81] Good, I. J. and Toulmin, G. (1956). \The Number of New Species, and the
Increase in Population Coverage, When a Sample is Increased." Biometrika, 43:
45{63. 25

[82] Hald, A. (1998). A History of Mathematical Statistics From 1750 to 1930. Wiley.

2, 4

[83] Heyde, C. C. and E., S. (1977). I. J. Bienaym(cid:19)e: Statistical Theory Anticipated.

Springer-Verlag. 5, 6

[84] | (2001). Statisticians of the Centuries. Springer-Verlag. 28

[85] Howie, D. (2002). Interpreting Probability: Controversies and Developments in

the Early Twentieth Century. Cambridge University Press. 5

[86] Je(cid:11)reys, H. (1931). Scienti(cid:12)c Inference. Cambridge University Press. 10

[87] | (1939). Theory of Probability. Oxford University Press. 7, 10, 11

[88] Kadane, J. B. (2001). \Jimmie Savage: An Introduction." ISBA Bulletin, 8: 5{6.

25

[89] Kapteyn, J. C. (1903). Skew Frequency Curves in Biology and Statistics. Noord-

ho(cid:11). 4

[90] Kasner, E. and Newman, J. R. (1940). Mathematics and the Imagination. Simon

and Schuster. 1

[91] Keynes, J. M. (1921). A Treatise on Probability, volume 8. St Martin’s. 9, 10

[92] Kolmogorov, A. (1933). \‘Sur L(cid:19)estimation Statisque des Parametres de la Loi de
Gauss." Bulletin of the Academy of Science URSS Ser. Math., 6: 3{32. 18

34

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

[93] Kolmogorov, A. N. (1933). Grundbegri(cid:11)e der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung.

Springer-Verlag. 2, 8

[94] Kyburg, H. E. and Smokler, H. E. (eds.) (1964). Studies in Subjective Probability.
New York: Wiley. Second revised edition, Krieger, Garden City, 1980. 11

[95] Lacroix, S. F. (1816). \Trait(cid:19)e (cid:19)E(cid:19)lementaire du Calcul des Probabilit(cid:19)es." 5

[96] Laplace, P.-S. (1774).

\‘M(cid:19)emoire sur la Probabilit(cid:19)e des Causes par les
(cid:19)Ev(cid:19)enements." M(cid:19)emoires de Math(cid:19)ematique et de Physique Present(cid:19)es (cid:19)a l’Acad(cid:19)emie
Royale des Sciences, Par Divers Savans, & L^us dans ses Assembl(cid:19)ees, 6: 621{656.
3

[97] | (1812). Th(cid:19)eorie Analytique des Probabilit(cid:19)es. Courcier. 5

[98] L(cid:19)evy, P. (1925). Calcul de Probabilit(cid:19)es. Gauthier-Villars. 9

[99] Lhoste, E. (1923). \Le Calcul des Probabilit(cid:19)es Appliqu(cid:19)e a L’artillerie." Revue

D’artillerie, 91, 92: 405{423 and 516{532, 58{82 and 152{179. 10

[100] Lindley, D. V. (1953). \Statistical Inference." Journal of the Royal Statistical

Society, Series B, 16: 30{76. 9

[101] | (1957). \Fiducial Distributions and Bayes’ Theorem." Journal of the Royal

Statistical Society, Series B, 20: 102{107. 18

[102] | (1957). \A Statistical Paradox." Biometrika, 44: 187{192. 18

[103] | (1958). \Fiducial Distributions and Bayes’ Theorem." Journal of the Royal

Statistical Society, Series B, 20: 102{107. 22

[104] | (1958). \Professor Hogben’s ‘Crisis’{A Survey of the Foundations of Statistics."

Applied Statistics, 7: 186{198. 17, 18

[105] | (1965). Introduction to Probability and Statistics from a Bayesian Viewpoint.
Part 1: Probability. Part 2: Inference. Cambridge University Press. 18, 27

[106] | (2000). \What is a Bayesian?" ISBA Bulletin, 1: 7{9. 2, 14, 18

[107] | (2004). \Bayesian Thoughts (An Interview with Helen Joyce)." Signi(cid:12)cance,

1: 73{75. 19

[108] | (2004). \That Wretched Prior." Signi(cid:12)cance, 1: 85{87. 20

[109] Lindley, D. V. and Smith, A. F. M. (1972). \Bayes Estimates for the Linear Model
(with discussion)." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 34: 1{44.
25

[110] Luce, D. and Rai(cid:11)a, H. (1957). Games and Decisions: Introduction and Critical

Survey. Wiley. 17

Stephen E. Fienberg

35

[111] Mayerson, A. L. (1964). \A Bayesian View of Credibility." Proceedings of the

Casualty Actuarial Society, 51: 85{104. 26

[112] Metropolis, N. (1987). \The Beginning of the Monte Carlo Method." Los Alamos

Science, 125{130. 14

[113] Metropolis, N., Rosenbluth, A. W., Rosenbluth, M. N., Teller, A. H., and Teller, E.
(1953). \Equations of State Calculations by Fast Computing Machines." Journal
of Chemical Physics, 21: 1087{1092. 14

[114] Metropolis, N. and Ulam, S. (1949). \The Monte Carlo Method." Journal of the

American Statistical Association, 44: 335{341. 14

[115] Mosteller, F. (1948). \On Pooling Data." Journal of the American Statistical

Association, 43: 231{242. 17

[116] Mosteller, F. and Nogee, P. (1951). \An Experimental Measurement of Utility."

Journal of Political Economy, 59: 371{404. 17

[117] Mosteller, F. and Wallace, D. L. (1963). \Inference in an Authorship Problem."

Journal of the American Statistical Association, 58: 275{309. 23

[118] | (1964). Inference and Disputed Authorship: The Federalist. Addison-Wesley.

23

[119] Nagel, E. (1936). \The Meaning of Probability (with discussion)." Journal of the

American Statistical Association, 31: 10{30. 8, 9

[120] | (1938). The Principles of the Theory of Probability. University of Chicago

Press. 22

[121] Neyman, J. (1937). \Outline of a Theory of Statistical Estimation Based on the
Classical Theory of Probability." Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society,
Series A, 236: 333{380. 9

[122] of Mathematical Statistics, I. (1988). \The Reverend Thomas Bayes, F.R.S.|

1701?-1761." IMS Bulletin, 17: 276{278. 4

[123] Pearson, K. (1892). The Grammar of Science. Walter Scott. 7

[124] | (1907). \On the In(cid:13)uence of Past Experience on Future Expectation." Philo-

sophical Magazine, 13: 365{378. 7

[125] Pfanzagl, J. and Sheynin, O. (1996). \Studies in the History of Probability and
Statistics: XLIV. A Forerunner of the t-distribution." Biometrika, 83: 891{898.
7

[126] Porter, T. (1986). The Rise in Statistical Thinking: 1820{1900. Princeton Uni-

versity Press. 2

36

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

[127] | (2004). Karl Pearson: The Scienti(cid:12)c Life in a Statistical Age. Princeton

University Press. 1

[128] Pratt, J. W. (1965). \Bayesian Interpretation of Standard Inference Statements."

Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B, 27. 27

[129] | (1995). \Foreword." In Eeckhoudt, L. and Gollier, C. (eds.), Risk: Evaluation,

Management and Sharing. New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf. 17

[130] Pratt, J. W., Rai(cid:11)a, H., and Schlaifer, R. (1965).

Introduction to Statistical

Decision Theory{Preliminary Edition. McGraw-Hill. 24

[131] Rai(cid:11)a, H. and Schlaifer, R. (1961). Applied Statistical Decision Theory. Division
of Research Graduate School of Business Administration, Harvard University. 18

[132] Ramsey, F. P. (1926). \Truth and Probability." Published in 1931 as Foundations
of Mathematics and Other Logical Essays, Ch. VII, pp. 156{198. Edited by R.B.
Braithwaite. Kegan, Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., London. Reprinted in Kyburg,
H. E. and Smokler, H. E. eds. (1964). Studies in Subjective Probability. Wiley,
New York, 61-92. 9, 16, 28

[133] Robbins, H. (1951). \Asymptotically Subminimax Solutions of Compound Statis-
tical Decision Problems." In Proceedings of the Second Berkeley Symposium on
Mathematical Statistics and Probability, volume 1, 131{148. Berkeley. 13

[134] | (1956). \An Empirical Bayes Approach to Statistics." In Proceedings of the
Third Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, volume 1,
157{163. University of California Press. 25, 33

[135] | (1964). \The Empirical Bayes Approach to Statistical Decision Problems."

Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 35: 1{20. 25

[136] Ross, I. and Tukey, J. W. (1975). Index to Statistics and Probability: Permuted

Titles, A|Microbiology. Los Altos, CA: R&D Press. 15

[137] Rubin, H. (1949). \The Existence of Measurable Utility and Psychological Prob-

ability." Statistics 331, Cowles Commission Discussion Paper. 5 pp. 13

[138] Savage, L. J. (1951). \The Theory of Statistical Decision." Journal of the Amer-
ican Statistical Association, 46: 55{67. Reprinted in Savage, Leonard J. (1981).
The Writings of Leonard Jimmie Savage: A Memorial Selection. American Sta-
tistical Association and Institute of Mathematical Statistics, Washington, DC,
201-213. 15, 16

[139] | (1952). \Review of Logical Foundations of Probability by Rudolph Carnap."

Econometrica, 29: 688{1690. 21

[140] | (1954). The Foundations of Statistics. New York: Wiley, second revised

paperback edition, dover, new york, 1972 edition. 9, 16, 18

Stephen E. Fienberg

37

[141] | (1960). \Unpublished Reading Note." Reproduced in Dale (36) as an Appendix,

pp. 597-602. 3

[142] | (1961). \The Foundations of Statistical Inference Reconsidered." In Proceed-
ings of the Fourth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probabil-
ity, volume 1, 575{586. 23, 28

[143] | (1962). The Foundations of Statistical Inference. A Discussion. London:

Methuen. G. Barnard and D.R. Cox, eds. 17, 19

[144] | (1970). \Reading Suggestions for the Foundations of Statistics." American
Statistician, 24: 23{27. [Reprinted in Savage, Leonard J. (1981). The Writings of
Leonard Jimmie Savage: A Memorial Selection. American Statistical Association
and Institute of Mathematical Statistics, Washington, DC, 536-546.]. 16

[145] | (1976). \On Rereading R.A. Fisher (with discussion) (J.W. Pratt, ed.)." Annals

of Statistics, 4: 441{500. 25

[146] | (1981). The Writings of Leonard Jimmie Savage: A Memorial Selection.
Washington, DC: American Statistical Association and Institute of Mathemat-
ical Statistics. 28

[147] Schlaifer, R. (1959). Probability and Statistics for Business Decisions. New York:

McGraw-Hill. 18

[148] Scott, A. and Smith, T. (1969). \Estimation for Multi-Stage Surveys." Journal

of the American Statistical Association, 64: 830{840. 25

[149] Seidenfeld, T. (1992). \R.A. Fisher’s Fiducial Argument and Bayes’ Theorem."

Statistical Science, 7: 358{368. 23

[150] Seneta, E. (1998). \Early In(cid:13)uences on Probability and S atistics in the Russian

Empire." Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 53: 201{213. 6

[151] Shafer, G. and Vovk, V. (2003). \The Sources of Kolmogorov’s Grundbegri(cid:11)e."
Working Paper #4. Available at http://www.probabilityand(cid:12)nance.com. 6

[152] Sheynin, O. B. (1989). \A. A. Markov’s Work on Probability." Archive for History

of Exact Sciences, 39: 337{377. [Errata in 40 (1989), 387.]. 6

[153] | (2004). \Fechner as a Statistician." British Journal of Mathematical and

Statistical Psychology, 57: 53{72. 6

[154] Smith, A. F. M. (1995). \A Conversation with Dennis Lindley." Statistical Science,

10: 305{319. 11

[155] Stigler, S. M. (1978). \Francis Ysidro Edgeworth, Statistician." Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 141: 287{322. (Also available with some correc-
tions as Chapter 5 of Stigler, Stephen M. (1999). Statistics on the Table: The His-
tory of Statistical Concepts and Methods. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
MA.). 7

38

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

[156] | (1980). \Stigler’s Law of Eponymy." Transactions of the New York Academy of
Sciences, Ser. 2, 39: 147{158. (Also available as Chapter 14 of Stigler, Stephen M.
(1999). Statistics on the Table: The History of Statistical Concepts and Methods.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.). 2

[157] | (1982). \Thomas Bayes’ Bayesian Inference." Journal of the Royal Statistical

Society, Series A, 145: 250{258. 4

[158] | (1983). \Who Discovered Bayes’ Theorem?" American Statistician, 37: 290{
296. (Also available with some corrections as Chapter 15 of Stigler, Stephen M.
(1999). Statistics on the Table: The History of Statistical Concepts and Methods.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.). 2, 4

[159] | (1986). The History of Statistics: The Measurement of Uncertainty Before

1900. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 2

[160] | (1986). \Laplace’s 1774 Memoir on Inverse Probability." Statistical Science,

1: 359{363. 5

[161] | (1999). Statistics on the Table: The History of Statistical Concepts and Meth-

ods. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 2

[162] | (2004). \How Ronald Fisher Became a Mathematical Statistician." Presented

at Journ(cid:19)ee \Bernard Bru", Universit(cid:19)e de Paris VI, April 2, 2004. 8

[163] Student (1908). \The Probable Error of a Mean." Biometrika, 6: 1{25. 7

[164] Suppes, P. (1956). \The Role of Subjective Probability and Utility in Decision-
making." In Proceedings of the Third Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical
Statistics and Probability, volume 5, 61{73. 22

[165] Tiao, G. and Zellner, A. (1964). \Bayes’ Theorem and the Use of Prior Knowledge

in Regression Analysis." Biometrika, 51: 219{230. 26

[166] Tukey, J. W. (1990). \The Collected Works of John W. Tukey, Volume VI: More
Mathematical, 1938 - 1984." In Mallows, C. L. (ed.), The Collected Works of John
W. Tukey, Volume VI: More Mathematical, 1938 - 1984, 119{148. Paci(cid:12)c Grove,
CA: Wadsworth. 22

[167] | (1990). \The Present State of Fiducial Probability." In Mallows), C. L. (ed.),
The Collected Works of John W. Tukey, Volume VI: More Mathematical, 1938 -
1984, volume VI, 55{118. Paci(cid:12)c Grove, CA: Wadsworth. 22

[168] von Mises, R. (1928). Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung, Statistik und Wahrheit.

Dover. 8

[169] | (1941). \On the Foundations of Probability and Statistics." Annals of Mathe-

matical Statistics, 12: 191{205. 8

[170] | (1942). \On the Correct Use of Bayes’ Formula." Annals of Mathematical

Statistics, 13: 156{165. 8

Stephen E. Fienberg

39

[171] von Neumann, J. and Morgenstern, O. (1944). Theory of Games and Economic
Behavior. Princeton: Princeton University Press. (Paperback edition, 1980.). 16

[172] Wald, A. (1939). \Contributions to the Theory of Statistical Estimation and
Testing { A Hypotheses." Annals of Mathematical Statistic, 10: 299{326. 9

[173] | (1947). \An Essentially Complete Class of Admissible Decision Functions."

Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 18: 549{555. 9

[174] | (1947). Sequential Analysis. New York: Wiley. (Paperback edition, Dover,

New York, 1973.). 13

[175] | (1950). Statistical Decision Functions. New York: Wiley. 15

[176] Wallis, W. A. (1980). \The Statistical Research Group, 1942{1945." Journal of

the American Statistical Association, 75: 320{335. 11, 13

[177] | (1981). \Memorial Tribute." In Savage, Leonard J. The Writings of Leonard
Jimmie Savage: A Memorial Selection, 11{24. Washington, DC: American Sta-
tistical Association and Institute of Mathematical Statistics. 17

[178] Wilks, S. S. (1936). \Discussion of Ernest Nagel: ‘The Meaning of Probability."

Journal of the American Statistical Association, 31: 29{30. 9

[179] Wrinch, D. and Je(cid:11)reys, H. (1919). \On Some Aspects of the Theory of Proba-

bility." Philosophical Magazine, 38: 715{731. 10

[180] Zabell, S. (1982). \W.E. Johnson’s ‘Su(cid:14)cientness’ Postulate." Annals of Statis-

tics, 10: 1090{1099. 10

[181] | (1989). \R.A. Fisher on the History of Inverse Probability." Statistical Science,

4: 247{256. 6

[182] | (1989). \R.A. Fisher on the History of Inverse Probability: Rejoinder." Sta-

tistical Science, 4: 261{263. 6

[183] Zellner, A. (1971). An Introduction to Bayesian Inference in Econometrics. New

York: Wiley. 26

Acknowledgments

I am indebted to many people for input to the enterprise behind this paper, for informal con-
versations, the sharing of papers and other materials. In particular, Margo Anderson sparked
my interest in the question behind the paper, and Steve Stigler has made several suggestions,
helped me track down information on the University of Chicago in the 1950s, and provided me
with repeated edits. Teddy Seidenfeld also provided considerable assistance and suggestions.
I have been especially fortunate to have had speci(cid:12)c comments, recollections and/or other in-
put from Robert Aumann, David Brillinger, Art Dempster, I.J. Good, Joel Greenhouse, Wes
Johnson, Dennis Lindley, Duncan Luce, Al Madansky, Ward Edwards, Frederick Mosteller,

40

When Did Bayesian Inference Become \Bayesian"?

John Pratt, Howard Rai(cid:11)a, Herman Rubin, Alastair Scott, Patrick Suppes, and Arnold Zell-
ner, although none are responsible for the interpretations or the arguments in this paper. A
presentation of much of the contents of the paper at the Paris Seminar on \Histoire du calcul
des probabilit(cid:19)es et de la statistique," also produced a number of helpful suggestions and com-
ments, especially from Marc Barbut and Antoine de Falguerolles. Finally, I thank the editor
and referees for providing detailed comments and helping me to address both language and
historical issues. This preparation of the paper was carried out while I was a visiting researcher
at the Centre de Recherche en Economie et Statistique of the Institut National de la Statistique
et des (cid:19)Etudes (cid:19)Economiques, Paris, France.

Corrected May 16, 2007.

