402 

NATURE 

[FEBRUARY  25,  1904 

that 

further 

Prof.  Hann  shows 

the  probabilities  of 
positive  temperature  variations  at  Greenwich  and  negative 
pressure  variations  at  Stykkisholm,  and  vice  versd,  are  o-83 
In  the  case  of  the  Azores  he  shows 
and  o-85  respectively. 
that  a  similar  reversal  with  Stykkisholm  occurs. 
Interest 
ing  results  are  also  obtained  when  he  oonsiders  the  new 
station  at  Angmagsalik,  in  Greenland. 

THE  AMERICAN  ASSOCIATION. 
THE  annual  meeting  of  the  American  Association  for  the 
Advancement  of  Science  was  held  at  St.  Louis  on 
December  26,  1903,  to  January  r.  The  address  delivered 
by  the  president  of  the  association,  Prof.  Ira  Remsen, 
appeared  in  NATURE  of  January  28;  and  extracts  from  the 
addresses  of  presidents  of  some  of  the  sections  are  given 
below. 

ATOMS  AND  ELEMENTS. 1 

science 

assailed  Aristotelian  metaphysics 

Is  matter  oontinuous  or  discrete?  argued  the  opposed 
schools of  Grecian  philosophy  led  by  Leucippus,  Democritus 
and  Epicurus,  and  dominated  by  Aristotle.  Despite  the 
clarity  of  the  statements  of  the  Roman  Lucretius,'  the 
atomic  hypothesis  received  scant  attention  until  the  seven 
teenth  century  of  the  Christian  era,  when  Galileo 's  experi 
mental 
and 
demanded  verification  of  the  premises  of  that  philosophy 
which  had  governed  all  the  schools  of  Europe  for  two 
thousand  years. 3  While  Gassendi,  Boyle,  Descartes,  New 
ton,  perhaps  Boscovich,  Lavaisier,  Swedeborg,  Richter, 
Fischer  and  Higgins  had  to  do  with  our  modern  atomic 
theory,  Dalton  one  hundred  years  ago  "  created  a  working 
tool  of  extraordinary  power  and  usefulness "  in  the  laws  of 
definite  and  multiple  proportions.  As  Clarke 4 
remarked, 
"  Between  the  atom  of  Lucretius  and  the  Daltonian  atom 
the kinship  is  very  remote."  Although  the lineage  is direct, 
the  work  of  Berzelius,  Gmelin  and  others;  the  laws  of 
Faraday,  Gay  Lussac,  Avogadro,  Dulong  and  Petit;  the 
reformations  of  Laurent  and  Gerhardt,  but  particularly 
Cannizzaro;  the  systematisations  of  de  Chancourtois,  New 
lands1  Hinrichs,  Mende!t\eff  and  Lothar  Meyer;  the  stereo 
chemrstry  of  van  't  Hoff  and  Le  Bel  have  imperialised  the 
ideas  of  the  Manchester  phi!Dsopher,  so  that  the  conceptions 
of  the  oonservative  atomists  of  to-day  are  quite  different 
from  those at the  beginning of  the  closed  century. 5 

The  Da!tonian  ideas  had  scarcely  reached  adolescence 
before  Prout  (rSrs),  giving  heed  tD  the  figures  concerned, 
would  have  all  the  elements  compounded  of  hydrogen.  The 
classical  atomic  mass  values  obtained  by  sympathetic  Stas 
and  the  numerous  investigations of  those  who  followed  him 
with  all  the  refinements  human  ingenuity  has  been  able 
devise,  temporarily  silenced  such  speculations  but  not  until 
Marignac  had  halved  the  unit,  Dumas  had  quartered  .it, 
the  one 
and  Ziingerle,  as  late  as  r882, 
thousandth  hydrogen  atom. 

insisted  upon 

Th;  notion,  like  Banquo's  ghost,  will  ever  up,  for  if  one 
may  judge  from  the  probability  calculations  of  Mallet  (Phil. 
Tratls.,  clxxi.,  1003,  r88r)  and  Strutt  (Phil.  Mag.,  (6),  i., 
JII),  a  profound  truth  underlies  the  now  crude  hypothesis. 

Crookes  (Chem.  News,  lv.,  83,  r886),  from  observations 
made  during  prolonged  and  painstaking  fractionations  of 
certain  of 
supported  his  previously 
announced  "  provisional  hypothesis  "  as  to  the  genesis  of 
the  elements from  a  hypothetical  protyle,  which  existed  when 
the  universe  was  without  form  and  void.  He  designated 
those  intermediate  entities,  like  yttrium,  gadolinium  and 

rare  earths, 

the 

1  Abridged  from  an  addref'S  delivered  before  the  Section  of  Chemistry 

of  the Amerkan  Association  by Prof.  C.  Baskerville. 

:2  "  Nature reserving these as seeds of  things 
Permits in  them  no  min ish  nor  decay; 
They can't be  fewer and they can't  be  less." 

Again,  of compounds-

u  Decay of some leaves others  ree  to grow 

And thus  the sum  of  things rests unimpaired." 

3  See  11 The  Atomic  '1 heory,"  the 

Dalton  Celebration, May,  1903. 

Wilde  Lecture  by F.  W.  Clarke  at 

Book  ii.,  79· 

•  Loc. cit. 
5  While  I  have  examined  much  of  the  original  literature,  Venable's 
I  have,  further· 
of a  work 

11  History of the  Periodic  Law" has  been  most  helpful. 
more,  had  the privilege of reading \"ery  carefully the 
entitled  "The Study of the Atom" (in press),  by Dr.  Venable. 

a 

ro, 

"  meta-elements," 1 

didymium, 
species  of  compound 
radicles,  as  it  were.  Urstoff;  fire  mist,  protyle,  the  ultra 
gaseous  form,  the  fourth  state  of  matter  (Crookes,  Royal. 
Societies,  June 
r88o)  was  condensed  by  a  process 
analogous  to  cooling;  in  short,  the  elements  were  created. 
The  rate  of  the  cooling  and  irregular  condensation  produced 
"  the  atavism  of  the  elements,"  and  this  caused  the  form 
the  periodic  system. 
ation  Df 
families  of 
Marignac  (Archives  des 
Physiques  et  Naturelles, 
17-5;  Chemical  News,  !vi.,  39),  criticising  this  hypothesis, 
states :-" I  have  always  admitted 2 
impossibility  of 
accounting  for  the  curious  relations  which  are  manifested 
between  the  atomic  weights  of  the  elements,  except  by  the 
hypothesis  of  a  general  method  of  formation  according  to 
definite  though  unknown  laws;  rven  when  these  relations 
have  the  character  of  general  ant  absolute  laws." 

the  natural 

the 

Further,  "  I  do  not  the  less  ackn  wledge  that  the  effect  of 
constant association  of  these  elemen  s  is  one of, the  strongest 
proofs  that  can  be  found  nf  the  co  1munity  of  their  origin. 
Besides,  it  is  not  an  isolated  fact  we  can  find  other  ex 
amples  such  as  the  habitual  association  in  minerals  of 
tantalum,  niobium,  and  titanium." 

The  peculiar  discharge  from  the  negative  electrodes  of  a 
vacuum  tube  was  investigated  many  years  ago  by  Hittorf 
and  Crookes,  who  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  it  was 
composed  of  streams  of  charged  particles.  All  are  familiar 
with 
the  very  recent  proposed  "  electrons "  and  "  cnr 
puscles "  resulting  from  the  beautiful  physical  researches 
of  Lodge  and  J.  J.  ThDmson.  These  appear  to  have  caused 
a  trembling  in  the  belief  of  many  in  the  immutability  of  the 
atom,  and  the complete abandonment of the  atom  is seriously 
discussed  bv  others. 

Although- by  chemical  means,  so  far,  we have be n  unable 
to  break  up  the  atoms,  apparently  electrical  energy,  in  the 
form  of  kathode  rays,  for  example,  follows  the  grain  of 
atomic  structure.  Some  advanced  thinkers  look  upon  the 
atoms  as  disembodied  charges  of  electricity.  Ostwald  has 
taught  it.  Electric  charges  are  known  only  as  united  to 
matter,  yet  Johnstone  Stoney  and  Larmor,  have  speculated 
on  the  properties of  such  charges  isolated.  "  Such  a  charge 
is  inertia,  even  though  attached  to  no  matter,  and  the  in 
crease  of  ine,-tia  of  a  body  due  to  electrification  has  been 
calculated  by  both  Thomson  and  Oliver  Heaviside,  the  con- 
ception  accordingly  being  advanced 
is 
electrical,  and  that  matter,  as  we  know  it,  is  built  up  of 
interlocked  positive  and  negative  electrons. 
If  it  were 
possible  in  any  mass  of  matter  to  separate  these  electrons 
then  matter would  disappear  and  there  would  remain  merely 
two  enormous  charges  of  electricity."  We  are  aware  of 
phenomena  attributed  to  the  negative  electrons;  we  await 
anxiously  the  announcement  of  the  po'sitive  electrons. 

that  all 

inertia 

We  do  know,  however,  as  A.  A.  Noyes  says,  that  "  there 
exists  in  the universe some thing  or things other  than  matter 
which,  by  associatiDn  with  it,  give  rise  to  the  changes  in 
properties  which  bodies  exhibit,  and  give  them  power  of 
producing  changes  in  the  properties  of  other  bodies." 

Shall  we say,  as does  Remsen,  "  An  element  is a  substance· 
made  up  of  atoms  of  the  same  kind?  "  Can  we  say  that 
it  is. not?  Venable  (the  "  De-finition  of  the  Element,"  Am. 
Chemist,  r875,  23)  truly  says:  "An  element  is  best  defined' 
by  means  of  its  properties."  These  conceits  are  not  ex 
clusive.  The  properties  are  the  result  of  the  action  of 
physical  forces  and  chemical  affinity,  whatever  that  may  be. 
Certain  of  the  novel  atmospheric  gases  have  so  far  re 
sponded  but  poorly  to  the  latter,  as  predicted  before  their 
discovery by  Flawitzsky,  Julius Thomsen  and de  Boisbaudran 
in  r887. 

The  following  simpler  definition  has  finally  served  as  my 
guide :  An  elemeHt  is  that  which  has  not  been  decomposed, 
so  far  as  we  are  aware,  iHto 
In 
short,  it  is  consistent. 

other  than  itself. 

We  have  decided  to  define  an  element  by  its  properties. 
The  alterations  produced 
the  properties  of  the  most 
characteristic  elements  by  the  presence  of  small  amounts  of 
foreign  substances  are  evident  in  steel.  The  influence  of 
arsenic  upon  the  conductivity  of  copper  is  well  known,  and 
Le  Bon  (Compt.  retld.,  cxxxi.,  706,  1900)  has  recently  shown 

in 

1  Address  before  Chemical  Section  of  the  British  Association, 

Ne'l'vs,  liv.,  117,  rBSs. 

2  Remarks  made  in  tS6o-s  after  publication  of  Stas's  '' Resean;:hes  on 

Atomic Weights,"  Archives,  ix.,  102,  24-376. 

NO.  1791,  VOL.  69] 

© 1904 Nature Publishing Group

FEBRUARY  25,  1904] 

NATURE 

that  traces  of  magnesium  (one  part  in  14,ooo)  in  mercury 
cause  the  latter  to  decompose  water  and  to  oxidise  rapidly 
in  the  air  at  ordinary  temperatu·res.  Thorium  with  less 
than  a  trace  of  actinium  produces  an  auto-photograph. 

This  point  cannot  be  too  strongly  stressed  in  the  rare 
earth  field.  One  who  has  wrought  with  thorium  dioxide 
well  knows  the influence  a  small  amount o.f  ceri'llm  has  upon 
solubility.  The  conflicting  statements  in  the  lite·rature 
as  to  the  colours  of  the  oxides  of  the  complexes,  neodidy 
mium  and  prreseodidymium,  cause one  to  wonder  if  different 
researchers  have  had  the  same  hreccei ty. 

An  appeal  to  the  spectroscope  is,  of  course,  in  the  minds 

of  a ll  my  hearers . 

Grunwald,  in  a  series  of  papers  on  his  theory  of  spectrum 
analysis, 1  endeavours  "  to  discover  rela tions  between  the 
·spec tra  and  thus  to  arrive  at  simpler,  if  not  fundamental 
.,  elements.'  "  He  came  t-o  the  conclusion 
that  "  all  the 
·so-called  elements  are  compounds  of  the  primary  elements  a 
. and  b  "  (coronium  and  helium).  Ames  (Am.  Chern.  ]., 
xi.,  138,  1889),  having  directed  attention  to  the  use  of 
•uncorrected  data  by  Grunwald, 
remarks :  "  The  concave 
grating  gives  the  only  accurate  method  of  determining  the 
ultra-violet  wave-lengths  of  the  elements;  and  as  a  con 
sequence  of  not  using  it,  most  of  the  tables  of  wave-lengths 
so  far  published  are  not of  much  value." 

Lockyer  maintained  that  the  lines  of  certain  brilliant 
vary  not  only  in  length  and  in  number,  but  also 
111  bnlhancy  and  in  breadth,  depending  upon  the  quantity 
of_ the  substance  as  well  as  temperature  (Roy.  Soc.  Proc ., 
lx1.,  148,  183;  Chem.  News,  lxxix.,  145).  Being  unable  to 
decompose  the  eleA'lents  in  the  laboratory,  he  studied  the 
.spectra  of  the  stars.  The  spectra  of  the  colder  stars  show 
many  more  metals,  but  no  metalloids ,  whereas  the  coldest 
the  Crookes  spectrum  of  metalloids  which 
s tars  show 
in 
are  compounds;  none  of 
than  100  ooo  visual 
the  spectrum  of 
obse rva tions  and  2000  photographs  were 
the 
resea!'ches. 

the  metalloids  are 

the  sun.  More 

found 

in 

Whether  we  follow 

Without  doubt  the  spectroscopi c  criteria  are  the  most 
valuable  we  have  in  judging  finally 
the  elements  and 
mayhap  will  remain  ;;o.  but  in  my  liumble  opinion:  such 
h av_e  not  alone  suffictent  authority,  as  yet,  to  usher  the 
asptrant  to  a  place  among the  elect.  The  contention frames 
1tself,  howev er ,  in  an  expression  o·f  the  need  for  uniformity . 
the  most  advanced  metaphysico 
chemical  teachings  or  no,  if  there  be  a ny  one ·concept  upon 
which  modern  practical  chemical  thought  depends,  it  is  the 
1aw  of  definiteness  of  composition.  There  may  be,  and 
-doubtless  are,  definite,  perhaps  invariabl·e,  properties  of  our 
ele?lents  ?ther than  their  combining  proportions,  the  atomic 
w etghts,  tf you  please,  yet,  so  far  as  we  know,  they  approxi 
ma te  more  closely  than  any  fixed,  if  not  permanent,  ratios. 
Many  of  these  values,  by  which  we  lay  such  store  are  de 
pendent  upon  data  in  which,  I  venture  the  assertion,  too 
great_ 
has  been  bestowed,  or  opinions  to  which 
suf!ictent  attenhon  has  not  been  given. 

phenomenon, 

As  hinted  at in  the earli.er  porti-on  of this unduly  prolonged 
a ddress,  many  have  theonsed  as  to  the  ultimate  composition 
of  matter.  The  logic  of  Larmor's  (Phil .  Mag.,  December, 
1897.  506)  theory,  involving  the  idea  of  an  ionic  substratum 
of  matter,  the  support  of  J.  J.  Thomson's  (Phil.  Mag., 
October,  1897,  312)  experiments,  the  confirmation  of  Zee 
mann 's 
the  emanations  of  Rutherford 
Martin's  (Chem.  News,  -Ixxxv.,  205,  1902)  explanations: 
the  correctness  of 
ca nnot 
idea  of  a  fo.u-rth  state  of  matter  (Phil.  Trans., 
11.,.  !88r,  433) ..  I?  the  maugural  address  as  president of  the 
Bnttsh  Assocmhon 
the 
n;echanica!  construction of  the  Rontgen  ray  tubes  a  sugges 
tlOn  by  Stlvanus  Thompson  t-o  use  for  the  antikathode  a 
metal  of  high  atomic  weight.  Osmium  and  icridium  were 
used,  thorium  tried,  and  in  1896  Cr-ookes  obtained  better 
results  with  metallic  uranium  than  platinum . 

to  cause  credence 

ack nowledges 

(1898), 

fail 

he 

in 

in 

a?d  the _facts  that  most  of  the  elements  with  high 
atomtc  wetghts,  111  fact  all  above  200  (tha llium  not  reported 

l ." Uber 

Pitt!.  Mag.,  xxtv.,  304,  1887.  Math. 
der Koh1e ."  Monatskifte /iZr Clumi'e,  viii. , 6so. 

das  Hydrogen.  und  Oxyge nspectrum ," 
des  Magnesiums und 
u  Math.  Spectralanalyse 

Kadmiums,"  Mtmatslufte  fUr CJumie,  ix., 956. 

NO.  1791,  VOL.  69] 

on), 1  exhibit  radio-active  properties,  are  doubtless  closely 
associated  and  have  to  do  with  the  eventual  composition  of 
I  have  unverified  observ a tions  whic h  go  to  show 
matter . 
the  existence of at least  one  element  with  a  very  high  atomic 
weight. 
If it  be  confirmed,  then  we  have  them  now  or  they 
are  making,  and  probably  breaking  up,  as  shown  by  that 
marvellous  class  of  elements  in  the  discovery'  of  which  the 
Curi es  h ave  been  pioneers. 

the  fifth  state  of  matter. 

If  our  ideas  that  all  known  elements  come  from  some 
primordi al  material  be  true,  then  it  stands  to  reason  that 
we are coming  in  time,  perhaps,  to  that fixed  thing,  a  frozen 
ether, 
I  may  make  use  of 
dangerous  analogy  and  liken  our  known  elements,  arranged 
in  a  perfected  na tural  system,  to  the  visible  material  spec 
trum,  while  electrons,  &c.,  constitute  the  ultra-violet  and 
cosmyle  composes  the  infra-red,  either  one  of  the  latter  by 
proper conditio ns  being convertible  into  percep tible  elemental 
matter . 

THE  SCOPE  OF  GEOGRAPHY. 2 

The  essential  in  geography  is  a  rel a tio n  between  the 
elements  of  terrestrial  environment  and  the  items  of  organic 
r espo nse ;  this  being  only  a  modernised  extension  of  Ritter's 
view.  Everything  that  involves  such  a  relationship  is  to 
th a t  ex tent  geographic.  Anything  in  which  such  a  relation 
ship  is  wanting  is  to  that  extent  not  geographic.  The loca 
ti on  of  a  manufacturing  village  a t  a  point  where  a  stream 
affords  water-power  is  an  example  of  th e  kind  of  relation 
that  is  meant,  and  if  this  example  is  accepted ,  then  the 
r easo nable  principle  of  continuity  will  guide  us  to  include 
under  geography  every  other  example  in  which  the  way 
that  organic  forms  have  of  doing  thin gs  is  conditioned  by 
their  inor ga nic  environment.  The  organ ic  pa rt  of  geo 
graphy  must  not  be  limited  to  man,  because  the  time  is 
now  past  when  man  is  studied  altogether  a part  from  the 
other  fo rm s  of  life  on  the  earth.  The  colo ni es  of  ants  on 
our  western  deserts,  with  their  burrows,  their  hills,  their 
roads  and 
to 
elements  of  environment  found  in  soil  and  climate  as  clearly 
as  a  manufacturing  village  exhibi ts  a  response  to  water 
power.  The  different  coloration  of  the  dorsal  and  ventral 
parts of  fish  is  a  response  to  the  external  illumination  of our 
non-luminous  earth.  The  word  arrive 
is  a  persistent 
memorial  of  the  importance  long  ago  attached  to  a  success 
ful  crossing  of  the  shore  line  that  separates  sea  and  land. 
It  is  hot  significant  whether  the  relation  a nd  the  elements 
that  enter  into  it  are  of  easy  or  difficult  understanding ,  nor 
whether  they  are  what  we  call  importa nt  or  unimportant, 
familiar  or  unfamiliar.  The  essential  quality  of  geography 
is  that  it  involves  relations  of  things  organic  and  inorganic; 
and  the  entire  content  of  geography  would  include  all  such 
rela tions. 

floors,  exhibit 

threshing 

responses 

their 

Thus  defined,  geography  has  two  chief  divisions.  Every 
thing  about  the  earth  or  any  inorganic  pa rt  of  it,  considered 
as  an  element  of  the  environment  by  which  the  organic  in 
h abitants  are  conditioned,  belongs  under  physical  geography 
or  physiography.'  Every  item  in  whi ch 
th e  organic  in 
habitants  of  the  earth-plant,  animal  or  man-show  a  re 
to  the  elements  of  environment,  belongs  under 
sponse 
organic  geography.  Geography  proper  involves  a  consider 
ation  of  relations  in  which  the  things  that  belong  under  its 
two  divisions  are  involved. 

Geography is,  therefore,  not simply a  description of places; 
it is  not simply an acx:ount of the  earth and of its  inhabitants, 
each  described  independently of  the  other;  it  involves  a  rela 
tion  of  some  element  of  physical  geography  to  some  item  of 
organic  geography,  and  nothing  from  which  this  relation 
is  absent  possesses  the  essential  quality  of  geographical 
discipline.  The location  of  a  cape or  of  a  city  is  an  elemen 
tary  fact  which  may  be  built  up  with  other  facts  into  a 
relation of  full  geographic  meaning;  but taken  alone,  it  has 
about  the  same  rank  in  geography  that  spelling  has  in 
language.  A  map  has  about  the  same  place  in  geography 

1  See the exquisite paper by Madame Curie on '' 

and  .Strauss.  Berichte  x:rcxiv.,  3033, 
al so.". Radio·a.ctive  Learl ," 
P elhm  (loc .  ctt.)  on  "Rad1o-acr1Ve  Tellurmm " ;  Strutt,  Ph#.  Mag.,  vi., 

Elster and  Geitel.  Giese!,  Marckwald,  &c. 
Abridged  from 

address deJivered  be fore  the  Se-C"tion of  Geology and 

Geography of the  American  Association by  Prof.  W.  l\L  D avis 

3  It sh ould  be noted that the British d efi nition of  physiography gives it a 

much  wider meaning than  is  here  indicated. 

© 1904 Nature Publishing Group

NATURE 

[FEBRUARY  25,  1904 

that  a  dictionary  has 
in  literature.  The  mean  annual 
temperature  of  a  given  station,  and  the  occurrence  of  a 
certain  plant  in  a  certain  locality,  are  facts  of  kinds  that 
must  enter  extensively  into  the  r elationships  with  which 
geography  deals;  but  these  facts,  standing  alone,  are  want 
ing  in  the  essential  quality  of  mature  geographical  science. 
Not  only  so;  many  facts  of  these  kinds  may,  when  treated 
in  other  relations,  enter  into  other  sciences;  for  it  is  not  so 
much  th e  thing  that  is  studied  as  the  relation  in  which  it  is 
studied  that  determines  the  science  to  which  it  belongs. 

There can  be  no  just  complaint of  narrowness  in  a  science 
that  has  charge  of  all  the  relations  among  the  elements  of 
terrestrial  environment  and  the  items  of  organic  response. 
Indeed,  the  criticism  usually  made  upon  the  subject  thus 
defined  is,  as  has  already  been  po·inted  out,  that  it  is  too 
broad ,  too  vaguely  limited  and  too  much  concerned  with  all 
s.orts  of  things  to  have  suffici·ent  unity  and  coherence  for  a 
real  science.  Some  persons,  indeed,  object  that  geography 
has  no  right  to  existence  as  a  separate  science;  that  it  is 
chiefly  a  compound  of  parts  of  other  sciences ;  but  if  it  be 
defi ned  as  concerned  with  the  relationships  that  have  been 
just  specified,  these  objections  have  little  force. 
It  is  true, 
indeed,  that  the  things  with  which  geography  must  deal  are 
dealt  with  in  other  sciences  as  well,  but  this  is  also  the  case 
with  astronomy,  physics, 
chemistry,  geology,  botany, 
zoology,  history,  economics,  and  other  sciences.  There  is  no 
subject .of  study  the  facts  of  which  are  independent  of  all 
other  subjects;  not  only  are  the  same  things  studied  under 
different  sciences,  but  every  science  employs  some  of  the 
methods  and  results  of  other  sc iences.  The  individuality  of 
a  science  depends  not  on  its  having  to  do  with  things  that 
are  cared  for  by  no  other  science,  or  on  its  employing 
methods  that  are  used  in  no  other  science,  but  on  its  study 
ing  these  things  and  employing  these  methods  in  order  to 
gain  its  own  well-defined  object.  Chemistry,  for  example, 
is  concerned  with  the  study  of  material  substances  in  re· 
to  their  constitution,  but  it  constantly  and  most 
lation 
properly  employs  physical  and  mathematical  methods 
in 
reaching  its  ends.  Botanists  and  zoologists  are  much 
interested  in  the  chemical  composition  and  physical  action 
of  plants  and  animals,  because  the  fa cts  of  composition  and 
action  enter  s.o  largely  into  the  understanding  of  plants  and 
animals  considered  as  living  beings.  Overlappings  of  the 
kind  thus  indicated  are  common  enough,  and  geography,  as 
well  as  other  sciences,  exhibits  them  in  abundance. 
It  may 
be  that  geography  has a  greater amount of overlapping  than 
any  other  science;  but  no  valid  objection  to  its  content  can 
be m a de  on  that ground ;  the  maximum  of  overlapping  must 
occur  in  one  science  or  another-there  can  be  no  discredit 
to  the  science  on  that  account.  Geography  has  to  do  with 
rocks  the  origin  of  which  is  studied  in  geology ;  with  the 
currents of  the  atmosphere,  the  processes  of  which  exemplify 
general  laws  that  are  studied  in  physics;  with  plants  and 
animals,  the  forms  and  manner  of  !!rowth  of  which  are  the 
first  care  of  the  botanist  and  zoologist;  and  with  man, 
whose actions recorded  in  order of  tim e  occupy  the historian ; 
but  the  particular  point  of  view  from  which  the  geographer 
studies  aU 
these  things  makes  them  as  much  his  own 
property  as  they  are  the  property  of  anyone  else. 

SOME  UNSOLVED  PROBLEMS  OF  ORGANIC  ADAPTATION.' 
The  recent  impulse  which  has  come  to  biologic  progress 
by  experimental  methods,  and  the  remarkable  results  which 
have  been  attained  thereby,  may  without  exaggeration  be 
said  to  have  raised  anew  many  an  earlier  doubt  as  weU  as 
brought  to  light  problems  apparently  beyond  the  scope  of 
It  may  not,  therefore,  be  an  ex 
the  older  explanations. 
travagant  assumption  to  announce  the  entire  question  -of 
organic  adaptations  as  open  for  reconsideration,  in  the  light 
of  which  no  apology  will  be  necessary  for  directing  atten 
tion  .to  certain  phases  of  the  subject  upon 
the  present 
occasiOn. 

Among  the  many  problems  which  recent  investigations 
and  conclusions  have  brought  into  better  perspective  as  well 
which  might  profitably  be  dis 
as  sharper 
of  a  smgle  address  preclude  any  very  wide 
cussed,  the 
I  have,  therefore,  chosen  to  restrict  my 
d1scusston  ch1efly  to  problems  of  coloration  among  lower 

?f 

1  Apridged 

.an  address de!ivered  before tbe Section of Zoology of the 

Amencan A:tsOClatlon  by  Prof.  C.  W.  Hargitt. 
NO.  1791,  VOL.  69l 

invertebrates,  including  incidental  references  to  correlated! 
subjects,  and  the  probable  limitations  of  colour  as  a  facoor 
in  organic  adaptation. 

As  is  perfectly  well  known,  colour  in  nature  is  due  to  one 
of  two  causes,  or  to  a  combination  of  both,  namely,  (r) 
what  has  been  termed  optical  or  structural  conditions,  such. 
as  diffraction, 
interference  or  unequal  reflection  of  light, 
examples  of  which  are  familiar  in  the  splendid  hues  of  the 
rainbow,  the  iridescent  sheen  and  metallic  colours  of  the 
(2)  \Vhat  are· 
feathers  of  many  birds,  wings  of  insects,  &c. 
known  as  pigmentary  colours,  due  to  certain  material  sub 
stances  lodged  within  the  tissues of  animals  or  plants  which 
have  the  property  of  absorbinf$  certain  elements  of  light 
and  of  reflecting  others,  and  thereby  producing  the  sensa 
tion  of  oolour.  While  the  two  are  physically  quite  distinct 
it  is  not  unusual  to  find  them  associated  in  producing  some· 
of  the  most  exquisite  colour  e.ffects  of  wh ich  we  have  know 
In  a  general  way  one  may  usually  distinguish. 
ledge. 
between 
these  two  sorts  of  colour  by  noting  that  those 
which  are  purely  optical  in  their  character  produce  a  con 
stantly  changing 
the  relative  position  of 
object  or  observer  may  happen  to  vary  with  reference  to  the 
angle  and  direction  of  light;  while,  upon  the  other  hand, 
colours  which  are  due  to  pigments  show  this  property  very 
slightly  or  not  at  all,  and  that,  moreover,- pigment  colours 
are  usu a lly  more  or  less  soluble  in  various  reagents,  such  as 
alcohol,  ether,  acids,  alkalies,  &c.,  and  that  they  often  fade 
rapidly  under  the  influence  of  strong  light  or  in  its  absence, 
or  upon  the  death  of  the  organism . 

impression  as 

The  work  of  Krukenburg,  MacMun,  Macallum,  M'Ken-· 
dric,  Hopkins,  Urech,  Eisig,  Cunningham,  and  a  host  of 
others,  comprising  a  mass  of  literature  of  enormous  pro 
portions,  will  be  available  to 
those  interested,  and  may 
afford  some  faint  conception  of  the  magnitude  and  import 
ance  of  the  field  to  be  explored,  as  well  as  an  introduction 
to  that  a lready  made  available.  And  while  as  a  result  of 
this  activity  many  and  various  organic  pigments  have  been 
isolated  and  their  composition  in  part  or  entirely  made 
known,  it  must  be  recognised  that  the  task  of  the  chemical 
analysis  of  any  such  highly  complex  compounds  as  most  of 
these  are  known  to  be  is  attended  with  extreme  difficulty 
and  no  small  measure  of  uncertainty.  StilJ,  it  has  been 
possible  fairly  to  distinguish  several  classes  of  such  pig 
ments,  differentiated  physiologically  as  follows : -

(I)  Those  directly  serviceable  in  the  vita l  processes  of  the 
organism.  Under  this  head  may  be  classed  such  pigments 
as hremoglobin,  chlorophyll,  zoonerythrin,  chlorocruorin,  and 
perhaps  others  less  known. 
It  need  not  be  emphasised  that 
by  far  the  most  important  of  these  are  the  two  first  named. 
The others,  found  chiefly  among  the  lower  invertebrates,  are 
believed  to  serve  a  function  similar  to  the  first. 

(2)  Waste  products.  Among  these  the  several  biliary  pro 
ducts  are  too  well  known  to  call  for  specia l  note.  Guanin 
is  a  pigment  of  common  occurrence  in  the  skin  of  certain 
fishes,  and  is  associated  with  the  coloration  of· the  species. 
Similarly  certain  colouring  matters  have  been  found  in  the 
pigments  of  many  Lepidoptera,  known  as  lepidotic  acid,  a 
substanc e  closely  allied  to  uric  acid,  and  undo ubtedly  o.f  the 
nature  of  a  waste  product. 

(3)  Rese.rve  products.  Of  these  there  are  several  series, 
one  of  wh1ch,  known  as  lipochrome  pigm ents,  is  associated 
with  the  metabolism  involved  i'n  the  formation  of  fats  and 
oils. 
Perhaps  of  similar  character  are  such  pigments  as. 
carmine,  or  rather  cochineal,  melanin,  &c. 
It  may  be  some 
what  doubtful  whether  these  pigments  do  not  rather  belong 
to  the  previous  class,  where  should  probably  be  listed  such 
products  as hrematoxylin,  indigo,  &c.,  all  of  which  have  been 
claimed  as  resultants of  destructive  metabolism  in  process of 
being  eliminated  from  the  physiologically  active  tissues  of 
the  body  of  the  organism.  Of  similar  character  is  probably 
tannic  acid,  . a  substance  well  known  among  plant  products 
and  involved  in  the  formation  of  many  of  the  brownish  and 
rusty 
of  autumn  foliage,  particularly  of  the  oaks 
and  allted  trees,  as  are  the  lipochromes  in  the  formation  of 
the  reds  and  yellows  which  form  so  conspicuou·s  a  feature 
among  autumn  colours. 

While  the  association  of  these  and  other  pigmentary 
matters  has  long  been  known 
in  connection  with  both 
animal  and  plant  growth,  and  while  the  conception  of  their· 
more  or  less  intimate  relation  to  the  active  metabolism  of 
the  various  tissues  is  not  new,  compa.ra.tively  little  has  beetl> 

© 1904 Nature Publishing Group

FERRUARY  25,  1904] 

NATURE 

done  toward  directly  investigating  and  elucidating  the  exact 
nature and extent of the process.  This seems to be  especially 
the  case  in  relation  to  the  part  played  by  these  products  in 
features  of  coloration  among 
those 
the 
organisms  with  which  we  are  now  concerned. 

formation  of 

From  considerations  of  researches  connected  with  various 

organisms  three things  seem  to  be  more or  less  evident : -

(I)  That  in  all  regenerative  processes  a  very  marked 
degree of  metabolism  is  involved,  whether  in  the  mere meta 
morphosis  of .old  tissues  into  new,  or  in  the  dkect  regener 
ation  of  new  tissues  by  growth  processes,  both  of  which 
seem  to  occur. 

(2)  That in  regenerative processes  there  is  often  associated 
the  development  of  pigmentary  substances  which  seem  to 
have  no  direct  function  in  relation  thereto. 

(3)  That  in  many  cases  there  follows  a  more  or  less  active 
excretion  and  elimination  of  portions  of  the  pigment  in 
question. 

In  the  present  review  I  have  not  in  the  least  sought  to 
ignore  or  discredit  the  value of natural  selection  as  a  factor 
in  organic  evolution.  Nnr  would  Ibe understood  as  wholly 
discarding  colour  as  a  factor  in  organic  adaptation,  pa,rticu 
lariy  among  the  higher  and  more  specialised  forms,  but 
rather  to  show  its  limits.  At  the  same  time  I  must  submit 
to  a  growing conviction  that  its  importance  has  been  largely 
overestimated,  and  that  other  factors  have  been  as  largely 
lost  sight  of. 
If  the  present  discussion  may  serve  in  even 
the  smallest  degree  to direct  attention  to  some  of  the  latter 
it  will  have  served  its  chief  purpose. 

UNIVERSITY  AND  EDUCATIONAL 
INTELLIGENCE. 

CAMBRIDGE.-An  examination  in 

tropical  medicine  and 
hygiene  will  be  held  during  the  year  I904.  The  examin 
ation  will  begin  on  August  9,  and  extend· over  three  days. 
The  examination  will  have  reference  to  the  natut'e,  inci 
prevention,  and  treatment of  the  epidemic  and  other 
diseases  prevalent  in  tropical  countries.  Every  candidate 
who  passes  the  examination  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  ex 
aminers will  receive  from  the university  a  diploma  testifying 
to  his knowledge  and  skill  in  tropical  medicine  and  hygiene. 
All  appli-cations  for  information  respecting  the  examination 
5hould  be  addressed  to  Mr.  G.  H.  F.  Nuttall,  Pathological 
Laboratory,  Cambridge. 

THE  Education  Committee  O<f 

the  Manchester  City 
Council  has  unanimously  resolved  to  recommend  that  a 
gr;mt  of  4oool.  be  given  from  the  city  rates  in  aid  of  the 
University  of  Manchester. 

IT  is  announced  in  Science  that  Prof.  John  Hays  Ham 
mond  has  added  Io,ooo!.  to  his  previous  gift  of  Io,ooo!.  for. 
a  metallurgical  laboratory  of  Yale  University,  and  that  by 
the  will  of  the  late  James  A.  Woolson  Boston  University 
will  ultimately  receive  I2o,ooo!.,  Radcliffe  College  6o,oool., 
and  the  Wesleyan  Academy  at  Wilbraham,  Mass.,  6o,oool. 

MR.  P.  N.  RussELL,  who  for  many  years  carried  on 
extensive  engineering  works  in  Sydney,  but  has  latterly 
resided  in  London,  has  made  a  further  donation·  of  so,oool. 
for  an  additional  endowment  to  the  School  of  Engineering 
at  the  University  of  Sydney.  Mr.  Russell  originated  this 
school  about  seven  years  ago  by  an  endowment  of  so,oool. 
LORD  KELVIN  will  distribute  the  prizes  at  the  North 
ampton  Institute,  London,. on  Friday,  February  z6.  The 
students'  conversazione  will  be  held  on  the  same  evening, 
and  will  be  continued  on  the  evening  of  Saturday,  February 
27,  when  the  building  will  .be  thrown  open  to  the  whole  of 
the  members  and  students of  the  institute· and  their  friends. 
THE  annual  report  of  the  Carnegie  Trust  for  the 

versities  of  Scotland  was  submitted  to  the  trustees  at  their 
third  annual  meeting,  which  was  held  in  London on  Friday 
last.  The  report  states  that  the  scheme  of  allocation  for 
five  years  of  an  annual  grant  of  4o,oool.  among  the  four 
Scottish  universities  became  operative  on  January  I,  I903. 
Of the  grant for  the  year  ended  December  3I,  I90J,  sums 
amounting -to  20,325!.  have  been  claimed  and  handed  over. 
One ·chair  has been  founded  and  its first  occupant  appointed 

NO.  1791,  VOL.  69] 

-the  Burnett  Fletcher  chair  of  history  and  archmology  in 
the  University  of  Aberdeen.  Of  the  sum  of  zo,oool.  re 
quired  for  the  endowment  of  this  chair,  donations  amount 
ing  to  about  I2,oool.  have  been  received  from  the  Burnett 
trustees,  Mrs.  Fletcher,  and  others.  The  ordinance  insti· 
tuting  a  chair  of  geology  in  the  University  of  Glasgow  has 
been  approved  by  Parliament,  and  it  is  expected  that  a  pro 
fessor  will  be  appointed  before  n·ext  winter  session,  when 
the  accumulations  in  hand  of  the  annual  grant  of  zoool. 
assignedtowards  the  endowment  of  this  chair  will  be  avail 
able,  together  with  such  portion  of  the  future  annual  grants 
as  may  .be  needed  to  complete  the  endowment  fund  of 
is  provided  by  the  Bellahouston 
IS,oool.,  half  of  which 
trustees  and  others. 
In  the  University  of  St.  Andrews  two 
lectureships-in  French  and  in  botany-have  been  estab 
lished,  each  with  an  endowment  of  w,oool.  Under  the 
scheme  of  endowment  of  post-graduate  study  and  research 
the  committee  has  made  the  first  awards.  The  estimated 
outlay  under  this  head  for  the  academic  year  I903-4  is 
3524!.,  of  which  the  sum  of  I828Z.  was  expended  within 
the  year  I903.  The  committee  has  entered  into  an  agree 
ment  with  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians  of  Edinburgh 
by  which  the  trust  has  purchased  the  property  and  labor 
atory  of 
for 
ro,oool.,  on 
the  College  of 
Physicia_ns  and  the  CoUege  of  Smgeons  continue  their  pre 
sent  annual  contributions  of  750!.  and  zool.  respectively  to 
the  working  of  the  laboratory. 

in  Forrest  Road,  Edinburgh, 

the  understanding 

the  college 

that 

THE  second  annual  'report  of  the  executive  committee  in 
connection  with  the  fund  for  advanced  universitv  educa 
tion  and  research  at  University  College,  London, 
pre 
sented  at  the  annual  general  meeting  of  the  members  of 
the  college  on  February  24. 
It  wiJI  be  remembered  that 
the  two  main  purposes  of  the  fund  are :-(I)  to  raise  the 
sum  of  20o,oool.  to  bring  about  the  incorpo·ration  of  Uni 
versity  CoJlege  in  the  University  of  London,  and  thus  to 
promote  the  unification  of  university  studies  in  London; 
(2)  To  provide  the  sum  necessary  to  equip  and  endow  Uni 
versity  College  adequately  for  its  work  as  an  integral  part 
of  the  University  of  London. 
For  this  purpose  it  was 
estimated  that  a  capital  sum  of. Soo,oool.  was  required,  or 
an  income  corresponding  to  such  capital  sum.  For  the  first 
of  these purposes  the  committee  has raised  I4I,oool.,  leaving 
a  balance  of  59,oool.  necessary  to  enable  the  conditions  of 
incorporation  to  be  fulfiJled.  Since  August  3I,  I903,  a  most 
important  addition  has  been .made  to  the  fund  owing  to 
the  munificence  of  an  anonymous donor,  who,  through  Pmf. 
E.  H.  Starling,  F.R.S.,  and  Dr.  Page  May,  promised  the 
sum  of  so,oool.  This  sum,  together  with  additional  sub 
scriptions  received  since  the  date  mentioned,  brings  the  total 
amount  raised  up  to  I67,287l.,  of  which  I4I,oo01. 
is  avail 
able  for  the  purpose  of  incorporation  and  the.  balance  of 
26,oool.  for  the  endowment  and  equipment  of  the  coJlege. 
It  will  be  seen  that  while  considerable  progr,ess  has  been 
made,  much  remains to be done  to  realise  the  whole  scheme. 
It  is  desirable  that  the  remainder  of  the  money  necessary 
for  incorporation  should  be  raised  without  delay  in  order 
to  make  it  possible  for  a  Bill  to  be  introduced  in  the  House 
of  Commons  next  session.  The  report  of  the  council  of 
University  College presented  on  the  same  occasion  contains, 
in  addition  to  fuJI  financial  statements  for  the  year  I902-
rgo3,  an  exhaustive list. of  original  papers  and  other  publi 
cations .completed  by  members  of  the  staff of  the  college 
during  the  same  period,  and  also  particulars  of  the  post 
graduate  courses  of  lectures  and  laboratory  work  during 
tlw  present  session. 

THE  secretaries  of  the  Royal  Society  have  addressed  a 
letter  to  the  Vice-Chancellor  of  the·  University  of  Oxford 
directing  attention  to  a  resolution  adopted  by  the  president 
and  council  of  the  Royal  Society :-" That  the  universities 
be  respectfully  urged  to  consider  the  desirability  of  taking 
such  steps  in  respect  of  their  regulations  as  will,  as  far  as 
possible,  ensure  that  a  knowledge  of  science  is  recognised 
in  schools  and.  ,elsewhere  as  an  essential  part  o.f  general 
education."  Enclosed  with  the. letter  was  a  statement  re 
garding  scientific  education  in  schools,  drawn  up  by  a  com 
mittee  nf  the  Royal  Sodety,  and  both  are  printed  in.  the 
Oxford  University  Gazette.  The  statement  points  out. that 
"it ·still  remains  subs:tantiaJly  true  that  the  public  schools 
have devised  for  themselves  no  adequate  way of assimilating 

© 1904 Nature Publishing Group

