7
0
0
2

n
u
J

5
2

]
I

A
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
3
6
3
.
6
0
7
0
:
v
i
X
r
a

Technical Report

IDSIA-07-07

A Collection of Deﬁnitions of Intelligence

Shane Legg
IDSIA, Galleria 2, Manno-Lugano CH-6928, Switzerland

shane@idsia.ch

www.idsia.ch/∼shane

Marcus Hutter

IDSIA, Galleria 2, Manno-Lugano CH-6928, Switzerland
RSISE/ANU/NICTA, Canberra, ACT, 0200, Australia

marcus@hutter1.net

www.hutter1.net

15 June 2007

Abstract

This paper is a survey of a large number of informal deﬁnitions of “intel-
ligence” that the authors have collected over the years. Naturally, compiling
a complete list would be impossible as many deﬁnitions of intelligence are
buried deep inside articles and books. Nevertheless, the 70-odd deﬁnitions
presented here are, to the authors’ knowledge, the largest and most well ref-
erenced collection there is.

Contents

1 Introduction
2 Collective deﬁnitions
3 Psychologist deﬁnitions
4 AI researcher deﬁnitions
5 Is a single deﬁnition possible?
References

Keywords

Intelligence deﬁnitions, collective, psychologist, artiﬁcial, universal.

2
2
4
7
9
9

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Introduction

“Viewed narrowly, there seem to be almost as many deﬁnitions of intel-
ligence as there were experts asked to deﬁne it.”

— R. J. Sternberg quoted in [14]

Despite a long history of research and debate, there is still no standard deﬁnition
of intelligence. This has lead some to believe that intelligence may be approximately
described, but cannot be fully deﬁned. We believe that this degree of pessimism
is too strong. Although there is no single standard deﬁnition, if one surveys the
many deﬁnitions that have been proposed, strong similarities between many of the
deﬁnitions quickly become obvious.
In many cases diﬀerent deﬁnitions, suitably
interpreted, actually say the same thing but in diﬀerent words. This observation lead
us to believe that a single general and encompassing deﬁnition for arbitrary systems
was possible. Indeed we have constructed a formal deﬁnition of intelligence, called
universal intelligence [22], which has strong connections to the theory of optimal
learning agents [19].

Rather than exploring very general formal deﬁnitions of intelligence, here we
will instead take the opportunity to present the many informal deﬁnitions that
we have collected over the years. Naturally, compiling a complete list would be
impossible as many deﬁnitions of intelligence are buried deep inside articles and
books. Nevertheless, the 70 odd deﬁnitions presented below are, to the best of our
knowledge, the largest and most well referenced collection there is. We continue to
add to this collect as we discover further deﬁnitions, and keep the most up to date
version of the collection available online [21]. If you know of additional deﬁnitions
that we could add, please send us an email.

2 Collective deﬁnitions

In this section we present deﬁnitions that have been proposed by groups or organ-
isations. In many cases deﬁnitions of intelligence given in encyclopedias have been
either contributed by an individual psychologist or quote an earlier deﬁnition given
by a psychologist. In these cases we have chosen to attribute the quote to the psy-
chologist, and have placed it in the next section. In this section we only list those
deﬁnitions that either cannot be attributed to a speciﬁc individuals, or represent a
collective deﬁnition agreed upon by many individuals. As many dictionaries source
their deﬁnitions from other dictionaries, we have endeavoured to always list the
original source.

1. “The ability to use memory, knowledge, experience, understanding, reason-
ing, imagination and judgement in order to solve problems and adapt to new
situations.” AllWords Dictionary, 2006

2

2. “The capacity to acquire and apply knowledge.” The American Heritage Dic-

tionary, fourth edition, 2000

3. “Individuals diﬀer from one another in their ability to understand complex
ideas, to adapt eﬀectively to the environment, to learn from experience, to
engage in various forms of reasoning, to overcome obstacles by taking thought.”
American Psychological Association [28]

4. “The ability to learn, understand and make judgments or have opinions that

are based on reason” Cambridge Advance Learner’s Dictionary, 2006

5. “Intelligence is a very general mental capability that, among other things, in-
volves the ability to reason, plan, solve problems, think abstractly, comprehend
complex ideas, learn quickly and learn from experience.” Common statement
with 52 expert signatories [13]

6. “The ability to learn facts and skills and apply them, especially when this

ability is highly developed.” Encarta World English Dictionary, 2006

7. “. . . ability to adapt eﬀectively to the environment, either by making a change
in oneself or by changing the environment or ﬁnding a new one . . . intelligence
is not a single mental process, but rather a combination of many mental pro-
cesses directed toward eﬀective adaptation to the environment.” Encyclopedia
Britannica, 2006

8. “the general mental ability involved in calculating, reasoning, perceiving rela-
tionships and analogies, learning quickly, storing and retrieving information,
using language ﬂuently, classifying, generalizing, and adjusting to new situa-
tions.” Columbia Encyclopedia, sixth edition, 2006

9. “Capacity for learning, reasoning, understanding, and similar forms of men-
tal activity; aptitude in grasping truths, relationships, facts, meanings, etc.”
Random House Unabridged Dictionary, 2006

10. “The ability to learn, understand, and think about things.” Longman Dictio-

nary or Contemporary English, 2006

11. “: the ability to learn or understand or to deal with new or trying situations :
. . . the skilled use of reason (2) : the ability to apply knowledge to manipulate
one’s environment or to think abstractly as measured by objective criteria (as
tests)” Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary, 2006

12. “The ability to acquire and apply knowledge and skills.” Compact Oxford

English Dictionary, 2006

13. “. . . the ability to adapt to the environment.” World Book Encyclopedia, 2006

3

14. “Intelligence is a property of mind that encompasses many related mental abil-
ities, such as the capacities to reason, plan, solve problems, think abstractly,
comprehend ideas and language, and learn.” Wikipedia, 4 October, 2006

15. “Capacity of mind, especially to understand principles, truths, facts or mean-
ings, acquire knowledge, and apply it to practise; the ability to learn and
comprehend.” Wiktionary, 4 October, 2006

16. “The ability to learn and understand or to deal with problems.” Word Central

Student Dictionary, 2006

17. “The ability to comprehend; to understand and proﬁt from experience.” Word-

net 2.1, 2006

18. “The capacity to learn, reason, and understand.” Wordsmyth Dictionary, 2006

3 Psychologist deﬁnitions

This section contains deﬁnitions from psychologists. In some cases we have not yet
managed to locate the exact reference and would appreciate any help in doing so.

1. “Intelligence is not a single, unitary ability, but rather a composite of several
functions. The term denotes that combination of abilities required for survival
and advancement within a particular culture.” A. Anastasi [2]

2. “. . . that facet of mind underlying our capacity to think, to solve novel prob-

lems, to reason and to have knowledge of the world.” M. Anderson [3]

3. “It seems to us that in intelligence there is a fundamental faculty, the alteration
or the lack of which, is of the utmost importance for practical life. This
faculty is judgement, otherwise called good sense, practical sense, initiative,
the faculty of adapting ones self to circumstances.” A. Binet [5]

4. “We shall use the term ‘intelligence’ to mean the ability of an organism to

solve new problems . . . ” W. V. Bingham [6]

5. “Intelligence is what is measured by intelligence tests.” E. Boring [7]

6. “. . . a quality that is intellectual and not emotional or moral: in measuring it
we try to rule out the eﬀects of the child’s zeal, interest, industry, and the like.
Secondly, it denotes a general capacity, a capacity that enters into everything
the child says or does or thinks; any want of ’intelligence’ will therefore be
revealed to some degree in almost all that he attempts;” C. L. Burt [8]

7. “A person possesses intelligence insofar as he has learned, or can learn, to

adjust himself to his environment.” S. S. Colvin quoted in [35]

4

8. “. . . the ability to plan and structure one’s behavior with an end in view.” J.

P. Das

9. “The capacity to learn or to proﬁt by experience.” W. F. Dearborn quoted

in [35]

10. “. . . in its lowest terms intelligence is present where the individual animal, or
human being, is aware, however dimly, of the relevance of his behaviour to
an objective. Many deﬁnitions of what is indeﬁnable have been attempted by
psychologists, of which the least unsatisfactory are 1. the capacity to meet
novel situations, or to learn to do so, by new adaptive responses and 2. the
ability to perform tests or tasks, involving the grasping of relationships, the
degree of intelligence being proportional to the complexity, or the abstractness,
or both, of the relationship.” J. Drever [9]

11. “Intelligence A: the biological substrate of mental ability, the brains’ neu-
roanatomy and physiology; Intelligence B: the manifestation of intelligence A,
and everything that inﬂuences its expression in real life behavior; Intelligence
C: the level of performance on psychometric tests of cognitive ability.” H. J.
Eysenck.

12. “Sensory capacity, capacity for perceptual recognition, quickness, range or
ﬂexibility or association, facility and imagination, span of attention, quickness
or alertness in response.” F. N. Freeman quoted in [35]

13. “. . . adjustment or adaptation of the individual to his total environment, or
limited aspects thereof . . . the capacity to reorganize one’s behavior patterns
so as to act more eﬀectively and more appropriately in novel situations . . . the
ability to learn . . . the extent to which a person is educable . . . the ability to
carry on abstract thinking . . . the eﬀective use of concepts and symbols in
dealing with a problem to be solved . . . ” W. Freeman

14. “An intelligence is the ability to solve problems, or to create products, that

are valued within one or more cultural settings.” H. Gardner [11]

15. “. . . performing an operation on a speciﬁc type of content to produce a partic-

ular product.” J. P. Guilford

16. “Sensation, perception, association, memory, imagination, discrimination, judge-

ment and reasoning.” N. E. Haggerty quoted in [35]

17. “The capacity for knowledge, and knowledge possessed.” V. A. C. Henmon

[16]

18. “. . . cognitive ability.” R. J. Herrnstein and C. Murray [17]

5

19. “. . . the resultant of the process of acquiring, storing in memory, retrieving,
combining, comparing, and using in new contexts information and conceptual
skills.” Humphreys

20. “Intelligence is the ability to learn, exercise judgment, and be imaginative.”

J. Huarte

21. “Intelligence is a general factor that runs through all types of performance.”

A. Jensen

22. “Intelligence is assimilation to the extent that it incorporates all the given
data of experience within its framework . . . There can be no doubt either,
that mental life is also accommodation to the environment. Assimilation can
never be pure because by incorporating new elements into its earlier schemata
the intelligence constantly modiﬁes the latter in order to adjust them to new
elements.” J. Piaget [30]

23. “Ability to adapt oneself adequately to relatively new situations in life.” R. Pin-

ter quoted in [35]

24. “A biological mechanism by which the eﬀects of a complexity of stimuli are
brought together and given a somewhat uniﬁed eﬀect in behavior.” J. Peterson
quoted in [35]

25. “. . . certain set of cognitive capacities that enable an individual to adapt and
thrive in any given environment they ﬁnd themselves in, and those cognitive
capacities include things like memory and retrieval, and problem solving and so
forth. There’s a cluster of cognitive abilities that lead to successful adaptation
to a wide range of environments.” D. K. Simonton [33]

26. “Intelligence is part of the internal environment that shows through at the
interface between person and external environment as a function of cognitive
task demands.” R. E. Snow quoted in [34]

27. “. . . I prefer to refer to it as ‘successful intelligence.’ And the reason is that the
emphasis is on the use of your intelligence to achieve success in your life. So
I deﬁne it as your skill in achieving whatever it is you want to attain in your
life within your sociocultural context — meaning that people have diﬀerent
goals for themselves, and for some it’s to get very good grades in school and to
do well on tests, and for others it might be to become a very good basketball
player or actress or musician.” R. J. Sternberg [36]

28. “. . . the ability to undertake activities that are characterized by (1) diﬃculty,
(2) complexity, (3) abstractness, (4) economy, (5) adaptedness to goal, (6)
social value, and (7) the emergence of originals, and to maintain such activities
under conditions that demand a concentration of energy and a resistance to
emotional forces.” Stoddard

6

29. “The ability to carry on abstract thinking.” L. M. Terman quoted in [35]

30. “Intelligence, considered as a mental trait, is the capacity to make impulses
focal at their early, unﬁnished stage of formation. Intelligence is therefore the
capacity for abstraction, which is an inhibitory process.” L. L. Thurstone [37]

31. “The capacity to inhibit an instinctive adjustment, the capacity to redeﬁne
the inhibited instinctive adjustment in the light of imaginally experienced trial
and error, and the capacity to realise the modiﬁed instinctive adjustment in
overt behavior to the advantage of the individual as a social animal.” L. L.
Thurstone quoted in [35]

32. “A global concept that involves an individual’s ability to act purposefully,
think rationally, and deal eﬀectively with the environment.” D. Wechsler [40]

33. “The capacity to acquire capacity.” H. Woodrow quoted in [35]

34. “. . . the term intelligence designates a complexly interrelated assemblage of
functions, no one of which is completely or accurately known in man . . . ” R.
M. Yerkes and A. W. Yerkes [41]

35. “. . . that faculty of mind by which order is perceived in a situation previously

considered disordered.” R. W. Young quoted in [20]

4 AI researcher deﬁnitions

This section lists deﬁnitions from researchers in artiﬁcial intelligence.

1. “. . . the ability of a system to act appropriately in an uncertain environment,
where appropriate action is that which increases the probability of success, and
success is the achievement of behavioral subgoals that support the system’s
ultimate goal.” J. S. Albus [1]

2. “Any system . . . that generates adaptive behviour to meet goals in a range of

environments can be said to be intelligent.” D. Fogel [10]

3. “Achieving complex goals in complex environments” B. Goertzel [12]

4. “Intelligent systems are expected to work, and work well, in many diﬀerent
environments. Their property of intelligence allows them to maximize the
probability of success even if full knowledge of the situation is not available.
Functioning of intelligent systems cannot be considered separately from the
environment and the concrete situation including the goal.” R. R. Gudwin [15]

5. “[Performance intelligence is] the successful (i.e., goal-achieving) performance

of the system in a complicated environment.” J. A. Horst [18]

7

6. “Intelligence is the ability to use optimally limited resources – including time

– to achieve goals.” R. Kurzweil [20]

7. “Intelligence is the power to rapidly ﬁnd an adequate solution in what appears
a priori (to observers) to be an immense search space.” D. Lenat and E.
Feigenbaum [23]

8. “Intelligence measures an agent’s ability to achieve goals in a wide range of

environments.” S. Legg and M. Hutter [22]

9. “. . . doing well at a broad range of tasks is an empirical deﬁnition of ‘intelligence’ ”

H. Masum [24]

10. “Intelligence is the computational part of the ability to achieve goals in the
world. Varying kinds and degrees of intelligence occur in people, many animals
and some machines.” J. McCarthy [25]

11. “. . . the ability to solve hard problems.” M. Minsky [26]

12. “Intelligence is the ability to process information properly in a complex envi-
ronment. The criteria of properness are not predeﬁned and hence not available
beforehand. They are acquired as a result of the information processing.” H.
Nakashima [27]

13. “. . . in any real situation behavior appropriate to the ends of the system and
adaptive to the demands of the environment can occur, within some limits of
speed and complexity.” A. Newell and H. A. Simon [29]

14. “[An intelligent agent does what] is appropriate for its circumstances and its
goal, it is ﬂexible to changing environments and changing goals, it learns from
experience, and it makes appropriate choices given perceptual limitations and
ﬁnite computation.” D. Poole [31]

15. “Intelligence means getting better over time.” Schank [32]

16. “Intelligence is the ability for an information processing system to adapt to
its environment with insuﬃcient knowledge and resources.” P. Wang [39]

17. “. . . the mental ability to sustain successful life.” K. Warwick quoted in [4]

18. “. . . the essential, domain-independent skills necessary for acquiring a wide
range of domain-speciﬁc knowledge – the ability to learn anything. Achiev-
ing this with ‘artiﬁcial general intelligence’ (AGI) requires a highly adaptive,
general-purpose system that can autonomously acquire an extremely wide
range of speciﬁc knowledge and skills and can improve its own cognitive ability
through self-directed learning.” P. Voss [38]

8

5 Is a single deﬁnition possible?

In matters of deﬁnition, it is diﬃcult to argue that there is an objective sense in
which one deﬁnition could be considered to be the correct one. Nevertheless, some
deﬁnitions are clearly more concise, precise and general than others. Furthermore,
it is clear that many of the deﬁnitions listed above are strongly related to each other
and share many common features. If we scan through the deﬁnitions pulling out
commonly occurring features we ﬁnd that intelligence:

• Is a property that an individual agent has as it interacts with its environment

or environments.

• Is related to the agent’s ability to succeed or proﬁt with respect to some goal

or objective.

• Depends on how able the agent is to adapt to diﬀerent objectives and envi-

ronments.

Putting these key attributes together produces the informal deﬁnition of intelli-

gence that we have adopted,

“Intelligence measures an agent’s ability to achieve goals in a wide range
of environments.” S. Legg and M. Hutter

Features such as the ability to learn and adapt, or to understand, are implicit in
the above deﬁnition as these capacities enable an agent to succeed in a wide range
of environments. For a more comprehensive explanation, along with a mathematical
formalisation of the above deﬁnition, see [22] or our forthcoming journal paper.

References

[1] J. S. Albus. Outline for a theory of intelligence. IEEE Trans. Systems, Man

and Cybernetics, 21(3):473–509, 1991.

[2] A. Anastasi. What counselors should know about the use and interpretation
of psychological tests. Journal of Counseling and Development, 70(5):610–615,
1992.

[3] M. Anderson. Intelligence. MS Encarta online encyclopedia, 2006.

[4] A. Asohan. Leading humanity forward. The Star, October 14, 2003.

[5] A. Binet and T. Simon. Methodes nouvelles por le diagnostic du niveai intel-

lectuel des anormaux. L’Ann´ee Psychologique, 11:191–244, 1905.

9

[6] W. V. Bingham. Aptitudes and aptitude testing. Harper & Brothers, New York,

1937.

[7] E. G. Boring. Intelligence as the tests test it. New Republic, 35:35–37, 1923.

[8] C. L. Burt. The causes and treatments of backwardness. University of London

press, 1957.

[9] J. Drever. A dictionary of psychology. Penguin Books, Harmondsworth, 1952.

[10] D. B. Fogel. Review of computational intelligence: Imitating life. Proc. of the

IEEE, 83(11), 1995.

[11] H. Gardner. Frames of Mind: Theory of multiple intelligences. Fontana Press,

1993.

[12] B. Goertzel. The Hidden Pattern. Brown Walker Press, 2006.

[13] L. S. Gottfredson. Mainstream science on intelligence: An editorial with 52

signatories, history, and bibliography. Intelligence, 24(1):13–23, 1997.

[14] R. L. Gregory. The Oxford Companion to the Mind. Oxford University Press,

Oxford, UK, 1998.

[15] R. R. Gudwin. Evaluating intelligence: A computational semiotics perspective.
In IEEE International conference on systems, man and cybernetics, pages 2080–
2085, Nashville, Tenessee, USA, 2000.

[16] V. A. C. Henmon. The measurement of intelligence. School and Society, 13:151–

158, 1921.

[17] R. J. Herrnstein and C. Murray. The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Struc-

ture in American Life. Free Press, 1996.

[18] J. Horst. A native intelligence metric for artiﬁcial systems.

In Performance

Metrics for Intelligent Systems Workshop, Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 2002.

[19] M. Hutter. Universal Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Sequential Decisions based
300 pages,

Springer, Berlin,

2005.

on Algorithmic Probability.
http://www.hutter1.net/ai/uaibook.htm.

[20] R. Kurzweil. The age of spiritual machines: When computers exceed human

intelligence. Penguin, 2000.

[21] S. Legg and M. Hutter.

A collection of deﬁnitions of

intelligence.

http://www.idsia.ch/∼shane/intelligence.html.

10

[22] S. Legg and M. Hutter. A formal measure of machine intelligence. In Proc.
15th Annual Machine Learning Conference of Belgium and The Netherlands
(Benelearn’06), pages 73–80, Ghent, 2006.

[23] D. Lenat and E. Feigenbaum. On the thresholds of knowledge. Artiﬁcial Intel-

ligence, 47:185–250, 1991.

[24] H. Masum, S. Christensen, and F. Oppacher. The Turing ratio: Metrics for
open-ended tasks. In GECCO 2002: Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolution-
ary Computation Conference, pages 973–980, New York, 2002. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers.

[25] J.

McCarthy.

artiﬁcial
www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/whatisai/whatisai.html, 2004.

What

is

intelligence?

[26] M. Minsky. The Society of Mind. Simon and Schuster, New York, 1985.

[27] H. Nakashima. AI as complex information processing. Minds and machines,

9:57–80, 1999.

[28] U. Neisser, G. Boodoo, T. J. Bouchard, Jr., A. W. Boykin, N. Brody, S. J.
Ceci, D. F. Halpern, J. C. Loehlin, R. Perloﬀ, R. J. Sternberg, and S. Urbina.
Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns. American Psychologist, 51(2):77–101, 96.

[29] A. Newell and H. A. Simon. Computer science as empirical enquiry: Symbols

and search. Communications of the ACM 19, 3:113–126, 1976.

[30] J. Piaget. The psychology of intelligence. Routledge, New York, 1963.

[31] D. Poole, A. Mackworth, and R. Goebel. Computational Intelligence: A logical

approach. Oxford University Press, New York, NY, USA, 1998.

[32] R. Schank. Where’s the AI? AI magazine, 12(4):38–49, 1991.

[33] D. K. Simonton. An interview with Dr. Simonton. In J. A. Plucker, editor,
Human intelligence: Historical inﬂuences, current controversies, teaching re-
sources. http://www.indiana.edu/∼ intell, 2003.

[34] J. Slatter. Assessment of children: Cognitive applications. Jermone M. Satler

Publisher Inc., San Diego, 4th edition, 2001.

[35] R. J. Sternberg, editor. Handbook of Intelligence. Cambridge University Press,

2000.

[36] R. J. Sternberg. An interview with Dr. Sternberg.

In J. A. Plucker, editor,
Human intelligence: Historical inﬂuences, current controversies, teaching re-
sources. http://www.indiana.edu/∼ intell, 2003.

11

[37] L. L. Thurstone. The nature of intelligence. Routledge, London, 1924.

[38] P. Voss. Essentials of general

In
B. Goertzel and C. Pennachin, editors, Artiﬁcial General Intelligence. Springer-
Verlag, 2005.

intelligence: The direct path to AGI.

[39] P. Wang. On the working deﬁnition of intelligence. Technical Report 94, Center

for Research on Concepts and Cognition, Indiana University, 1995.

[40] D. Wechsler. The measurement and appraisal of adult intelligence. Williams &

Wilkinds, Baltimore, 4 edition, 1958.

[41] R. M. Yerkes and A. W. Yerkes. The great apes: A study of anthropoid life.

Yale University Press, New Haven, 1929.

12

