Contemporary Mathematics

8
0
0
2

y
a
M
8

A beginner’s guide to forcing

Timothy Y. Chow

Dedicated to Joseph Gallian on his 65th birthday

]

O
L
.
h
t
a
m

[

2
v
0
2
3
1
.
2
1
7
0
:
v
i
X
r
a

1. Introduction

In 1963, Paul Cohen stunned the mathematical world with his new technique of
forcing, which allowed him to solve several outstanding problems in set theory at a
single stroke. Perhaps most notably, he proved the independence of the continuum
hypothesis (CH) from the Zermelo-Fraenkel-Choice (ZFC) axioms of set theory. The
impact of Cohen’s ideas on the practice of set theory, as well as on the philosophy
of mathematics, has been incalculable.

Curiously, though, despite the importance of Cohen’s work and the passage of
nearly ﬁfty years, forcing remains totally mysterious to the vast majority of math-
ematicians, even those who know a little mathematical logic. As an illustration,
let us note that Monastyrsky’s outstanding book [11] gives highly informative and
insightful expositions of the work of almost every Fields Medalist—but says almost
nothing about forcing. Although there exist numerous textbooks with mathemat-
ically correct and complete proofs of the basic theorems of forcing, the subject
remains notoriously diﬃcult for beginners to learn.

All mathematicians are familiar with the concept of an open research problem.
I propose the less familiar concept of an open exposition problem. Solving an open
exposition problem means explaining a mathematical subject in a way that renders
it totally perspicuous. Every step should be motivated and clear; ideally, students
should feel that they could have arrived at the results themselves. The proofs
should be “natural” in Donald Newman’s sense [13]:

This term . . . is introduced to mean not having any ad hoc con-
structions or brilliancies. A “natural” proof, then, is one which
proves itself, one available to the “common mathematician in the
streets.”

I believe that it is an open exposition problem to explain forcing. Current
treatments allow readers to verify the truth of the basic theorems, and to progress
fairly rapidly to the point where they can use forcing to prove their own indepen-
dence results (see [2] for a particularly nice explanation of how to use forcing as a

2000 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. Primary 03E35; secondary 03E40, 00-01.

1

c(cid:13)0000 (copyright holder)

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

TIMOTHY Y. CHOW

black box to turn independence questions into concrete combinatorial problems).
However, in all treatments that I know of, one is left feeling that only a genius with
fantastic intuition or technical virtuosity could have found the road to the ﬁnal
result.

This paper does not solve this open exposition problem, but I believe it is a
step in the right direction. My goal is to give a rapid overview of the subject,
emphasizing the broad outlines and the intuitive motivation while omitting most
of the proofs. The reader will not, of course, master forcing by reading this paper
in isolation without consulting standard textbooks for the omitted details, but
my hope is to provide a map of the forest so that the beginner will not get lost
while forging through the trees. Currently, no such bird’s-eye overview seems to be
available in the published literature; I hope to ﬁll this gap. I also hope that this
paper will inspire others to continue the job of making forcing totally transparent.

2. Executive summary

The negation of CH says that there is a cardinal number, ℵ1, between the
cardinal numbers ℵ0 and 2ℵ0 . One might therefore try to build a structure that
satisﬁes the negation of CH by starting with something that does satisfy CH (G¨odel
had in fact constructed such structures) and “inserting” some sets that are missing.
The fundamental theorem of forcing is that, under very general conditions, one
can indeed start with a mathematical structure M that satisﬁes the ZFC axioms,
and enlarge it by adjoining a new element U to obtain a new structure M [U ] that
also satisﬁes ZFC. Conceptually, this process is analogous to the process of adjoining
a new element X to, say, a given ring R to obtain a larger ring R[X]. However,
the construction of M [U ] is a lot more complicated because the axioms of ZFC
are more complicated than the axioms for a ring. Cohen’s idea was to build the
new element U one step at a time, tracking what new properties of M [U ] would be
“forced” to hold at each step, so that one could control the properties of M [U ]—in
particular, making it satisfy the negation of CH as well as the axioms of ZFC.
The rest of this paper ﬂeshes out the above construction in more detail.

3. Models of ZFC

As mentioned above, Cohen proved the independence of CH from ZFC; more
precisely, he proved that if ZFC is consistent, then CH is not a logical consequence
of the ZFC axioms. G¨odel had already proved that if ZFC is consistent, then
¬CH, the negation of CH, is not a logical consequence of ZFC, using his concept
of “constructible sets.” (Note that the hypothesis that ZFC is consistent cannot
be dropped, because if ZFC is inconsistent then everything is a logical consequence
of ZFC!)

Just how does one go about proving that CH is not a logical consequence
of ZFC? At a very high level, the structure of the proof is what you would expect:
One writes down a very precise statement of the ZFC axioms and of ¬CH, and then
one constructs a mathematical structure that satisﬁes both ZFC and ¬CH. This
structure is said to be a model of the axioms. Although the term “model” is not
often seen in mathematics outside of formal logic, it is actually a familiar concept.
For example, in group theory, a “model of the group-theoretic axioms” is just a
group, i.e., a set G with a binary operation ∗ satisfying axioms such as: “There
exists an element e in G such that x ∗ e = e ∗ x = x for all x in G,” and so forth.

A BEGINNER’S GUIDE TO FORCING

3

Analogously, we could invent a term—say, universe—to mean “a structure that
is a model of ZFC.” Then we could begin our study of ZFC with deﬁnition such as,
“A universe is a set M together with a binary relation R satisfying. . . ” followed
by a long list of axioms such as the axiom of extensionality:

If x and y are distinct elements of M then either there exists z in
M such that zRx but not zRy, or there exists z in M such that
zRy but not zRx.

Another axiom of ZFC is the powerset axiom:

For every x in M , there exists y in M with the following property:
For every z in M , zRy if and only if z ⊆ x.

(Here the expression “z ⊆ x” is an abbreviation for “every w in M satisfying wRz
also satisﬁes wRx.”) There are other axioms, which can be found in any set theory
textbook, but the general idea should be clear from these two examples. Note
that the binary relation is usually denoted by the symbol ∈ since the axioms are
inspired by the set membership relation. However, we have deliberately chosen the
unfamiliar symbol R to ensure that the reader will not misinterpret the axiom by
accidentally reading ∈ as “is a member of.”

As an aside, we should mention that it is not standard to use the term universe
to mean “model of ZFC.” For some reason set theorists tend to give a snappy name
like “ZFC” to a list of axioms, and then use the term “model of ZFC” to refer
to the structures that satisfy the axioms, whereas in the rest of mathematics it is
the other way around: one gives a snappy name like “group” to the structure, and
then uses the term “axioms for a group” to refer to the axioms. Apart from this
terminological point, though, the formal setup here is entirely analogous to that of
group theory. For example, in group theory, the statement S that “x ∗ y = y ∗ x
for all x and y” is not a logical consequence of the axioms of group theory, because
there exists a mathematical structure—namely a non-abelian group—that satisﬁes
the group axioms as well as the negation of S.

On the other hand, the deﬁnition of a model of ZFC has some curious features,

so a few additional remarks are in order.

3.1. Apparent circularity. One common confusion about models of ZFC
stems from a tacit expectation that some people have, namely that we are supposed
to suspend all our preconceptions about sets when beginning the study of ZFC. For
example, it may have been a surprise to some readers to see that a universe is deﬁned
to be a set together with. . . . Wait a minute—what is a set? Isn’t it circular to
deﬁne sets in terms of sets?

In fact, we are not deﬁning sets in terms of sets, but universes in terms of sets.
Once we see that all we are doing is studying a subject called “universe theory”
(rather than “set theory”), the apparent circularity disappears.

The reader may still be bothered by the lingering feeling that the point of in-
troducing ZFC is to “make set theory rigorous” or to examine the foundations of
mathematics. While it is true that ZFC can be used as a tool for such philosophical
investigations, we do not do so in this paper. Instead, we take for granted that or-
dinary mathematical reasoning—including reasoning about sets—is perfectly valid
and does not suddenly become invalid when the object of study is ZFC. That is,
we approach the study of ZFC and its models in the same way that one approaches
the study of any other mathematical subject. This is the best way to grasp the

4

TIMOTHY Y. CHOW

mathematical content; after this is achieved, one can then try to apply the technical
results to philosophical questions if one is so inclined.

Note that in accordance with our attitude that ordinary mathematical reason-
ing is perfectly valid, we will freely employ reasoning about inﬁnite sets of the kind
that is routinely used in mathematics. We reassure readers who harbor philosophi-
cal doubts about the validity of inﬁnitary set-theoretic reasoning that Cohen’s proof
can be turned into a purely ﬁnitistic one. We will not delve into such metamathe-
matical niceties here, but see for example the beginning of Chapter VII of Kunen’s
book [10].

3.2. Existence of examples. A course in group theory typically begins with
many examples of groups. One then veriﬁes that the examples satisfy all the axioms
of group theory. Here we encounter an awkward feature of models of ZFC, which
is that exhibiting explicit models of ZFC is diﬃcult. For example, there are no
ﬁnite models of ZFC. Worse, by a result known as the completeness theorem, the
statement that ZFC has any models at all is equivalent to the statement that ZFC
is consistent, which is an assumption that is at least mildly controversial. So how
can we even get oﬀ the ground?

Fortunately, these diﬃculties are not as severe as they might seem at ﬁrst. For
example, one entity that is almost a model of ZFC is V , the class of all sets. If we
take M = V and we take R to mean “is a member of,” then we see that the axiom
of extensionality simply says that two sets are equal if and only if they contain the
same elements—a manifestly true statement. The rest of the axioms of ZFC are
similarly self-evident when M = V .1 The catch is that a model of ZFC has to be a
set, and V , being “too large” to be a set (Cantor’s paradox), is a proper class and
therefore, strictly speaking, is disqualiﬁed from being a model of ZFC. However, it
is close enough to being a model of ZFC to be intuitively helpful.

As for possible controversy over whether ZFC is consistent, we can sidestep the
issue simply by treating the consistency of ZFC like any other unproved statement,
such as the Riemann hypothesis. That is, we can assume it freely as long as we
remember to preface all our theorems with a conditional clause.2 So from now on
we shall assume that ZFC is consistent, and therefore that models of ZFC exist.

3.3. “Standard” models. Even granting the consistency of ZFC, it is not
easy to produce models. One can extract an example from the proof of the complete-
ness theorem, but this example is unnatural and is not of much use for tackling CH.
Instead of continuing the search for explicit examples, we shall turn our attention
to important properties of models of ZFC.

One important insight of Cohen’s was that it is useful to consider what he called
standard models of ZFC. A model M of ZFC is standard if the elements of M are
well-founded sets and if the relation R is ordinary set membership. Well-founded
sets are sets that are built up inductively from the empty set, using operations such
as taking unions, subsets, powersets, etc. Thus the empty set {} is well-founded, as
are {{}} and the inﬁnite set {{}, {{}}, {{{}}}, . . .}. They are called “well-founded”
because the nature of their inductive construction precludes any well-founded set
from being a member of itself. We emphasize that if M is standard, then the

1Except, perhaps, the axiom of regularity, but this is a technical quibble that we shall ignore.
2In fact, we already did this when we said that the precise statement of Cohen’s result is

that if ZFC is consistent then CH is not a logical consequence of ZFC.

A BEGINNER’S GUIDE TO FORCING

5

elements of M are not amorphous “atoms,” as some of us envisage the elements
of an abstract group to be, but are sets. Moreover, well-founded sets are not
themselves built up from “atoms”; it’s “sets all the way down.”

While it is fairly clear that if standard models of ZFC exist, then they form
a natural class of examples, it is not at all clear that any standard models exist
at all, even if ZFC is consistent.3 (The class of all well-founded sets is a proper
class and not a set and hence is disqualiﬁed.) Moreover, even if standard models
exist, one might think that constructing a model of ZFC satisfying ¬CH might
require considering “exotic” models in which the binary relation R bears very little
resemblance to ordinary set membership. Cohen himself admits on page 108 of [6]
that a minor leap of faith is involved here:

Since the negation of CH or AC may appear to be somewhat un-
natural one might think it hopeless to look for standard models.
However, we make a ﬁrm decision at the point to consider only
standard models. Although this may seem like a very severe lim-
itation in our approach it will turn out that this very limitation
will guide us in suggesting possibilities.

Another property that a model of ZFC can have is transitivity. A standard
model M of ZFC is transitive if every member of an element of M is also an
element of M . (The term transitive is used because we can write the condition in
the suggestive form “x ∈ y and y ∈ M implies x ∈ M .”) This is a natural condition
to impose if we think of M as a universe consisting of “all that there is”; in such a
universe, sets “should” be sets of things that already exist in the universe. Cohen’s
remark about standard models applies equally to transitive models.4

Our focus will be primarily on standard transitive models. Of course, this
choice of focus is made with the beneﬁt of hindsight, but even without the beneﬁt
of hindsight, it makes sense to study models with natural properties before studying
exotic models. When M is a standard transitive model, we will often use the symbol
∈ for the relation R, because in this case R is in fact set membership.

4. Powersets and absoluteness

At some point in their education, most mathematicians learn that all familiar
mathematical objects can be deﬁned in terms of sets. For example, one can deﬁne
the number 0 to be the empty set {}, the number 1 to be the set {0}, and in general
the number n to be the so-called von Neumann ordinal {0, 1, . . . , n−1}. The set N of
all natural numbers may be deﬁned to be ℵ0, the set of all von Neumann ordinals.5
Note that with these deﬁnitions, the membership relation on ℵ0 corresponds to the
usual ordering on the natural numbers (this is why n is deﬁned as {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}
rather than as {n − 1}). The ordered pair (x, y) may be deﬁned `a la Kuratowski
as the set {{x}, {x, y}}. Functions, relations, bijections, maps, etc., can be deﬁned
as certain sets of ordered pairs. More interesting mathematical structures can be
deﬁned as ordered pairs (X, S) where X is an underlying set and S is the structure

3It turns out that the existence of a standard model of ZFC is indeed a stronger assumption

than the consistency of ZFC, but we will ignore this nicety.

4We remark in passing that the Mostowski collapsing theorem implies that if there exist any

standard models of ZFC, then there exist standard transitive models.

5We elide the distinction between the cardinality ℵ0 of N and the order type ω of N.

6

TIMOTHY Y. CHOW

on X. With this understanding, the class V of all sets may be thought of as being
the entire mathematical universe.

Models of ZFC, like everything else, live inside V , but they are special because
they look a lot like V itself. This is because it turns out that virtually all mathe-
matical proofs of the existence of some object X in V can be mimicked by a proof
from the ZFC axioms, thereby proving that any model of ZFC must contain an
object that is at least highly analogous to X. It turns out that this “analogue”
of X is often equal to X, especially when M is a standard transitive model. For
example, it turns out that every standard transitive model M of ZFC contains all
the von Neumann ordinals as well as ℵ0.

However, the analogue of a mathematical object X is not always equal to X.
A crucial counterexample is the powerset of ℵ0, denoted by 2ℵ0. Na¨ıvely, one might
suppose that the powerset axiom of ZFC guarantees that 2ℵ0 must be a member
of any standard transitive model M . But let us look more closely at the precise
statement of the powerset axiom. Given that ℵ0 is in M , the powerset axiom
guarantees the existence of y in M with the following property: For every z in M ,
z ∈ y if and only if every w in M satisfying w ∈ z also satisﬁes w ∈ ℵ0. Now, does
it follow that y is precisely the set of all subsets of ℵ0?

No. First of all, it is not even immediately clear that z is a subset of ℵ0; the
axiom does not require that every w satisfying w ∈ z also satisﬁes w ∈ ℵ0; it
requires only that every w in M satisfying w ∈ z satisﬁes w ∈ x. However, under
our assumption that M is transitive, every w ∈ z is in fact in M , so indeed z is a
subset of ℵ0.

More importantly, though, y does not contain every subset of ℵ0; it contains
only those subsets of x that are in M . So if, for example, M happens to be countable
(i.e., M contains only countably many elements), then y will be countable, and so
a fortiori y cannot be equal to 2ℵ0 , since 2ℵ0 is uncountable. The set y, which we
might call the powerset of ℵ0 in M , is not the same as the “real” powerset of ℵ0,
a.k.a. 2ℵ0 ; many subsets of ℵ0 are “missing” from y.

This is a subtle and important point, so let us explore it further. We may ask,
is it really possible for a standard transitive model of ZFC to be countable? Can we
not mimic (in ZFC) Cantor’s famous proof that 2ℵ0 is uncountable to show that M
must contain an uncountable set, and then conclude by transitivity that M itself
must be uncountable?

The answer is no. Cantor’s theorem states that there is no bijection between ℵ0
and 2ℵ0. If we carefully mimic Cantor’s proof with a proof from the ZFC axioms,
then we ﬁnd that Cantor’s theorem tells us that there is indeed a set y in M that
plays the role of the powerset of ℵ0 in M , and that there is no bijection in M
between ℵ0 and y. However, this fact does not mean that there is no bijection at all
between ℵ0 and y. There might be a bijection in V between them; we know only
that such a bijection cannot be a member of M ; it is “missing” from M . So Cantor’s
theorem does not exclude the possibility that y, as well as M , is countable, even
though y is necessarily “uncountable in M .”6 It turns out that something stronger
can be said: the so-called L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem says that if there are any
models of ZFC at all, then in fact there exist countable models.

More generally, one says that a concept in V is absolute if it coincides with its
counterpart in M . For example, “the empty set,” “is a member of,” “is a subset of,”

6This curious state of aﬀairs often goes by the name of Skolem’s paradox.

A BEGINNER’S GUIDE TO FORCING

7

“is a bijection,” and “ℵ0” all turn out to be absolute for standard transitive models.
On the other hand, “is the powerset of” and “uncountable” are not absolute. For
a concept that is not absolute, we must distinguish carefully between the concept
“in the real world” (i.e., in V ) and the concept in M .

A careful study of ZFC necessarily requires keeping track of exactly which con-
cepts are absolute and which are not. However, since the majority of basic concepts
are absolute, except for those associated with taking powersets and cardinalities, in
this paper we will adopt the approach of mentioning non-absoluteness only when
it is especially relevant.

5. How one might try to build a model satisfying ¬CH

The somewhat counterintuitive fact that ZFC has countable models with many
missing subsets provides a hint as to how one might go about constructing a model
for ZFC that satisﬁes ¬CH. Start with a countable standard transitive model M .
The elementary theory of cardinal numbers tells us that there is always a smallest
cardinal number after any given cardinal number, so let ℵ1, ℵ2, . . . denote the next
largest cardinals after ℵ0. As usual we can mimic the proofs of these facts about
cardinal numbers with formal proofs from the axioms of ZFC, to conclude that
there is a set in M that plays the role of ℵ2 in M . We denote this set by ℵM
2 .
Let us now construct a function F from the Cartesian product ℵM
2 × ℵ0 into the
set 2 = {0, 1}. We may interpret F as a sequence of functions from ℵ0 into 2.
Because M is countable and transitive, so is ℵM
2 ; thus we can easily arrange for
these functions to be pairwise distinct. Now, if F is already in M , then M satisﬁes
¬CH! The reason is that functions from ℵ0 into 2 can be identiﬁed with subsets
of ℵ0, and F therefore shows us that the powerset of ℵ0 in M must be at least ℵ2
in M . Done!

But what if F is missing from M ? A natural idea is to add F to M to obtain a
larger model of ZFC, that we might call M [F ].7 The hope would be that F can be
added in a way that does not “disturb” the structure of M too much, so that the
argument in the previous paragraph can be carried over into M [F ], which would
therefore satisfy ¬CH.

Miraculously, this seemingly na¨ıve idea actually works! There are, of course,
numerous technical obstacles to be surmounted, but the basic plan as outlined above
is on the right track. For those who like to think algebraically, it is quite appealing
to learn that forcing is a technique for constructing new models from old ones by
adjoining a new element that is missing from the original model. Even without any
further details, one can already imagine that the ability to adjoin new elements to
an existing model gives us enormous ﬂexibility in our quest to create models with
desired properties. And indeed, this is true; it is the reason why forcing is such a
powerful idea.

What technical obstacles need to be surmounted? The ﬁrst thing to note is
that one clearly cannot add only the set F to M and expect to obtain a model
of ZFC; one must also add, at minimum, every set that is “constructible” from F
together with elements of M , just as when we create an extension of an algebraic

7Later on we will use the notation M [U ] rather than M [F ] because it will turn out to be
more natural to think of the larger model as being obtained by adjoining another set U that is
closely related to F , rather than by adjoining F itself. For our purposes, M [U ] and M [F ] can just
be thought of as two diﬀerent names for the same object.

8

TIMOTHY Y. CHOW

object by adjoining x, we must also adjoin everything that is generated by x. We
will not deﬁne “constructible” precisely here, but it is the same concept that G¨odel
used to prove that CH is consistent with ZFC, and in particular it was already a
familiar concept before Cohen came onto the scene.

A more serious obstacle is that it turns out that we cannot, for example, simply
take an arbitrary subset a of ℵ0 that is missing from M and adjoin a, along with
everything constructible from a together with elements of M , to M ; the result will
not necessarily be a model of ZFC. A full explanation of this result would take
us too far aﬁeld—the interested reader should see page 111 of Cohen’s book [6]—
but the rough idea is that we could perversely choose a to be a set that encodes
explicit information about the size of M , so that adjoining a would create a kind
of self-referential paradox. Cohen goes on to say:

Thus a must have certain special properties. . . . Rather than de-
scribe a directly, it is better to examine the various properties of a
and determine which are desirable and which are not. The chief
point is that we do not wish a to contain “special” information
about M , which can only be seen from the outside. . . . The a
which we construct will be referred to as a “generic” set relative
to M . The idea is that all the properties of a must be “forced” to
hold merely on the basis that a behaves like a “generic” set in M .
This concept of deciding when a statement about a is “forced” to
hold is the key point of the construction.

Cohen then proceeds to explain the forcing concept, but at this point we will diverge
from Cohen’s account and pursue instead the concept of a Boolean-valued model
of ZFC. This approach was developed by Scott, Solovay, and Vopˇenka starting in
1965, and in my opinion is the most intuitive way to proceed at this juncture. We
will return to Cohen’s approach later.

6. Boolean-valued models

To recap, we have reached the point where we see that if we want to construct
a model of ¬CH, it would be nice to have a method of starting with an arbitrary
standard transitive model M of ZFC, and building a new structure by adjoining
some subsets that are missing from M . We explain next how this can be done,
but instead of giving the construction right away, we will work our way up to it
gradually.

6.1. Motivational discussion. Inspired by Cohen’s suggestion, we begin by
considering all possible statements that might be true of our new structure, and
then deciding which ones we want to hold and which one we do not want to hold.
To make the concept of “all possible statements” precise, we must introduce
the concept of a formal language. Let S denote the set of all sentences in the ﬁrst-
order language of set theory, i.e., all sentences built out of “atomic” statements
such as x = y and xRy (where x and y are constant symbols that each represent
some ﬁxed element of the domain) using the Boolean connectives OR, AND, and
NOT and the quantiﬁers ∃ and ∀. The axioms of ZFC can all be expressed in this
formal language, as can any theorems (or non-theorems, for that matter) of ZFC.
For example, “if A then B” (written A → B) can be expressed as (NOT A) OR B,
“A iﬀ B” (written A ↔ B) can be expressed as (A → B) AND (B → A), “x is

A BEGINNER’S GUIDE TO FORCING

9

a subset of y” (written x ⊆ y) can be expressed as ∀z ((zRx) → (zRy)), and the
powerset axiom can be expressed as

∀x ∃y ∀z ((z ⊆ x) ↔ (zRy)).

An important observation is that when choosing which sentences in S we want
to hold in our new structure, we are subject to certain constraints. For example, if
the sentences φ and ψ hold, then the sentence φ AND ψ must also hold. A natural
way to track these constraints is by means of a Boolean algebra. The most familiar
example of a Boolean algebra is the family 2S of all subsets of a given set S, partially
ordered by inclusion. More generally, a Boolean algebra is any partially ordered set
with a minimum element 0 and a maximum element 1, in which any two elements
x and y have a least upper bound x ∨ y and a greatest lower bound x ∧ y (in the
example of 2S, ∨ is set union and ∧ is set intersection), where ∨ and ∧ distribute
over each other (i.e., x ∨ (y ∧ z) = (x ∨ y) ∧ (x ∨ z) and x ∧ (y ∨ z) = (x ∧ y) ∨ (x ∧ z))
and every element x has a complement, i.e., an element x∗ such that x ∨ x∗ = 1
and x ∧ x∗ = 0.

There is a natural correspondence between the concepts 0, 1, ∨, ∧, and ∗ in
a Boolean algebra and the concepts of falsehood, truth, OR, AND, and NOT in
logic. This observation suggests that if we know that we want certain statements
of S to hold in our new structure but are unsure of others, then we can try to
record our state of partial knowledge by picking a suitable Boolean algebra B, and
mapping every sentence φ ∈ S to some element of B that we denote by [[φ]]
. If φ
B
= 1 and if φ is “deﬁnitely false” then we set
is “deﬁnitely true” then we set [[φ]]
takes on some intermediate value between 0 and 1. In a
[[φ]]
sense, we are developing a kind of “multi-valued logic” or “fuzzy logic”8 in which
some statements are neither true nor false but lie somewhere in between.

= 0; otherwise, [[φ]]

B

B

B

B

B

(6.1)

(6.2)

(6.3)

= [[φ]]

= [[φ]]

= ([[φ]]

[[NOT φ]]

B
and [[xRy]]

should satisfy the conditions

It is clear that the mapping φ 7→ [[φ]]
B
[[φ OR ψ]]
B
[[φ AND ψ]]
B

B
∨ [[ψ]]
B
∧ [[ψ]]
B
)∗
B
What about atomic expressions such as [[x = y]]
? Again, if we deﬁ-
nitely want certain equalities or membership statements to hold but want to post-
pone judgment on others, then we are led to the idea of tracking these statements
using a structure consisting of “fuzzy sets.” To make this precise, let us ﬁrst observe
that an ordinary set may be identiﬁed with a function whose range is the trivial
Boolean algebra with just two elements 0 and 1, and that sends the members of
the set to 1 and the non-members to 0. Generalizing, if B is an arbitrary Boolean
algebra, then a “fuzzy set” should take a set of “potential members,” which should
themselves be fuzzy sets, and assign each potential member y a value in B corre-
sponding to the “degree” to which y is a member of x. More precisely, we deﬁne a
a B-valued set to be a function from a set of B-valued sets to B. (Deﬁning B-valued
sets in terms of B-valued sets might appear circular, but the solution is to note
that the empty set is a B-valued set; we can then build up other B-valued sets
inductively.)

B

8We use scare quotes as these terms, and the term “fuzzy set” that we use later, have meanings

in the literature that are rather diﬀerent from the ideas that we are trying to convey here.

10

TIMOTHY Y. CHOW

6.2. Construction of M B. We are now in a position to describe more pre-
cisely our plan for constructing a new model of ZFC from a given model M . We
pick a suitable Boolean algebra B, and we let M B be the set of all B-valued sets
in M . The set S should have one constant symbol for each element of M B. We
B
from S to B, which should obey equations such as (6.1)–
deﬁne a a map φ 7→ [[φ]]
(6.3) and should send the axioms of ZFC to 1. The structure M B will be a so-called
Boolean-valued model of ZFC; it will not actually be a model of ZFC, because it
will consist of “fuzzy sets” and not sets, and if you pick an arbitrary φ ∈ S and
ask whether it holds in M B, then the answer will often be neither “yes” nor “no”
but some element of B (whereas if N is an actual model of ZFC then either N
satisﬁes φ or it doesn’t). On the other hand, M B will satisfy ZFC, in the sense that
= 1 for every φ in ZFC. To turn M B into an actual model of ZFC with desired
[[φ]]
properties, we will take a suitable quotient of M B that eliminates the fuzziness.

We have already started to describe M B and the map [[·]]

, but we are not done.
For example, we need to deal with expressions involving the quantiﬁers ∃ and ∀.
These may not appear to have a direct counterpart in the formalism of Boolean
algebras, but notice that another way to say that there exists x with a certain
property is to say that either a has the property or b has the property or c has
the property or. . . , where we enumerate all the entities in the universe one by one.
This observation leads us to the deﬁnition

B

B

(6.4)

[[∃x φ(x)]]

B

B

[[φ(a)]]

= _
a∈M B

Now there is a potential problem with (6.4): In an arbitrary Boolean algebra, an
inﬁnite subset of elements may not have a least upper bound, so the right-hand
side of (6.4) may not be deﬁned. We solve this problem by ﬁat: First we deﬁne
a complete Boolean algebra to be a Boolean algebra in which arbitrary subsets of
elements have a least upper bound and a greatest lower bound. We then require
that B be a complete Boolean algebra; then (6.4) makes perfect sense, as does the
equation

(6.5)

[[∀x φ(x)]]

B

B

[[φ(a)]]

= ^
a∈M B

B
or [[x = y]]

Equations (6.4) and (6.5) take care of ∃ and ∀, but we have still not deﬁned
B
B
, or ensured that M B satisﬁes ZFC. The deﬁnitions of [[x = y]]
[[xRy]]
B
and [[xRy]]
are surprisingly delicate; there are many plausible attempts that fail
for subtle reasons. The impatient reader can safely skim the details in the next
paragraph and just accept the ﬁnal equations (6.6)–(6.7).

We follow the treatment on pages 22–23 in Bell’s book [3], which motivates the
B
deﬁnitions of [[x = y]]
by listing several equations that one would like
to hold and inferring what the deﬁnitions “must” be. First, we want the axiom of
extensionality to hold in M B; this suggests the equation

B
and [[xRy]]

B
[[x = y]]

= [[(∀w (wRx → wRy)) AND (∀w (wRy → wRx))]]

B

.

Another plausible equation is
B
[[xRy]]

= [[∃w ((wRy) AND (w = x))]]

B

.

It is also plausible that the expression [[∃w ((wRy) AND φ(w))]]
only on the values of [[φ(w)]]

should depend
for those w that are actually in the domain of y

B

B

A BEGINNER’S GUIDE TO FORCING

11

(recall that y, being a B-valued set, is a function from a set of B-valued sets to B,
should be closely related
and thus has a domain dom(y)). Also, the value of [[wRy]]
to the value of y(w). We are thus led to the equations

B

[[∃w (wRy AND φ(w))]]

[[∀w (wRy → φ(w))]]

B

B

= _

(cid:0)y(w) ∧ [[φ(w)]]

w∈dom(y)

= ^

(cid:0)y(w) ⇒ [[φ(w)]]

w∈dom(y)

B

(cid:1)

B

(cid:1)

where x ⇒ y is another way of writing x∗ ∨ y. All these equations drive us to the
deﬁnitions

(6.6)

(6.7)

B
[[xRy]]

= _

(cid:0)y(w) ∧ [[x = w]]

B

(cid:1)

w∈dom(y)

B
[[x = y]]

= ^

B
(cid:0)x(w) ⇒ [[wRy]]

(cid:1) ∧ ^

(cid:0)y(w) ⇒ [[wRx]]

B

(cid:1)

w∈dom(x)

w∈dom(y)

B

B
The deﬁnitions (6.6) and (6.7) again appear circular, because they deﬁne [[x = y]]
and [[xRy]]
joint inductive deﬁnition.

in terms of each other, but again (6.6) and (6.7) should be read as a

One ﬁnal remark is needed regarding the deﬁnition of M B. So far we have not
imposed any constraints on B other than that it be a complete Boolean algebra.
But without some such constraints, there is no guarantee that M B will satisfy ZFC.
For example, let us see what happens with the powerset axiom. Given x in M B, it
is natural to construct the powerset y of x in M B by letting

dom(y) = Bdom(x),
i.e., the “potential members” of y should be precisely the maps from dom(x) to B.
B
Moreover, for each w ∈ dom(y), the value of y(w) should be [[w ⊆ x]]
. The catch
is that if B is not in M , then maps from dom(x) to B may not be B-valued sets
in M . The simplest way out of this diﬃculty is to require that B be in M , and
we shall indeed require this.9 Once we impose this condition, we can weaken the
requirement that B be a complete Boolean algebra to the requirement that B be
a complete Boolean algebra in M , meaning that inﬁnite least upper bounds and
greatest lower bounds over subsets of B that are in M are guaranteed to exist,
but not necessarily in general. (“Complete,” being related to taking powersets, is
not absolute.) Examination of the deﬁnitions of M B and [[·]]
reveals that B only
needs to be a complete Boolean algebra in M , and it turns out that this increased
ﬂexibility in the choice of B is very important.

We are now done with the deﬁnition of the Boolean-valued model M B. To
summarize, we pick a Boolean algebra B in M that is complete in M , let M B be
B
the set of all B-valued sets in M , and deﬁne [[·]]

using equations (6.1)–(6.7).

At this point, one needs to perform a long veriﬁcation that M B satisﬁes ZFC,
and that the rules of logical inference behave as expected in M B (so that, for
B
= 1). We omit
= 1 and ψ is a logical consequence of φ then [[ψ]]
example, if [[φ]]
these details because they are covered well in Bell’s book [3]. Usually, as in the case

B

B

9While choosing B to be in M suﬃces to make everything work, it is not strictly neces-
sary. Class forcing involves certain carefully constructed Boolean algebras B that are not in M .
However, this is an advanced topic that is not needed for proving the independence of CH.

12

TIMOTHY Y. CHOW

of the powerset axiom above, it is not too hard to guess how to construct the object
whose existence is asserted by the ZFC axiom, using the fact that M satisﬁes ZFC,
although in some cases, completing the argument in detail can be tricky.

6.3. Modding out by an ultraﬁlter. As we stated above, the way to convert
our Boolean-valued model M B to an actual model of ZFC is to take a suitable
quotient. That is, we need to pick out precisely the statements that are true in
our new model. To do this, we choose a subset U of B that contains [[φ]]
for
every statement φ that holds in the new model of ZFC. The set U , being a “truth
deﬁnition” for our new model, has to have certain properties; for example, since for
every φ, either φ or NOT φ must hold in the new model, it follows that for all x
in B, U must contain either x or x∗. Similarly, thinking of membership in U as
representing “truth,” we see that U should have the following properties:

B

(1) 1 ∈ U ;
(2) 0 /∈ U ;
(3) if x ∈ U and y ∈ U then x ∧ y ∈ U ;
(4) if x ∈ U and x ≤ y (i.e., x ∧ y = x) then y ∈ U ;
(5) for all x in B, either x ∈ U or x∗ ∈ U .

A subset U of a Boolean algebra having the above properties is called an ultraﬁlter.
Given any ultraﬁlter U in B (U does not have to be in M ), we deﬁne the quotient
M B/U as follows. The elements of M B/U are equivalence classes of elements of M B
under the equivalence relation

x ∼U y

B
iﬀ [[x = y]]

∈ U.

If we write xU for the equivalence class of x, then the binary relation of M B/U—
which we shall denote by the symbol ∈U —is deﬁned by

xU ∈U yU

B
iﬀ [[xRy]]

∈ U.

It is now fairly straightforward to verify that M B/U is a model of ZFC; the hard
work has already been done in verifying that M B satisﬁes ZFC.

7. Generic ultraﬁlters and the conclusion of the proof sketch

At this point we have a powerful theorem in hand. We can take any model M ,
any complete Boolean algebra B in M , and any ultraﬁlter U of M , and form a new
model M B/U of ZFC. We can now experiment with various choices of M , B, and U
to construct all kinds of models of ZFC with various properties.

So let us revisit our plan (in Section 5) of starting with a standard transitive
model and inserting some missing subsets to obtain a larger standard transitive
model. If we try to use our newly constructed machinery to carry out this plan,
then we soon ﬁnd that M B/U need not, in general, be (isomorphic to) a standard
transitive model of ZFC, even if M is. Some extra conditions need to be imposed.
Cohen’s insight—perhaps his most important and ingenious one—is that in
many cases, including the case of CH, the right thing to do is to require that U
be generic. The term “generic” can be deﬁned more generally in the context of an
arbitrary partially ordered set P . First deﬁne a subset D of P to be dense if for
all p in P , there exists q in D such that q ≤ p. Then a subset of P is generic if it
intersects every dense subset. In our current setting, the partially ordered set P is
B\{0}, and the crucial condition on U is that it be M -generic (or generic over M ),
meaning that U intersects every dense subset D ⊆ (B\{0}) that is a member of M .

A BEGINNER’S GUIDE TO FORCING

13

If U is M -generic, then M B/U has many nice properties; it is (isomorphic to) a
standard transitive model of ZFC, and equally importantly, it contains U . In fact,
if U is M -generic, then M B/U is the smallest standard transitive model of ZFC that
contains both M and U . For this reason, when U is M -generic, one typically writes
M [U ] instead of M B/U. We have realized the dream of adjoining a new subset of M
to obtain a larger model (remember that U is a subset of B and we have required
B to be in M ).

It is, of course, not clear that M -generic ultraﬁlters exist in general. However,
if M is countable, then it turns out to be easy to prove the existence of M -generic
ultraﬁlters; essentially, one just lists the dense sets and hits them one by one. If
M is uncountable then the Boolean-valued model machinery still works ﬁne, but
M -generic ultraﬁlters may not exist.10 Fortunately for us, the idea sketched at the
beginning of Section 5 relies on M being countable anyway.

Let us now return to that idea and complete the proof sketch. Start with a
countable standard transitive model M of ZFC. If M does not already satisfy ¬CH,
then let P be the partially ordered set of all ﬁnite partial functions from ℵM
2 × ℵ0
into 2, partially ordered by reverse inclusion. (A ﬁnite partial function is a ﬁnite
set of ordered pairs whose ﬁrst coordinate is in the domain and whose second
coordinate is in the range, with the property that no two ordered pairs have the
same ﬁrst element.) There is a standard method, which we shall not go into here,
of completing an arbitrary partially ordered set to a complete Boolean algebra;
we take the completion of P in M to be our Boolean algebra B. Now take an M -
generic ultraﬁlter U , which exists because M is countable. If we blur the distinction
between P and its completion B for a moment, then we claim that F := S U is a
partial function from ℵM
2 ×ℵ0 to 2. To check this, we just need to check that any two
elements x and y of U are consistent with each other where they are both deﬁned,
but this is easy: Since U is an ultraﬁlter, x and y have a common lower bound
z in U , and both x and y are consistent with z. Moreover, F is a total function;
this is because U is generic, and the ﬁnite partial functions that are deﬁned at a
speciﬁed point in the domain form a dense set (we can extend any partial function
by deﬁning it at that point if it is not deﬁned already). Also, the sequence of
functions from ℵ0 to 2 encoded by F are pairwise distinct; again this is because U
is generic, and the condition of being pairwise distinct is a dense condition. The
axioms of ZFC ensure that F ∈ M [U ], so M [U ] gives us the desired model of ¬CH.
There is one important point that we have swept under the rug in the above
proof sketch. The set ℵM
2 is still hanging around in M [U ], but it is conceivable that
6= ℵM[U]
ℵM
2 may no longer play the role of ℵ2 in M [U ]; i.e., it may be that ℵM
.
2
2
Cardinalities are not absolute, and so cardinal collapse can occur, i.e., the object
that plays the role of a particular cardinal number in M may not play that same
role in an extension of M . In fact, cardinal collapse does not occur in this particular
case but this fact must be checked.11 We omit the details, since they are covered
thoroughly in textbooks.

10This limitation of uncountable models is not a big issue in practice, because typically the
L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem allows us to replace an uncountable model with a countable surrogate.
11The fact that cardinals do not collapse here can be traced to the fact that the Boolean
algebra in question satisﬁes a combinatorial condition called the countable chain condition in M .

14

TIMOTHY Y. CHOW

8. But wait—what about forcing?

The reader may be surprised—justiﬁably so—that we have come to the end of
our proof sketch without ever precisely deﬁning forcing. Does “forcing” not have a
precise technical meaning?

Indeed, it does. In Cohen’s original approach, he asked the following funda-
mental question. Suppose that we want to adjoin a “generic” set U to M . What
properties of the new model will be “forced” to hold if we have only partial infor-
mation about U , namely we know that some element p of M is in U ?

If we are armed with the machinery of Boolean-valued models, then we can
answer Cohen’s question. Let us informally say that p forces φ (written p ||− φ)
if for every M -generic ultraﬁlter U , φ must hold in M [U ] whenever p ∈ U . Note
that U plays two roles simultaneously; it is the generic set that we are adjoining
to M , and it also picks out the true statements in M [U ]. By the deﬁnition of an
, then φ must be true in M [U ] if p ∈ U . Therefore
ultraﬁlter, we see that if p ≤ [[φ]]
we can give the following formal deﬁnition of “p ||− φ”:

B

(8.1)

p ||− φ iﬀ p ≤ [[φ]]

B

.

The simplicity of equation (8.1) explains why our proof sketch did not need to refer
to forcing explicitly. Forcing is actually implicit in the proof, but since ||− has such
B
, it is possible in principle to produce a proof of
a simple deﬁnition in terms of [[·]]
B
Cohen’s result without explicitly using the symbol ||− at all, referring only to [[·]]
and Boolean algebra operations.

Of course, Cohen did not have the machinery of Boolean-valued models avail-
able. What he did was to ﬁgure out what properties the expression p ||− φ ought
to have, given that one is trying to capture the notion of the logical implications
of knowing that p is a member of our new “generic” set. For example, one should
have p ||− (φ AND ψ) iﬀ p ||− φ and p ||− ψ, by the following reasoning: If we
know that membership of p in U forces φ to hold and it also forces ψ to hold, then
membership of p in U must also force φ AND ψ to hold.

By similar but more complicated reasoning, Cohen devised a list of rules anal-
ogous to (6.1)–(6.7) that he used to deﬁne p ||− φ for any statement φ in S. In
this way, he built all the necessary machinery on the basis of the forcing relation,
without ever having to introduce Boolean algebras.

B

Thus there are (at least) two diﬀerent ways to approach this subject, depending
on whether ||− or [[·]]
is taken to be the fundamental concept. For many applica-
tions, these two approaches ultimately amount to almost the same thing, since we
can use equation (8.1) to pass between them. In this paper I have chosen the ap-
proach using Boolean-valued models because I feel that the introduction of “fuzzy
sets” and the Boolean algebra B are relatively easy to motivate. In Cohen’s ap-
proach one still needs to introduce at some point some “fuzzy sets” (called names
or labels) and a partial order, and these seem (to me at least) to be pulled out of a
hat. Also, the deﬁnitions (6.1)–(6.7) are somewhat simpler than the corresponding
deﬁnitions for ||−.

On the other hand, even when one works with Boolean-valued models, Cohen’s
intuition about generic sets U , and what is forced to be true if we know that p ∈ U ,
is often extremely helpful. For example, recall from our proof sketch that the con-
structed functions from ℵ0 to 2 were pairwise distinct. In geometry, “generically”

A BEGINNER’S GUIDE TO FORCING

15

chosen functions will not be equal; distinctness is a dense condition. Cohen’s intu-
ition thus leads us to the (correct) expectation that our generically chosen functions
will also be distinct, because no ﬁnite p ∈ U can force two of them to be equal.
This kind of reasoning is invaluable in more complicated applications.

9. Final remarks

We should mention that the Boolean-valued-model approach has some disad-
vantages. For example, set theorists sometimes ﬁnd the need to work with models
of axioms that do not include the powerset axiom, and then the Boolean-valued
model approach does not work, because “complete” does not really make sense in
such contexts. Also, Cohen’s original approach allows one to work directly with an
arbitrary partially ordered set P that is not necessarily a Boolean algebra, and a
generic ﬁlter rather than a generic ultraﬁlter. (A subset F of P is a ﬁlter if p ∈ F
and p ≤ q implies q ∈ F , and every p and q have a common lower bound in F .)
In our proof sketch we have already caught a whiﬀ of the fact that in many cases,
there is some partially ordered set P lying around that captures the combinatorics
of what is really going on, and having to complete P to a Boolean algebra is a tech-
nical nuisance; it is much more convenient to work with P directly. If the reader
prefers this approach, then Kunen’s book [10] would be my recommended refer-
ence. Note that Kunen helpfully supplements his treatment with an abbreviated
discussion of Boolean-valued models and the relationship between the two diﬀerent
approaches.

In my opinion, the weakest part of the exposition in this paper is the treatment
of genericity, whose deﬁnition appears to come out of nowhere. A posteriori one
can see that the deﬁnition works beautifully, but how would one guess a priori that
the geometric concepts of dense sets and generic sets would be so apropos in this
context, and come up with the right precise deﬁnitions? Perhaps the answer is
just that Cohen was a genius, but perhaps there is a better approach yet to be
discovered that will make it all clear.

Let us conclude with some suggestions for further reading. Easwaran [8] and
Wolf [16] give very nice overviews of forcing written in the same spirit as the
present paper, giving details that are critical for understanding but omitting messy
technicalities. Scott’s paper [14] is a classic exposition written for non-specialists,
and Cohen [7] gave a lecture late in his life about how he discovered forcing. The
reader may also ﬁnd it helpful to study the connections that forcing has with
topology [5], topos theory [12], modal logic [15], arithmetic [4], proof theory [1]
and computational complexity [9].
It may be that insights from these diﬀering
perspectives can be synthesized to solve the open exposition problem of forcing.

10. Acknowledgments

This paper grew out of an article entitled “Forcing for dummies” that I posted
to the USENET newsgroup sci.math.research in 2001. However, in that article I
did not employ the Boolean-valued model approach, and hence the line of exposition
was quite diﬀerent. Interested readers can easily ﬁnd the earlier version on the web.
I thank Costas Drossos, Ali Enayat, Martin Goldstern, and Matt Yurkewych

for pointing me to references [14], [5], [7], and [15] respectively.

I am deeply indebted to Matthew Wiener and especially Andreas Blass for
their many prompt and patient answers to my dumb questions about forcing.

16

TIMOTHY Y. CHOW

Thanks also to Fred Kochman, Miller Maley, Christoph Weiss, Steven Gubkin,
James Hirschhorn, and the referee for comments on an earlier draft of this paper
that have improved the exposition and ﬁxed some bugs.

References

[1] Jeremy Avigad, Forcing in proof theory, Bull. Symbolic Logic 10 (2004), 305–333.
[2] James E. Baumgartner, Independence proofs and combinatorics, in Relations Between Com-
binatorics and Other Parts of Mathematics, Proc. Symp. Pure Math. XXXIV, 35–46, Amer-
ican Mathematical Society, 1979.

[3] John L. Bell, Set Theory: Boolean-Valued Models and Independence Proofs, 3rd ed., Oxford

University Press, 2005.

[4] George S. Boolos and Richard C. Jeﬀrey, Computability and Logic, 3rd ed., Cambridge Uni-

versity Press, 1989.

[5] Kenneth A. Bowen, Forcing in a general setting, Fund. Math. 81 (1974), 315–329.
[6] Paul J. Cohen, Set Theory and the Continuum Hypothesis, Addison-Wesley, 1966.
[7] Paul J. Cohen, The discovery of forcing, Rocky Mountain J. Math. 32 (2002), 1071–1100.
[8] Kenny Easwaran, A cheerful introduction to forcing and the continuum hypothesis, Los

Alamos ArXiv, math.LO/0712.2279.

[9] Jan Kraj´ıˇcek, Bounded Arithmetic, Propositional Logic, and Complexity Theory, Cambridge

University Press, 1995.

[10] Kenneth Kunen, Set Theory: An Introduction to Independence Proofs, North Holland, 1983.
[11] Michael Monastyrsky, Modern Mathematics in the Light of the Fields Medals, 2nd ed., A. K.

Peters, 1998.

[12] Saunders Mac Lane and Ieke Moerdijk, Sheaves in Geometry and Logic, Springer-Verlag,

1992.

[13] Donald J. Newman, Analytic Number Theory, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
[14] Dana Scott, A proof of the independence of the continuum hypothesis, Math. Sys. Theory 1

(1967), 89–111.

[15] Raymond M. Smullyan and Melving Fitting, Set Theory and the Continuum Problem, Oxford

University Press, 1996.

[16] Robert S. Wolf, A Tour Through Mathematical Logic, Mathematical Association of America,

2005.

Center for Communications Research, 805 Bunn Drive, Princeton, NJ 08540
E-mail address: tchow@alum.mit.edu
URL: http://alum.mit.edu/www/tchow

