Castro-Alvaredo, Olalla A.; Mazzoni, Michele
Two-point functions of composite twist ﬁelds in the Ising ﬁeld theory. (English)
J. Phys. A, Math. Theor. 56, No. 12, Article ID 124001, 25 p. (2023)

(cid:3)
Zbl 07660819
(cid:2)

(cid:0)
(cid:1)

Summary: All standard measures of bipartite entanglement in one-dimensional quantum ﬁeld theories
can be expressed in terms of correlators of branch point twist ﬁelds, here denoted by T and T †. These are
symmetry ﬁelds associated to cyclic permutation symmetry in a replica theory and having the smallest
conformal dimension at the critical point. Recently, other twist ﬁelds (composite twist ﬁelds), typically
of higher dimension, have been shown to play a role in the study of a new measure of entanglement
known as the symmetry resolved entanglement entropy. In this paper we give an exact expression for the
two-point function of a composite twist ﬁeld that arises in the Ising ﬁeld theory. In doing so we extend
the techniques originally developed for the standard branch point twist ﬁeld in free theories as well as an
existing computation due to Horváth and Calabrese of the same two-point function which focused on the
leading large-distance contribution. We study the ground state two-point function of the composite twist
ﬁeld Tµ and its conjugate T †
µ . At criticality, this ﬁeld can be deﬁned as the leading ﬁeld in the operator
product expansion of T and the disorder ﬁeld µ. We ﬁnd a general formula for log⟨Tµ(0)T †
µ (r)⟩ and for
(the derivative of) its analytic continuation to positive real replica numbers greater than 1. We check our
formula for consistency by showing that at short distances it exactly reproduces the expected conformal
dimension.

MSC:

81-XX Quantum theory
82-XX

Statistical mechanics, structure of matter

Keywords:

integrable quantum ﬁeld theory; Ising model; branch point twist ﬁelds; symmetry resolved entanglement
entropy; form factor expansion; correlation functions

Full Text: DOI arXiv

Edited by FIZ Karlsruhe, the European Mathematical Society and the Heidelberg Academy of Sciences and Humanities
Page 1
© 2023 FIZ Karlsruhe GmbH

