8
0
0
2

n
u
J

9

]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[

1
v
4
7
4
1
.
6
0
8
0
:
v
i
X
r
a

Embedding quantum and random optics in a
larger ﬁeld theory

Peter Morgan

Physics Department, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Abstract

Introducing creation and annihilation operators for negative frequency components
extends the algebra of smeared local observables of quantum optics to include an
associated classical random ﬁeld optics.

Key words: quantum optics, quantum ﬁelds, random ﬁelds
PACS: 03.50.De, 03.65.Ta, 03.70.+k, 42.50.-p

The free ﬁeld aspect of quantum optics can be constructed as a quantum ﬁeld
theory using creation and annihilation operators, ˆa†
g and ˆaf , that satisfy the
commutation relation

= (g, f ) = −¯h

ˆaf , ˆa†
gi
h
[ˆaf , ˆag] = 0.

kα˜g∗

αβ(k)ηβνkλ ˜fλν(k)θ(k0)2πδ(kµkµ)

Z

d4k
(2π)4

,

(1)

f ∗ are observables only if fµν(x) = f ∗

fµν(x) and gµν(x) are complex bivector test functions, which are typically
taken to be pure positive frequency delta functions in quantum optics, even
though a distribution is an improper test function and even though the smeared
ﬁeld operators ˆφf = ˆaf + ˆa†
µν(x) are real
functions. For each null 4-vector wave-number kλ, the expression kα ˜f ∗
is negative semi-deﬁnite (taking the metric to be η = diag[1, −1, −1, −1]) —
that is, kλ ˜fλν(k) is a zero or space-like 4-vector — so (g, f ) is an inner product
on the test function space. A vacuum state |0i is annihilated by all annihila-
tion operators, ˆaf |0i = 0. This presentation of quantum optics is a natural
consequence of Ref. [1], which derives the inner product between test functions
that is given above.

αβ(k)ηβνkλ ˜fλν(k)

Email address: peter.w.morgan@yale.edu (Peter Morgan).
URL: http://pantheon.yale.edu/ PWM22 (Peter Morgan).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

10 January 2019

 
 
 
 
 
 
ˆφf , ˆφg
h

With the above constructions, the smeared ﬁeld operator ˆφf satisﬁes micro-
= 0, when the supports of the test functions f and g are
causality,
space-like separated; for test functions with supports that are not space-like
6= 0. It is this nontrivial commutation relation
separated, generally
i
that makes quantum optics a local quantum ﬁeld theory.

ˆφf , ˆφg

i

h

If we now introduce a second set of creation and annihilation operators, ˆb†
g
g and ˆaf and which satisfy ˆbf |0i = 0 and the
and ˆbf , which commute with ˆa†
commutation relations

ˆbf , ˆb†
gi
h

= (g, f )− = −¯h

Z

kα˜g∗

αβ(k)ηβνkλ ˜fλν(k) θ(−k0) 2πδ(kµkµ)

= (f ∗, g∗),
= 0,

ˆbf , ˆbg
h

i

we can construct a random ﬁeld observable

ˆχf = ˆaf + ˆa†

f ∗ + ˆbf + ˆb†

f ∗,

for which the commutator

[ ˆχf , ˆχg] =

ˆaf , ˆa†
g∗

f ∗, ˆbg
ˆb†
h
i
= (g∗, f ) − (f ∗, g) + (f ∗, g) − (g∗, f ) = 0

ˆa†
f ∗, ˆag
h

ˆbf , ˆb†
g∗
h

+

+

+

i

i

h

i

d4k
(2π)4

(2)

(3)

(4)

is trivial for all test functions f and g; hence ˆχf can be called a classical random
ﬁeld. The algebra of observables that is generated by ˆφf and ˆχf contains both
quantum optics and an associated classical random ﬁeld optics. Note that from
a classical perspective negative frequency components are positive energy.

Many observables in quantum optics are not constructed as functions of ˆφf ,
but are instead constructed as projection operators such as ˆa†
f |0i h0| ˆaf , using
only positive frequency test functions (with f normalized, (f, f ) = 1). We
generally model both measurement and preparation apparatus as coupling
to limited ranges of positive frequency wave-numbers. It makes no diﬀerence
to any experimental predictions whether we use a†
f to construct
and measure physical states, if the test functions we use are all purely positive
frequency. For all such observables, we can equally well discuss quantum optics
or the associated classical random ﬁeld optics.

f or a†

f + b†

If all the local measurements we have so far made are, for systematic reasons,
in the algebra generated by ˆφf , nonetheless quantum optics can be embed-
ded in a larger ﬁeld theory that has a classical interpretation. If we can in
future construct devices that measure ˆχf as well as devices that measure ˆφf ,

2

the quantum theoretical models we construct could then be interpreted as a
mathematics of classical stochastic signal analysis[2,3,4], in which quantum
ﬂuctuations of measurement devices aﬀect both the measured system and
other measurement devices. Even if we never succeed in measuring ˆχf , we
can nonetheless compute what the results of measurements of ˆχf would be in
the states that we in fact measure using only ˆφf , and interpret quantum ﬁeld
theory in terms of the enlarged algebra of observables.

In such an approach, Planck’s constant is a measure of quantum ﬂuctuations,
which are classically distinguished from thermal ﬂuctuations by their Lorentz
invariance properties[5]. Planck’s constant plays two rˆoles in a conventional
free quantum ﬁeld theory, both ﬁxing the scale of incompatibility
=
(g∗, f )−(f ∗, g) between measurements and ﬁxing the scale of quantum ﬂuctua-
(f ∗, f ) of measurements of ˆφf in the vacuum state (determined by the
tions
variance of the Gaussian characteristic function h0| eiλ ˆφf |0i = e−λ2(f ∗,f )/2 ).
These two rˆoles can be separated in two ways. Firstly, we can introduce an
observable ˆξf = α(ˆaf + ˆa†

f ∗) + β(ˆbf + ˆb†

f ∗), for which

ˆφf , ˆφg
h

q

i

ˆξf , ˆξg
h

= (α2 − β2)
h0| eiλ ˆξf |0i = e−λ2(α2+β2)(f ∗,f )/2.

(cid:16)

i

(g∗, f ) − (f ∗, g)

,
(cid:17)

(5)

Secondly, we can introduce Lorentz invariant self-adjoint number operators ˆΞa
and ˆΞb, which satisfy the commutation relations
=
b†
f , with all other commutation relations trivial. The algebra generated by
f , ˆaf and ˆbf with these commutation relations satisﬁes the Jacobi
ˆΞa, ˆΞb, ˆa†
identity. ˆΞa and ˆΞb can be used, with the methods of [5,6], to construct Lorentz
invariant “super”-vacuum states that have increased ﬂuctuations, for which
the Gaussian characteristic function for the observable ˆξf is

ˆΞa, a†
f i
h

ˆΞb, b†
f i
h

f and

f , ˆb†

= a†

Tr

e−µˆΞa−ν ˆΞbeiλ ˆξf
h
e−µˆΞa−ν ˆΞb
Tr
h

i

i

= e−λ2(α2 coth µ+β2 coth ν)(f ∗,f )/2,

µ, ν > 0.

(6)

Both these constructions allow us to increase the scale of vacuum ﬂuctuations
relative to the scale of measurement incompatibility, which we can tentatively
characterize as

• suppressed ﬂuctuations — incompatibility between measurement devices
is aﬀected less by quantum ﬂuctuations than the scale of quantum ﬂuc-
tuations of the vacuum, µ, ν > 0;

• compensated ﬂuctuations — measurement devices interact with negative
frequency quantum ﬂuctuations, which compensate for the eﬀects of pos-
itive frequency quantum ﬂuctuations, β2 > 0.

3

If we separate the two rˆoles of Planck’s constant in either of these two ways,
measurement incompatibility becomes a property of measurement devices dif-
ferent from the scale of quantum ﬂuctuations.

For many years the stochastic electrodynamics approach (SED) has produced
quite interesting results[7] using a stochastic formalism for the electromagnetic
ﬁeld, however the present operator and Hilbert space formalism for random
ﬁelds is much closer to the familiar mathematics of quantum optics. Both in
SED and here, there are Lorentz invariant ﬂuctuations of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld; merely by introducing an explicit classical model for quantum ﬂuctua-
tions of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, we go beyond the capabilities of semiclassical
optics.

When very many or inﬁnite degrees of freedom are introduced, classical ran-
dom ﬁeld models for experiments are of a very diﬀerent nature from classical
particle property models, so that the no-go theorems against classical particle
property models for quantum mechanical experiments are essentially irrelevant
to classical random ﬁeld models. I have previously shown that the violation of
Bell inequalities, in particular, is not incompatible with classical random ﬁeld
models[8], and contextuality is natural for classical random ﬁeld models — by
the inclusion of the experimental apparatus in models whenever necessary —
whereas contextuality is not natural for classical particle property models.

Experiments in the quantum mechanical regime are often in coarse-grained
equilibrium, in the sense that the statistics of the discrete events that are
measured are time-invariant. Insofar as a given experiment is in coarse-grained
equilibrium, a change of an experimental apparatus is, to a ﬁrst approximation
at the level of statistics of discrete events, a change of the boundary conditions
of the electromagnetic random ﬁeld at equilibrium, which generally has global
consequences for experimental results even if the dynamics is local. Histori-
cally, Bohr and Heisenberg espoused a disturbance interpretation of quantum
theory until Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen[9] forced them, in 1935, to adopt an
essentially positivistic interpretation[10, pp 34-35]. Particle properties cannot
be given a local disturbance interpretation, but a local disturbance interpre-
tation of quantum ﬁeld theory is possible if we take a random ﬁeld approach.
Although measurements associated with space-time regions that are at time-
like separation are apparently incompatible with one another in general, as a
matter of physical principle, we can mathematically model that measurement
incompatibility in a number of diﬀerent ways.

There is an elementary sense in which the results presented above are not at
all new. The probability density associated with the observable ˆχf for any
state is no more than the possibly negative density associated with the ob-
servable ˆφf for the same state convolved with a possibly negative density that
is precisely enough to smear away the non-classical negative values, which

4

is a well-known but unmotivated and unappealing approach to reconciling
the Wigner function, for example, with classical preconceptions. An algebraic
context, however, gives some justiﬁcation for and a way to interpret what is
otherwise a largely ad-hoc procedure.

A positive reason for using classical random ﬁeld models in physics in the long
term, once their intrinsic properties, their measurement theory, and their re-
lationship to quantum ﬁeld theory are better understood, is that a substantial
class of interacting classical random ﬁelds can be constructed straightforwardly[11],
in contrast to the lack of any rigorous interacting quantum ﬁeld theory in four
dimensions and the mathematical awkwardness of regularization and renor-
malization. It appears that measurement incompatibilities of a linear inter-
acting ﬁeld theory cannot be represented by a local algebra of observables
in which we consider only positive frequency components of test functions,
but we can use classical random ﬁeld models of experiments that explicitly
model interactions between measurement devices that are due to quantum
ﬂuctuations.

References

[1] R. Menikoﬀ and D. H. Sharp, J. Math. Phys. 18, 471(1977).

[2] L. Cohen, Proceedings of the IEEE 77, 942(1989).

[3] L. Cohen, Time-Frequency Analysis (Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ, 1995).

[4] B. Boashash (ed.), Time-Frequency Signal Analysis and Processing (Elsevier,

Oxford, 2003).

[5] P. Morgan, Phys. Lett. A 338, 8(2005); Arxiv:quant-ph/0411156.

[6] P. Morgan, Phys. Lett. A 321, 216(2004); Arxiv:quant-ph/0304171.

[7] L. de la Pe˜na and A. M. Cetto, The Quantum Dice. An introduction to

Stochastic Electrodynamics (Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 1996).

[8] P. Morgan, J. Phys. A 39, 7441(2006); Arxiv:cond-mat/0403692.

[9] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777(1935).

[10] A. Fine, The Shaky Game, 2nd edn. (University of Chicago Press, Chicago,

1996).

[11] P. Morgan, J. Math. Phys. 48, 122302(2007); arXiv:0704.3420 [quant-ph].

5

