The theory of relativity
and
the Pythagorean theorem∗

L. B. Okun

Abstract

It is shown that the most important eﬀects of special and general theory of relativity
can be understood in a simple and straightforward way. The system of units in which
the speed of light c is the unit of velocity allows to cast all formulas in a very simple
form.The Pythagorean theorem graphically relates energy, momentum and mass. The
paper is addressed to those who teach and popularize the theory of relativity

1 Introduction

The report ”Energy and mass in the works of Einstein, Landau and Feynman” that I was
preparing for the Session of the Division of Physical Sciences of the Russian Academy
of Sciences (DPS RAS) on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of Lev Davidovich
Landau’s birth was to consist of two parts, one on history and the other on physics.
The history part was absorbed into the article “Einstein’s formula: E0 = mc2. ‘Isn’t the
Lord laughing?”’ that appeared in the May issue of Uspekhi Fizicheskikh Nauk [Physics-
Uspekhi] journal [1]. The physics part is published in the present article. It is devoted to
various, so to speak, technical aspects of the theory, such as the dimensional analysis and
fundamental constants c and ¯h; the kinematics of a single particle in the entire velocity
range from 0 to c; systems of two or more free particles; and the interactions between
particles: electromagnetic, gravitational, etc. The text uses the slides of the talk at
the session of the Section of Nuclear Physics of the DPS RAS in November 2007 at the
Institute for Theoretical and Experimental Physics (ITEP). My goal was to present the
main formulas of the theory of relativity in the simplest possible way, using mostly the
Pythagorean theorem.

8
0
0
2

p
e
S
5
1

]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
9
7
3
2
.
9
0
8
0
:
v
i
X
r
a

2 Relativity

2.1. The advanced standpoint.

The history of the concept of mass in physics runs to many centuries and is very in-
teresting, but I leave it aside here. Instead, this will be an attempt to look at mass from
an advanced standpoint. I borrowed the words from the famous title of Felix Klein’s
Elementary Mathematics from an Advanced Standpoint (traditionally translated into

∗This is a slightly corrected version of the paper published in Physics - Uspekhi 51 622 (2008). In particular,

the short subsections of the text are numbered as had been suggested by one of the readers.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Russian incorrectly as Elementary Mathematics from the Standpoint of Higher Math-
ematics. See V.G. Boltyanskii’s foreword to the 4th Russian edition). The advanced
modern standpoint based on principles of symmetry in general and on the theory of rel-
ativity in particular makes it possible to avoid inevitable terminological confusion and
paradoxes.

2.2. The principle of relativity. Ever since the time of Galileo and Newton, the
concept of relativity has been connected with the impossibility of detecting, by means
of any experiment, a translational (uniform and rectilinear) motion of a closed space
(for instance, inside a ship) while remaining within this space. At the turn of XIX and
XX centuries Poincar´e gave to this idea the name ‘the principle of relativity’ . In 1905
Einstein generalized this principle to the case of the existence of the limiting velocity of
propagation of signals. (The ﬁnite velocity of propagation of light has been discovered
by R¨omer already in 1676). Planck called the theory constructed in this way ‘Einstein’s
theory of relativity’.

2.3. Mechanics and optics. Newton tried to construct a uniﬁed theory uniting
the theory of motion of massive objects (mechanics) and the theory of propagation of
light (optics).
In fact, it became possible to create the uniﬁed theory of particles of
massive matter and of light only in the XX century. It was established on the road to
the vantage ground of truth (I am using here the ironical wording of Francis Bacon) that
light is also a sort of matter, just like the massive stuﬀ, but that its particles are massless.
This interpretation of particles of light — photons — continues to face resistance from
many students of physics, and even more from physics teachers.

3 Dimensions

3.1. Units in which c = 1. The maximum possible velocity is known as the speed
of light and is denoted by c. When dealing with formulas of the theory of relativity it
is convenient to use a system of units in which c is chosen as a unit of velocity. Since
c/c = 1, using this system means that we set c = 1 in all formulas, thus simplifying them
greatly. If time is measured in seconds, then distance in this system of units should be
measured in light seconds: one light second equals 3

1010 cm.

3.2. Poincar´e and c. One of the creators of the theory of relativity, Henri Poincare,
when discussing in 1904 the fact that c is found in every equation of electrodynamics,
compared the situation with the geocentric theory of Ptolemy’s epicycles in which ev-
ery relation between motions of celestial bodies included the terrestrial year. Poincare
expressed his hope that the future Copernicus would rid electrodynamics of c [3]. How-
ever, Einstein showed already in 1905 that c was to play the key role as the limit for the
velocity of signal propagation.

·

3.3. Two systems of units: SI and c = 1. The unit of velocity in the In-
ternational System of Units SI, 1 m/s, is forced on us by convenience arguments and
by standardization of manufacturing and commerce but not by the laws of Nature. In
contrast to this, c as a unit of velocity is imposed by Nature itself when we wish to
consider fundamental processes of Nature.

3.4. Dimensional factors. Consider some physical quantity a. Let us denote
by [a] the dimension of the quantity a. The dimension of a deﬁnitely changes if it is
multiplied by any power of the universal constant c but its physical meaning remains
unaﬀected. In what follows I explain why this is so.

3.5. Velocity, momentum, energy, mass. The dimensions of momentum, mass,
and velocity of a particle are usually related by the formula [p] = [m][v] while the

2

dimensions of energy, mass, and velocity are related by the formula [E ] = [m][v 2]. Let
us introduce dimensionless velocity v/c and from now on denote this ratio as v. Likewise,
referring to momentum p we actually mean the ratio p/c. When speaking of energy, we
actually mean the ratio e = E/c 2. Obviously, the dimensions of p, e, and m become
identical and therefore, these quantities can be measured in the same units, for example,
in grams or electron-volts, as is customary in elementary particle physics.

3.6. On the letter e denoting energy. Choosing e as the notation for energy
may invite the reader’s ire since this symbol traditionally stands for electron and electric
charge. However, this choice cannot cause confusion and, importantly, it will lead to a
compact form of formulas for a single particle, always reminding us that these formulas
were written using the system of units in which c = 1. On the other hand, it will be
clear a little later that the letter E is a convenient notation for the energy of two or
more particles. I happened to see Einstein’s formula with a lower-case e on a billboard
on Rublevskoye highway in Moscow. I wonder, why should this e irritate physicists?

3.7. On the diﬀerence between energy and frequency. Two paragraphs ago I
insisted that e = E/c 2 is energy even though its dimension is that of mass. In that case
it is logical to ask why ω = E/¯h is not energy but frequency? Indeed, the quantum of
action ¯h, like the speed of light c, is a universal constant. The answer to this question
can be found by considering how e and ω are measured. E and e are measured by the
same procedure, say, using a calorimeter, while frequency is measured in a drastically
diﬀerent manner, say, using clocks. Therefore, the equality ω = E/¯h informs us of the
link between two diﬀerent types of measurement, while the equality e = E/c 2 carries
no such information. Arguments similar to those concerning frequency hold equally well
for wavelength. I have to emphasize that these metrological distinctions are mostly of a
historical nature since in our day atomic clocks operate on the diﬀerence between atomic
energy levels.

4 Single particle

4.1. Relative and absolute quantities. The kinetic energy of any body is a relative
quantity: it depends on the reference frame in which it is measured. The same is true
for the momentum of a body and its velocity. In contrast to them, the mass of a body
is an absolute quantity: it characterizes the body as such, irrespective of the observer.
The rest energy of a body (see below) is also an absolute quantity since the frame of
reference is ﬁxed in it once and for all — ‘nailed to it’.

4.2. Invariant mass. The mass of a body is deﬁned in the theory of relativity by

the formula

m2 = e2

p2.

(1)

−
p
. Likewise, v =
|
|

Here and in what follows p =
. Note that energy and momentum of
|
a given body are not bounded from above while the mass of the body is ﬁxed. Formula
(1) is the simplest relation between energy, momentum, and mass that one could write
‘oﬀ the top of one’s head’. (The relation between e, p, and m cannot be linear since p
is a vector while e and m are scalars in three-dimensional space.) We shall see now that
formula (1) has another, much more profound theoretical foundation.

v
|

4.3. The 4-momentum. Minkowski was the ﬁrst to point out that the theory of
relativity gains the simplest form if considered in four-dimensional spacetime [4]. Energy
and momentum in the theory of relativity form a four-dimensional energy-momentum
vector pi(i = 0, a), where p0 = e, pa = p, and a = 1, 2, 3. Mass is the Lorentz scalar that

3

p2; four-dimensional space
characterizes the length of the 4-vector pi: m 2 = pi
is pseudo-Euclidean, which explains the minus sign in the formula for length squared.
(The reader will recall that p2 = p2.) Another way to clarify why the sign is negative is
by introducing the imaginary momentum ip. Then m 2 = e 2 + (ip)2 and we are dealing
with the Pythagorean theorem for such a pseudo-Euclidean right triangle in which the
hypotenuse m is shorter than the cathetus e.

2 = e 2

−

4.4. Relation between momentum and velocity. The momentum of a body is

related to its velocity v by the formula

p = ev.

(2)

This formula satisﬁes in the simplest manner the requirement that the momentum 3-
vector be proportional to the velocity 3-vector and that the dimensional proportionality
coeﬃcient not vanish for the massless photon. Conservation of the thus deﬁned momen-
tum in the theory of relativity is implied by the uniformity of 3-space while conservation
of energy is implied by the uniformity of time (Noether’s theorem).

4.5. The Pythagorean theorem. Formula (1) is shown in Fig. 1 by an ordinary

right triangle in which m and p are catheti and e is the hypotenuse.

4.6. Transition from m

= 0 to m = 0. Formula (1) is obviously valid at m = 0
while formula (2) holds for v = 1. This implies that there is a smooth transition from
massless particles to massive, when the energy of the latter particles greatly exceeds
their mass.

4.7. Physics from p = 0 to p = e. Let us consider formulas (1) and (2) ﬁrst at
m), and then in the
zero momentum, then in the limit of very low momenta (when p
limit of very high momenta when p
m, and ﬁnally in the case of massless photons.
We will call the case of very small momenta and velocities the Newtonian case, and that
of very high momenta and velocities close to the speed of light, the ultrarelativistic case.
We will start with zero momentum.

≫

≪

∼

e

e

p

m

Fig. 1

4

6
5 Rest energy

5.1. Zero momentum. If momentum is zero, then in the case of a massive particle
the velocity is also zero and energy e is by deﬁnition equal to the rest energy e0. (The
subscript 0 reminds us that here we are dealing not with the energy of a given body in
general but with its energy precisely in the case when its momentum is zero!) Hence
equation (1) implies

e0 = m.

(3)

If, however, the particle is massless, then equation (1) at p = 0 implies that e = e0 = 0
(see 7.6).

5.2. Horizontal ‘biangle’. If m

= 0 and p = 0, then the triangle shown in Fig.1

‘collapses’ to a horizontal ‘biangle’ (Fig. 2).

5.3 Einstein’s great discovery. In units in which c

= 1, equation (3) has the form

E0 = mc 2 .

(4)

The realization that ordinary matter at rest stores an enormous amount of energy in its
mass was Einstein’s great discovery.

5.4. The ‘famous formula’. Equation (4) is very often written (especially in
popular physics literature) in the form of ‘Einstein’s famous equation’ that drops the
subscript 0:

E = mc 2 .

(5)

This simpliﬁcation, to which Einstein himself sometimes resorted, might seem innocuous
at ﬁrst glance, but it results in unacceptable confusion in understanding the foundations
of physics. In particular, it generates a totally false idea that ‘according to the theory
of relativity’ the mass of a body is equivalent to its total energy and, as an inevitable
result, depends on its velocity. (‘Wished to make it simpler, got it as always’.1)

e0

m

Fig. 2

5.5. No experiment can disprove the ‘famous formula’. Very clever people
thought up this formula in such a way that it never contradicts experiments. However,
it contradicts the essence of the theory of relativity. In this respect, the situation with
the ‘famous formula’ is unique — I do not know another case that could be compared
with this one.

5.6. This is not a matter of taste but of understanding. You hear time
and again that the introduction of momentum-dependent mass is ‘a matter of taste’.
Of course, one can write the letter m instead of E/c 2 and even call it ‘mass’, although

1A paraphrase of former Russian Prime Minister Chernomyrdin’s ‘statement of the day’: “Wished to make

it better, got as always.” (Note added by the Author in translation.)

5

6
6
it is no more sensible than writing p instead of E/c and calling it ‘momentum’. Alas,
this ‘dress changing’ introduces unnecessary and bizarre notions — relativistic mass and
rest mass m0— and creates an obstacle to understanding the theory of relativity. A
well-known Russian proverb comes to mind: “Call me a pot if you wish but don’t push
me into the oven.” Unfortunately, people who call E/c 2 ‘mass’ do place this ‘pot’ into
the ‘oven’ of physics teaching.

5.7. Longitudinal and transverse masses.

In addition to relativistic mass,
concepts of intense use at the beginning of the XX century were the transverse and
longitudinal masses: mt and ml. This longitudinal masses increased as (e 3/m 3) m and
‘explained’ — in terms of Newton’s formula F = ma — why a massive body cannot
be accelerated to the speed of light. Then it was forgotten and such popularizers of
the theory of relativity as Stephen Hawking started to persuade their readers that even
much gentler growth of mass with velocity ((e/m) m) could explain why the velocity of
a massive body cannot reach c. I single out Hawking only because, printed on the dust
jacket of the Russian edition of his latest popular science book [5], which advertises the
formula E = mc 2, we see this text: “Translated into 40 languages. More than 10 million
copies sold worldwide.”

5.8. False intuition. After my talk at the ITEP A N Skrinsky told me that
the notion of relativistic mass hampered a well-known physicist’s understanding that a
relativistic electron colliding with an electron at rest can transfer all its energy to the
latter. Indeed, how could a heavy baseball bat transfer all its energy to the lightest ping-
pong ball? In physics, as in daily life, people very often rely on intuition. This is why
it is so important, when studying the theory of relativity, to work out the relativistic
intuition and mistrust nonrelativistic intuition. (In order to ‘feel’ how an electron at
rest can receive the entire energy of a moving electron it is suﬃcient to use their center-
of-inertia frame to consider scattering by 180 degrees, and then return back to the
laboratory frame.)

6 Newtonian mechanics

6.1. Momentum in Newtonian mechanics. Newtonian mechanics describes with
high accuracy the motion of macroscopic bodies in a terrestrial environment and of
massive celestial bodies because their velocities are much smaller than the speed of
light. For instance, the velocity of a bullet is of the order of 1 km/s, which corresponds
to v = 1/300000 and v 2 = 10−11. In this situation equation (2) reduces to

p = mv .

(6)

Equation (1) is schematically shown in the Newtonian limit in Fig. 3. The side of the
triangle representing p in Fig. 3 is far too long. Scaled correctly, it should be a few
microns.

6

p

e

m

Fig. 3

6.2. Kinetic energy ek. It is reasonable to rewrite formula (1) for low velocities

so as to isolate the contribution of the short cathetus:

and then to present it in the form

e 2

−

m 2 = p 2

m)(e + m) = p 2 .

(e

−

(7)

(8)

This allows us to obtain a nonrelativistic expression for kinetic energy without resorting
to the conventional series expansion of the square root. We take into account that the
total energy e is the sum of rest energy e0 and kinetic energy ek and therefore e = m+ek.
6.3. Energy in Newtonian mechanics. In the Newtonian limit we have ek
m
(e.g. for a bullet ek/m = 10−11). Energy can therefore be replaced with high accuracy
by mass m in formula (2) for momentum and in the factor (e + m) in equation (8).
This last equation immediately implies an expression for kinetic energy ek in Newtonian
mechanics:

≪

ek =

=

.

(9)

p 2
2m

mv 2
2

6.4. Potential energy. In addition to velocity-dependent kinetic energy, an impor-
tant role in nonrelativistic mechanics is played by potential energy, which depends only
on the position (coordinate) of the body. The sum of kinetic and potential energy is
conserved at any instance of time. The potential energy of a body placed in an external
ﬁeld of force is deﬁned to within an arbitrary additive constant because the force acting
on the body equals the gradient of potential energy. In a similar manner, the potential
energy of interaction of several bodies depends only on their positions at the moment of
interaction. However, in the theory of relativity any interaction propagates at a ﬁnite
velocity. Hence, potential energy is an essentially nonrelativistic concept.

6.5. Newton and modern physics. Newton’s ﬂash of genius marked the birth
of modern science. The post-Newtonian progress of science is fantastic. Today’s under-
standing of the structure of matter is radically diﬀerent from Newton’s. Nevertheless,
even in the XXI century many physics textbooks continue to use Newton’s equations
at energies ek
e0, which exceed the limits of applicability of Newton’s mechanics
e0) by many orders of magnitude. If some professors prefer to insist on keeping
(ek
up with this tradition of velocity-dependent mass, they ought to at least familiarize
their students with the fundamental concepts of mass and rest energy, and with the true
Einstein equation E0 = mc 2.

≫

≪

7

7 Ultrarelativism

≫

7.1. High energy physics. Let us now consider in some detail the limiting case in
which e/m
1. The ratio of energy and mass characteristic for high energy physics is
precisely this. For example, this ratio for electrons in the LEP (Large Electron-Positron)
Collider at CERN was e/m = 105, since m = 0.5 MeV and e = 50 GeV. For protons in
the LHC (Large Hadron Collider), which is located in the same tunnel where the LEP
104. (Here, m
was in previous years, we ﬁnd e/m
7.2. A vertical triangle. The triangle for protons in the LHC is drawn highly
schematically in Fig. 4. Its base is in fact shorter than its hypotenuse by four orders of
magnitude.

938 MeV, e

7 TeV.)

∼

∼

∼

7.3. The neutrino. Neutrinos are even more ultrarelativistic particles: their masses
are a fraction of one electron-volt and their energies reach several MeV for neutrinos
emerging from the Sun and nuclear reactors, and several GeV for neutrinos generated
in particle decays in cosmic rays and in accelerators. The base of the triangle shown
schematically in Fig. 4 is much shorter at these energies than its vertical cathetus and
its hypotenuse.

p

e

m

Fig. 4

p

7.4. Neutrino oscillations and m2/2e. Equation (e

p)(e+p) = m 2 immediately
m 2/2e. The diﬀerences between the masses of three neutrinos
implies that e
ν1, ν2, ν3 possessing deﬁnite masses in a vacuum result in oscillations between neutri-
nos having no well-deﬁned masses but possessing certain ﬂavors: νe, νµ, ντ . (This phe-
nomenon is similar to well-known beats that occur when several frequencies interfere.)
The neutrino oscillation data give

−

−

≃

∆m 2

21 = (0.77

0.04)

±

×

−4 eV2

10

8

∆m 2
32
|

|

= (24

3)

±

×

−4 eV2 .

10

7.5. The photon. The photon mass is so small that no experiment has been able
to detect it. Hence, it is usually assumed that the photon mass equals zero. This means
p
that for a photon e = p, where p =
, and the triangle shown in Fig. 4 collapses to a
|
|
vertical biangle (Fig. 5).

p

e

Fig. 5

7.6 The photon and rest energy? It is logical to conclude the discussion of
single-particle mechanics by returning to the question: is the concept of rest energy e0
applicable to massless photon? It may seem at ﬁrst glance that it is not, since a photon
propagates at the speed c, however small its energy is, so that ‘a rest for it is but a
dream’ 2. This being so, how can we use the equality e0 = 0 if the photon is never at
rest? We can because our e0 is deﬁned as the energy corresponding to zero momentum,
not velocity. Obviously this energy is zero for the photon with p = 0: this is implied
by equation (1). If a particle has m = 0, p = 0, e = 0 and biangle of Fig. 5 collapses
to a point, we can say that it ‘passed away to the state of eternal rest’. Looking at
the limiting transition to zero mass, we can show that the reference frame in which a
photon is ‘eternally at rest’ has to be rigidly connected to another ‘eternally resting’
photon. Consequently, the value e0 = 0 at m = 0 is in perfect agreement with the
limiting transition.

8 Two free particles

8.1. Collision of two particles. Colliders. If two particles collide at relativistic

2This is a paraphrase of the famous line from Alexander Block. (Note added in translation).

9

energies, a comparison of the reference frame in which one of them is at rest with
a reference frame in which their common center of inertia is at rest demonstrates the
advantages of the latter. We already saw this in the case commented on by A N Skrinsky.
If the momenta of the colliding particles are equal and oppositely directed, as for example
in the LHC or LEP collider, then practically the entire energy of the colliding particles
may be spent on the creation of new particles.

8.2. Mass of a system of particles. The total energy E and the total momentum
P of an isolated system of particles are conserved. Energy and momentum being additive,
for two free particles we have

E = e1 + e2

P = p1 + p2.

We now deﬁne the quantity M by the formula

M 2 = E 2

P 2.

−

(10)

(11)

(12)

8.3. Masses are additive at v = 0. Equation (12) is invariant under Lorentz
transformations, as is equation (1). Therefore, it is logical to refer to M as the mass of
a system of two particles. In the static limit, when p1 and p2 equal zero, equation (12)
implies that

M = e01 + e02 = m1 + m2.

(13)

In the Newtonian limit, M equals the sum of the masses of the two particles with an
accuracy of (v/c)2, i.e. the masses are practically additive.

8.4. Masses are not additive at v

= 0. However, M and the masses m1 and
m2 are practically unrelated at high velocities. For instance, M exceeds the electron
mass in the LEP collider or the proton mass in the LHC by four orders of magnitude
(see section 7). The value of M is crucially dependent on the relative directions of the
momenta of two particles, since the sum of two vectors is a function of the angle between
them. Thus, we have for two photons moving in the same direction

P =

P
|
|

=

p1 + p2
|

|

= p1 + p2.

(14)

8.5. Collinear photons. For photons p1 = e1, and p2 = e2. Therefore, for two

photons moving in the same direction we can write

P = p1 + p2 = e1 + e2 = E.

(15)

Equation (12) then implies that in this case the mass of a pair of photons M = 0. And
this means that the mass of a ‘needle’ light beam is zero.

8.6. What if photons ﬂy away from each other? However, if photons ﬂy away
p2 and P = 0. In that case, the
in opposite directions with equal energies, then p1 =
rest energy of two photons simply equals the sum of their energies and the mass of this
system is

−

M = E0 = 2e.

(16)

8.7. Shock. Of course, the statement that a pair of two massless or very light
particles might have an enormous mass may shock the unprepared reader. Is there any
sense in speaking of the rest energy of two photons if ‘rest is but a dream’ to either of
them? What is at rest in this case?

10

6
8.8. The answer is obvious. The entity at rest is the geometric point – the center
of inertia of the two photons. While the rest energy for one particle is the energy hidden
in its mass, for two photons it is simply the sum of their energies (kinetic energies!)
in the reference frame in which their momenta are equal in magnitude and opposite in
direction. There is no hidden energy in this case!

8.9. What does it mean to be conserved? When saying that energy is con-
served, we mean that the sum of the energies of particles entering a reaction equals the
sum of the energies of particles created as a result of this reaction. The statement on
the conservation of momentum has a similar meaning. However, since momentum is
a vector quantity, now we are dealing with a vector sum of momenta. (In the case of
momenta we speak about three independent conservation laws: conserved are the sums
of projections of momenta on three mutually orthogonal directions.) The conserved
pi. As for the energies of individual particles
quantities are thus E =
ei their momenta pi in the laboratory reference frame, they are conserved only in elastic
forward scattering. Here, it is important to stress the diﬀerence between the concepts of
additivity and conservation. The former concept refers to the state of a system of free
particles, the latter refers to the process of interaction of the particles.

ei and P =

P

P

8.10. Is mass conserved? With E and P conserved, the mass M of a system
P 2, must be conserved as
(a set) of particles, deﬁned by the formula M 2 = E 2
well. In contrast to energy and momentum, however, mass is not additive: M
mi.
Some authors talk about the non-additivity of mass as if it were identical to its non-
conservation (e.g. we ﬁnd this statement in
9 of Field Theory by Landau and Lifshitz
§
[6].) In fact, as I emphasized above, in general neither masses nor energies or momenta
are conserved for individual particles participating in a reaction; not even the particles
themselves are. Hence, it is incorrect to speak of mass nonconservation as something in
contrast to conservation of energy and momentum.

P

=

−

8.11. Einstein’s thought experiment. Of course, the concept of the mass of two
photons ﬂying away from each other looks rather strange. However, it was by using this
very idea that Einstein came to discover the rest energy of a massive body in 1905. He
noticed that having emitted ‘two amounts of light’ in opposite directions, the body at
rest continues to stay at rest but that its mass in this thought experiment diminishes.
In the laboratory reference frame both the body and the center of inertia of the two
photons are at rest. Consequently, the mass of the initial body equals the sum of two
masses: that of the resulting body and that of the system of two photons.

→

8.12. Positronium annihilation. Nihil in Latin means nothing. A positronium is
an ‘atom’ consisting of a positron and an electron. The reaction in which a positronium
converts to two photons e+e−
γγ was given the name annihilation, perhaps because
at that time photons were not considered particles of matter. Annihilation conserves
M because E and P are conserved. In the initial state M equals the sum of masses
of the electron and the positron [minus the binding energy, which is small and in this
In the ﬁnal state M equals the sum of energies of
context irrelevant (see below)].
two photons in the positronium’s rest frame. The rest energy of the electron and the
positron thus transforms completely into the energy (kinetic) of the photons, but the
masses of the initial and ﬁnal states are identical in this process, exactly as follows from
the conservation of total energy and total momentum.

8.13. Meson decays. Likewise, when a K meson decays into two or three π mesons,
the kaon’s rest energy transforms into the sum of total energies of the pions, each of
which has the form e = ek + m. However, the mass of a system of two or three pions
produced in the decay of a kaon equals the kaon mass.

11

6
8.14. What do we call ‘matter’ ? In any decay the rest energy transforms into
the energy of motion, while the total energy of an isolated system remains conserved.
The mass of the system is conserved but the masses of its individual particles are not.
Massive particles decay into less massive particles, or sometimes into massless ones. In
elementary particle physics we call ‘particles of matter’ not only massive particles such
as protons and electrons, but also very light neutrinos and massless photons, and even
gravitons (see below). Today’s quantum ﬁeld theory treats all of them on an equal basis.
8.15. Energy without particles? Matter does not disappear in decay and annihi-
lation reactions leaving behind only energy like the Cheshire cat would leave behind only
its smile. In all these processes the carriers of energy are particles of matter. Energy
without matter (‘pure energy’) has never been observed in any process studied so far.
True, this might be not so for so-called dark energy, which was discovered in the last
years of the XX century. Dark energy manifests itself in the accelerating expansion of
the Universe. (The evidence for this accelerating expansion is found in recession veloc-
ities of remote supernovas.) Three-fourths of the entire energy in the Universe is dark
energy and its carrier appears to be the vacuum. The remaining quarter is carried by
ordinary matter (5%) and dark matter (20%). Dark energy does not aﬀect processes
with ordinary matter observed in laboratories.
In a laboratory experiment energy is
always carried by particles.

9 Non-free particles

9.1. Bodies and particles. All physical bodies consist of elementary particles. Such
elementary particles as the proton and the neutron are themselves made up of ‘more
elementary particles’ — quarks and gluons. Such particles as the electron and the
neutrino appear at our current level of understanding as truly elementary particles. The
feature common for the proton and the electron is that the masses of all protons in the
world are strictly identical, as are the masses of all electrons. In contrast to this, the
masses of all macroscopic bodies of the same type, say, of all 10-cent coins, are only
approximately equal. Practically the diﬀerence between two coins arises because the
process of minting coins is far from being ideal. What is more important here is that the
mass of a coin is not well deﬁned because diﬀerent energy levels of a coin are practically
degenerate, while the mass of the nearest excited state of a proton exceeds the proton
mass by several hundred MeV. Therefore Nature mints ideally identical protons.

9.2. Mass of a gas. In all the cases discussed above, particles moved away freely
when the mass of the system of particles was greater than the sum of their masses. Let us
turn now to a situation in which they are not free to move away. This situation is found,
for example, in the frequently discussed thought experiment with a gas of molecules or
photons in a closed vessel at rest. The total momentum of this gas is zero because the
gas is isotropic: P =
pi = 0. Hence, the total mass M of this gas equals its total
energy E (and in this case it is identical to E0) and hence to the sum of energies of
individual particles: M = E =

P

ei.

P

9.3. Mass of a heated gas. When gas in a nonmoving vessel is heated, its total
momentum remains unchanged and equal to zero while the total energy increases because
the kinetic energy of every particle increases. As a result, the mass of the gas as a whole
increases, while the mass of each individual particle remains unchanged. (Sometimes a
wrong statement may be encountered in the literature that the masses of particles (or
photons) increase as their kinetic energies are increased.)

9.4. Mass of a hot iron. In the same manner, the mass of an iron must increase as

12

it heats up, even though the masses of the vibrating atoms remain the same. However,
the set of formulas (10)–(12) written for a system of free particles cannot be applied
to the iron since the particles (atoms in this case) are not free but are tied into the
crystal lattice of the metal. Obviously, an increase in the iron mass is too small to be
measurable.

10 Atoms and atomic nuclei

10.1. On formulas (10)–(12). Why are formulas (10)–(12) unsuitable for dealing with
such non-free particles as electrons in atoms and nucleons in atomic nuclei? First and
foremost, on account of the uncertainty relation these particles do not possess precisely
deﬁned momenta. The smaller the volume to which they are conﬁned, the greater is the
uncertainty of their momenta.

10.2. Uncertainty relation. The laws of quantum mechanics, and the uncertainty
relation as one among them, are very important both for atoms and for nuclei. As we
know, the product of the momentum uncertainty ∆p and the coordinate uncertainty ∆x
must be not smaller than the quantum of action ¯h. Hence, particles within atoms have
no deﬁnite momenta and only possess a certain total momentum.

10.3. Energy of the ﬁeld. Another reason why formulas (10)–(12) are not valid
inside atoms is the fact that the space between individual particles in an atom is es-
sentially not empty but ﬁlled with a material medium, i.e. physical ﬁelds. The space
inside the atom is ﬁlled with an electromagnetic ﬁeld and the space inside a nucleus, by
a much denser and stronger ﬁeld, often described as the meson ﬁeld.

10.4. Real and virtual particles.

In classical theory particles and ﬁelds are
concepts that cannot be reduced to one another. In quantum ﬁeld theory we use the
language of Feynman diagrams, which reduce the concept of a ﬁeld to that of a virtual
= m 2. We say about such particles that they are oﬀ mass shell.
particle for which e 2
(Particles that are called on mass shell are real particles and for them e 2
p 2 = m 2.)
Also, the 4-momentum pi = (e, p) is conserved at each vertex of the diagram.

p 2

−

−

10.5. Binding energy. As a result of the presence of the ﬁeld, we need to take into
account in formula (10), E = e1 + e2, the ﬁeld energy of two closely interacting particles,
say, in the deuteron, the nucleus of heavy hydrogen. Consequently, M < m1 + m2. The
M is known as the binding energy. The mass of the deuteron
quantity ε = m1 + m2
is less than the mass of the proton plus that of the neutron of which deuteron consists.
The binding energy of nucleons in deuteron is 2.2 MeV. To break deuteron into nucleons
we need to spend an amount of energy equal to or greater than the binding energy.
The atomic nuclei of all other elements of the periodic Mendeleyev table also owe their
existence to the binding energy of their nucleons in the nucleus.

−

10.6. Fusion and ﬁssion of nuclei. We know that the binding energy per nucleon
rises to a maximum at the beginning of the periodic Mendeleyev table for the helium
nucleus and in the middle of the Table for the iron nucleus. This is why huge amounts of
kinetic energy are released when helium is formed from hydrogen in fusion reactions in
the Sun and in hydrogen bombs. In nuclear reactors and atomic bombs, kinetic energy
is released by ﬁssion reactions when heavy nuclei of uranium and plutonium break into
lighter nuclei from the middle of the periodic Mendeleyev Table.

10.7. Chemical reactions. Substantially lower energy, on the order of electron-
volts, is released in chemical reactions. It is caused by diﬀerences in binding energies
in various chemical compounds. However, the source of kinetic energy in both chemical
and nuclear reactions is the diﬀerence between the masses of initial and ﬁnal particles

13

6
(molecules or nuclei) that take part in these reactions. Since molecules and even atomic
nuclei are nonrelativistic bound systems and the concept of potential energy is appli-
cable to their components, the corresponding mass diﬀerences can be calculated using
this concept. Thus, one can explain the released energy in terms of potential energy
transforming into kinetic energy.

10.8. Coulomb’s law. The binding energy of electrons in atoms is much lower
than the electron mass. Hence, the concept of binding energy in atoms can be explained
in terms of the nonrelativistic concept of potential energy. The binding energy ε equals
(with a minus sign) the sum of positive kinetic energy of the bound particle and its
negative potential energy. The potential energy of, say, an electron in a hydrogen atom
is given by Coulomb’s law (in units, in which ¯h, c = 1):

U =

α
r

,

−

(17)

where α = e 2/¯hc = 1/137 and e is the electron charge.

10.9. More about potential energy. The concept of potential energy is deﬁned
5 “The Lagrange
§
6 “Energy”). The sum of kinetic and
§
If one of the two interacting particles is essentially

only in the Newtonian limit (see Landau and Lifshitz,Mechanics, [7]:
function of a system of material points” and
potential energies is conserved.
relativistic, or both are, the concept of potential energy is inapplicable.

10.10. Electromagnetic ﬁeld. The Coulomb ﬁeld in the theory of relativity is
the 0th component of the 4-potential of the electromagnetic ﬁeld Ai(i = 0, 1, 2, 3). The
source of the ﬁeld of a particle with electric charge e is the 4-dimensional electromagnetic
current given in the next paragraph. The interaction between two moving particles works
through propagation of the ﬁeld from one charge to the other. It is described by the
so-called Green’s function or the propagator of an electromagnetic ﬁeld. (In quantum
electrodynamics, we speak of propagation of virtual photons. The potential Ai is a
4-vector because the spin of the photon equals unity.)

10.11. Important clariﬁcation. If a virtual photon carries away a 4-momentum
q, then 4-momenta of the charged particle prior to the emission of a photon pin and after
pﬁ = q. The 4-vector p in the expression epi/E
its emission pﬁ satisfy the condition pin
for the conserved current is p = (pin + pﬁ)/2, and E = √EinEﬁ. As p 2
ﬁ = m 2, so
qp = 0. (I denoted energy here by the letter E because e in the expression for current
stands for charge. We are clearly short of letters.)

in = p 2

−

10.12. Gluons and quarks. A gluon’s spin also equals unity. At ﬁrst glance,
the interaction between gluons and quarks is completely analogous to the interaction
between photons and electrons. Not at second glance, though. The point is that all
electrons carry the same electric charge while quarks have three diﬀerent color charges.
A quark emitting or absorbing a gluon may change its color. Clearly, this means that
gluons must themselves be colored. It can be shown that there must be eight diﬀerent
color species of gluons. While photons are electrically neutral, gluons carry color charges.
It might seem that color-charged gluons
must be intense emitters of gluons, being a sort of ‘luminous light’. In fact, quantum
chromodynamics — the theory of interaction between quarks and gluons — has a spec-
tacular property known as conﬁnement. In contrast to electrons and photons, colored
quarks and gluons do not exist in a free state. These colored particles are locked ‘for
life’ inside colorless (white) hadrons. They can only change their incarceration locality.
There are no Feynman diagrams with lines of free gluons or free quarks.

10.13. Quantum chromodynamics.

14

11 Gravitation

11.1. Gravitational orbits. Various emblems often show the orbits of electrons in
atoms resembling the orbits of planets. It should be clear from the above that according
to quantum mechanics, there are no such orbits in atoms. On the other hand, quan-
tum eﬀects are absolutely inﬁnitesimal for macroscopic bodies, all the more so for such
heavy ones as planets. Consequently, their orbits are excellently described by classical
mechanics.

11.2. Newton’s constant. The potential energy of the Earth in the gravitational

ﬁeld of the Sun is given by Newton’s law

U =

GM m
r

,

−

(18)

where M is the solar mass, m is the mass of the Earth, r is distance between their
centers, and G is Newton’s constant:

(Here we use units in which c

= 1.)

G = 6.71

×

−39¯hc [GeV/c 2 ]

10

−2

.

(19)

11.3. The quantity pipk/e. The source of gravitation in Newtonian physics is
mass. In the theory of relativity the source of gravitation is the quantity pipk/e, which
plays the role of a kind of ‘gravitational current’. (The reader will recall that pi is the
energy-momentum 4-vector, and i = 0, 1, 2, 3. Consequently, the ‘gravitational current’
has four independent components instead of the ten that a most general symmetrical
four-dimensional tensor would have.) The propagation of the ﬁeld from the source to
the ‘sink’ is described by Green’s function of the gravitational ﬁeld or the propagator of
the graviton — a massless spin-2 particle. This propagator is proportional to g ilg km +
g ikg lm, where g ik is a metric tensor. (As in the case of the photon discussed
g img kl
above, the 4-momentum of the graviton is q = pin
pﬁ and the 4-momentum in the
expression for current is p = (pin + pﬁ)/2, while e = √eineﬁ. We are again short of
letters! This time, letters for indices.)

−

−

11.4. The graviton. Like the photon, the graviton is a massless particle. This
is the reason why Newton’s and Coulomb’s potentials have the form 1/r. However, in
contrast to the photon, which cannot emit photons, the graviton can and must emit
gravitons. In this respect the graviton resembles gluons, which emit gluons.

11.5. The Planck mass. Elementary particle physics often uses the concept of the

Planck mass:

mP =

¯hc
G

.

s

(20)

In units in which c, ¯h = 1 we have mP = 1/√G = 1.22
The gravitational interaction between two ultrarelativistic particles increases as the
square of their energy E in the center-of-inertia reference frame. It reaches maximum
strength at E
1/mP. How-
mP as the distance between the particles approaches r
ever, let us return from these fantastically large energies and short distances to apples
and photons in gravitational ﬁelds of the Earth and the Sun.

∼

∼

·

1019 GeV.

11.6. An apple and a photon. Consider a particle in a static gravitational ﬁeld,
for instance, that of the Sun. The source of the ﬁeld is the quantity PlPm/E where
Pl is the 4-momentum of the Sun and E is its energy. In the rest frame of the Sun l,
m = 0 and PlPm/E = M , where M is the solar mass. In this case the numerator of
g ikg 00,
the propagator of the gravitational ﬁeld g ilg km + g img kl

g ikg lm is 2g i0g k0

−

−

15

6
−

and the tensor quantity pi pk times the numerator of the propagator reduces to a simple
expression 2e 2
m 2. Hence, for a nonrelativistic apple of mass m the ‘gravitational
charge’ equals m while for a photon with energy e it equals 2e. Note the coeﬃcient 2.
Kinetic energy is attracted twice as strongly as the hidden energy locked in mass. This
simple derivation of the coeﬃcient 2 makes unnecessary the complicated derivation of
paper [8] using isotropic coordinates.

11.7. A photon in the ﬁeld of the Sun. The interaction of photons with the
gravitational ﬁeld must cause a deﬂection of a ray of light propagating from a remote
star and passing close to the solar disk. In 1915 Einstein calculated the deﬂection angle
1.75 ′′. (Here, M and R denote the solar mass
and showed that it must be 4GM/c 2R
and solar radius, respectively.) This prediction was conﬁrmed during the solar eclipse
of 1919, which stimulated a huge surge of interest in the theory of relativity.

≃

11.8. An atom in the ﬁeld of the Earth. As a nonrelativistic body on the Earth
moves upwards, its potential energy increases in proportion to its mass. Correspondingly,
the diﬀerence between energies of two levels of an atomic nucleus must be the higher,
the higher the ﬂoor of the building in which this nucleus is located.

11.9. A photon’s energy is conserved. On the other hand, the frequency ω of
a photon propagating through a static gravitational ﬁeld, and correspondingly its total
energy e = hω, should remain unchanged.

As a result, a photon emitted on the ground ﬂoor of a building from a transition
between two energy levels of a nucleus will be unable to produce a reverse transition in
the same nucleus on the upper ﬂoor. This theoretical prediction was conﬁrmed in the
1960s by Pound and Rebka [9] who used the just discovered M¨ossbauer eﬀect, which
makes it possible to measure the tiniest shifts in nuclear energy levels.

However, the wavelength changes. A photon propagating through a static gravita-
tional ﬁeld like a stone has its total energy e and frequency ω conserved. However, its
momentum and therefore wavelength change as the distance to the gravitating body
changes.

11.10. Refractive index. As a photon moves away from the source of a gravi-
tational ﬁeld, its velocity increases and tends to c, and when it approaches the source,
it decreases. Hence, the gravitational ﬁeld, like a transparent medium, has a refractive
index. This is a visually clear explanation of the deﬂection of light in the ﬁeld of the
Sun and in the gravitational lenses of galaxies. Shapiro experimentally discovered the
decrease in the velocity of photons near the Sun when measuring the delay of the radar
echo returned by planets.

11.11. Clocks and gravitation. Ordinary clocks, like atomic clocks, are ticking
the faster, the higher they are lifted. Let two synchronized clocks A and B be placed
on the ﬁrst ﬂoor. If we move clock A to the second ﬂoor and then, say, a day later,
move clock B to the second ﬂoor as well, clock A will be ahead of B as A has been
ticking faster than B for 24 hours. Nevertheless, both A and B will continue to serve
as identically reliable stopwatches. When every point in space is assigned an individual
clock, one in fact assumes that all clocks tick at a rate that is independent of the distance
to gravitating bodies (in our case, on which ﬂoor of the building they are). However,
this is not true for ordinary clocks. In order to distinguish extraordinary clocks from
ordinary clocks, we will refer to extraordinary ones as ‘cloned’. As we saw above, the
frequency of light measured using clocks placed on various ﬂoors is independent of the
ﬂoor number. If, however, it is measured with ‘cloned’ local clocks, we discover that it
is the lower, the higher is the ﬂoor. One interpretation of the Pound–Rebka experiment,
stating that the energy of a vertically moving photon decreases with height, like the

16

kinetic energy of a stone thrown upwards, is based on precisely this argument. However,
a drop in kinetic energy of the stone is accompanied with an increase in its potential
energy, so that the total energy is conserved. Now, a photon has no potential energy, so
that its energy in a static gravitational ﬁeld remains constant.

12 Epistemology and linguistics

12.1. Physics and epistemology. Episteme in Greek means knowledge. Epistemics
is the science of knowledge, a relatively young branch of epistemology, the theory of
knowledge and cognition. Obviously, the problems I discuss in this talk concern not
only physics but epistemology, too.

12.2. Physics and semantics. The Greek attribute ‘semanticos’ (signifying) was
used in linguistics already by Aristotle. However, what are the links tying the science of
languages — linguistics — and semantics — the science of words and symbols, an element
of linguistics — to physics? This is the right moment to recall the words allegedly said
by V A Fock: “Physics is an essentially simple science. The most important problem in
it is to understand what each letter denotes.” XX century physics drastically changed
our understanding of what a vacuum and matter are, and connected in a new way
such properties of matter as energy, momentum, and mass. The elaboration of the
fundamental concepts of physics has not been completed and is unlikely to end in the
foreseeable future. This is one of the reasons why it is so important to choose the
adequate words and letters when discussing physical phenomena and theories.

12.3. Concepts glued together’. Newton’s Principia ‘glued together’ the con-
cepts of mass and matter (substance): “mass is proportional to density and volume.” In
Einstein’s papers mass is ‘glued together’ with inertia and gravitation (the inertial and
gravitational masses). And energy is glued to matter.

12.4. The archetype. According to dictionaries, an archetype is the historically
original form (the protoform), the original concept or word, or the original type (proto-
type). The concept of the archetype keenly interested Pauli, who in 1952 published a
paper on the eﬀect of archetypical notions on the creation of natural-science theories by
Kepler. It is possible that the concept of mass is just the archetypical notion that glued
together the concepts of matter, inertia, and weight.

12.5. Atom and archetype. Atom and Archetype — that was the title chosen
for the English translation from German of the book [10] presenting the correspondence
between Wolfgang Pauli and the leading German proponent of psychoanalysis Carl Jung,
covering the period from 1932 to 1958. W. Pauli and C. Jung discussed, among other
things, the material nature of time and the possibility of communicating with people who
lived several centuries or millennia before us. It is widely known that Pauli treated rather
seriously the eﬀect named after him: when he walked into an experimental laboratory,
measuring equipment broke down.

12.6. Poets on terminology. David Samoilov on words: “We wipe them clean
as we clean glass. This is our trade.” Vladimir Mayakovskii: “The street is writhing
for want of tongue.
It has no nothing for yelling or talking.” (Translated by Nina
Iskandaryan.) Many an author responds to the dearth of precise terms and inability to
use them by resorting to meaningless words like ‘rest mass’ which impart smoothness
and ‘energetics’ to texts, just as ‘blin’ 3 does to ordinary speech.

3‘Blin’ is a slang euphemism for a ‘four-letter word’ in vulgar Russian.

17

12.7. How to teach physics. Terms need ‘wiping clean’ and ‘unglueing’. The
‘umbilical cord’ connecting the modern physical theory with the preceding ‘mother the-
ory’ needs careful cutting in teaching. (In the case of the theory of relativity the mother
was the ‘centaur’ composed of Maxwell’s ﬁeld theory and Newton’s mechanics, with rel-
ativistic mass serving as the umbilical cord.) Let us recall the title of F Klein’s famous
book Elementary Mathematics from an Advanced Standpoint. The landscape of modern
physics must be contemplated from an advanced standpoint: not from a historical gully
but from the pinnacle of symmetry principles. I ﬁrmly believe that it is unacceptable
to claim that the dependence of mass on velocity is an experimental fact and thus hide
from the student that it is a mere interpretational ‘factoid’. (Dictionaries explain that
a factoid looks very much like a fact but is trusted only because we ﬁnd it in printed
texts.)

13 Concluding remarks

13.1. The ‘E = mc 2 problem’: could it be avoided? One is tempted to think
that the ‘E = mc 2 problem’ would not arise from the ﬁrst place if the quantity E/c 2 —
the proportionality coeﬃcient between velocity and momentum — were identiﬁed with a
new physical quantity christened as, say, ‘inertia’ or ‘iner’; it would be identical to mass
as momentum tended to zero. As a result, mass would become ‘rest inertia’. Likewise,
another new quantity could be introduced — ‘heaviness’ or ‘grav’ — pipk/E reducing to
mass at zero momentum. But physicists preferred ‘to refrain from multiplying entities’
and from introducing new physical quantities. They formulated instead new, more
p 2c 2 = m 2c 4 and p = vE/c2.
general relations between old quantities, for example E 2
Unfortunately, many authors attempt to retain even in relativistic physics such non-
relativistic equations as p = mv, and such nonrelativistic glued-up concepts as ‘mass is
a measure of inertia’ and ‘mass is a measure of gravitation’; as a result, they prefer to
use the notion of velocity-dependent mass. It is amazing how again and again a physi-
cist would choose the ﬁrst of these paths (new equations) in his research papers and the
second one (old glued-up concepts) in science-popularizing and pedagogical activities.
This could of course only produce unbelievable confusion in the minds of those who read
popular texts and blindly follow the authority.

−

13.2. On the reliability of science. An opinion that has become widely publicized
recently is that science in general and physics in particular are untrustworthy. Many
popularizers of science create the impression that the theory of relativity proved New-
ton’s mechanics wrong just as chemistry proved alchemy wrong and astronomy proved
astrology wrong. Such declarations are a crude distortion of the essence of scientiﬁc
revolutions. Newton’s mechanics remains a correct science today, in the XXI century,
and will continue to be correct forever. The discovery of the theory of relativity only put
bounds on the domain of applicability of Newton’s mechanics to velocities much smaller
than the speed of light c. It also demonstrated its approximate nature in this domain
(to within corrections of the order of v 2/c 2). Similarly, the discovery of quantum me-
chanics put bounds on the domain of applicability of classical mechanics to phenomena
for which the quantity of action is large in comparison with the quantum of action ¯h.
Quite to the contrary, the domain where astrology and alchemy exist is that of preju-
dice, superstition, and ignorance. It is rather funny that those who compare Newton’s
mechanics with astrology typically believe that mass depends on velocity.

13.3. Recent publications. Additional information on the aspects discussed above

can be found in [11, 12].

18

13.4. On the title. My good friend and expert in the theory of relativity read
the slides of this talk and advised me to drop Pythagoras’s name from the title. I chose
not to follow his advice as in the relativity-related literature I had never come across a
discussion of right-angled triangles without the approximate extraction of square roots.
13.5. Acknowledgment I am grateful to T Basaglia, A Bettini, S I Blnnikov, V F
Chub, M A Gottlieb E G Gulyaeva, E A Ilyina, C Jarllscog, V I Kisin, B A Klumov, B L
Okun, S G Tikhodeev, M B Voloshin, V R Zoller for their advice and help. The work was
supported by the grants NSh-5603.2006.2, NSh-4568.2006.2 and RFBR-07-02-00830-a.

References

[1] Okun L B “Formula Einshteina: E0 = mc 2. ‘Ne smeetsya li Gospod’ Bog’ ?” Usp.
Fiz. Nauk 178 541 (2008) [“The Einstein formula E0 = mc 2 ‘Isn’t the Lord laughing’ ?”
Phys. Usp. 51 513 (2008)], arXiv:0808.0437

[2] Klein F Elementarmathematik vom h¨oeheren Standpunkte aus. Erster Band,
Arithmetik, Algebra, Analysis 3 Auﬂage (Berlin: Verlag fon Julius Springer, 1924)
[Translated into English: Elementary Mathematics from an Advanced Standpoint, Arith-
metics, Algebra, Analysis (New York: Dover Publ., 2007); Translated into Russian
(Moscow: Nauka, 1987)]

[3] Poincar´e H ”Sur la dynamique de l’electron”, Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico
di Palermo 21 129 (1906) [Translated into Russian: “O dinamike elektrona” (“On the
dynamics of electron”) Izbrannye Trudy (Selected Works) Vol. 3 (Moscow: Nauka, 1974)
p. 433]

[4] Minkowski H ”Raum und Zeit” Phys. Z., 10, 104–111 (1909) [Translated into
Russian: “Prostranstvo i Vremya” (“Space and time”), in Lorentz H A, Poincare H,
Einstein A, Minkowski H Printsip Otnositel’nosti. Sbornik Rabot Klassikov Relyativizma
(The Principle of Relativity. Collected Papers of Classics of Relativism) (Eds V K
Frederiks, D D Ivanenko) (Moscow – Leningrad: ONTI, 1935) pp. 181 – 203]

[5] Hawking S The Universe in a Nutshell (New York: Bantam Books, 2001) [Trans-
lated into Russian (Translated from English by A Sergeev) St.-Petersburg: Amfore,
2007)]

[6] Landau L D, Lifshitz E M Teoriya polya (The Classical Theory of Fields) (Moscow:

Nauka, 1988) [Translated into English (Amsterdam: Reed Elsevier, 2000)]

[7] Landau L D, Lifshitz E M Mekhanika (Mechanics) (Moscow: Nauka, 1988) [Trans-

lated into English (Amsterdam: Elsevier Sci., 2003)]

[8] Okun L B “The concept of mass” Phys. Today 42 (6) 31–36 (1989); Okun L B

“Putting to rest mass misconceptions” Phys. Today 43 (5) 13, 15, 115, 117 (1990)

[9] Pound R V, Rebka G A (Jr.) “Apparent weight of photons” Phys. Rev. Lett. 4

337–341 (1960)

[10] Pauli W, Jung C Atom and Archetype: Pauli/Jung Letters. 1932–1958. (Ed. C
A Meyer) (Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 2001); Meier C A (Herausgegeben)
Wolfgang Pauli, C. G. Jung Ein Briefwechsel 1932–1958 Berlin: Springer-Verlag, (1992)
[11] Okun L B “Chto takoe massa? (Iz istorii teorii otnositel’nosti)” (‘What is mass?
(From the history of relativity theory)’), in Issledovaniya po Istorii Fiziki i Mekhaniki.
2007 (Research on the History of Physics and Mechanics. 2007) (Executive Ed. G M
Idlis) (Moscow: Nauka, 2007)

[12] Okun L B “The evolution of the concepts of energy, momentum and mass from
Newton and Lomonosov to Einstein and Feynman”, in Proc. of the 13th Lomonosov
Conf. August 23, 2007 (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc) (in press)

19

