8
0
0
2

t
c
O
7
2

]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[

1
v
3
0
9
4
.
0
1
8
0
:
v
i
X
r
a

The direction of time in quantum ﬁeld theory

Peter Morgan
Physics Department, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

November 7, 2018

Abstract

The algebra of observables associated with a quantum ﬁeld theory
is invariant under the connected component of the Lorentz group and
under parity reversal, but it is not invariant under time reversal. If
we take general covariance seriously as a long-term goal, the algebra
of observables should be time-reversal invariant, and any breaking of
time-reversal symmetry will have to be described by the state over
the algebra. In consequence, the modiﬁed algebra of observables is a
presentation of a classical continuous random ﬁeld.

R

First some mathematical preliminaries are necessary. Quantum ﬁeld
theory is presented at an elementary level in terms of an operator-valued
distribution, ˆφ(x). That this is a distribution reﬂects the fact that ˆφ(x)
is not itself an operator that we can associate with a measurement; for
an operator, we have to smooth the quantum ﬁeld by averaging, to obtain
ˆφf =
f (x) ˆφ(x)d4x, where the test function f (x) is generally taken to be
a Schwartz space function, which is zero at inﬁnity and smooth both in
real space and, as ˜f (k), in Fourier space. There are notational, conceptual,
and mathematical advantages to working with the smeared operators ˆφf
instead of with the operator-valued distribution ˆφ(x), and we can always
get back to operator-valued distributions, albeit improperly, by using Dirac
delta functions. Routinely, ˆφf is expressed as the sum of non-observable
creation and annihilation operators a†
f ∗, where af and
a†
f ∗ are both complex linear in f to ensure that ˆφf is complex linear. The
quantized Klein-Gordon ﬁeld, for example (because it is the most elementary
non-interacting quantum ﬁeld), can be straightforwardly presented in terms
of commutation relations between creation and annihilation operators[1],

f and af , ˆφf = af + a†

ag, a†
f i
h

= (f, g),

af , ag
h

i

= 0.

(1)

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
The Hermitian inner product (f, g) is manifestly Lorentz invariant, except
for time reversal,

(f, g) = ¯h

d4k
(2π)4 2πδ(kµkµ

−

Z

m2)θ(k0) ˜f ∗(k)˜g(k).

(2)

This ﬁxes the algebraic structure of the quantized Klein-Gordon ﬁeld op-
erators. In particular, this construction ensures that the ﬁeld ˆφf satisﬁes
microcausality, so that [ ˆφf , ˆφg] = 0 whenever the real-space supports of the
functions f and g are space-like separated (in terms of operator-valued dis-
tributions, [ ˆφ(x), ˆφ(y)] = 0 whenever x and y are space-like separated). The
θ(k0) factor, however, which implements the requirement that the
energy spectrum of the Hamiltonian operator must be positive,
introduces an explicit direction of time into quantum ﬁeld theory.
The Hamiltonian operator is the generator of time translations in quantum
theory, and is required to be in the forward time-like direction, so this is not
a surprise, but it deserves attention. Note that because of the connection
with time translations and the positivity of the Hamiltonian, non-invariance
under time-reversal transcends the straightforward free quantum ﬁeld model
that is described above.

The nature of this direction of time in quantum ﬁeld theory has perhaps
been less considered than it might have been because of the ways in which
quantum ﬁeld theory is usually presented. Especially curious is what hap-
pens if we change the inner product so that there is no explicit direction of
time,

(f, g)C = 1

2 ¯h

Z

d4k
(2π)4 2πδ(kµkµ

−

m2) ˜f ∗(k)˜g(k) = 1

2 [(f, g) + (g∗, f ∗)] . (3)

(f ∗, g)

g∗ ] + [a†

f ∗ , ag] = 1

2 [(g∗, f ) + (f ∗, g)

In consequence of this choice, the quantum ﬁeld ˆφf becomes classical — in
fact a presentation of a continuous random ﬁeld — in the sense that
[ ˆφf , ˆφg] = [af , a†

(g∗, f )] = 0
(4)
whatever functions we use for f and g. In this Hilbert space formalism, in
other words, the choice of a direction of time is the diﬀerence between clas-
sical and quantum ﬁelds. If we take it that the algebra of observables ought
to be invariant under the whole Lorentz group, including under the discrete
parity and time-reversal symmetries — indeed, it ought to be diﬀeomor-
phism invariant, but that is for another day — then any lack of parity and
time-reversal symmetry should be described by the state over the algebra of
observables.

−

−

2

To consider the meaning of test functions and the projection to positive
frequencies in the inner product, we will specialize to the vacuum sector,
which is constructed by deﬁning a vacuum state
as the zero eigenstate
of all annihilation operators, af
= 0 for all test functions. The vacuum
0
|
i
sector, then, is the Fock space of states constructed by applying creation
g1a†
, a†
operators to the vacuum, a†
, ... (more abstractly, the Fock
0
g |
i
space can be constructed by using the GNS construction[2, Ch. 3]).

0
i
|

g2 |

0
i

There are two ways in which this algebra of operators can be used in
the vacuum sector. Most obviously, we could measure ˆφf in the vacuum
for an ensemble of measurements in the vacuum state we would
state;
2kk! (f ∗, f )k,
obtain a probability distribution with moments
= 0, which correspond to a normal probability distribution
0
h
|
with mean 0 and variance (f ∗, f ) 1. This approach, however, is inappropri-
ate for most real measurement apparatuses, which are tuned to give a zero
response to the vacuum. A diﬀerent approach, which is almost always used
in some variant in quantum optics2, is to use the projection operator

= (2k)!

ˆφ2k
f |

ˆφ2k−1
f

0
i
|

0
|
h

0
i

ˆXf =

a†
0
0
f |
|
i h
(f, f )

af

,

(5)

very often with an improper pure wave-number test function3. This kind
of measurement asks whether a state resonates with the measurement ap-
paratus; for example, in the vacuum state the moments of the probability
distribution are all zero, signifying that we always observe 0; in the nor-
the moments of the probability distribution
malized state

a†
g |
√(g,g)
2, signifying that we observe 1 with probability p
(f, g)
|

are all p =

= 1

i
1
(g,g)(f,f ) |
1 ˆφf is only an observable if ˆφ†

f = ˆφf , which requires that f ∗ = f is real, so that
(f, f )C = (f, f ); for this observable vacuum classical and quantum probabilities coincide.
2The quantized electromagnetic ﬁeld can be constructed exactly as above[3, 4], except

0
i

g
|

that the inner product includes the components of bivector test functions fµν and gµν,

(f, g)EM = ¯h

Z

d4k
(2π)4 2πδ(kαkα)θ(k0) ˜f ∗

µβ(k)kµkν ˜g β

ν (k).

The algebraic structure is thus identical above the level of the inner product, but the
geometrical structure in space-time that is expressed by the inner product is diﬀerent.

3We cannot use the (f, f ) normalization constant to construct a true projection oper-
ator for a pure wave-number test function. (f, f ) is not deﬁned for a delta function in
Fourier space, a pure frequency in a single direction that is evenly distributed over all of
space-time. Note that the commutator [ ˆXf , ˆXg] is generally non-zero when the supports
of f and g are space-like separated, so quantum optics formalisms which use this or similar
operators are not causally local in this sense. Nor is ˆXf linear in f .

3

−

p. Sometimes the measurement apparatus will
and 0 with probability 1
resonate, sometimes it won’t, depending on how closely parallel the test
functions g and f are in terms of the inner product that deﬁnes the alge-
braic structure. Quantum optics has constructed many useful states and
measurement operators that are used to model experiments, which will not
be further rehearsed here.

−

−

(g

, f
∗

, f
∗

2 [(f, g)

(f, g)C = 1

2 [(f, g) + (g

Every construction of an observable that is possible in quantum ﬁeld
theory is also possible for a classical continuous random ﬁeld, using the
classical inner product (f, g)C = 1
)] instead of using the
∗
quantum inner product (f, g); superpositions and interference are just as
possible for continuous random ﬁelds as for quantum ﬁelds. What, then,
is the diﬀerence between the classical and the quantum inner products?
Firstly, the diﬀerence between the quantum and classical inner products,
)], is zero when the supports of f and
(f, g)
∗
g are space-like separated. Additionally, there is precisely a factor of two
between the quantum and classical inner products if classical modeling uses
only test functions that are restricted to positive frequencies (a choice that
results in the analytic signal in classical signal analysis, so we may perhaps
use the name analytic test function). With test functions used in classical
models restricted to positive frequency, quantum optics and a classical con-
tinuous random ﬁeld version of quantum optics are operationally identical,
albeit with an inessential factor of 2 4.
In eﬀect, the continuous random
ﬁeld exploits more degrees of freedom than the corresponding quantum ﬁeld
theory, and has the same functional dependence on the common degrees of
freedom, so it can accommodate empirical data at least as well. Note that
it is a commonplace in classical signal analysis that the perfect measure-
ment of signal frequency is incompatible with the measurement of the signal
for only a ﬁnite time, so that — for example, because signal analysis is a
large subject — the Wigner function is a common tool in classical signal
analysis[5]. I have discussed the diﬀerences, similarities, and relationships
between the classical and quantum theories of measurement and their alge-
bras of observables, from a ﬁeld theory point of view, elsewhere[1, 6, 3, 7]5.

4Measurements constitute a set of constraints on the ans¨atze that are chosen as models
for a given set of experiments. If the constraints are satisﬁable by f , they are also satisﬁable
by a constant multiple of f .

5Of related interest, Hobson[8, 9] has recommended using ideas from quantum ﬁeld
theory when motivating quantum mechanics at the undergraduate level.
In Hobson’s
approach, however, ﬁelds have a particle aspect that causes discrete events, whereas I
prefer to understand events as the result of resonances of the ﬁeld with the carefully
tuned thermodynamic properties of experimental apparatus that are not point-like.

4

There is a signiﬁcant sense in which quantum ﬁeld theory is overcon-
strained by the restriction to positive frequency: there are no known inter-
acting quantum ﬁeld theories on Minkowski space.
In contrast, with the
introduction of negative frequencies a large class of interacting continuous
random ﬁeld theories can be constructed[3], following an approach that was
tried but abandoned for quantum ﬁelds in the 1960s. Hence, there is both a
signiﬁcant mathematical advantage and a signiﬁcant conceptual advantage
to using classical continuous random ﬁeld models consistently in Physics.
Of course there may be other constraints that have not yet been considered
that will make continuous random ﬁelds either impossible or impractical, or
simply on balance not attractive to Physicists, but note that Bell inequalities
are not more problematic than they are for quantum ﬁelds[10, 7].

If we eliminate the direction of time from the algebra of observables,
there will presumably be a signiﬁcant breaking of time invariance in the
states we construct, for we know that it is most often possible to model
experiments in Physics using only ﬁelds, without having to resort to their
time-reversed anti-ﬁelds6. A continuous random ﬁeld formalism eﬀectively
has no anti-ﬁelds because the algebra of observables is already time-reversal
invariant.

The immediate consequences for quantum ﬁeld theory of enforcing time-
reversal invariance of the algebra of observables are extreme:
instead of
using quantum ﬁeld models, we use continuous random ﬁeld models, and we
can use Lie ﬁelds to express non-Gaussian vacuum correlations[3], instead
of having to resort to renormalization. The Lie ﬁeld approach that is made
available when we require time-reversal invariance of the algebra of observ-
ables results in a reconceptualization of Physics that goes far beyond the
Nature of Time. The Lie ﬁeld approach, however, is essentially an empiri-
cist intermediary for future theories, because only correlations are explicitly
modeled; causality, which is an essential part of the explanatory and pre-
dictive power of a theory but cannot be directly measured in the quantum
mechanical world of discrete measurement events, is only emergently part
of a continuous random ﬁeld model.

References

[1] P. Morgan, “A succinct presentation of the quantized Klein-Gordon
ﬁeld, and a similar quantum presentation of the classical Klein-Gordon

6Since “anti-ﬁeld” is not to my knowledge an existing terminology, please substitute

“anti-particle” if you cannot yet give up particle language.

5

random ﬁeld”, Phys. Lett. A 338, 8 (2005); arXiv:quant-ph/0411156.

[2] R. Haag, Local Quantum Physics, 2nd ed. (Springer, Berlin, 1996).

[3] P. Morgan, “Lie ﬁelds revisited”, J. Math. Phys. 48, 122302 (2007);

arXiv:0704.3420 [quant-ph].

[4] R. Menikoﬀ and D. H. Sharp, “A gauge invariant formulation of quan-
tum electrodynamics using local currents”, J. Math. Phys. 18, 471
(1977).

[5] L. Cohen, “Time-Frequency Distributions — A Review”, Proc. IEEE

77, 941 (1989).

[6] P. Morgan, “Models of Measurement for Quantum Fields and for Clas-
sical Continuous Random Fields”, AIP Conf. Proc. 889, 187 (2007);
arXiv:quant-ph/0607165.

[7] P. Morgan, “The straw man of quantum physics”, arXiv:0810.2545

[quant-ph].

[8] A. Hobson, “Electrons as ﬁeld quanta: A better way to teach quantum
physics in introductory general physics courses”, Am. J. Phys. 73, 630
(2006).

[9] A. Hobson, “Teaching Quantum Physics Without Paradoxes”, The

Physics Teacher 45, 96 (2007).

[10] P. Morgan, “Bell inequalities for random ﬁelds”, J. Phys. A: Math.

Gen. 39, 7441 (2006); arXiv:cond-mat/0403692.

6

