See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/343643978

Learning to Estimate the Body Shape Under Clothing From a Single 3-D Scan

Article  in  IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics · August 2020

DOI: 10.1109/TII.2020.3016591

CITATIONS
24

4 authors, including:

Pengpeng Hu

Coventry University

27 PUBLICATIONS   159 CITATIONS   

SEE PROFILE

READS
608

V. Dadarlat

Universitatea Tehnica Cluj-Napoca

70 PUBLICATIONS   236 CITATIONS   

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

AI-based point cloud processing View project

Special Issue: 3D Reconstruction with RGB‐D Cameras and Multi-Sensors View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Pengpeng Hu on 26 January 2021.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2020.3016591, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

1

Learning to Estimate the Body Shape Under
Clothing from a Single 3D Scan

Pengpeng Hu, Nastaran Nourbakhsh Kaashki, Vasile Dadarlat, and Adrian Munteanu

Abstract—Estimating the 3D human body shape and pose un-
der clothing is important for many applications, including virtual
try-on, non-contact body measurement, and avatar creation for
virtual reality. Existing body shape estimation methods formulate
this task as an optimization problem by ﬁtting a parametric body
model to a single dressed-human scan or a sequence of dressed-
human meshes for a better accuracy. This is impractical for many
applications that require fast acquisition such as gaming and
virtual try-on due to the expensive computation. In this paper, we
propose the ﬁrst learning-based approach to estimate the human
body shape under clothing from a single dressed-human scan,
dubbed Body PointNet. The proposed Body PointNet operates
directly on raw point clouds and predicts the undressed body in
a coarse-to-ﬁne manner. Due to the nature of the data – aligned
paired dressed scans and undressed bodies; and genus-0 manifold
meshes (i.e. single-layer surfaces) – we face a major challenge of
lacking training data. To address this challenge, we propose a
novel method to synthesize the dressed-human pseudo-scans and
corresponding ground truth bodies. A new large-scale dataset,
dubbed BUG (Body Under virtual Garments)
is presented,
employed for the learning task of body shape estimation from 3D
dressed-human scans. Comprehensive evaluations show that the
proposed Body PointNet outperforms the state-of-the-art methods
in terms of both accuracy and running time.

Index Terms—Body PointNet, Body shape under clothing,
Body Pose Estimation, OffsetNet, 3D scanning, dressed human
dataset.

I. INTRODUCTION

A CCURATE estimation of shape under clothing is a

crucial task to quite a number of emerging promising
applications such as virtual try-on tools, non-contact body
measurement, and avatar creation for virtual reality. Despite
the fact that accurate geometry of a body can be directly
obtained by scanning undressed people [1], [2], the procedure
is inconvenient to most people and is also an infringement of
the right to privacy. This is also the case when people need to
wear skin-tight clothes to get scanned. Therefore, predicting
shape and pose of a body under clothing is highly motivated.
This task is extremely challenging due to the complicated
non-rigid clothing deformations resulting from variations in
the subject pose and shape spaces. Hence, estimation of
shape under clothing is an ill-posed problem. Besides, data

Pengpeng Hu is with the Department of Electronics and Informatics,Vrije

Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, email: phu@etrovub.be.

Nastaran Nourbakhsh Kaashki

is with the Department of Electron-
ics and Informatics,Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, email:
nknourba@etrovub.be.

Vasile Dadarlat is with the Department of Computer Science, Technical

University Cluj, Romania, email: vasile.dadarlat@cs.utcluj.ro

Adrian Munteanu

is with

Informatics,Vrije Universiteit
acmuntea@etrovub.be (see: http://www.etrovub.be/acmuntea).

Brussels,

the Department
Brussel,

of Electronics
Belgium,

and
email:

acquisition and body prediction model also highly effects on
the prediction accuracy.
To overcome the aforementioned, a limited number of meth-
ods have been proposed to predict the body under clothing.
Typically, these methods formulate this task as an optimization
problem and incorporate constraints such as the body should
lie inside the clothing surface. In [6] a parametric shape model
named SCAPE [7] was used in order to ﬁt the dressed-human
scan sequence by optimizing the shape using different poses.
As the SCAPE model
is overly-smooth and lacks feature
details, in [8] the SMPL [9] model was used in order to ﬁt the
dressed-human temporal sequence based on an optimization
procedure. The approach in [25] jointly captures clothing
geometry and body shape using separate meshes from the
3D mesh sequence. However, all these methods require mesh
sequences as input, and this can be obtained using expensive
capture systems under controlled conditions, severely limiting
their use in practical applications. [5] deformed a body tem-
plate to a single dressed mesh based on ICP (iterated closest
point) registration and Laplacian mesh deformation. Even
though this method can take a single dressed scan as input, it is
still an optimization-based method, which is time-consuming.
Besides, its simple clothing ﬁtting solution applies different
weights to tight and wide clothing, which limits the precision
and yields limited accuracy of the biometric measurements. In
contrast to these 3D approaches, some methods also explored
reconstructing body models from 2D images or videos [26],
[27], [28]. However, these methods are much less accurate
than 3D-based methods due to the ambiguity that cannot be
avoided when converting from 2D to 3D.
Although deep learning has been successfully applied on 3D
data [3], [4], no existing learning-based method has been
proposed so far for body shape estimation from 3D dressed-
there are two main reasons
human scans. We argue that
for this. First, traditional deep networks convert the irregular
point clouds to data structures suitable for CNN operations,
such as a collection of 2D images corresponding to different
views, or 3D voxel grids; however, this will result in un-
necessarily voluminous data. Moreover, converting geometric
data is not time- and memory-efﬁcient, thereby not usable
in real world applications. Recently, due to the contribution
of PointNet [10], point clouds can be directly provided as
input to neural networks. Second reason has to do with the
lack of a 3D dataset of dressed/undressed human bodies.
Training a neural network for body shape estimation requires
a large-scale dataset consisting of dressed-human bodies and
their corresponding undressed bodies. Limited by scanning
technology, 3D scanners can only obtain the outmost surface of

1551-3203 (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Vrije Universiteit Brussel. Downloaded on January 26,2021 at 13:49:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2020.3016591, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

2

the subject, therefore, it is impossible to concurrently capture
the underlying body geometry occluded by the clothes. One
intuitive solution is to ﬁrst ask a subject to take off their clothes
keeping in a static pose or perform a motion during scanning,
and then ask this subject to put their clothes back on and
take the same static pose or perform the same motion during
scanning [1]. To scan the static pose this way is possible if
the subject is trained to keep absolutely still during scanning
or if a fast-enough scanner is used. However, due to the very
large size requirement of the training dataset, it is extremely
expensive and time-consuming to do data collection in this
way. Furthermore, to scan a motion sequence in this way,
replicating identical movements with and without clothes, is
nearly impossible for a human subject and the result cannot
be perfect [8] because nobody can perform the absolute same
motion twice in the real world. Pose ﬁtting and penetration
resolving can only visually “ﬁx” this issue [1], but will
introduce additional errors.
Inspired by the recent success of geometric deep neural
networks [10], [18], in this paper we aimed at learning a
non-linear function that converts dressed-human scans to the
corresponding undressed body shapes. Point clouds are the
raw data produced by 3D scanners. Converting point clouds
to other representations may lead to artifacts due to incomplete
information in the scanned 3D data. The alternative is to
propose deep networks speciﬁcally designed for point clouds.
Considering this, we propose Body PointNet to estimate body
shape and pose from a single dressed-human scan. Body
PointNet is an Encoder-Decoder architecture. Given a single
dressed-human scan, the encoder outputs a feature descrip-
tor. Subsequently, constrained by the feature descriptor, the
decoder progressively predicts the complete undressed body
points. Body PointNet is trained in an end-to-end manner.
When the ground truth is difﬁcult or impossible to be obtained
from the real world, a synthetic dataset is the second-best
solution, which has been proved to be successful in training
networks, such as [11], [12]. To generate realistic clothes
for virtual characters, one can use numerous methods [13],
[14] and commercial software programs, one of which being
Clo3D(www.clo3d.com).
As mentioned above, the goal of this study is to estimate body
shape and pose from a dressed-human scan that has only a
single-layer point cloud. However, the virtual dressed-human
body generated by any cloth simulation software has two or
more layers—at least the body skin surface and one clothing
layer; these should not and cannot be both directly provided
as input to a neural network for body shape estimation. The
reason is that one has to simulate the restriction of real-
world scanning systems having access to only the outermost
surface. Besides, these methods are time-consuming hence
they are not suitable for dressing a large-scale body dataset. To
address these two main issues, we propose a novel method to
synthesize dressed scans and paired bodies. We also propose a
new dataset, termed Body Under virtual Garments (BUG), for
training and quantitative evaluation. BUG contains 0.6 million
high resolution clothed pseudo-scans and 0.2 million ground
truth bodies.
The main contributions in this paper include:

• Body PointNet, a novel deep learning framework of body
shape estimation from a single dressed-human 3D scan.
To our best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst paper estimating
the body shape from dressed-human scans via deep
learning in an end-to-end manner.

• A novel method of fast synthesizing the dressed human

scans.

• A novel large-scale dressed-human dataset consisting of
100,000 male and 100,000 female subjects with various
shapes and poses under 3 clothing styles, which is used
for training machine learning algorithms and to quantita-
tively evaluate human body estimations.

II. RELATED WORK

A. Body Shape and Pose Under Clothing

Parametric body models are commonly used to reconstruct
body models under clothing. Existing methods can be mainly
classiﬁed into ﬁve categories according to the type of input:
a) 3D sequences; b) single 3D scans; c) single RGB images;
d) multi-view RGB images; and e) others. [15], [16] ﬁt
the SCAPE model to a Microsoft Kinect capture sequence
by locking some parameters controlling identity over the
duration of the sequence. These methods assume that
the
human captured in the sequence is only wearing tight clothing
which does not deform depending on pose. [6], [8], [25]
addressed estimation of body under wide clothing. However,
these methods are sensitive to temporal alignment, which
is usually difﬁcult and computationally expensive. In [5],
a body template is deformed to ﬁt the scan based on ICP
registration and Laplacian mesh deformation. However, its
simple cloth ﬁtting solution applies different weights to tight
and wide clothing, yielding limited accuracy of the resulting
biometric measurements. Employing simple RGB images as
input attracts many researchers with the goal of reconstructing
body shapes and poses from it. However,
these methods
focus only on ﬁtting a parametric body model to joints and
silhouettes of the clothed-body images [26], [27] and are
prone to uncertainties. In [17], the SCAPE model is ﬁtted
to a set of calibrated multi-view images or video sequences.
The clothing styles worn on the subjects can be arbitrary, but
the subjects must be captured in a number of different poses
or in a long dynamic sequence. [31] presented a method
of estimating body from front- and side-view silhouettes
of the dressed person images. This method highly depends
on regressing 3D body landmarks from the silhouettes,
assuming that the body is only in an A-pose. [29] trained four
regressors to regress the SMPL parameters from the selected
body measurements. In [30] a process called crowd-shaping
was proposed to implement body shape reconstruction from
standard linguistic descriptions of a 3D shape. Similar to
[31], [29], [30] cannot obtain the target pose.
Existing methods formulate body shape reconstruction as
a constrained optimization problem, which proves to be
computationally expensive and sensitive to the initialization
parameters. Unlike these methods, we re-formulate this task
as a learning-based problem. Our approach learns a mapping
directly from the dressed-human domain to the body shape
domain without any initialization. We fully automatically

1551-3203 (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Vrije Universiteit Brussel. Downloaded on January 26,2021 at 13:49:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2020.3016591, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

3

jointly solve the body shape estimation problem in an end-to-
end manner. Extensive experimental evaluations demonstrate
that our method works well for both tight and loose clothing
and outperforms the existing state of the art.

B. Deep learning in Point Clouds

Inspired by the signiﬁcant success of applying deep learning
to 2D images, deep learning attracted a lot of attention in
the context of geometric data analysis and processing. Several
methods have been proposed speciﬁcally to deal with point
cloud data. The seminal work in this area is PointNet [10],
which takes as input the point cloud, each point being repre-
sented by its (x, y, z) coordinates. PointNet is composed of
three main modules: a Spatial Transformer Network (STN)
module, an Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) module, and a
symmetric function designed to be invariant to the permutation
of points, which is necessary for feature learning from point
clouds.
Based on PointNet, several deep networks targetig various
applications were proposed in the recent past. These include
3D-CODED [18] to determine 3D correspondences, PCN [35]
designed for shape completion tasks, Dynamic Graph CNNs
[19] for shape segmentation and classiﬁcation, and PU-Net
[20] for point cloud upsampling. We are the ﬁrst to apply
a PointNet-based method to body shape estimation. We also
show through extensive experiments that our approach is
applicable to 3D scans of humans wearing both tight and
loose clothing, in static poses or in motion, without any user
intervention.

III. PROPOSED METHOD

A. Overview

The proposed deep learning approach, dubbed Body PointNet,
aims at estimating the body shape of a subject under clothing
from a single 3D scan. The proposed model
is depicted
in Figure 1. Body PointNet can be roughly split into two
parts: one that processes existing points to generate an initial
undressed body; and the other part that operates on the initial
undressed body points to reﬁne the estimated shape.

B. Body PointNet

this approach, called 3D-CODED,

A work that shares some similarity to ours was proposed
in [18];
trains a deep
network to deform a template and to ﬁt it to a scan. The
output produced by the network is not sufﬁciently precise
as the resulting biometric measurements are not sufﬁciently
accurate. The authors of [18] reﬁne the reconstruction by
performing a regression step that minimizes the Chamfer
distance between the deformed template and input point
cloud data. However, by directly applying 3D-CODED the
template is deformed to align to the dressed body scan. In
this way one overestimates the biometrics, obtaining a fatter
body compared to reality. In addition, the need for solving an
optimization problem increases the computational complexity
and ultimately the processing speed.
In contrast to 3D-CODED, we propose Body PointNet, which
avoids the use of a template and the additional optimization
step. Given a dressed-human scan S, our goal is to design

a neural network that will take S as input and predict the
undressed body B. Body PointNet mainly consists of a virtual
scanner, OffsetNet, FeatureNet and the MLP-based decoder.
In a ﬁrst stage, given a dressed body mesh, a virtual scanner
is employed to generate an input point cloud of n points with
coordinates (x, y, z). The input point cloud is normalized
using OBB normalization [24]. Then m subsamples of the
normalized points are feed into thee OffsetNet to learn a set
of m offsets for each of the points in the subsampled point
cloud and a deep feature f1. The residual difference between
the m normalized points and offsets represents the initial
body points (see Figure 1). FeatureNet consumes these initial
body points and learns a global deep feature f2 on them. The
feature of the dressed body f1 and the feature of the initial
body f2 are fused to obtain a ﬁnal global feature f . Then
a decoder (implemented with MLP layers) uses this global
feature to predict a dense output. Finally, a de-normalization
step is performed to recover the original scale and orientation
of the ouput.
In terms of implementation, OffsetNet consists of a simpliﬁed
PointNet [10] architecture with hidden feature sizes of 128,
512, 512, 1024 extracting a 1024-size feature f1, and a
multi-layer perceptron with 1024, 1024 and m × 3 neurons
leading to an m × 3 offset matrix. FeatureNet is a simpliﬁed
PointNet with hidden feature sizes of 128, 256, 512 and 1024,
leading to the 1024-size feature f2. Following the strategy of
coarse-to-ﬁne reconstruction [35], [36], we use a multi-layer
perceptron with hidden layers of size 1024,1024 and 6890 × 3
to estimate ﬁnal undressed body points. In order to output a
watertight mesh representation of the prediction, our decoder
directly regress 6890 points preserving the same order with
SMPL bodies.
C. Loss functions
We train Body PointNet in a supervised manner. The following
loss functions are incorporated in the training procedure.
Initial
body
reconstruction is dependent on the predicted offset. We
deﬁne a loss term to jointly supervise the learning of the
offset estimation and the initial body reconstruction. We
deﬁne this loss using Symmetric Chamfer distance (SCD) as:

reconstruction

loss. The

initial

body

Linitial = SCD(V b
1
(cid:88)
initial|

min
y∈V b

GT

x∈V b

initial

|V b

1
|V b
GT |

(cid:88)

y∈V b

GT

min

x∈V b

initial

initial, V b

GT ) =

||x − y||2+

||y − x||2

(1)

SCD measures the average closest point distance between
the estimated initial undressed body points V b
initial and the
ground truth body points V b
Fine reconstruction loss. We deﬁne the ﬁne reconstruction
loss as:

GT .

Lf ine =

1
V b

f ine

(cid:88)

x∈V b

f ine

||x − y||2

min
V b

GT

(2)

1551-3203 (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Vrije Universiteit Brussel. Downloaded on January 26,2021 at 13:49:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2020.3016591, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

4

Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed Body PointNet design. Given a dressed body scan, the proposed virtual scanner is applied to generate an input point
cloud of n points with XYZ coordinates. OffsetNet (implemented using PointNet and MLP layers) subsamples m normalized points (implemented with OBB
normalization [24]) and learns the feature f1 and a set of m offsets. The initial undressed body points, which is the residual difference between the normalized
points and the offsets, is fed into FeatureNet (implemented with PointNet layers) to learn a deep feature f2 on the initial body points. Then the concatenated
feature f is further fed into MLP layers to output dense body points followed by a de-normalization module.

GT = {vi ∈ R3, i = 1, ..., 6890} is ground truth
where V b
vertices of the mesh from the SMPL model, and V b
f ine contains
6890 predicted points preserving the same order as the SMPL
body.
Complete loss. Our ﬁnal loss function is deﬁned as:

Loss = winitial × Linitial + wf ine × Lf ine

(3)

where winitial and wf ine are the weights that control the
contribution of each term.

IV. DATASET

In this section, we describe our method of synthesizing the
BUG dataset for training and validation, including the dressed-
human scans and the ground truth bodies. We start by review-
ing the existing dressed human datasets.

A. Existing Datasets

Fig. 2.
body shape for (c); (e) overlay of (c) and (d).

INRIA Dataset: (a), (b) and (c) scan samples; (d) estimated target

There are three main publicly available datasets for the task of
estimating body shape under clothing: INRIA [6], BUFF [8]
and the dataset from [31]. The ﬁrst two are scanned datasets,
and the last one is a synthetic dataset. The INRIA dataset by
[6] is a collection of mesh sequences of 6 individuals, equal
number of male and female, in 3 various motion sequences

and 3 clothing styles. The “ground truth shape and pose” of a
subject is obtained by ﬁtting the S-SCAPE model [21] to the
“tight clothes” sequence. However, as shown in Figure 2, the
undressed body penetrates the dressed-human scan, which is
not suitable for training our neural network. In addition, only 6
types of body shapes are included, which is not suitable to train
a network for body shape estimation. The BUFF dataset by [8],
also contains mesh sequences of 6 subjects, equal number of
male and female, in 2 clothing styles and 2 different motion
sequences. Similar to the INRIA dataset, the “ground truth
shape” of a subject is obtained by ﬁtting the SMPL model [9]
to the designed “tight clothes” sequence, and the mean of these
ﬁtted bodies is considered as the “ground truth shape”.The
BUFF dataset also lacks the ground truth of the pose and is
thereby inapplicable for training our deep network. In [31] its
authors have built 1081 A-pose SCAPE-based models using
46 real bodies and synthesized more 637 body models via
interpolation. A long-sleeved shirt and long pants were dressed
onto these 1718 bodies via physically-based simulation. This
synthetic dataset is designed for the task of estimating body
shape under clothing from dressed-human silhouettes. This
dataset is too small to train our network. Besides, the lack
of pose variations and the issue of multi-layer dressed bodies
make it not to be a good choice.
B. The proposed BUG dataset

As mentioned above, to prepare a dataset for training our
network is not straightforward. Typically, we should solve the
following three main challenges:

• Perfect alignment between the undressed bodies and

dressed bodies

• The input should be single-layer;
• The dataset should be large-scale to train a deep network.
To address it, we propose a novel synthetic method consisting
of two main modules: Dressing and Scanning modules. Figure

1551-3203 (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Vrije Universiteit Brussel. Downloaded on January 26,2021 at 13:49:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2020.3016591, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

5

TABLE I
AVERAGE TIME OF OUR DRESSING METHOD.

Clothing style

Garments (including shoes) vertex number

Dressing time

A
B
C

23478
17763
28192

0.6s
0.4s
0.9s

Fig. 3. Overview of our synthetic method. We ﬁrst design garments on
a template body based on expensive physically-based simulation. Next, we
transfer garments from a template body to SMPL bodies. Then, pseudo-scans
are generated by our scanning module.

Fig. 4. BUG dataset samples: (a) body mesh samples; (b) dressed-human
mesh samples for (a).

3 illustrates the overview of our synthetic method.
Dressing. To obtain realistic human body shapes and poses,
we sampled 100,000 SMPL [9] parameters estimated in the
SURREAL dataset [11] for males and females respectively.
To dress the 200,000 bodies is not a straightforward task.
Despite the impressive progress on garment modeling, the
common processing pipeline requires a designer to manually
create 2D patterns, to align them to the 3D body, and then
to adjust the parameters of physically-based simulation to
attain realistic garments. Such a time-consuming processing
pipeline makes it extremely expensive to dress an extensive
dataset of body models needed for training deep models. To
reduce the labor intensity, automatic dressing techniques such
as [32], [33] were proposed. These methods usually need to
solve an objective function to have an alignment followed by a
reﬁnement processing to address the penetration issue. Despite
automation, these methods are still computationally expensive.
Our redressing method is illustrated in Figure 3. We create a
male and a female reference bodies in A-pose from SMPL
model. Three clothing styles including long-sleeved shirts and
pants (type A), football suits (type B), and shirt, pants and
coat (type C) are ﬁrst put on the two reference bodies using
the Clo3D software (www.clo3d.com). A pair of shoes is also
designed for the sake of completeness. Inspired by the work
of [34], we bind each vertex of garments to triangles of the
reference body. The main difference is that we choose to bind
each vertex of garments onto six closest triangles of the body
rather than only one triangle. This simple improvement can
result in a smooth surface of the redressed garments. Due to
the same semantic vertices and triangles among SMPL body
meshes, the deformed garments can be fast inferred by the
shape and pose of a target body. As this binding is a local
operation, more realistic clothing details such as wrinkles will
be synthesized during transferring the garment to a target
body. Table I shows the average time of dressing a body.
Scanning. Directly using the synthetic dressed-human model
in the training procedure is not possible due to the multi-
layer problem, as shown in Figure 4(b). In addition, noise is
an important perturbation that affects point clouds captured in
real human 3D scanning scenarios, which should be accounted

for.
To address this problem, we propose a virtual scanning
methodology which simulates a realistic 3D scanner and
incorporates the inherent noise perturbations affecting the
measurements. Our virtual scanner is a four-camera (Time-
of-Flight) system which captures four depth images of the
subject from four different points of view (see Figure 5(a)). We
note that thanks to the Central Limit Theorem, various sources
of noise in the acquisition pipeline combine to a Gaussian
noise distribution. Hence, the resulting depth data is corrupted
by Gaussian noise, simulating the noise in the acquisition
procedure. We subsequently back-project the captured depth
images into 3D point clouds, and align them by making use
of the extrinsic parameters of the cameras (see Figure 5(b))
using the following equation:

S =

m
(cid:88)

i=1

RiCi

(4)

where S is the resulting dressed-human pseudo-scan, Ri, Ci
are the extrinsic matrix and the point cloud data obtained by
camera i respectively, and m is the number of cameras.
By means of our virtual scanner, we generate single-layer point
clouds for the multi-layer dressed bodies. The virtual scanner
is implemented in Blender, an open source 3D computer
graphics software (www.blender.org).

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

In this section, we explain the training setup in the ex-
periments. We conduct experiments on public datasets, the
proposed dataset as well as real-world scanned data, and
quantitively and qualitatively compare our results with those
obtained with state-of-the-art methods in the literature. The
ablation study is also performed to demonstrate the contribu-
tion of components in our networks.

A. Training setup

In the training stage, we split
into training,
validation, and testing by 97%, 2% and 1% respectively.
The training is done using the Adam optimizer [22] with

the dataset

1551-3203 (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Vrije Universiteit Brussel. Downloaded on January 26,2021 at 13:49:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2020.3016591, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

6

TABLE III
INRIA SAMPLES.

Input ID

Subject ID

Gender

Clothing

(cid:93)6
(cid:93)7
(cid:93)8
(cid:93)9
(cid:93)10
(cid:93)11

Subject 1
Subject 2
Subject 3
Subject 4
Subject 5
Subject 6

Male
Male
Male
Female
Female
Female

Tight
Layered
Layered
Wide
Layered
Layered

Fig. 5. Three-dimensional scanning simulation: (a) is the setup of the
presented virtual scanner; (b) is the scan data, the point cloud captured by
each camera is colorized by a different color.

TABLE II
BUFF SAMPLES.

Input ID

Subject ID

Gende

Clothing

(cid:93)1
(cid:93)2
(cid:93)3
(cid:93)4
(cid:93)5

00005
00032
00096
00114
03223

Male
Male
Male
Female
Female

t-shirt and long pants
soccer outﬁt
t-shirt and long pants
t-shirt and long pants
soccer outﬁt

learning rate of 0.0001 for 50 epochs and a
an initial
batch size of 16 on a desktop PC (Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver
4112 CPU @ 2.60GHz 64GB RAM GPU GeForce GTX
1080Ti) based on TensorFlow [23]. The learning rate is
decayed by 0.7 every 50K iterations. The weight of each term
deﬁned in Equation (5) are set to: winitial = 1 and wf ine = 1.

B. Evaluation metric

We employ a widely-used evaluation metric,
the
Chamfer Distance (CD). The CD error measures the average
Euclidean distance between the reconstructed body mesh and
the ground truth body mesh. The measurement unit is mil-
limeter(mm). The CD error is deﬁned as:

that

is,

CD(Vrec, VGT ) =

1
Vrec

(cid:88)

x∈Vrec

min
VGT

||x − y||2

(5)

In our experiments, we calculate the average value µ and
average standard derivation σ of the vertex-to-vertex error.

C. Results on BUFF and INRIA

In this experiment, we use two datasets: BUFF dataset and
INRIA dataset. The BUFF dataset only provides the sequences
of 5 subjects wearing 2 clothing styles (t-shirt and long pants,
and soccer outﬁt). The INRIA dataset has the sequences of
6 subjects wearing 3 clothing styles (tight, layered and wide
clothing). Therefore, we select 5 scans from the BUFF dataset
(Table II) and 6 scans from the INRIA dataset (Table III) to
test our method.
Results tested on BUFF samples using our method are shown
in Figure 6. It can be noted that the majority of the predicted
body is inside the input dressed scans. The gap between body
and clothing can be clearly seen (Figure 6(b)). The penetration
mainly exists in the shoulder, chest and upper thigh parts. The
reason is that the cloth of these parts has much higher pressure,
which can be understood that the cloth layer is almost the same
as the body layer on these areas. This observation is consistent

Fig. 6. Results tested on BUFF samples using our method: a) BUFF samples;
textured meshes) and our results
b) overlap BUFF samples (transparent
(yellow meshes).

with the actual ﬁtting in the real world.
Figure 7 illustrates our results tested on INRIA samples. We
can see that our method also works well for the posed input.
Another interesting observation is that our method shows
a very good generalization performance. For example, the
clothing worn on (cid:93)1, (cid:93)3 ,(cid:93)5 and (cid:93)9 subjects are not included in
our training data. Moreover, the wide dress (in Figure 7((cid:93)9))
is totally different with our prepared clothing in BUG dataset.
However, Body PointNet successfully generalizes the learning
to these unseen clothing, and outputs plausible results.
D. Results on BUG: quantitative comparisons

The BUG dataset
includes the ground truth posed body
models, which can be used to quantitatively compare our
method with the state-of-the-art methods. We compare with
[5], [27], [18] and [31]. The evaluation is based on the 2,000
BUG testing dataset(not
included in the training dataset).
Figure 8 shows the error map of some estimated body shapes.
Figure 9 compares the cumulative per-vertex errors; it can
be seen that the majority of vertices of the estimated body
shape using our method have per-vertex errors of less than
20 millimeters. Figure 10 illustrates the means and standard
deviations of errors. These results show that our method
outperforms these reference methods.
E. Results on problematic scanned data: robustness to pertur-
bations

Now, we test the robustness of our method to sensor noise
and missing data. Three common scanning systems including

1551-3203 (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Vrije Universiteit Brussel. Downloaded on January 26,2021 at 13:49:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2020.3016591, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

7

Fig. 7. Results tested on INRIA samples using our method: top) INRIA
samples; bottom) overlap INRIA samples (transparent purple meshes) and
our results (yellow meshes).

TABLE IV
COMPARISONS OF RUNNING TIME.

Method

Input

Additional inputs

Reconstruction time

[5]
[27]
[31]
[18]
Ours

1 scan
1 photo
2 silhouettes
1 scan
1 scan

Prior model

Camera parameters
Prior model

11 minutes
2.5 minutes
3.6 seconds
1 minute
5.8 seconds

Multi-Kinect scanning [37], a Microsoft Kinect Version 2
and a turntable scanning system [1], and a photogrammetric
scanning system called PhotoScan (https://www.agisoft.com/)
are used to capture three subjects. Figure 11 shows the visual
comparisons. The scan from [37] is very noisy, incomplete and
incorrectly aligned. The result of [6] has a terrible penetration
problem; the result of [26] is incorrect in terms of shape and
posture; the result of [18] is fatter and unnaturally-deformed.
In contrary, our result is plausibly reliable. The estimated body
(Yellow) is almost inside the garment (Fuchsia). The scan from
[1] has missing data in the area of head, but it is a clean mesh.
[6] generated an improved result compared to the noisy input.
[26] still generates an incorrect result. [18] result is an overly
estimated body shape. Our result is also improved by inputting
a clean mesh. The scan from PhotoScan has noise in the
areas of the arm and crotch. The performance of [6] reduces
due to the unexpected noise. The error of [26] is large. The
performance of [18] seems to be preserved, but the estimated
body is again oversized compared to reality. Our result remains
to be the best compared to these methods. In summary, our
method can be used on scans captured by different scanners,
proving to be robust to large noise levels and missing data.

In Table IV, we compare our method with previous methods in
terms of running time. It can be seen that our method is much
faster than the methods proposed by [18] and [6], [26] and
[18]. [31] runs faster than ours. However, this method needs
the camera intrinsic and extrinsic parameters to be given.
Similarly, [6] and [18] depends the prior model to implement
the ﬁtting algorithm. [26] needs the 2D joints as the associated
input. These additional inputs such as 2D joints and camera
parameters, are not easy guaranteed in real-world applications.

Fig. 8. Comparison of reconstruction error with start-of-the-art methods. The
color of each point is colorized by per-vertex error in millimeters.

F. Ablation Study

We conduct ablation experiments based on the type A
of clothing (A long-sleeved shirt and long pants) for the
male to understand the value of our design. The following
experimental results are based on the testing dataset (1000
samples) which has no overlap with the training dataset.
Global
feature. We ﬁrst compare the
inﬂuences of the global feature and the local feature on the
reconstruction results. We replace PointNet with DGCNN[19]
in the Body PointNet to extract the local feature of point
sets. As shown in Table V, the global feature outperforms
the local feature for the task of body shape estimation under
clothing.

feature or local

Regress 3D vertices or SMPL parameters. In the proposed
Body PointNet, we regress vertices of SMPL bodies instead
of regressing the SMPL parameters. We replace the vertex
decoder with two MLP decoders to regress the SMPL shape
parameters and pose parameters respectively. Table VI shows
the comparison. It can be seen that the reconstruction via

1551-3203 (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Vrije Universiteit Brussel. Downloaded on January 26,2021 at 13:49:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2020.3016591, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

8

Fig. 9. Cumulative per-vertex error of estimated body shape

Fig. 10. Means and standard deviations of error

TABLE V
ABLATION STUDY ON THE FEATURE(UNIT:mm).

TABLE VI
ABLATION STUDY ON THE DECODER(UNIT:mm).

Feature

Global

Local

µ
σ
max

0.91
2.15
30.18

0.99
2.79
48.64

Decoder

Regress 3D vertices

Regress SMPL parameters

µ
σ
max

0.91
2.15
30.18

26.34
23.46
156.64

regressing SMPL parameters is less accurate.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

With or without OffsetNet. We reconstruct the body in a
coarse-to-ﬁne manner. As shown in Table VII, the proposed
OffsetNet contribute to reduce the reconstruction error.

In this work, we propose the ﬁrst learning-based framework
to estimate body shape and pose under clothing from a 3D
scan. Our method directly operates on a single scan of a
dressed-human and outputs a point cloud that corresponds to

1551-3203 (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Vrije Universiteit Brussel. Downloaded on January 26,2021 at 13:49:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2020.3016591, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

9

REFERENCES

[1] P. Hu, T. Komura, D. Holden, and Y. Zhong, “Scanning and animating
characters dressed in multiple-layer garments,” The Visual Computer,
vol. 33, no. 6-8, pp. 961–969, 2017.

[2] J. Tong, J. Zhou, L. Liu, Z. Pang, and H. Hao, “Scanning 3d full human
bodies using kinects,”in IEEE Transactions on visualization and computer
graphics.vol. 18,no. 4,pp.643–650, 2012.

[3] C. Zhang, G. Zhou, H. Yang, Z. Xiao, and X. Yang, “View-based 3d
cad model retrieval with deep residual networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, 2019.

[4] T. Huynh-The, H. Hua-Cam, and D.-S. Kim, “Encoding pose features
to images with data augmentation for 3d action recognition,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2019.

[5] N. Hasler, C. Stoll, B. Rosenhahn, T. Thorm¨ahlen, and H.-P. Seidel,
“Estimating body shape of dressed humans,” Computers & Graphics,
vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 211–216, 2009.

[6] J. Yang, J.-S. Franco, F. H´etroy-Wheeler, and S. Wuhrer, “Estimation
of human body shape in motion with wide clothing,” in European
Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 2016, pp. 439–454.

[7] D. Anguelov, P. Srinivasan, D. Koller, S. Thrun, J. Rodgers, and J. Davis,
“Scape: shape completion and animation of people,” in ACM transactions
on graphics (TOG), vol. 24, no. 3. ACM, 2005, pp. 408–416.

[8] C. Zhang, S. Pujades, M. J. Black, and G. Pons-Moll, “Detailed, accurate,
human shape estimation from clothed 3d scan sequences,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2017, pp. 4191–4200.

[9] M. Loper, N. Mahmood, J. Romero, G. Pons-Moll, and M. J. Black,
“Smpl: A skinned multi-person linear model,” ACM transactions on
graphics (TOG), vol. 34, no. 6, p. 248, 2015.

[10] C. R. Qi, H. Su, K. Mo, and L. J. Guibas, “Pointnet: Deep learning on
point sets for 3d classiﬁcation and segmentation,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017, pp.
652–660.

[11] G. Varol, J. Romero, X. Martin, N. Mahmood, M. J. Black, I. Laptev,
and C. Schmid, “Learning from synthetic humans,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017, pp.
109–117.

[12] P. Guerrero, Y. Kleiman, M. Ovsjanikov, and N. J. Mitra, “Pcpnet
learning local shape properties from raw point clouds,” in Computer
Graphics Forum, vol. 37, no. 2. Wiley Online Library, 2018, pp. 75–85.
[13] Y. Meng, P. Mok, and X. Jin, “Interactive virtual try-on clothing design
systems,” Computer-Aided Design, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 310–321, 2010.
[14] T. Igarashi and J. F. Hughes, “Clothing manipulation,” in Proceedings
of the 15th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and
technology. ACM, 2002, pp. 91–100.

[15] A. Weiss, D. Hirshberg, and M. J. Black, “Home 3d body scans
from noisy image and range data,” in 2011 International Conference on
Computer Vision.

IEEE, 2011, pp. 1951–1958.
[16] T. Helten, A. Baak, G. Bharaj, M. M¨uller, H.-P. Seidel, and C. Theobalt,
“Personalization and evaluation of a real-time depth-based full body
tracker,” in 2013 International Conference on 3D Vision-3DV 2013.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 279–286.

[17] A. O. B˘alan and M. J. Black, “The naked truth: Estimating body shape
under clothing,” in European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer,
2008, pp. 15–29.

[18] T. Groueix, M. Fisher, V. G. Kim, B. C. Russell, and M. Aubry, “3d-
coded: 3d correspondences by deep deformation,” in Proceedings of the
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 230–246.
[19] Y. Wang, Y. Sun, Z. Liu, S. E. Sarma, M. M. Bronstein, and J. M.
Solomon, “Dynamic graph cnn for learning on point clouds,” ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 38, no. 5, p. 146, 2019.

[20] L. Yu, X. Li, C.-W. Fu, D. Cohen-Or, and P.-A. Heng, “Pu-net: Point
cloud upsampling network,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 2790–2799.

[21] A. Jain, T. Thorm¨ahlen, H.-P. Seidel, and C. Theobalt, “Moviereshape:
Tracking and reshaping of humans in videos,” in ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG), vol. 29, no. 6. ACM, 2010, p. 148.

[22] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”

arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

[23] M. Abadi, P. Barham, J. Chen, Z. Chen, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin,
S. Ghemawat, G. Irving, M. Isard et al., “Tensorﬂow: A system for large-
scale machine learning,” in 12th {USENIX} Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation ({OSDI} 16), 2016, pp. 265–283.

[24] L. Ge, Y. Cai, J. Weng, and J. Yuan, “Hand pointnet: 3d hand pose
estimation using point sets,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 8417–8426.

Fig. 11. Visual comparison of results tested on real scans with different
methods: Top: Scan from [37]; Middle: Scan from [1]; Bottom: Scan from
PhotoScan.

TABLE VII
ABLATION STUDY ON THE OFFSETNET(UNIT:mm).

Method Without OffsetNet With OffsetNet

µ
σ
max

1.07
2.52
41.71

0.91
2.15
30.18

the estimated body shape. We also present a novel dataset
(BUG) of high-resolution 3D clothing sequences with ground
truth body shape and posture. The proposed dataset enables
training of deep networks for body pose and body shape
estimation as well as comprehensive quantitative evaluations.
Extensive results show our method outperforms the state-of-
the-art methods in terms of accuracy and running time.
The main limitation of this work is that we do not include
in a longer
hair in the training dataset. This will result
head for the estimated body, as shown in Figure 6(b) (cid:93)4
and Figure 7(cid:93)11.
It would be also interesting to apply
physically-based simulation to reﬁne the geometry of the
garment in the training dataset. It is also promising to extend
the proposed method to investigate other applications like
people reidentiﬁcation [38] and pose estimation [39]. These
are topics of future investigation.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to acknowledge the support of
Innoviris
the close collaboration with
Treedy’s in the framework of this project, as well as the
support of FWO in project G084117.

(project eTailor),

1551-3203 (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Vrije Universiteit Brussel. Downloaded on January 26,2021 at 13:49:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2020.3016591, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

10

[25] G. Pons-Moll, S. Pujades, S. Hu, and M. J. Black, “Clothcap: Seamless
4d clothing capture and retargeting,” ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), vol. 36, no. 4, p. 73, 2017.

[26] F. Bogo, A. Kanazawa, C. Lassner, P. Gehler, J. Romero, and M. J.
Black, “Keep it smpl: Automatic estimation of 3d human pose and shape
from a single image,” in European Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2016, pp. 561–578.

[27] A. Kanazawa, M. J. Black, D. W. Jacobs, and J. Malik, “End-to-
end recovery of human shape and pose,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 7122–
7131.

[28] T. Alldieck, M. Magnor, W. Xu, C. Theobalt, and G. Pons-Moll, “Video
based reconstruction of 3d people models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 8387–
8397.

[29] S. Pujades, B. Mohler, A. Thaler, J. Tesch, N. Mahmood, N. Hesse,
H. H. B¨ulthoff, and M. J. Black, “The virtual caliper: Rapid creation of
metrically accurate avatars from 3d measurements,” IEEE transactions
on visualization and computer graphics, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 1887–1897,
2019.

[30] S. Streuber, M. A. Quiros-Ramirez, M. Q. Hill, C. A. Hahn, S. Zufﬁ,
A. O’Toole, and M. J. Black, “Body talk: crowdshaping realistic 3d
avatars with words,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 35,
no. 4, p. 54, 2016.

[31] D. Song, R. Tong, J. Chang, X. Yang, M. Tang, and J. J. Zhang, “3d
body shapes estimation from dressed-human silhouettes,” in Computer
Graphics Forum, vol. 35, no. 7. Wiley Online Library, 2016, pp. 147–
156.

[32] R. Brouet, A. Sheffer, L. Boissieux, and M.-P. Cani, “Design preserving
garment transfer,” ACM Transactions on Graphics, vol. 31, no. 4, pp.
Article–No, 2012.

[33] Y. Lee, J. Ma, and S. Choi, “Automatic pose-independent 3d garment
ﬁtting,” Computers & Graphics, vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 911–922, 2013.
[34] P. Hu, E. S. Ho, N. Aslam, T. Komura, and H. P. Shum, “A new method
to evaluate the dynamic air gap thickness and garment sliding of virtual
clothes during walking,” Textile Research Journal, p. 0040517519826930,
2019.

[35] W. Yuan, T. Khot, D. Held, C. Mertz, and M. Hebert, “Pcn: Point
completion network,” in 2018 International Conference on 3D Vision
(3DV).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 728–737.

[36] P. Mandikal and V. B. Radhakrishnan, “Dense 3d point cloud reconstruc-
tion using a deep pyramid network,” in 2019 IEEE Winter Conference on
Applications of Computer Vision (WACV).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1052–1060.
[37] M. Kowalski, J. Naruniec, and M. Daniluk, “Livescan3d: A fast and
inexpensive 3d data acquisition system for multiple kinect v2 sensors,”
in 2015 International Conference on 3D Vision.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 318–
325.

[38] J. Garc´ıa, A. Gardel, I. Bravo, and J. L. L´azaro, “Multiple view oriented
matching algorithm for people reidentiﬁcation,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 1841–1851, 2014.

[39] R. C. Luo and S. Y. Chen, “Human pose estimation in 3-d space using
adaptive control law with point-cloud-based limb regression approach,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 51–58,
2015.

Pengpeng Hu Pengpeng Hu is post-doctoral fel-
low at the Electronics and Informatics (ETRO) de-
partment of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB),
Belgium. He received the Doctorate degree in Dig-
ital Textile Engineering from Donghua University,
China, in 2017. He was a visiting scholar at School
of Informatics of the Edinburgh University, UK in
2016. He was post-doctoral fellow at Computer and
Information Sciences Department of the Northum-
bria University, UK in 2017. Sine 2018, he is post-
doctoral fellow at VUB. His research interests in-
clude geometric deep learning, 3D human body reconstruction, RGB-D image
and digital fabrication.

is a PhD student at

Nastaran Nourbakhsh Kaashk Nastaran Nour-
bakhsh Kaashki
the Elec-
tronics and Informatics (ETRO) department of the
Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Belgium. She re-
cieved her ASc (2006) at Shariaty Technical Col-
lege, her BSc (2009) at Zanjan University, and her
MSc (2014) at Amirkabir University of Technol-
ogy (Tehran Polytechnic) in Computer Engineering-
Artiﬁcial Intelligence. In the period 2014-2018, she
was a research and development engineer in an
artiﬁcial-intelligence-based company, Tehran, Iran.
She has joined ETRO department in 2018. Her areas of specialty and interest
are computer vision and deep learning approaches.

Vasile Dadarlat Vasile Teodor Dadarlat is a pro-
fessor within the Computer Science Department of
the Technical University of Cluj Napoca (TUCN),
Romania. He received the MSc degree in Computer
Science from ‘Politehnica’ University of Bucharest,
Romania,
in 1980, and the Doctorate degree in
Computer Science from Technical University of Cluj
Napoca, Romania in 1995. In the period from 1986
till now he owned different positions at TUCN,
Romania, and since 1998, he became full professor
in Computer Science at TUCN. He acted as invited
lecturer at many European universities and managed important institutional
actions. His research interests include QoS based protocols in computer
networks, security for wireless sensor networks, Internet of Things, e-Health,
e-Environment, E-Learning. Vasile Teodor Dadarlat is the author of more than
150 journal and conference publications, book chapters, and contributions to
standards. He also served as chair and member of many technical program
comities for important IEEE conferences.

Adrian Munteanu Adrian Munteanu is professor at
the Electronics and Informatics (ETRO) department
of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Belgium.
He received the MSc degree in Electronics and
Telecommunications from Politehnica University of
Bucharest, Romania, in 1994, the MSc degree in
Biomedical Engineering from University of Patras,
Greece, in 1996, and the Doctorate degree in Ap-
plied Sciences from Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Bel-
gium, in 2003. In the period 2004-2010 he was post-
doctoral fellow with the Fund for Scientiﬁc Research
– Flanders (FWO), Belgium, and since 2007, he is professor at VUB. Adrian
Munteanu contributed to more than 350 publications and holds 7 patents.
He is the recipient of the 2004 BARCO-FWO prize for his PhD work, the
(co-)recipient of the Most Cited Paper Award from Elsevier for 2007. Adrian
Munteanu served as Associate Editor for IEEE Transactions on Multimedia
and currently serves as Associate Editor for IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing.

1551-3203 (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Vrije Universiteit Brussel. Downloaded on January 26,2021 at 13:49:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

View publication stats

