Chapter VALFRED ADLER ON RELIGIONAlfred Adler (1870-1937) was a Jew and spent much of his early life in Vienna. Like Freud, he too entered the field of psychology through psychiatry. He was very much interested in the Freudian doctrines and joined Freud's discussion circle in 1902, wherefrom# he started regarding himself as a junior colleague rather than a Freudian disciple. A charter meatoer of the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society, he became its president and one of its foremost original thinkers. Encouraged by Freud, Adler engaged in those original investigations in psychoanalysis, which led to his gradual but unmistakable departure from Freudian thought and to his resignation in 1911 from the society. He founded a new school - 'Individual Psychology' and in 1935 this school began to pistolish its own organ, "International Journal of Individual Psychology". Following world War I# Adler became interested in the psychology of children and instituted child guidance clinics in Vienna.Adler calls his school 'Individual* because it stresses the uniqueness with which each individual person develops his own style of life. The word 'individual' is derived from the Latin word 'individuum', which literally266Means 'undiVided', 'indivisible'. Individual psychologyemphasizes not only the uniqueness of each individual butalso the organic wholeness of the human personality. AsAdler says* "Individual Psychology tries to see Individuallines as a whole and regards each single reaction* eachmovement and impulse as an articulated part of an individual6attitude towards lifeFrom the very outset* Freud's theories appealed to Adler, who had for sometime been interested in the capacity of the body to condensate for organic change. This was a known fact among physicians that damage to certain organs in the bedf was sometimes followed by a compensatory reaction* which from teleological point of view might be regarded as the organ's attempt to overcome its defect. Adler believed that it was possible to observe similar reactions to organic defects in the psychological sphere. Such ebservatlons made it reasonable to suppose that it mis the very inferiority of the functions which stimulated the individual to overcome his defects* te such good effect that ence inferior function became the superior one. So far Adler's thesis* presented in his book "A Study of Organic Inferiority and Its Psychical Compensation" (1967} was readily acceptable to Freud and his followers as a unique contribution to ego psychology* but the1. Adler* A** The Science of Living* p. 31%2©1next four years made it apparent that Adler was developing his concept, not merely as an interesting sideline, but as a key to the understanding ef the whole Mental life. According to him, to be a human being means to possess a feeling of inferiority that is constantly pressing on towards its own conquest.The science of Individual Psychology develops out of the effort to understand that mysterious creative power of life - that power Which expresses itself in the desire todevelop* to strive and to achieve - and even to compensate for2defects in one direction by striving for success in another. This power is teleological ~ it expresses itself in the striving after a goal and in this striving bodily movement and mental condition cooperate. It is thus absurd to study bodily movements and mental conditions abstractly without relation to an individual whole. The important thing is to understand the context - the goal of an individual*s life, which marks the line ef direction for all his acts and movements. This goal enables us to understand the hidden meaning behind the various separate acts - we see them as parts ef a whole. And When we study the parts - provided we study them as parts of a whole - we get a better sense of the whole.2. Adler* A.* Understanding Human Mature, p. 192C?Adler differs from Freud In several respects, mostnoticeably at first by his emphasis @n ego rather than lifcico,as the great motivating force in life and source of neurotic 3difficulties. Both Freud and Adler accept the importance o‘ infantile period as moulding the character and behaviour of human being. The “infantile sexuality" which is so much stressed by Freud, seems to Adler a strained interpretation of the little child's behaviour. Much more obvious and fundamental in Adler's view are the child's resistance to domination and eagerness to dominate. The child is actually weak and inferior in many ways to those around him and at times feels inferior, but he combats this feeling by assert!no himself as far as possible and by aspiring to grow up and be superior. Everyone, Adler says, has a fundamental will for power, an urge towards dominance and superiority, if an individual feels himself inferior in some respect, he is driven by his feeling of inferiority toward a goal of superiority. He strives to make himself superior or at least to put up a pretense of superiority. He is driven towards compensation of one kind or another.All human action, all human progress can be explained in terms of this striving to overcome the inferiority. Man finds himself exposed without protection to the forces ol3. Adler, A.# 'Individual Psychology' in Murchison, C. (ed Psychologies of 1930, p. 398203nature and is forced to provide for his safety. Naturally mor­al ways searches for safety and protection. This feeling inferiority drives him to make his position higher and better . This is the goal of human behaviour towards which he directs his striving. As he says* “The impetus from minus to plus never ends* The urge from below to above never ceases. Whatever premises all our philosophers and psychologists drear* of - self-preservation, pleasure principle, equalization - al] these are but vague representations, attempts to express the great upward drive.* Thus for Adler, the striving for superiority is innate, an intrinsic necessity of life. It is the basic dynamic principle. There are no separate drives, for each drive receives its power from this basic urge, in short, Adler regards the “self-assertive impulse" rather thar the sex impulse as the major drive, and as the drive most likely to generate hostility toward competitors, anti-socialCattitudes and the maladjustments of neuroses and psychoses.Adler is very much opposed to psychic determinism. He believes in mind’s free play. As he says, "what we perceive of mental movement is itself a movement which i- directed towards a goal .. .. we cannot imagine a mentaland emotional life without a goal .. .. No human beingcan think, feel, will, dream without all these activities4. Ibid.5. Woodworth, R.S., Contemporary Schools of Psychology, p. 194204being determined, continued, modified and directed, toward ar ever-present objective," For Adler, this very idea that a man is constantly striving towards a goal furnishes the way of understanding a man's mental life. Thus, we find that Adler'? thought moves outwards towards the problems of man's adaptation to the external world, while Freud's thought tends to ignore the external, to concentrate inwards. Adler emphasizes the forward orientation, whereas Freud has laid emphasis on backward orientation.The principal feature of Adler's theory lies in Its emphasis on the -teleological character of human striving. Individual's life is always marked, in all direction by the goal. Whether a person is having the normal way or the neurotic way of life, the clue is ever the goal. Man is motivated more by his expectations of the future than by his experiences of the past. It is a crusade against mechanistic psychology on behalf of a teleological psychology. Such a view runs counter to prevalent opinion regarding the scientific respectability of the concept of teleology. As a concept it has theological connotations stemming from medieval teaching regarding god's purposes in directing the course of mundane events by supernatural intervention. Ansbachers observe, "It was in Vaihinger's idealistic positivism that6. Adler, A.,Understanding Human Nature, p. 19205Adler now found for his subjectivistic and finalisticpsychology foundation which was acceptable, encouraging and 7stimulating."Hans Vaihinger’s book, "The Philosophy of 'As if' '* appeared in 1911, the same year in the beginning of which Adler withdrew from the Freudian circle. Adler was highly influenced by Vaihinger's fictionalism in his concept of goal. Hans Vaihinger was one of the most acute and careful of Kant's commentators. Kant showed that our ideas of reason like soul, world as a whole and god do not represent any objective realities which we can possibly know, but, we are nevertheless aided in our enquiries in different fields o* psychology, cosmology and theology if we proceed as if therePwere objects like soul, world as a whole and god. KantQcalled them "neuristie fictions". Vaihinger's main insicht was suggested by this 'as if* justification of the ideas o* reason. Adler takes over this philosophical doctrine o* idealistic positivism and bends it to his own design. He combines the concept of fiction with that of the goals. The goal does not exist in the future as a part Of some teleological design, but it exists subjectively here and no**7. Ansbacher, H.L. and Ansbacher, R.R. (eds.), The Individual Psychology of Alfred Adler, p. 888. Kant, I*, Critique of Pure Reason, Trans. Smith, N.K., pp. 307-3089. Ibid., p. 3322C 6as a striving for an ideal which affects present behaviour. Woodworth therefore says, "By reducing the goal to an idea] operating in the present, the objection against teleological causality was eliminated."The fictional goal is thus a device of the individual to free himself from inferiority feeling. On the basis of this combination of 'fiction' and 'goal* Adler understands the concept of 'God' in religion as a mere idea and not an independent spiritual reality. At the same time he opines that such an idea is a necessary goa] of human beings, because it is the very idea of superiority and perfection to the highest possible degree, which every human being is striving to achieve and which is inherent in man's thinking and feeling since the time of his creation.But, how can this individualistic aggressive tendency of mankind be held in check so that community life may be at all possible? Adler, no less than Freud, is forced to provide a polarity of motives though he is disinclined to appeal to heredity and innate drives. The child has at least a native capacity for friendly, loving response, and this germ will develop into a loyal co-operative spirit if the child i.^ properly treated in the first few years. Along with the important role of mother, the entire family situation with which the child has to cope in his first few years stimulates10. Woodworth, R.S., op.cit., p. 301207him to develop a certain attitude towards life - a certain "style of life" in Adler's well-known phrase. Each individual adopts his style early in life and maintains it as he meets the problems of life. Thus, Adler, no less than Freud, but in a very different way, lays great stress on the family situation as formative of the individual's character.Thus Adlerian Individual Psychology points out thatevery child is born as an individual with the potentiality o*sociability and as he grows up, as a result of his oonstunt.interaction with the external environment and with the help ofthe mother's co-operation this inherited potentiality isdeveloped into proper social feeling and then he graduallymoves towards socialization. So, an individual's socializationis not anything from the non-social to the social but frompotentiality to actuality. All human judgments of value,success, meaning and religion are founded vqpon this socialnature of man. All that we ask of conduct, of ideals, ofgoals, of action, of traits of character is that they shouldserve towards human co-operation. We shall never come acrossa man who has no social feeling. It is the community whichgives meaning to the "value" and "life" of an individual. Toquote Adler, "Human beings live in the realm of meanings. Weexperience reality through the meaning we give to it, nof as11it is set, but as something interpreted."11. Adler, A.,What Life Should Mean You?, p. 32 ORAdler observes that the primal energy, which Ms established regulative religious goals, is no other than that of social-feeling. The fundamental idea of religion is "love thy neighbour", whose successful accomplishment is possible only by the fullest development of social feeling. Normal development in all the fields consists in a perfect balance between the striving for superiority and social interest.When this spontaneous social feeling is instilled into the upward strivings of the self, it heightens the feeling ot worth and value and gives courage and optimism. All mal­adjustments are the result of an inadequate social interest, of a restricted sense of belonging,Adler stands firmly on the ground of evolution and regards all human striving as a striving for perfection. The highest effective goal is called God - the goal of overcomine. Probably the strongest step towards this perfection of men is taken when he accomplishes his unification with God as the total release from all evils - evils of self-aggression, evils which arise due to lack of social feeling. The mar i n whom the social feeling has not been properly developed is confronted with many difficulties and it is interesting to note that these troubles produce in him the 'belief in lod*, with this consolation in mind that he would be able to ft nc3 or achieve his actual goal of life in the hereafter, because for him the existence on earth is a very superfluous209endeavour. Thus God, as it is the conception of a goal to get beyond the present state, is always the outcome of social nature ef man - whether in the properly developed persons or among the maladjusted ones.Ellenberger holds that Adler's social interes- hascosmic significance. He observes, "Community feeling is -reflection of the general interdependence of the cosmos,which lives within us, from which we cannot abstractourselves completely and endows us with the faculty to feel12into, that is, to emphathise with other beings."Adler rarely mentions the unconscious and provides a subsidiary plaee to 'Libido* or sex-impulse. The basic thesl* of Adlerian philosophy is that to be a human being Is to feel oneself inferior. In place of sexual instinct Adler presents this inferiority feeling as the basic drive of all human deeds. The aim ©f this feeling is to strive to overcome the inferiority and attain superiority. For him, the unconscious is not a separate category, but merely a part of the pe- son striving which he does not understand and the so-called contrast between the conscious and the unconscious is only an aspect ef a unified relational system and does not represent the discrete entities.12. Ellenberger, H.F., "The Discovery of the Unconscious", p. 60921/1There are three possible results of the individual's striving for superiority and his attempts to overcome inferiority feeling -(1) Successful compensation when the striving finally leads to good adjustment to three challenges of life - society, work, and sex«(2) Overcompensation when striving becomes too apparent and leads to varying degrees of maladjustment.(3) Retreating into illness as a means of obtaining power, for every neurosis can be understood as an attempt to free oneself from a feeling of inferiority in order to gain feeling of superiority.A few writers have tried to relate Adler’s Individual Psychology to religion because of his emphasis upon the significance of the individual*s own constitution. Adler himself in an exchange of views with a protestant Pastor, Ernest John, published in "Religion and Individual Psychology" (1935), admits that there is a conuion ground between religion and individual psychology, protesting that he is not will!no to make his psychology into a Christian exposition since,"the scientific nature of my work must be guarded against the hard and fast criteria of other movements which lie outside science. It cannot possibly make these criteria its owr113. Way, Lewis, Alfred Adler - An Introduction to his Psychology, p. 51221Adler has developed the science of character of all human beings based on social factors and attitudes of individuals towards life and society. Out of this classification of character traits he has pointed out an aggressive character trait in which are included vanity and ambition, jealousy, envy, avarice and hate. Another type o‘" character, he says, is non-aggressive which includes traits of seclusiveness, anxiety, faint heartedness, untamed instincts as the expression of lessened adaptation. Thp genesis of religion and religious attitudes lies in these character traits.Adler says, "Character is a social concept . A character trait is the appearance of some specific mode o1 expression on the part of individual, who is attempting to adjust himself to the world in which he lives. Character is a psychic attitude, it is the quality and nature of an1 4individual's approach to the environment in which he lives.7’ Adler points out how vanity and ambition which are the characteristic traits of individual's character give rise to the idea of God, which is held to be central theme of almost all religions. Adler says that "there is no limit of the development of vanity and ambition. It is very interesting to see how in fairy tales, as well as in the overheated14. Adler, Alfred, Understanding Human Nature, p. 161psychic striving of vain individuals the striving for powe>assumes the expression of desire for the ideal of God-likeness* One does not have to search far to find that avain person acts exactly as though he were God or he behaveshimself as though he were God's lieutenant or again, heexpresses wishes and desires, which only God could fulfil .The manifestation* the striving for God-likeness, is theextreme point of a tendency which presents itself in all hjsactivities and amounts to a desire to project himself beyond15the boundaries of his personality."This kind of explanation of Adler seems completely similar to the movement of thought from Kant to Hegel, which revolves in a fundamental sense around the idea of mans self-realization as God-like being. Hegelianism is a revelation of the truth about religion as phenomenon o* man' self-deification and resulting self-alienation. Buddhism, Vedantism of India and some other oriental forms of religion have also preached the positive form of religion in terms of self culture or spiritual unfoldment. Advaita Vedanta point out that the summum bonnon of life is the realization of truth or real nature of the self and the highest perfection of religion consists in the realization of Brahman or one's own inherent nature. In the light of such views, it 1~ evident that Adlerian view of genesis of the idea of God is15. Ibid., p. 215213anthropomorphic deification of man himself. It is also a kind of projection of man's own wishes to become God-like.This type of concept about the genesis of religious attitude and the idea of God, Adler has determined in the character traits of individuals. He further explains that, "the evidences of this tendency are many in our age. That large group of people that interest itself in spiritualism, psychic research, telepathy and similar movements is composed of Just such people, who are anxious to grow beyond the boundaries of their humanities, who are desirous e* possessing powers which human beings do not possess, who wish to remove themselves beyond time and space as in the1 fintercourse with ghosts and the spirits of the dead.'1The genesis of religious attitude, apart frompsychological reasons, is that, "a large portion of human!tvgets its first conception of the nature of man from thecatch word phrases of the Bible which declares that mar was17created in the image of God." This sort of conception leaves a very deep impression upon the soul of a child. 3y soul, Adler means, "a moving and living organism*. He holds that “the soul stands in innate relationship to free motion. Those organisms which are strongly rooted have no necessity16. Ibid., p. 10117, Hay, Lewis, op.cit., p. 216214ef a soul.*1® Closely related to this thirst for God- likeness is the ideal of the fairy tale Utopia Where every dream comes tree* which leaves upon children a very deep impression of reality. This gives rise to religions tendency, which may not be got rid of until they are very old. “The satisfaction of one's vanity through the misuse of one's desire for religious satisfaction is also found on the trail of the striving for God-likeness,"1* Adler says, “We have to only remark how important it may be to an Individual who has suffered psychic shipwreck, to remove himself from other human beings, and engage in personal conversation with God; such an individual considers himself quite in the proximity of God, who is duty bound, by virtue of the worshipper's prayers and orthodox rituals to personally concern Himself with the worshipper's well-being. Such religious hocus- pocus is usually so far from religion that it impresses us,sasnbeing purely psychopathologieal." This sort of pathologicalexplanation of character traits ef an individual in thinking abeut God-likeness is quite similar to the concept of Freud that religion is an obsessive nurosis, that is it is neurotic tendency which gives rise to religious attitude and feeling ef thinking ef God-likenoss. Seme ef these chronically18. Ibid., p. 217 If. Ibid.20. Ibid.? 1 rmisunderstood people beat a retreat into religion, where thevproceed to do just what they have done before. They complainand commiserate with themselves and shift their pains to the21shoulders of a complainant God. In this process they believe that God# this extra-ordinary honoured and worshipped Being, is concerned entirely with serving them, and is responsible for their every action.Adler enlarges the scope of psychology in a significant way. He perceives that, beyond the specific sexual and family factors, the question of the "meaninq" of life to the individual has a prime importance in the functioning of the personality. Religion is one of the verv important factors in this frame of reference. The individual, Adler says, unconsciously constructs a system of Mfiction" K which he finds a "meaning" for his life at least in his own subjective terms. He does this because the nature of the human being is such that he inherently requires a frame of reference in order to be capable of functioning as a person. At 1his point in his work, Adler is interpreting the psychological significance of the "meaning" of life within the format of his earlier analytical theories. Later, however, he realises that a concept thereof is only psychological. He then attempts the more difficult task of leading the individual psychology towards an absolute meaning of li’e21. Ibid., p. 26321622via his religious sense of social feeling. It must benoted that while the goal is fictional, the striving for goalis for Adler, a fundamental fact. If the 'goal* istranscendental idea of perfection (sometimes referred as Godof religion) it may be fictional, but the constant strivingto achieve it is never unreal, rather innate in mankind. Inother words, God may be real or not, but the urge to realiseGod-likeness (i.e. religious urge) is innate and anundeniable fact of life. It is an expression of the creativepower of the self. Adler, thus escapes solipsism by hiremphasis on social interest as innate potentiality andconsequently the back-bone of all religious feelings, viv,the urge to attain self-transcendence. Here, Adler achievesa limited success, but the problems he encounters areultimate ones and their scope is larger than he is equipped 23to handle. Thus, though Adler himself is not a true depth psychologist, he embarks upon a new road for depth psycho!ocy.Though Adler has not dealt with religious phenomena in such details as Freud and Jung have done, theories developed by him may well be employed to study religion as psychological factor in the life of an individual and socle tv as well. He says that the psychic life of man is determined by his goal. Since, religion is said to be the wish-22. cf. Progoff, Ira, The Death and Rebirth of Psycho!o<~y,F« 923. Adler, A., Understanding Human Nature, p. 92:7fulfilment and it seeks to achieve some goal in an individual's life, Adler's theories in this respect may prove helpful in analysing religion psychologically and socioloai- eally. This sort of striving, Adler says, is always teleological and is innate in human beings, "The goal towards which every human being's actions are directed is determined by those influences and those impressions which the environment gives to the child," Thus in the genesis of relic icus attitude environmental factors play an effective role, Adler' r- theories of compensation, self-assertion and inferiority complex and striving for superiority to compensate are basic factors to engender the religious attitude in human beings, Freud says that religion is compensation. For Adler, too, compensation is a great source of one's being religious.People generally develop a tendency to ascribe their misfortunes to their ill-luck, as though some supernatural power had caused them in which, according to Adler, vanity plays an evil game. These are the same people who act as though some sinister deity spent its time persecuting them. This tendency is a source of the genesis of religious feeling and leads to belief in some supernatural power. /,The religious ideas of Adler are followed implicitly by Jung in developing the analytical psychology. Neo- Freudians have also adopted his technique. The noteworthv24. Ibid., p. 28218point of Ms approach is that Adler is more concerned withthe conscious processes than Freud was. Adler's theory is,25to a great extent a theory of what Freud called ego. Theego*s desire for power is the key to the behaviour-patternswhich eaeh individual develops as his way of life. Adler'sobservation in 1933 about four years before his deathrepresents a final statement of his understanding of theplace of religious ideas in human thought and culture : "Theidea of God and its immense significance for mankind can beunderstood* recognised and appreciated from the point of viewof individual psychology as the ooncretisation andinterpretation of human awareness of greatness and perfection,and that the individual as well as society are bound to agoal which rests in the future and which increases in thepresent the driving forces through the enhancement of feelings 26and emotions •"Since, religion and morality are very intimately related, let ns have a glance on Adlerian concept of moral values. He newer regards ethical demand as a mere restriction of human nature or its modification through outside pressure or an outcome of an intrinsic conflict between internal opposing forces. For him, ethical behaviour is a form of expression which is in harmony with a natural predisposition.25. Molman, B.B., Contemporary Theories and Systems in Psychology, p. 29926. Adler, A., "Religion and Individual Psychology" in Ansbaeher, H.L. and Ansbacher, R.R.(eds.), Superiority and Social Interest, p. 276*219All the seci&l factors - ethical imperatives and cultural progress - Adler tries to explain in terms of the communal feeling of human beings. He suggests a possibility which may help the individual to overcome his inferiority and which is a subjective origin of morality. An individual can make the foreign (ethical) demands his own. When it is done the ethical Imperatives have been replaced by the imperatives of freedom. Thus, the individual will not oome into conflict with his environment and will formally maintain himself as independently willing. Only then the individual is said to overcome the inferiority feeling and is no longer a servant but has become a master of himself.Both in Freudian psychoanalysis as well as in Adlerian individual psychology we find the idea of God. In neither of those two theories God is conceived as an Independent spiritual reality but only as an idea. In Freudian view the idea of God is the idea of infantile father figure, and to Adler it is the eoneretisation of the idea of perfection, which is the idea of the goal to be achieved by each individual. In both these theories, this idea of God can be traced back as basically associated with the infantile idea. In Freudian analysis it can be said that childhood helplessness is at the root of religious idea. In the infantile stage (in the famous Oedipus Stage as designated by S. Freud) the child's feelings of helplessness in the face220of the adults a zoned him arouses the very desire to imagine the existence of a father-figure who would give him shelter and protection from the outward danger and difficulties.This idea ©f God is sometimes interpreted as originated fromthe father-figure in the primaeval horde theory. Adler also*considers the idea of God as originating from the infantile feeling of inferiority and an urge to overcome it by attaining superiority, strength and perfection. But, the Freudian God simply provides a hand of security, while Adler's image of God, inspires man to become God-like and thereby attain highest perfection.Adler regards the striving for 'perfection' as an innate urge. Freud rejects such "an instinct towards perfection" and says, "I have no faith, however in the existence of any such internal instinct and I cannot see how this benevolent illusion is to be preserved .. .. whatappears in a minority of human individuals as an untiring impulsion towards further perfection can easily be understood as a result of the intinctual repression upon which is based all that is most precious in human civilisation." Adler on the contrary says, "Our experience, however, has shown us that the assumption of a striving for a goal is more than simply a convenient fiction. It has shown itself to be27. Freud, S., Beyond the Pleasure Principle, pp. 55-56221largely coincident with the actual facts in its fundamentals,whether these facts are to be found in the conscious orunconscious social life. The striving for a goal, thepurposiveness of the psychic life is not only a philosophic28assumption but actually a fundamental fact."Adler believes that because of reductionist bias Freud overlooks human urge for transcendence. But, Adler accepts it in the form of social interest. For him social interest is inborn. As he observes, "This social feeling remains throughout life, changed, coloured, circumscribed in some cases, enlarged and broadened In others until it touches not only the members of his own family, but also his dan, his nation and finally the whole of humanity. It is possible that it may extend beyond these boundaries and express itself towards animals, plants, lifeless objects or finally towards the whole cosmos."2* This reminds one of Freud's oceanic feeling whose significance he fails to realise because of his atavistic determinism.Adler's argument relating to 'goal* is always in the context of his assumption that human life is oriented towards the future and that this orientation is maintained by the unconscious creation of a fictional final goal of perfection28. Adler, A,, Understanding Human Mature, p. 7329. Ibid., p. 43222in every individual• s personality formation, This goal is a useful fiction in that it becomes an organising principle around which the process of perfection, thought* feeling and action are unified in the unique individual personality. The idea of God, therefore, has immense significance because it has enabled human beings to organise their individual and communal perceptions of reality around strivings towards perfection,Adler holds that the “fiction" is consequently seen as being necessary to human survival and development. Unlike the “illusion" in Freud's scheme,which interferes with our perception of reality, the “fiction* makes perception and all organised human activity possible, Adler's view of approaching religious ideation does not however, prevent him from util izing the concept of illusion. His reference to it is an ironic broadside against the psychoanalytic system in which it plays so important a role. He goes on to say, "Now that man no longer sees himself as the centre of world events, he is satisfied with a more meagre coneretization of the image of God and is inclined to conceive it as causally acting force of nature. Individual Psychology, however, because of its essential views would have to regard such an unpremised mechanistic position as an illusion, in as much as it is without any goal or direction. In this the mechanistic position is like drive psychology which is cut from the same223cloth.1Beth Freud and Adler advocate a pragmatic view of religion. But, while the usefulness ef religion is fundamental and necessary in Adler's eyes, it is termed only transitory to Freud with a limited application to the intellectually underdeveloped mass. In Adler's opinion, when a man attains highest perfection, i.e., realisation of God- likeness, he can successfully follow the guiding principle of all religions - “Love thy neighbour" - which unites them all and makes them fittest for finer thoughts and better works. Such persons alone feel themselves firmly established in the vast process of evolution. But, Freud, While admitting the pragmatic value of religion to overcome mental weakness, insecurity, helplessness, anxiety, horrors of hardship etc., wishes that if man could employ his reason and thereby condition his emotions, he would be able to outgrow the childishness ef an appeal to religion. Thus, religious urge which is necessarily real and innate in Adlerian theory, becomes to Freud a sign of immature attempt to get rid of the difficulties ef the world and consequently that which is considered ultimate to Adler is only temporarily useful to Freud.Freud interprets religien as a universal obsessional neurosis in describing the religious rituals. Just as the30. Adler, A., “Religion and Individual Psychology" op.eit., p. 277224religious^spendj^urs after hours in observing ceremonies, rituals, festivals, etc., the neurotics also spend several hours in mashing hands or feet or doing something like that. Though, in Adler me de not find any such mention of obsessional neurotic interpretation of religion still he also maintains this idea very clearly that lack of social interest, due to an increased inferiority feeling which stands as a hindrance to the way ©f achieving the fullest perfection which is no other than the idea of God for Adler, drives the individual into neurosis or crime.Neither Freud nor Adler is primarily intrested in morality as such. Indeed to Adler is attributed the remark, "If anyone talks to me of morality, I look to see if per chance his hand is not in my pocket." But, neither Freud nor Adler can avoid reference to morality, inasmuch as rightly or wrongly it is regarded as part and parcel of human nature and society. Neither of them is eager to formulate any kind of ethieal principle or standard. They both offer an explanation of the moral phenomenon. Both explain the development of morality in individual life, and so both of them refer to the childhood period. For them morality is not an essential aspect of human personality, though according to both every individual, placed as he is in social setting, is bound to observe sense moral standard or other. Thus, for31. Quoted in Way, L.» op.cit., p. 208225both of then, morality is nore a social than an individual affair. But, their approach is initially different. Freud tries to explain morality in terns of libido as it expresses itself in the Oedipus stage. In Adler libido or sex is not given any position of a prime -move r; but he too explains it in terns of childhood experience of inferiority. But, Adler has an advantage over Freud in explaining origin ef BK»rality, in so far as he looks upon “social-feeling" as basic to hunan personality. Because of his social feeling, the individual of Adler has a proclivity to Morality, while the individual of Freud has to put up a show of Morality with Much struggle.But, then Adler believes that the values are all useful and teleological fictions. If we are to take the theory of fietionalisM literally, the gap between Frend and Adler narrows down. Indeed both offer for rational and dispassionate consideration a perspective in which morality is seen to be no less complex than is the moral agent itself. The enigma §f morality is that it is the self that promulgates the moral law and assumes the obligation to act according to law; and yet it is the self that defines the law.The concept of * fiction" used by Adler for understanding religious ideation is also opposed to Marx’s analogy of religious imagery to “opium". Acaording to Marx, religious beliefs induce a kind of dream-state into which the suffering and oppressed human being is withdrawn from the consideration of his misery•T226and from the contemplation of the means and action which would be required to end it. In Adler*s view, the Marxist critique* if correct* would have to be turned against itself, since Marx also built his system around a "fictional final goal" of perfection. Adler says* "The striving to gain strength from the divine goal always flows from man's Insecurity and constant inferiority feeling. The fact that the form of the ideal varies is not essential. Whether the highest effective goal is called Qod or Socialism or as we call it* the pure idea of social interest or as others call it in Obvious reference to social interest* ego ideal* italways reflects the same ruling, perfection, promising,32grace-giving goal of overcoming."In Adler's system the idea of God is the human awareness ef greatness and perfection. The formation of religious ideas and convictions within the life of a society or group is, in Adler's view an extension ef the organisation of convictions and strivings which are involved in the normal and healthy development ef individuals. As such religious Ideas are norms. Convictions are norms of human psychology, and not only of psychopathology. This view ef Adler's is quite opposite to Freud's reduction that religious ideas are obsessive-compulsive symptoms. But* this does not mean that32. Adler, A., Religion and Individual Psychology, op.cit.* pp. 277-178227Adler is unaware ef psyehopathologieal uses ef any guiding Image. This will eceur whenever the image is so highly self-centred and non-oo-operative that it defies the requirements of social living and the individual is thus prepared to devalue reality and dogmatise the guiding image as occurs in the psychoses. In this context# Adler stresses that anyone who formulates this goal of godlikemess is soon forced to flee from real life.33Adler's use of the idea ef God# as "goal of goals" distinguishes his view from that of Marx# whose dictatorship of the pnoletrait and withering away of the state foresaw the end of history as being attainable within history. According to Adler# the end of history remains outside of history# and at the same time operates in every present moment as guiding fiction of perfection. Therefore, It increasingly functions both as a corrective to# and as a spur towards our overcoming the injustice# inequity and imperfection and every social system. For Adler 'perfection' is a concept that can never be applied to life# since perfect means finished# permitting no further change or work. The continuous striving for security urges towards the overcoming ef the present reality in favour of a better one. The goal of perfection must boar within it the goal of an ideal community. All that we value33. Ausbacher# H.L. and Ansbacher# R.R. (eds.)# The Individual Psychology of Alfed Adler# p. 97228in life is essentially the product of social interest. Mankind has frequently made attempts to imagine this final goal of human development. The best conception which one has gained so far of this ideal elevation of mankind is the concept of God. There is no question that the concept of God actually includes this movement towards a goal and that it best serves the purpose of a concrete goal of projection for the obscure desires of man to reach perfection.34But, the question arises that if religion is a make- believe, how is it that for thousands of years mankind is deluded by it? Adler of course does not use the notions of libido and father-image of Freud but like Freud he characterises religion as a subjective fiction; the urge for religion or attainment ef superiority may be real from the subjective standpoint but the goal being a fiction it does net haw any objective basis. It is indeed a wonder how a fiction has been holding its sway over mankind from time Immemorial. Adler also does not explain why man formulated this fiction. Again, for Adler God is nothing but the notion of perfection concretised. But, the mere idea of perfection is net perhaps adequate enough to develop the notion of a personal God, a living God and a loving God, with whom we hold most intimate relations. And the notion of personal34. Ibid., p. 187229G©d holding intimate relations with man is a dominant notion of monotheistic religions. Thus, Adler fails to explain monotheistic notion of God as we find in living religions.On the other hand, Adler like Freud, does not offer any explanation of the origin of pluralistic religion in which we find the idea of many gods all of whom do not represent height of perfection.Again Adler would perhaps say that man*s compensatory drive for perfection has led him to conceive ©f an all-perfect being with whom he identifies himself. But, it is difficult to understand why man would try to overcome his basic Inferiority not by developing his own superiority, but, by first Inventing (in fiction of course) an external superior being and then by Identifying with such a being. No explanation is offered for this complex process, instead of a direct and a simple one. Further# Adler also lays a great emphasis on social feeling. Religion operates in many cases as a social cohesive force, but unfortunately, Adler does not throw any light on the real role of religion in society. He admits that the primal energy of religion is the social feeling# and yet holds that religious faith will continue to live until it is replaced by a profound intellectual insight. We are not told what the function of social feeling will be in the domain of religion with the dawn ef such insight and why again this insight will weaken religion.230In Adler* s individual psychology however, the continuity between religious faith and scientific illumination is stressed over any discontinuity. His approach to the understanding of human psychology contains a profound respect for the importance of all the efforts of the creative human imagination to achieve orientation in a world of uncertainty and change. According to him, not only the higher religions, but also the primitive religious forms can be seen as contributing to human life and to our understanding of the social interest which is the key to human survival and development. Adler remarks, "The worship, too of a fetish, of a lizard, of phallus as a fetish in a pre-hist©rie tribe does not seem to be scientifically justifiable. Still, we should not overlook the fact that this primitive conception of the Universe has furthered community life, the social feeling of humanity, since every one who was under the spell of the same religious favour, was regarded as a brother, as taboo and was accorded the protection of the larger tribe.Adler does not assert the "existence" of God, since that question is by definition out of the scope of airy psychological investigation. According to him, the highest effective goal is the pure idea of social Interest rather than God. Technically, then, Adler appears to be an atheist.35. Ibid., p. 462231Adler's 'atheism*, however, retains a religious feeling forthe possibilities of human life, a kind of religious seal tohave those possibilities understood and actualized. Socialinterest means, according to Adler, the striving for acommunity which must be thought of as ever lasting as wecould think of it if mankind had reached the goal of perfection.It is never a presentday community or society, a specificpolitical or religious formation. This is rather the goalwhich signifies the ideal community, the ultimate fulfilment36of social evolution.Adler's 'social interest*, however, is not a mere theoretical command for human brotherhood. It is a basic fact of nature, given by life itself to our species. Adler here grasps the age-old wisdom ©f religion that the universe is one and that man can realize himself only in cosmic feeling. His social interest, like Freud's oceanic feeling, points to something larger than our surface consciousness. But the unconscious plays a comparatively small role in Adler's thought. Ho, therefore, falls to enter into the deeper layers of the self in order to discover the ultimate meaning of the cosmic dimension of man's existence and his religion. But Adler rightly points out that human behaviour cannot be adequately interpreted in terms of urges; it needs the comple­ment of aims, purposes and goals. In function, the Adlerian goal with its seeret strivings parallels the Freudian wish with its suppressed desire.^36. Ibid., p. 142