You
a
Your lecture is Dr. Steven Novella.
Dr. Novella is an academic neurologist at Yale School of Medicine
and is a leading force in medical education for patients,
the public, medical students, and medical professionals.
He earned his MD from Georgetown University
and completed his residency training at Yale School of Medicine.
Dr. Novella is the founder and senior editor of Science-Based Medicine,
a popular blog dedicated to promoting the highest standards of science in medical practice.
Do you believe that a technologically advanced alien civilization is visiting the Earth
at this time or any time in the past?
Are they abducting people from their bedrooms,
perhaps even right out of a heavily populated area like a large city?
Are they leaving us messages in geometric designs in wheat fields?
If this is true, does the government know about it?
And if so, are they engaged in a multi-generational cover-up of their knowledge of aliens?
And if so, why?
Is culture, perhaps even the human race, descended from alien visitors?
How can we claim to know the answer to these questions, or in fact, any question?
In this course, we will explore our current knowledge of the human brain as a tool for thinking.
The course is essentially a giant exercise in so-called metacognition,
or thinking about thinking itself.
It endeavors to give you the skills of what we call critical thinking.
Socrates said that the unexamined life is not worth living.
The motto for this course could be, the unexamined thought is not worth thinking.
What's at stake with all of this?
Well, science and belief permeate our lives.
They permeate our culture, our civilization.
We, for example, face environmental issues.
Is there global warming?
Is the planet warming up, for example?
And if so, are we causing it, and what can we do about it?
What future technologies should we invest our very limited resources into?
If we make the correct choices about where to invest, then there's a lot to gain.
If we make the wrong choices, we could squander billions on dead ends.
Also, we buy products every day that involve claims, either explicit or implicit.
And we need to be able to evaluate those claims in order to make good purchasing decisions.
For example, there is a company that will sell you a very expensive piece of exercise equipment,
and they claim that in four minutes of exercise, just a few times a week,
you can get all the exercise you need to be in perfect health,
