And this involves the scientific method as well.
This is scientific skepticism, not just doubt,
but a positive set of methods for examining reality.
Science essentially is a systematic way of comparing our ideas to external objective data.
Science, in short, the goal of science is to lead us to conclusions which are actually true,
as opposed to conclusions that we simply wish are true.
However, not all science is valid.
There is good science and bad science, or not so good science.
And some science is so flawed that we, in fact, call it pseudoscience.
It's not even real science anymore.
Science follows scientific methodology.
It is not a set of beliefs, but it is a set of methods.
And there are ways of defining that as well as distinguishing good science from bad science,
something that we will explore a lot throughout this course.
Here's one example.
There are many people and companies that claim that they have developed,
or they are developing an engine that can burn water as fuel.
Now, of course, the incentive for such a piece of technology is huge.
Imagine if we can replace all of the fossil fuels that are both expensive
and that are put in carbon dioxide and other pollutants into the air.
Imagine if we could replace that with something as simple as water.
Essentially, what the process is that they keep reinventing over and over again
is to electrolyse water, meaning separate water into its oxygen and hydrogen components,
the resulting mixed gas you might call oxyhydrogen,
and then burning that oxygen and the hydrogen back together again into water.
So the byproduct of the process is water.
They're burning the gas, the oxygen, the hydrogen, and getting energy out of it.
If this really were a legitimate method for running a car or running any engine,
how is it that the scientists and engineers of the world had missed this for so long?
That's the kind of question that a critical thinker would ask.
If, in fact, it is true that such an engine can work,
then perhaps the reason it has been quote-unquote missed for so long
is that there is a conspiracy of oil companies to suppress this scientific knowledge.
That's often the rationalization that those who claim to have such a piece of technology put forward.
But is such a conspiracy plausible?
Is it itself now just another claim that is just as fantastical as the claim that you can burn water?
We can also examine the plausibility of the claim itself by asking a very simple question.
If this is a process for generating energy, where is this energy ultimately coming from?
Even a very high school level of understanding and thermodynamics will tell you that
you're putting more energy into separating the water into oxygen and hydrogen
than you can possibly get out of it again by burning it back into water.
