that that's as good as a 30-minute exercise using a lesser piece of equipment.
Is this true?
Is it worth spending thousands of dollars on such a piece of equipment?
And how should we evaluate their claims?
Should we listen to anecdotal stories by other people who may be using the piece of equipment?
Or should we require objective scientific evidence to evaluate those claims?
We also use critical thinking in order to think about how we run our civilization.
Our population is rapidly approaching 7 billion people,
and we need to make that sustainable in some way.
I'm a physician. I see patients every day, and I know the difficulty they go through
often in making healthcare choices for themselves and for their family.
We have to purchase healthcare products, decide what foods to eat,
what lifestyles changes to make in order to stay healthy.
All of these claims are based upon evidence and logic,
and we need critical thinking in order to be able to evaluate them properly.
One of the premises of this course is that we are our brains.
We are that 3 pounds of grey jelly that floats inside of our skull.
The brain is comprised of about 100 billion neurons,
plus a lot of other cells that not only support those neurons,
but modify, modulate their function.
The brain is, in essence, an organ that can think.
It is an organ that is self-aware.
Not only the most complicated organ that we know about it,
it may, in fact, be the most complicated thing in the universe that we know about.
The brain can remember, it can feel, believe, calculate, extrapolate, infer, and deduce.
It does everything that we think of as thinking.
It is our universal tool and our greatest strength.
Most people believe that if there's one thing that separates us,
or that is our greatest advantage over all the other creatures on this planet,
it's our intelligence.
But the brain is also strangely deceptive.
It is also the root of many of our flaws and weaknesses.
This course will also be exploring what we might call human nature.
This may sound pessimistic, but it's true that humans possess logic,
but we are not inherently logical creatures.
We are not like the Vulcans of Star Trek mythology, right?
We have emotions.
So in addition to being logical, we are also highly emotional creatures.
What that means is that we tend to follow our evolved emotions and rationalizations.
Our thoughts follow what you might consider to be the pathway of least resistance,
not necessarily always the optimal pathway.
