We also live in a capitalistic society which means that every day we're subject to marketing claims.
Marketing claims are highly motivated, in fact, to misrepresent the facts
or to at least give us a very specific perspective.
They're trying to influence our thoughts and our behavior,
so they engage in what you might call persuasive speech and maybe even deception.
Even when there are laws against outright fraud, marketers are paid a lot of money in order to flirt with that line.
How much can they twist or misrepresent the facts without crossing over that line into actual fraud?
And as consumers, every day we have to sort through all of these deliberately deceptive claims
to figure out which ones are reliable and which ones aren't.
Further, many companies will use pseudoscience or even anti-scientific claims
in order to back up their marketing, back up their products.
And that can seem very persuasive to somebody who isn't schooled or skilled
in telling real science from pseudoscience.
Let me give you one example of this.
In the last couple of years, a company has made literally millions of dollars selling so-called power bands.
These are little pieces of rubber, in fact about a dollar or two worth of rubber,
with a cheap plastic hologram embedded in it.
Now the company claims that this hologram gives off a vibrational energy,
which is balanced in order to resonate with the inherent vibrational energies of your own body.
And in so doing, it will improve your balance and your performance.
You'll have more energy, if you engage in sports, you will perform that sport even better.
In fact, they have many professional endorsements, recognizable sports professionals
who wear their product and say that it helps them shoot baskets better or play golf better.
So should we believe these claims?
Should we spend 30 to 40 or maybe 60 dollars in some cases in order to buy a piece of rubber
we wear around our wrist and improve our ability to play golf?
Well, the company further supports their claims with anecdotes,
as I said, like the not only professional endorsements, but just everyday people who use their products.
And we tend to be very compelled by stories.
When someone else is telling us a story, we are hardwired, if you will.
It is human nature to find those stories very compelling.
And they also give demonstrations.
They have you hold on to a power band and show how much improved your balance is.
It turns out that these demonstrations are very deceptive.
They are little more than parlor tricks that a magician, for example, might use in order to deceive you.
The American Council on Exercise actually did a blinded study of these bands, these rubber bands,
as if they really needed to do, given the plausibility.
But they went ahead and did it anyway and they find when you blind people to whether or not they are wearing one of these bands,
there is essentially no effect whatsoever.
Which means that any perceived effect was all in the minds of the people who were wearing the bands,
who believed that there was some effect.
