There were similar predictions made in New Zealand.
These were based upon really the false claim that the phases of the moon and the position of the moon
controls or can provoke and therefore predict earthquakes.
Again, without there being any basis in scientific fact, this caused a panic in the populace.
Of course, there are earthquakes all the time.
There is the normal background frequency of earthquakes.
There's always an earthquake of some severity just around the corner,
especially in those parts of the world that are susceptible to earthquakes.
That can always be taken as confirmation about the prediction,
whether or not the prediction had any new information in it at all.
I also think it's helpful to consider thinking as a process
and to focus on the process rather than on any particular conclusion.
In fact, we should really invest ourselves in this process.
Once we invest in a conclusion, I mean emotionally invest in a conclusion,
then we start to twist facts and logic in order to fit that desired conclusion.
And humans are very good at doing just that, rationalizing or twisting facts and logic
to shoehorn them into a conclusion that we've already settled on.
The character Sherlock Holmes, perhaps the most iconic rational character in literature, said in one story,
it is a capital mistake to theorize before one has data.
And sensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories instead of theories to suit facts.
And that captures the essence of what I am saying.
Invest in the process and be very flexible when it comes to any conclusions.
In addition, one might say that we are currently living not only in the age of information with the internet,
we're living in the age of misinformation.
We are subject all the time.
Every day I get spam in my email, email which are making very specific claims,
whether they're politically motivated, ideologically motivated or trying to sell me something
or perhaps even lure me into a scam.
There are many rumors that now spread not only like wildfire but faster.
They spread with the speed of electrons through the internet.
There are many urban myths that capture our imagination in some way
and again get spread credulously, so-called friend of a friend stories,
like the executive who checks into a hotel, gets picked up in the bar,
and then wakes up the next morning with his kidney missing while he's laying in a tub of ice.
How plausible is that story?
Should we believe it?
Can something like that actually happen?
But we are now awash in such stories, whether they're innocent and just fun
versus malicious and trying to either steal our money or lure us into a scam
or maybe just to influence our voting.
In a democracy we are constantly subject to people who are trying to influence our political thinking.
