Well, if there is no smoking-gun evidence, then why do people persist or some people in believing in Bigfoot?
And that's where the errors in logic and the rationalizations kick in.
Many people engage in what we would call special pleading.
Perhaps Bigfoot can become invisible at will, and that's why we never can capture an unambiguous photograph of him.
Or capture him.
Well, is that really a valid way of excusing the absence of evidence?
And mixed in with all of this, there are just out-and-out hoaxes, like the Patterson-Gimlin film.
This is the iconic movie of what appears to be a Bigfoot walking through a campsite.
And this is still presented by some believers as the best evidence to date of Bigfoot.
However, the film is not incompatible with a simple hoax.
There is nothing in that film that can distinguish it from simply a person wearing a costume.
In 2008, to give a more clear-cut example, Matt Wittin and Rick Dyer claimed that they found a Bigfoot corpse
and that they had the frozen specimen in a freezer.
They even went as far as to call a press conference and to try to elicit the help of scientists to test the DNA of their Bigfoot specimen.
In the end, what they had was simply a stuffed Bigfoot costume, and they were exposed as deliberately concocting this hoax.
Why did they do it?
People do weird things for weird reasons, but they clearly did it.
So we always have to be on the lookout for hoaxes and deliberate deception,
not just innocent or perhaps flawed critical thinking deception in these types of claims.
Let's also go back to the UFO example I gave at the beginning of this lecture.
Those are really interesting questions, whether or not you think that they're very plausible that we could be being visited by aliens.
What I find more interesting than even that question is, why do people believe that we're being visited by aliens?
As human beings, we have the capacity for curiosity as well as reason,
but we are plagued by a host of cognitive flaws and pitfalls that may lead us to even fantastical beliefs that don't really hold up to the cold harsh light of scientific scrutiny.
But the good news is that critical thinking can be learned.
It is a skill that you can learn and that can be reinforced by habit.
The scientific approach to critical thinking is empirical.
It is a way of testing our beliefs systematically against the real world that is out there.
Once we develop our critical thinking skills and really begin to examine our beliefs systematically, it can be extremely empowering.
It's in fact a defense mechanism against all the machinations out there that are trying to deceive us,
whether for ideological, political, or just marketing reasons.
It's also very liberating.
It liberates us from being weighed down by all of those false beliefs and perhaps mutually incompatible beliefs that we tend to hold because of our emotional makeup.
So developing these critical thinking skills is both empowering, liberating, and a defense mechanism against the world that we currently live in.
