When a large consensus on a specific claim is achieved,
there's probably a greater chance that that consensus reflects reality
than the process of just an individual.
There's no guarantee of that.
A consensus may be systematically biased as well,
but at least you're stepping out of yourself and the own limitations of your knowledge.
It's also important to be humble, which means knowing your own limits.
We tend to get into trouble when we assume we have expertise or knowledge that we don't have,
or we don't question the real limits of our knowledge.
The world's a very complicated place.
Nobody could know everything.
So we always have to be on the lookout for where the limits of our own knowledge are.
And also, be comfortable with uncertainty.
There are some things we simply cannot know, or we just currently do not know.
There may be times when, after reviewing all the logic and all the evidence,
our only conclusion is we currently just don't know.
The level of uncertainty is fairly great.
Let's give an example from popular culture, which I will frequently do throughout this course.
There are those who claim that there is a large, hominid primate living in North America.
You may call it Bigfoot or use the Indian term Sasquatch.
Is this a credible belief or not?
How can we know whether or not Bigfoot is wandering through the forests of North America?
Well, what are the implications?
If there is one such creature, either he's the very last of his kind,
or if it's a sustainable population, there must be a breeding population around somewhere,
which means there's hundreds and probably thousands of these creatures around.
Where are they all?
What's the evidence for such a creature existing?
Has anyone ever captured a live specimen, found a dead specimen, found a skeleton?
Skeletal remains?
Any completely objective evidence that is not susceptible to misinterpretation?
The evidence that is usually presented is none of those things, no actual unambiguous specimens of Bigfoot.
All we have are what we sometimes call Blobsquatch, fuzzy photographs through trees at the very limits of resolution
and perhaps not well-in-focused pictures.
So anything that we can't clearly identify, that becomes quote-unquote evidence for Bigfoot.
Or there are things that are easily hoaxed, like just imprints of feet or footprints in the mud or in the ground.
But there's nothing that we would consider smoking-gun evidence.
There are eyewitness accounts.
There are people who claim that they have seen Bigfoot.
Well, then that leads to the question, how reliable are eyewitness accounts?
And we will explore that further too, but I will just quickly say now that they're very unreliable for many reasons that we will explore.
