Logic and critical thinking are therefore learned skills.
While we have some inherent sense of logic, we are overwhelmingly emotional creatures.
We have the capacity for logic, but logic and critical thinking are skills.
We're not born as master critical thinkers.
For example, we are also not born with the ability to play the violin like a concert violinist,
or we are not born with the skills and the experience necessary to perform well as a football player in the NFL.
You should no more expect to be born a highly developed critical thinker
than you should expect someone to be born a violinist or somebody who can play in the NFL.
These are all skills and abilities that need to be developed over years
and practiced in order to be good at critical thinking.
Humans tend to make a lot of errors in thinking.
Our inherent tendency, again, this evolved pathways of least resistance,
include a lot of flaws in thinking.
Flaws in logic are one example.
We call these logical fallacies.
We tend to make logical connections that are not valid, that are not real.
Our thinking is also plagued with many false assumptions.
Our heads are filled with facts, things that we know to be true, but in fact are false.
Either they're just out and out wrong, or they're just assumptions that may or may not be true, but we really don't know.
Our memories are also massively flawed.
We tend to naively assume that our memories are an accurate passive recorder of what has happened,
when in fact our memories are plagued with numerous flaws that make them highly unreliable.
And there are things that psychologists call the churistics,
which are down and dirty rules of thumb or patterns of thinking.
They're mental shortcuts that we tend to take that may be right much of the time,
but they're wrong often enough that they lead us astray quite frequently.
How do we compensate for all of these flaws in our brains functioning?
Again, that's what this course is all about, that metacognition.
If I had to give a single term to encapsulate all of the skills in this course,
it would be scientific skepticism.
Skepticism includes systematic doubt,
essentially questioning everything that you think,
questioning the process of your thinking,
and questioning everything that you think you know.
The Scottish philosopher David Hume summed this up a little bit when he said,
a wise man proportions his belief to the evidence.
That's one component of critical thinking,
basing your beliefs on actual evidence as opposed to wishful thinking, for example.
The goal of all of this is to arrive at conclusions that are likely to be true,
as opposed to conclusions that are unreliable,
but also to have some kind of a sense of how reliable our conclusions are.
