This is not an isolated incident.
There are many similar products.
You can now buy a golf shirt that's woven with energy fibers that is essentially claimed to do the same thing as these power bands.
But there's literally no signs to support any of this.
This is a great example of marketing pseudoscience, using words like energy and vibrations,
in order to convince people that there is something to it.
When, in fact, if you have a fair degree of scientific literacy, you can see this for what it is.
Meaningless pseudoscientific jargon.
So thinking critically is, as I said, a process.
So what is this process like?
What do we mean when we say to think critically?
Well, there's a few components of it that are worth pointing out.
The first is to examine all of your premises, all of the facts that you are assuming or that you think are true.
Many of them may not be reliable, or they may be assumptions.
You may not know whether or not they're true, but they're just something that you're assuming is true.
You also need to examine your logic.
Is the logic you're using legitimate, or is it flawed in some way,
or perhaps it's just systematically biased in a certain direction?
You also should try to become aware of your motivations.
People are extremely good at rationalizing beliefs when they are motivated to,
because they have a desire to believe a certain conclusion.
Understanding your own motivations will help you deconstruct that process
and will give you the skills to, again, lead to conclusions that are more likely to be true
as opposed to the ones that you just wish to be true.
And critical thinking also means thinking through the implications of a belief
that different beliefs about the world should all be compatible with each other.
But we do have a tendency to compartmentalize,
to just have one belief walled off from all other beliefs,
and therefore we insulate it from refutation.
If you think, if this were true, what else has to be true?
And does that make sense?
And just continue that process, and that's a good way to tell how plausible
and how likely to be true a certain belief or claim is.
It's also a good idea to check with others,
because no matter how developed your critical thinking skills are,
there's still one person who's thinking is going to be quirky and individual.
You have a limited fund of knowledge and a limited perspective.
In fact, your knowledge and perspective may be limited in ways that you're not aware.
You don't know what you don't know.
So if you check your beliefs with others, it increases the probability
that any of these holes in your thinking will be covered up.
