The process loses energy.
It is therefore not a source of energy.
The plausibility of such claims are beyond low.
They border on the impossible as much as we can say so in science.
So it's not very plausible.
It's hard to dismiss that plausibility simply with conspiracy theories.
And what evidence do they have that they can actually produce these engines that can run on water?
Well, it's always very thin.
It's always one step away.
They just need a little bit more money from investors in order to go that final step to make it finally work.
Their demonstrations always have major flaws, like they're running the engine along with a gasoline engine
that's burning gas for fuel to electrolyze the water.
They never give you what they claim.
So that certainly is a cause for questioning the validity of those claims.
This course will also explore the nature of knowledge itself.
What can it mean to know something?
What does that actually mean?
Well, the scientific method is based upon what we call methodological naturalism.
That's the philosophical term for it, which simply means that natural effects have natural causes.
And in trying to model and understand the world, you cannot invoke essentially magic.
You can't refer to supernatural or miraculous causes, causes that don't have any testable cause in the natural world.
It's not because we don't want there to be supernatural causes.
It's just that they're not amenable to the methods of scientific inquiry.
Therefore, from a scientific point of view, we could never really know about them.
And we'll get into this in more detail in a future lecture on the philosophy of science.
It also means that all conclusions in science are provisional.
There is no such thing as 100% metaphysical certitude.
There's no truth with a capital T.
All of our beliefs have error bars around them.
And as I said previously, not only do we have to assess what is likely to be true,
but how certain or how confident can we be about that belief knowing that we'll never quite ever get to 100% certitude.
This also means that all of our beliefs are open to revision.
That when new data comes in, or maybe just a better way of interpreting data or looking at the way things work,
we have to be open to revising what we thought we knew.
In addition to all of the flaws in thinking that I mentioned, human beings are also subject to delusions.
Sometimes our thinking goes so far awry that we can invent beliefs, invent our own reality,
or we can get swept up in the beliefs of others.
One common manifestation of this is a public panic.
Recently, psychics predicted that an earthquake was going to occur in Italy.
This caused many people to actually flee from cities.
The panic was so great.
