One such need is the desire for control, or at least to have the illusion or the sense
of control.
We don't like to feel as if we are victims of a capricious universe or a capricious world
or we are helpless in the face of unseen forces or even randomness.
We like to think that we exert some control over ourselves, over the events that happen
to us, and over our environment.
One manifestation of this desire for control is belief in superstitions.
We tend to develop beliefs that if we engage in a certain activity, it will protect us
in some way or it will enable us to perform better or to succeed.
People really develop these superstitious beliefs.
For example, sports stars are famous for superstitious beliefs.
They may decide that if they wear a certain shirt, for example, that they will play a
better game.
This is nothing short of magical thinking, but it gives us the illusion that we can exert
some control over otherwise random events.
There is a psychological study done by Whitstone et al. where they showed further that feeling
lack of control enhances our tendency towards pattern recognition, our tendency to see an
illusion of control in random data, which I will discuss more in a future lecture.
We also have a desire for simplicity, and this is easy to understand.
The simpler things are, the more control we can have over them, and we certainly don't
like feeling overwhelmed by our environment, by the tasks that we have before us, by the
things that are happening in the world.
We tend to oversimplify the things that we are confronted with.
We are motivated to oversimplify.
We pigeonhole and we stereotype.
It enables us to boil down a very complicated set of data to some simple rule.
This can be helpful and adaptive when we understand that the rule is just a schematic.
It's an oversimplified representation of a much more complicated reality.
When we actually start to accept our oversimplified versions of reality as if they are reality,
that leads to things like bigotry, where we may lump an entire group of people in together
and assume that they all share traits rather than understanding all of the diversity and
complexity that does exist within even definable groups.
Let me give you an analogy from my own profession as a physician, and that is in making a diagnosis.
We may seek the simplest answer to a complex set of signs and symptoms or problems that
patients are confronting us with, and that may motivate us to find one answer, to find
a single diagnosis that explains everything.
However, that's not always the case.
It may be that there is a lot of noise in the symptoms that a patient is presenting
us with.
They may, in fact, have one new condition, but they will also present signs and symptoms
that have to do with just what we might call the symptoms of life, the background noise
of symptoms that we all experience.
Many patients have more than one chronic illness at the same time.
