dramatic negative evidence.
This is not an isolated incident.
This is, in fact, what typically happens when prophecies fail.
When prophecies fail, the believers, in fact, are strengthened in their belief in the prophet
and in the prophecy.
They find some way to rationalize away the failure and they dig their heels in and they
are motivated to believe even more strongly.
This again partly stems from the need to appear consistent, which is related to the need for
social esteem.
We try to avoid appearing as if we conflict with ourselves.
In fact, salesmen may exploit this human need to appear consistent in order to persuade
you to buy something that perhaps you don't really need.
They might say something, for example, would you say that this would be a useful product
to buy or could you find a use for this product?
If you agree with that, then you appear to be supporting the value of it and if you then
say yes, that would be valuable but I still don't want to buy it, that would make you
feel inconsistent and therefore you try to avoid that.
They also do something which is called getting the buyer down to the final objection.
In essence, get you to say that you would buy their product if it were not for this
one thing, this one problem that stands in your way.
They then eliminate that last objection, therefore you have no further reason to defend your
decision not to buy the product.
If you now still refuse to buy it, you will appear inconsistent and people will buy the
product rather than risk appearing inconsistent to the salesperson.
A lot of how these motivations affect our thoughts and behavior can be explained with
a concept known as cognitive dissonance.
Cognitive dissonance theory has been a very successful theory throughout the last decades
of psychological thought and research.
It's turned out to be a very helpful, robust model.
Essentially what this means is that when we have two beliefs in our head at the same time
that are mutually exclusive or that conflict with each other, that causes the emotional
experience of cognitive dissonance.
We don't like that feeling.
It motivates us to resolve the conflict.
Initially we may avoid cognitive dissonance through compartmentalization.
We just keep conflicting beliefs separate from each other.
When they are forced into conflict, we need to resolve that conflict somehow.
An adaptive way to resolve a conflict is to update one or both beliefs.
If they are in conflict, one or both must be an error in some way.
If we find and correct the error, that can resolve the dissonance.
What we tend to do is to simply rationalize away the belief that we want to hold.
Our belief conflicts with reality because there's a conspiracy, because it happened
but just in a way that's not evident.
