our activity and to think about how our behavior will be perceived by others and by the public.
Children have not fully developed that part of their brain.
So they have a lot of the same basic motivations and emotions that adults do, but they don't
have this social filter that we have in place, and therefore their motives are much more
transparent.
So they're an excellent window into human emotions and motivations because they're not
good at hiding them.
Adults are better at hiding our emotions, at our motivations.
We're better at rationalizing what we want to believe, and we're better at putting a
socially acceptable spin on our behavior.
Again, the underlying psychological motivations, however, are largely the same.
We do legitimately mature as we get older, but our same basic needs are all still there.
Ironically, highly intelligent people may not necessarily be better at making decisions,
but they are better at rationalizing the decisions that they do make.
Psychologists now recognize a separate skill set called emotional intelligence, being a
rational, logical, and intelligent person isn't enough if you don't also combine that
with the skill set of emotional intelligence.
This is understanding the relationship between our motivations and our decisions, the tendency
to relieve cognitive dissonance with rationalization, and when we understand these things and understand
the emotional basis of our motivations, then we can transcend what I like to call our monkey
brains and act on a more transcendent, you know, a more critical thinking level of decision
making and behavior.
Essentially, neuroanatomically, what we're doing is we are using our frontal lobes to
make good decisions rather than just rationalize bad decisions or rationalize the primitive
decisions that our emotions want us to make.
Coming back to Arthur Conan Doyle, again, a fascinating, now almost iconic story of
a person who was able to understand rationality well enough to craft the character of Sherlock
Holmes, who was certainly a rational, critical thinking character, and yet he chose superstition
and fantasy over reason and science.
Perhaps if he understood his own motivations better, had developed his own emotional intelligence
better, he would have been a little bit more like his own character of Sherlock Holmes,
and he wouldn't have fallen for the Coddingly Fairy or the spiritualist mediums of his day
who were using essentially simple parlor tricks to fool the public.
So we all live with the solution that we are rational beings, we like to believe that we
are rational, and then that's part of our self-esteem.
The truth, however, is far more complicated than that.
