things that we think of as having agency and things that we think of as not having agency.
By agency, we mean it acts as if it has a will of its own.
It acts as if it is acting on its own.
If a branch is blowing in the breeze, we rationally know that that is an inanimate object.
The tree is alive, but it's acting just passively in the wind.
But if it's moving and it's making noise, we may instinctively think, oh, maybe that
may be a predator, maybe something that is acting on its own will, something with agency.
This, for example, is why we so easily imbue meaning and emotions onto, for example, cartoon
characters.
We can be emotionally moved by a two-dimensional cartoon character because it's acting as
if it is a person, as if it has agency, and that triggers all of the emotional hardwiring
in our brains.
We also have a sense of the supernatural, the belief that there is more to the world
than what is immediately apparent.
This ties back further to our need for a sense of connection, a need for there to be meaning,
a need for the profound.
We have a sense that we are connected to something that is profound.
It feels good to us in some way.
This can then be reinforced by confirmation bias, by sifting through data and looking
for the data that seems to confirm our beliefs, which we'll talk about more in a future lecture
on biases.
This all affects our behavior, the way obviously our motivations and our emotions, and in fact,
we have looked for ways psychologists to influence people's behavior.
There are many very practical reasons why we might want to do this.
Public service campaigns, for example, we want people to not drive drunk, for example.
So how do we do that?
Our initial instinct is to give people information, assuming that they will arrive through reason
at the correct decision and the correct behavior.
But research has shown that this is not very effective.
It's very difficult to change people's behavior just by making a rational argument to them.
Their behavior is still overwhelmed by their beliefs, it's overwhelmed by their emotions.
The scared, straight, so-called approach is very minimally effective.
However, if you address the individual's emotions, that is much more effective.
It's still difficult to get people to change old habits.
But if you convince them that, for example, by using social pressures, and this utilizes
a technique called social norming, if you tell people, you know, other people don't
drink and drive, that will have more of an impact on your behavior than telling you the
reasons why you shouldn't drink and drive.
I like to use children as an example.
If you're a parent, or if you have nieces or nephews, or in some way spend time around
young children, it's obvious that they are very socially inept.
Their brains have not fully developed, specifically their frontal lobes, the most-evolved, hierarchically
highest part of the brain that gives us our ability to socialize, specifically to plan
