way down to just our brainstem, the most primitive functions of all, just like breathing and
doing very basic things, maintaining balance while we walk, and then we have more sophisticated,
more highly evolved emotions on top of that, and then eventually our more advanced reasoning
hierarchically on top of that.
Much of our cognition, however, takes place subconsciously in the more primitive parts
of our brain, and that is where the emotions take place.
Emotions essentially make quick decisions for us that are mostly adaptive.
They include things like fear, lust, hunger, anxiety, disgust, happiness, and sadness.
They are evolved adaptive strategies.
The thinking is that emotions provide an evolutionary calculus.
They provide us with a very direct behavioral motivation.
It is easier and more reliable, for example, to simply make us feel disgust at certain
kinds of things, at certain chemicals that give off a certain odor, for example, or the
way certain things look, for example, if food looks as if it is rotting, that will make
us feel disgust, rather than to have us calculate the risks of eating a certain food, or for
example, if we are confronted with a danger like a predator, we don't have to calculate
the risks of encountering that predator or fleeing.
We simply experience the emotion of fear, and then we act upon that emotion.
Psychologist Abraham Harold Maslow made an attempt, perhaps the first attempt, to classify
the different emotional needs that people have, known as Maslow's hierarchy of needs.
In addition to the very basic emotions that I described, we also have a set of higher
psychological needs that we seek.
We desire to be safe, to be loved, to have self-esteem, and to experience what Maslow
called self-actualization.
There is some reflection in our neuroanatomy.
As I said, there is a hierarchy from our more evolved parts of our brain to the more primitive
parts of our brain, which will enact the more basic needs.
The lizard brain can experience hunger, but only our much more evolved neocortex can experience
something as the need for self-actualization.
It's probably true, and the current psychological thinking is that Maslow's hierarchy is not
a literal hierarchy where you have to meet one need before you can meet a need at a hierarchical
level.
But it does reflect, I think, a reasonable categorization of the different kinds of needs
that people have.
We do know that when we meet our psychological needs, our brain gives us a reward.
It makes us feel good, another emotion.
There is a basic punishment and reward system built into the hard-wiring of our brain.
When we do something that is likely to be disadvantageous evolutionarily, we feel bad
about it, and when we do something that is advantageous, we feel good about it.
We get a shot of dopamine to our reward centers, and we feel good about the behavior that we
just engaged in.
What are these needs?
What are the needs that motivate us so much?
