We engage in a logical process we call special pleading where we invent reasons to resolve
the apparent conflict between different beliefs.
These are in fact very good at inventing reasons to justify our beliefs.
Let's also look at morality.
One of our emotions, if you will, is a sense of justice.
That is something that is hardwired into our brains.
It's not a learned sense.
We have an innate sense of justice.
In fact, animals in the animal kingdom have also been shown experimentally to have an
innate sense of justice.
For example, there is a species of bird that defend each other from predators.
When one bird sees a predator enter an area, they will give off an alarm and then they
will come to the defense of their territory and by flocking together and defending their
territory together, the many smaller birds can fend off a larger predator.
If however, one of the birds in the community, in the area, does not come to the defensive
call of other birds, when they give a defensive call, those birds will not reciprocate.
They will not defend that bird.
These birds seem to have an innate sense of reciprocity, of justice, if you will.
Let's discuss a classic moral dilemma to see how we have an innate hardwiring in terms
of how we think about morality and justice.
Let's say that there is a train switch, this is the so-called train switch example that
can divert a train from one track to another.
On one track, there is one person and that's the track that the train is currently heading
down.
On the adjacent track, there are five people.
Now, most people would say, well, one person versus five people, you would much rather
have just one person die than five people die.
However, let's say the train is going towards the five people, would you flip the switch
to divert the train so that it kills only one person than five people?
You still will be responsible in a way for that one person's death, but you will save
five people.
Most people will do that.
They will switch the tracks actively killing that one person in order to save five people.
If you alter the context a little bit and you say, okay, different scenario, there's
five people on the track, again, the contrived situation of this moral dilemma is they don't
see the train coming, there's no way to get them off the track.
There is, you're on the front of the train standing next to another person.
If you throw that person off the train onto the tracks in front of the train that will
trigger the brakes of the train, the train will break and save those five people.
Will you throw that person onto the track in order to save those five people?
Most people won't do that.
They will switch the tracks from five people to one person, but they won't throw somebody
onto the tracks in order to save five people.
