Now the cold calculus is the same.
You're sacrificing one person in both cases in order to save five people.
But something feels different to us about that situation.
Throwing the person on the tracks is just too much of an active, direct cause of their
death.
And we're emotionally unwilling to do that when the more passive approach of just switching
the tracks, which will cause downstream the train to hit that one person, we were able
to overcome that by not throwing the person on the tracks.
There's no real rational reason for that.
That is simply derived from our evolved emotional sense of what's right and what's wrong.
Here's another example.
This comes from the book Super Sense by a colleague of mine, Bruce Hood, who is a psychologist.
He has an example that he often uses on lectures where he says, would you wear a cardigan
sweater that was once worn by a famous serial killer?
In fact, we'll offer people $20 to just wear a sweater.
That is, the sweater has been dry cleaned.
It's 100% perfectly clean.
There is no blood or anything else on the sweater.
It's just a sweater that happened to have been worn by a famous serial killer.
Many people will not wear the sweater.
Perhaps you could think for yourself, would you feel comfortable putting on this sweater?
Why is this?
It's just wool or cotton or whatever it's made of.
It can't possibly harm us.
But we have a sense of disgust.
Our emotion of disgust gets triggered by this.
This is tied to another sense that is inherent in humans, and that is the sense of essence.
The notion that inanimate objects can carry the essence of their history.
There's something different about that cardigan sweater because at one point in its past,
it was worn by a serial killer.
It's spiritually contaminated in some way.
Again, when we explore this belief, it doesn't really make sense, but it just doesn't feel
right to us.
In fact, most cultures have a concept of spirituality.
This innate sense of essence goes beyond just inanimate objects.
We think that there is a spiritual force, whether it's called animus chi or prana.
This life force separates us from things that are non-living.
In fact, we tend to categorize in our brains living from non-living things.
We process information about living things differently than non-living things.
Specifically, living things are processed through the emotional centers of our brain.
We imbue meaning and feeling to things that we think are alive in ways that we don't do
neurologically to things like a rock that are inanimate.
Although the division is not exactly between living and non-living things, it's between
