We always want to make our own behavior and our own beliefs seem consistent to others.
We also have a very strong resistance to admitting error.
We don't like to admit that we're wrong or to admit that we have flaws because that
is a threat to our self-esteem and our ego.
Let me give you an example, a very sad example unfortunately from medicine.
There are clinics in China and in other parts of the world who are prematurely offering
stem cell therapy for severe medical problems, often neurological problems.
In one case, a mother sought this stem cell therapy for her four-year-old daughter who
had severe loss of vision.
The daughter was examined by eye doctors, ophthalmologists, before the mother took her
to the stem cell clinic.
She was told that this treatment is really not legitimate.
These clinics are not science-based.
They're probably just taking advantage of desperate patients.
But she was motivated to seek any possibility of a treatment for her child, a perfectly
reasonable desire.
She paid for the treatment, her child underwent the stem cell therapy.
When she returned to her eye doctors in the United States, they examined her daughter
and found that her vision was completely unchanged.
All of the objective evidence said that there was no benefit whatsoever to her child's vision.
And yet, the mother convinced herself that her daughter was seeing better, that she had
improved vision.
She used whatever confirmation bias and bias perception that she could in order to convince
herself that her decision was not a mistake, that she had not subjected her daughter to
an unnecessary treatment, perhaps even dangerous treatment, and wasted a lot of resources going
against the advice of her physicians.
Her motivation to believe that her daughter was helped motivated her to believe that she
could see even when the objective evidence was that she couldn't.
Another example from fairly recently, in May of 2011, Harold Camping, a self-professed
preacher and prophet, predicted that the rapture would come, that his followers would
be saved while those who were not a follower of his particular brand of Christian belief
would be met with literal hell on earth.
On May 21st, this divine judgment did not come.
Nothing happened.
Initially, his followers were perplexed.
They couldn't understand how the very careful predictions of Harold Camping, which he justified
with some elaborate analysis of biblical phrases, they couldn't understand how it could not
come true.
But then they hit upon their rationalization.
Harold Camping argued that the judgment, in fact, did occur, that it was just a spiritual
judgment, not a physical judgment.
Therefore, there is absolutely no outward manifestation that the judgment occurred, no evidence.
Therefore he and his followers were enabled to maintain their belief in the face of pretty
