Sir Arthur Conan Doyle wrote the famous Sherlock Holmes series of stories.
The character of Sherlock Holmes was hyper-rationalist.
He clearly understood reasoning and critical thinking.
And yet Arthur Conan Doyle himself was deeply into spiritualism.
He firmly believed in the spiritual mediums of his day.
In fact, this eventually led him into conflict with his, originally, his dear friend, the
famous magician Houdini.
Houdini was a rationalist and he made a career out of debunking the spiritualist mediums
of his day because he knew that they were using the same escapist techniques that he
would use on stage to entertain.
Doyle and Houdini came to blows over this and that ended their friendship.
Doyle also was famously taken in by what we now know as the Coddingley fairies.
Two girls, Elsie Wright and Francis Griffiths, claimed that they were being visited by little
winged fairies in their garden at Coddingley Village.
And they provided photographs as proof of this visitation.
In the end, it was easily demonstrated that their photographs were of them posing with
paper cutouts that they literally cut out of books and then propped up on sticks.
That was the evidence, that literally flimsy evidence that Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, the
author of Sherlock Holmes, completely fell for.
It's a great story and it leads to the question of why.
How is it possible that the author of Holmes could have fallen for a literal childish hoax?
And that's what we're going to be exploring in this lecture.
Our brains are belief machines.
We are motivated to believe.
We are born to believe, especially those things that we want to believe.
What we will be exploring in this lecture is what drives this human desire for belief
and what drives these specific things that we tend to believe in.
The hope is that by understanding what motivates us, understanding what makes us tick as it
were, that we will be able to transcend or at least mitigate the influence of those motivations.
In fact, we might say that the default mode of human psychology, a term frequently used
to mean, again, the pathway of least resistance, default mode, meaning the way we will tend
to think unless we make a specific effort to act a different way.
The default mode is to arrive at beliefs for largely emotional reasons and then to employ
our reason more to justify those beliefs than to modify or arrive at those beliefs in the
first place.
Therefore, in many ways, we are slaves to our own emotions.
That is, if we let ourselves be.
It is helpful to try to understand this interaction between beliefs and motivations and reason
in the context of neuroanatomy, of understanding the way our brains are organized.
In a very meaningful evolutionary sense, our brains are literally a lizard brain inside
of a mammal brain, inside of a primate brain, inside of a human brain.
The most recently evolved parts of our brain, the neocortex or the frontal lobes, hierarchically
can modify and control the earlier evolved more primitive parts of our brain, all the
