So while we seek a simple answer, we may be confronted with a much greater complexity.
A good rule of thumb is that reality is always more complicated than you think or that you
would like to think.
We also have a desire for the universe to have meaning.
We want the universe to make sense.
We want our lives to have meaning.
We want there to be a plan for us.
It gives us a sense of purpose, and it gives us a filter, a way of making sense out of
all of the complex things that happen in life, some good, some bad, some we just can't make
sense of.
But if we think that there's this overarching meaning to our own existence, it does give
us this very comforting sense of meaning.
We want to believe that things happen for a reason, when the reality is probably closer
to the fact that stuff just happens.
Related to this is our desire to believe that big effects must have big causes.
We don't like to think that there could be a massive consequence to a very innocuous
or innocent cause.
The JFK assassination is one example of this.
Many people still believe to this day that the president JFK was assassinated by some
vast conspiracy of a large organization or perhaps forces working within the government
that it couldn't have been done by one person acting alone, the so-called lone nut theory
that just doesn't emotionally sit right with them.
How could this one crazed individual by himself do something which had such a massive effect
on world events?
There had to be an equally big cause, a conspiracy that was equal to the consequences of the
president of the United States being assassinated.
Yet another need that we have is the need for self-esteem, the need to not only feel
good about ourselves, but to feel that the others in our community respect us.
This has largely to do with the fact that we are intensely social animals.
A lot of our emotions and our thinking are tied up with interfacing with other people
in our environment.
Not only do we need to get attention from other people and feel loved by other people,
but we need to develop very highly developed social skills.
Part of that is looking after our own sense of self-worth and how others in our community
look at us.
This is often referred to as having an ego, and again a certain amount of ego is very
adaptive, but it also powerfully motivates us to interpret the world in a way that is
favorable to our own ego.
Psychologists often refer to this as the fundamental attribution error, that we tend to look for
external causes to explain our own behavior, and when we do so, we're very kind to ourselves.
We're very good at rationalizing away our own behavior in order to protect our own self-esteem.
We also do things to avoid social embarrassment or stigma.
For example, we may avoid appearing inconsistent.
