about what it thinks it's seeing.
In this case, three disconnected dots were perceived of as being part of one massive
mile-long object.
Another example of how it's possible to think you're seeing something that's not there
simply because of the situation is the Battle of LA.
Now, I'm not referring to the 2011 movie, but rather the air raid over Los Angeles that
took place on February 25, 1942.
Over 1,400 anti-aircraft shells were fired.
Eventually, however, it was concluded that the entire air raid was simply a false alarm,
probably the result of war nerves.
This was towards the beginning of World War II.
It might have been triggered by something as innocuous as a weather balloon.
However, once the shells were started to fire, the soldiers who were manning these anti-aircraft
batteries were firing at something.
They thought that they were seeing planes invading the West Coast of the United States.
Another dramatic example of how our brain constructs a picture in our heads from the
sensory input is the fact that the different senses can actually influence each other.
Our brains will compare different types of sensory input in order to construct one seamless
picture out of all of them.
They will adjust one sense or the other in order to make things match.
One example of this is a 2001 wine test by Moreau, Brochet and Dubardieu.
What they did was they colored white wine with red food coloring.
They then gave the red wine to wine tasting experts and asked them to describe what they
were tasting.
The experts used objects to describe the odors and the taste that was the same color as the
wine being tasted.
In other words, they were describing the white wine as if it were a red wine.
They were fooled apparently.
Their highly developed and sophisticated wine tasting sense was fooled merely by the color
of the wine they thought they were drinking.
In a related study, Brochet placed the same exact wine into different bottles with then
either cheap or expensive labels.
Wine tasting experts were then asked to compare the different wines and rate them.
They rated the wine with the expensive label in glowing terms while denigrating the exact
wine with the cheap label as unworthy.
Here we could see how perception was fairly dramatically influenced by mere expectation,
even among experts.
Gender perception is something else which is also a combination of different types of
sensory input.
You might think that it's purely visual.
Does someone look male or do they look female?
