So it's not the kind of thing that happens gradually.
Your brain keeps them synchronous until you're outside of that 80 millisecond window and
then it's suddenly noticeably asynchronous.
It's also true that our brains actually see, or at least infer, a little bit into the future.
When we catch a baseball, the 80 milliseconds it takes for your brain to process the visual
information, would make you miss the ball every time, you would be 80 milliseconds behind
reality.
It may not make a difference in everyday activity, but when you're trying to catch a fast moving
ball, those 80 milliseconds will make a difference.
So our brains evolved in order to compensate for that.
They actually project rapid movement slightly into the future in order to compensate for
this 80 millisecond delay due to processing.
Another example, this one is a so-called pathological example, meaning it doesn't occur in everybody
but it does occur in some people and that is called synesthesia.
Synesthesia is a phenomenon when one sensory modality is interpreted by the brain as if
it were a different sensory modality.
Or people with synesthesia may see numbers or hear light or smell colors, a color will
have a smell to them.
This happens because one part of the brain is interpreting sensory input of a different
sort.
So if you have visual information going to your auditory cortex, the auditory cortex will
interpret it in the way that it knows how as a sound.
You will be able to hear light.
It's not clear whether this synesthesia represents a bleeding over of information from one sensory
area to an adjacent sensory area in the brain or if there are actually specific connections
being made, if this is an alternate type of wiring in the brain.
To some extent, there is some synesthesia even in all so-called normal, neurologically
typical individuals.
Again, our brains do compare and do use the information that visual information is influencing
the auditory cortex as in the McGurk effect.
So there is some cross-processing going on.
With synesthesia, it's just much more dramatic.
Up to this point, I've been talking about the ways in which our brain constructs the
sensory information that's coming into us, makes assumptions, alters it, highlights certain
things, for example, in order for the information to be useful to us but at the same time introducing
artifacts and error.
Now I'm going to shift a little bit to the ways in which we pay attention to that sensory
information.
Information is hugely important to the notion of perception because we are being bombarded
with an overwhelming amount of sensory information.
You cannot possibly pay attention to even a significant fraction, let alone all of it,
