Eyewitnesses are subject to suggestion.
They have a false confidence in their own accuracy and they're subject to confabulation,
making up details.
Remember I said that our brains construct a narrative, a story.
They construct a consistent reality out of what it thinks it perceives and part of that
construction is to fill in missing pieces.
That's called confabulation and people will do that subconsciously automatically and they
will think that these pieces that they added were perceived or actually out there in reality.
Therefore perception is a construct.
That's the bottom line lesson of this lecture.
It is something that is happening inside your brain.
Each individual sensory stream is interpreted and modified.
The different streams are combined and compared and then altered based upon that comparison
and we attend to a very small subset of that information which we then weave into a whole
story adding in confabulating pieces as needed.
The end result is a story that is largely a fiction.
The brain creates illusions of a continuous congruent reality, fills in the gaps as needed,
makes assumptions that are usually but not always true resulting in illusions that are
dramatic when they're specifically designed to trick the brain.
But this happens to us every day.
Every day as we're going through our lives we don't get this objective perfect view of
reality around us.
We have this very, very imperfect constructed view.
There are also higher order constructions.
In a subsequent lecture I will talk about how sensory input is constructed into meaningful
patterns.
So not only are the components of what we perceive constructed, how we put it together
into a meaningful way is also constructed.
This will often result in unnecessary arguments from what I call an irrational faith in the
fidelity of our own perceptions.
If however we understand the limits of our perceptions then we will not overly rely upon
that.
We will not say, hey I saw it with my own eyes, seeing is believing.
We'll say, I think I saw this but honestly I don't know and I can't really know exactly
what I saw because it was something that was constructed by my brain.
In the next lecture I'm going to talk about memory because as soon as you perceive something
it becomes a memory.
So what you really have are memories which themselves are constructed and altered of
what you think you saw.
In lecture four I will go over in more detail how our memories are also constructed.
