flashes on and off so you're not looking at it continuously, very dramatic changes can
happen to that picture, to that scene in the flashes that it will be very difficult for
you to perceive.
You will not notice most of them.
You will be blind to the change.
Subjects have explored the extent to which we can be blind to even significant changes.
For example, now there are several experiments showing that when interacting with an unfamiliar
person, somebody you don't know personally, that person can actually change outside of
your view and about 60% of the time, subjects won't notice that they're talking to a different
person than they were just a moment ago.
Even a dramatic change such as that, changing one person for an entirely different person,
can escape our notice.
An example of our ability to only attend to a small number of things at the same time
is multitasking.
The term multitasking itself is sort of a recent invention used to define doing more
than one thing at the same time.
The research shows, however, that people essentially can't do this.
We cannot attend to more than one thing at the same time.
What people do when they are multitasking is they shift their attention back and forth
between or among the things that they are doing or that they are attending to.
But they only have so much attention.
They can only give attention to just one thing at a time.
In experiments, only about 2.5% of people, for example, were able to talk and drive at
the same time without a reduction in their driving performance.
That's a very small number.
The rest of the people had a significant decrease in their driving performance while they were
attempting to attend to something else at the same time.
In other experiments, it's ironically been demonstrated that people who think that they
are good at multitasking actually suffered from multitasking the most.
Their performance went down the greatest when they attempted to multitask.
Therefore, dividing our attention uses up cognitive resources.
It is exactly as if you, say, have 100% of your attention if you divide it between two
things and each is getting 50% of your attention and performance goes down by 50%.
In addition, it may be a little bit worse than that because you're expending a little
bit of your resources to switch back and forth and therefore both tasks suffer even more
than if you were just focusing on one at a time.
Talking on your cell phone while driving is now a very important example of this and that's
why many states now have laws that prohibit doing that because your ability to attend to
what's happening around you significantly decreases when you're just having a conversation.
Eyewitness testimony is therefore notoriously unreliable if everything I've said in this
lecture up to this point is true.
