make certain versions of the spinning silhouette illusion appear to be moving in one direction
more often than the other.
Another ambiguous stimuli illusion, this one is a very classic one, is the old young woman
illusion.
In this you have a picture that can be constructed either as an old woman looking in one direction
or a young woman looking in the other direction.
The ambiguous stimuli can be constructed in different ways.
There is also the horse camouflage illusion.
A picture of a snowy landscape with rocks could appear to be just that.
However, the snowy and the rocky areas are laid out in such a way that it actually suggests
the shape of a horse with brown spots on white fur.
Your brain may or may not put that together into the shape.
When it does, however, then the picture of the horses will snap into place and then you
cannot unsee those horses.
This is also a process of your brain filling in missing information.
The outline of the horse is just suggested by the drawing and then your brain will fill
in the details.
The image again snaps into place.
These types of optical illusions I've been talking about has relevance for UFO sightings,
for example, pilots or others believing they see an unidentified flying object.
For example, in 1997, a military helicopter reported seeing what they thought was another
aircraft that was about to collide with them.
They in fact took evasive action.
However, it turns out that what they were viewing was simply a Mylar balloon.
It was a small, immatallic balloon.
However, the pilot, again a trained pilot, somebody with a lot of experience who you
would think would be able to distinguish a balloon from an aircraft, was unable to
do so.
His brain made wrong assumptions about distance and everything else flowed from there.
Of course, your brain could see the object as being far away, large and moving very
rapidly or it could be close, small and moving very slowly.
Your brain constructed either way.
The pilot's brain thought they were seeing a large aircraft moving quickly towards him
when, in fact, it was a small balloon just drifting by.
Another example, the Stevenville Light UFO of January 8, 2008.
Some witnesses saw a UFO one mile long.
Investigation reveals, however, that these were simply flares that were dropped by F-16s.
However, the witnesses constructed the UFO by connecting the dots.
This is something that our brains do when, again, when it's constructing our perception
of the world around us.
It will fill in lines or connections where it thinks they should be based upon assumptions
