In this lecture, we're continuing to explore the ways in which our underlying brain activity
is deceptive and constructed.
We're moving on now to perception.
For example, in July 17, 1996, TWA Flight 800 crashed shortly after takeoff.
There were many eyewitnesses who reported seeing a missile or a streak of light going
to the plane.
However, an exhaustive FBI and National Transportation and Safety Board investigation concluded that
there was no missile.
Therefore, what did all those eyewitnesses see?
Another very dramatic example, in 1978, a red panda escaped from the Rotterdam Zoo.
The story of the escaped panda ran in the local papers, following which there were hundreds
of red panda sightings all over the city.
However, it was soon discovered that the panda was killed just outside the zoo and that the
bear had died prior to the story and all of the sightings.
Therefore, what did all of those hundreds of eyewitnesses see?
It could not have been a red panda.
Is seeing believing or perhaps it's more accurate to say that believing is seeing?
In this lecture, it's my job to convince you that you cannot trust anything you think you
see or perceive.
There are simply too many flaws in the ways our brain constructs these perceptions.
Our perceptions are not passive.
It's not like a tape recorder or a film camera where details are simply recorded as they
come in.
In fact, our brains actively construct a picture of what is going on around us based upon a
tiny fraction of all the sensory information that's coming in.
This introduces many opportunities for distortions and error.
Brains have learned over centuries really how to exploit the foibles of the brain's
sensory processing.
They have developed a practical knowledge of how to deceive you, how to do things right
in front of your face without you seeing or perceiving that they happened.
They use this knowledge for entertainment.
However, it's certainly as possible for these same tricks to be used for nefarious purposes.
That is another example in which artists, in this case, have learned how to exploit
the ways in which our brain processes information in order to create a specific effect.
For example, they have developed laws of perspective and dimensionality, the ability to create a
three-dimensional image on a two-dimensional canvas.
They do this without an underlying knowledge of the neuroscience, but just a practical knowledge
of how the visual system works and how it constructs what we think we see.
Perhaps the simplest demonstration of the constructed aspect of our sensory input is
optical illusions.
All types of illusions, by definition, are times when the brain constructs a sensory
