But your brain makes the lighter shadows, the lighter squares in the shadow seem lighter
relative to the darker shadows, the darker squares.
And the darker squares outside the shadow seem darker relative to the lighter squares.
That's a brain-processing thing that alters how you see the shade of those squares.
You can't unsee this optical illusion even when you know exactly what is happening.
The same thing is true of size.
For example, the moon horizon illusion.
The moon appears to be bigger when it's on the horizon than when it is overhead.
But this is, in fact, not true.
It is merely an illusion that is resulting from the fact that when the moon is on the
horizon there are objects, trees, and buildings, etc., that give perspective.
When the moon is high in the sky, there is nothing to compare it to, so it seems relatively
smaller.
Some other three-dimensional illusions, again, the brain makes assumptions about size, distance,
and relative position.
These assumptions are based upon what is usually correct, but when one or more of those assumptions
are incorrect, the brain can construct a false three-dimensional image of reality.
The ability to judge distance is especially important.
No one is immune to these factors, to poor viewing conditions, to lack of a clear reference,
for example, so even being a trained pilot or a trained observer does not make your brain
construct things differently or make you immune to these illusions.
Three-dimensional images are a construction.
It is something that is happening inside your brain, and that's important to remember.
There are also perceptual reversals.
This has to do with ambiguous stimuli, your brain constructing images in different ways
at different times.
There is the classic cube illusion, for example, where you have a two-dimensional drawing of
a three-dimensional cube, and either face can be perceived as pointing towards you at any
one time, and in your brain the cube can flip back and forth between facing one direction
or another.
There is also a spinning silhouette illusion, a silhouette of a young female dancer spinning
around, and your brain can perceive her as either spinning clockwise or counterclockwise,
and it will tend to flip back and forth between one direction and the other.
That's because the illusion, the spinning silhouette, is compatible with rotating in
either direction.
Your brain can construct the shadows and the perspective either way.
First looking at how people perceive the spinning silhouette illusion also reveal other influences
such as perspective biases.
For example, we assume that our brains tend to assume that what we are viewing is receiving
light from above.
There is a lighting from above bias in how we construct images, and this does tend to
