However, there are numerous studies which indicate that what we see in terms of gender
is affected by the voice that we hear, especially when the visual input is ambiguous or androgynous.
We will see an ambiguous or androgynous picture as male if it is accompanied by a male-sounding
voice and as female if it's accompanied by a female-sounding voice.
This same research also shows that we respond better to Congress sensory input when the
voice matches the face we see it coming from and the movements that are being made rather
than in Congress.
Sometimes our brain will have difficulty putting conflicting sensory input together.
Another very dramatic example of how our brain uses different types of sensory input in order
to construct its picture is the so-called McGurk effect after the researcher who first
described it.
The consonants that we hear are affected by the mouth movements that we see.
For example, if you hear someone say bah and while looking at video of someone saying bah
or fa or dah or va, we will actually hear what we see people saying or what we hear
will be dramatically influenced by the mouth movements that we are actually seeing.
Our brain adjusts the sound in order to make it Congress with the lip movements that we
see.
You actually hear different consonants when this is happening.
One very dramatic example of how our brains are modifying, altering, constructing the
sensory input.
There is also temporal synchronization.
Sounds and sights like clapping hands seem to be simultaneous.
However, the light traveling from somebody clapping their hands travels much faster than
the sound waves propagate.
So the two sensory inputs do not arrive at you, at your sensory organs, at exactly the
same time.
It also takes a slightly different amount of time for your brain to process those two
types of information.
And yet, when we look at somebody clapping their hands, the two events appear to be exactly
simultaneous.
That however is a constructed illusion in your brain.
Your brain synchronizes the two events because it knows that they're supposed to occur at
the same time.
In fact, as long as the visual and auditory information are within 80 milliseconds of
each other, your brain will perceive them as being simultaneous.
So therefore, if someone is clapping their hands while moving farther and farther away
from you, and therefore the difference in time between the visual and auditory information
is getting farther and farther apart, they will still seem to be synchronous, seem to
be occurring at the exact same moment until they are arriving at greater than 80 milliseconds
apart, which will occur when someone is about 90 feet or 27 meters away.
At that point, they will suddenly become noticeably asynchronous.
