perception in an incorrect way.
It's a misperception of reality.
Generally, objects in our world appear to be stable and they appear to be accurate with
respect to reality.
That property psychologists refer to as constancy.
Optical illusions, by definition, represent an exception to constancy, a time when objects
are either not stable or they do not accord with reality.
There is some kind of internal inconsistency or paradox in what we think we are seeing.
This is because the brain has to make assumptions.
It makes assumptions about what's likely to be true and then it processes the sensory
information based upon those assumptions.
Most of the time those assumptions are correct, but when they're not correct, that results
in an optical illusion.
Now, constructed optical illusions are designed to specifically exploit known ways in which
the brain processes information.
There are different types of optical illusions.
There are perspective illusions which all exploit the ways in which our brains construct
three-dimensional images out of two-dimensional input.
Visual input is all two-dimensional.
Our retinas are a flat, curved surface.
The brain has to then infer from that two-dimensional input a three-dimensional world with relative
size and distance and movement, for example.
Mostly, it does this with the stereoscopic vision, the fact that it has input from two
different eyes that it can compare.
But even with just input from one eye, and you can test this yourself by closing off
one eye, the brain can make reasonable inferences about the three-dimensionality of the world
around it.
There are optical illusions that are also based upon relative shade and size of objects.
There are illusions based upon ambiguous stimuli where the brain can construct the image in
more than one way, and your brain will tend to switch back and forth between different
constructions.
And there are after-image optical illusions.
The visual system will adapt to lighting and color, for example.
And then when that is changed, the adaptation causes an after-image.
That's not really there.
Some examples of optical illusions that are fairly dramatic, in my opinion, include the
a shading illusion.
In this illusion, a shadow is falling across a checkerboard.
Now the light squares in the shadow appear to be lighter than the dark squares outside
of the shadow, even though they are, in fact, the exact same shade.
You can move the squares next to each other and see that the shade is identical.
