at the same time.
So we filter out most sensory information that is reaching us and we pay attention to only
a very tiny amount of it, what our brains deem to be important.
Again, that's something that magicians have learned to exploit.
They know how to make your brain attend to one area or to one thing that's happening
and completely ignore and not perceive at all something else that's happening even though
it's right in front of you.
There are some now famous experiments in which this is demonstrated very dramatically.
Experts are asked to watch a video, for example, in which they are instructed to focus or pay
attention to one type of activity that's happening in the video.
While at the same time, something else very dramatic is happening in the video right before
your eyes and about 60% or so of people who watch the video will completely miss it.
They will be completely unaware of dramatic events happening right before their eyes simply
because they were instructed to attend to a different part of what was happening in the
video.
In fact, our focus, the amount of focus that we have can also shift around.
We can be focused on just one part of our visual field with completely ignoring the peripheral
vision or we can be on the lookout trying to diffuse our attention among a greater percentage
of our visual field.
In fact, only the very center of the visual field is highly detailed.
If you hold out your thumb at arm's length, the size of the thumb is about the area where
you have 20-20 vision if your vision is normal and healthy.
You have very extremely poor vision and you generally can't pay attention to every part
of your peripheral visual field at the same time.
We do tend to shift around to say the upper left or the lower left part of our peripheral
vision at different times.
When you do that, when you attend to one part of the visual field, the objects in that part
of the visual field are actually enhanced.
Your brain will process more of the information coming from that part of the visual field
and it will suppress information coming from other parts of the visual field.
That is an important concept as well.
It's not just that we're paying attention to only one part of our sensory information.
When we do that, we actually suppress information coming from elsewhere in order for our brains
to prevent getting distracted by all sorts of what it deems to be at the moment irrelevant
information.
What I described is what we call inattentional or attentional blindness.
We are blind to things that we are not attending to.
There is another very closely related phenomenon called change blindness.
With change blindness, we do not notice sometimes even dramatic changes that happen in our
environment.
For example, if you're looking at a picture with a lot of elements in it and the picture
