We do have, that is a tendency that psychologists have now described and this is an example
of it, the tendency to insert ourselves into memories that we recall.
Now this is a caution for any profession that must elicit a history.
So police officers, physicians, therapists, any time where you're soliciting a history
from another person you need to remember the incredible tendency for suggestibility and
creating false memories.
This is why, for example, as a physician I always teach medical students that when you
begin to take a medical history you should never ask leading questions.
You need to ask open-ended questions and let patients fill in the details themselves.
If you ask leading questions like are you having a pain in your left shoulder, you're
going to generate a certain amount of suggestible false positives from that.
Further, not only do we need to avoid encouraging people to invent memories, we need to make
sure there's always some external physical corroboration.
Courts in fact are moving in this direction, more and more caution about the validity of
eyewitness testimony and recognition of the need to validate any testimony with some kind
of objective evidence.
In conclusion, the way to summarize everything I've discussed is that memories are highly
constructed.
Every time you remember something you are recreating the memory, updating it and changing
its details.
Memories will change over time, they fade over time.
We lose important details like whether or not they're correct.
They can fuse one memory to another.
We can take one detail from one memory and insert it into another.
They morph to fit our internal narrative and we cannot tell the true memories from entirely
false memories or contaminated memories.
Our confidence is not a good guide.
The bottom line is that it's naive to implicitly trust our own memories.
This may be unsettling, but it's an important step to recognize that we need to be realistic
and humble about the limitations and flaws of human memory.
It will help us avoid wrong conclusions and unnecessary conflict and arguments.
How many times have you argued with somebody over your differing memories of an event?
You just have to recognize that without external objective verification, you really can't know
how accurate the details of your memory are.
But by recognizing the fallibility of human memory, that is an important step on the journey
towards true critical thinking.
