In fact, there were cases of people who were sentenced to prison for committing abuses when
the only evidence against them was from so-called recovered memory or false memory.
Dr. Hopkins is another example of how easy it is to innocently or naively manufacture
false memories.
Hopkins is a painter who became an amateur UFO abduction investigator, and his research
technique was to use hypnosis to interview subjects who suspected that they may have
been abducted by aliens.
Usually what happened is somebody would read a book or watch a TV show about alien abductions
and say, I wonder if I was abducted, I had some unusual experience or I saw a UFO once.
Some of these people may have found themselves in the hands of somebody like Bud Hopkins
who used hypnosis in order to recover what he believed was their partially repressed or
erased memory of their alien abduction.
Under hypnosis, which essentially is a condition in which people are highly suggestible, even
more so than normal, he would ask a series of very leading questions where he would encourage
them to imagine themselves being abducted.
It's therefore not surprising that a standard abduction scenario would emerge out of those
hypnosis sessions, and then his clients would come to really remember being abducted by
aliens.
But there's every reason to think that these were just another form of false memory.
It's so easy to create false memories, in fact, that you could do so just by giving people
a simple word list and having them memorize the list.
You can give them very subtle suggestions by just having a theme to the words on the
list.
And then you show them another list that has words that were not on it, but they are similar
to words that were on the list or they're in the same theme.
So if you, for example, give subjects a list of 10 different kinds of fruit, and then you
show them another list later on, all of fruit, but with different kinds of fruit on the list,
they may remember seeing the types of fruit that they hadn't seen.
They constructed a false memory of seeing those words because thematically it fits with
the theme of the words that they were given.
Children are particularly susceptible to suggestibility and creating false memory.
There's also often social demands and other motivational factors that may cause us to
bring our memories in line with what's being suggested to us.
There are false experiences as well that are very easy to generate.
Now a study was done, a study was able to produce a false memory of subjects eating popcorn
just by exposing them to vivid imagery of others doing the same thing.
So for example, if they read an advertisement for a new brand, a false brand of popcorn
that describes it vividly as how it tastes and how it feels, and then a week later they
were asked whether they were actually given the popcorn to taste or whether it was just
described to them, a certain percentage of the people who were never exposed to the popcorn
will remember having eaten it themselves.
They incorporated the vivid description and they inserted themselves into the events that
they read about.
