of a conspiracy that there was more than one shooter there.
Initially, her reports were very simple.
She said that she saw nothing.
She was standing next to the car when the shots ran out.
She saw what happened to the president, but otherwise she didn't really see a thing is
what she said.
But then over the years, she started to embellish her story.
She began to add details that maybe she saw something over at the grassy knoll, and then
years later, she saw a person over at the grassy knoll.
Eventually, she even recalled running down a person, running after a person who was trying
to flee the scene from the grassy knoll.
These details were all added bit by bit over years each time she was interviewed.
She remembered the gist of the event, and she remembered the narrative that was developed,
that there was a conspiracy of multiple shooters.
And then the details morphed over the years, documented on multiple interviews, to fit
that narrative, completely disconnected from the reality of what she actually saw as documented
immediately after the event.
Past events become in this way contaminated, and researchers talk about memory contamination.
We incorporate details that we are exposed to after an event into the memory of the event
itself.
Researcher Loftus et al. studied thousands of subjects and found that people incorporate
misleading details from questions or other accounts into their own visual memory.
So for example, you show subjects a film of something happening, and then just by asking
them leading questions, what was the woman in the video wearing?
They went, in fact, let's say there was no woman in the video, but you're asking them
about a woman, so they think, all right, there must have been a woman there, why else
would you be asking them about a woman?
Therefore, they remember seeing a woman, and they invent details.
They can tell you what she was wearing.
They can see the details.
They remember them vividly.
These are false memories that were constructed easily just by asking a slightly leading question.
There is also a need to conform to what we think we know about the event we're trying
to recall.
Witnesses therefore tend to contaminate each other's accounts, bringing them in line with
each other.
Now, all of this is not deliberate deception going on.
Witnesses are all honest and sincere.
This is just how our memory works.
In order to keep all of our memories consistent, we update the details so that they all fit
together.
If we have to alter or make up details of a memory in order to do that, our brains happily
do that to fill in any gaps, gloss over any inconsistencies.
