The limits of human memory are not just with recall.
We tend to have an innate sense that our only problem with memory is recall.
That's because we feel like we have difficulty remembering something, but then it may pop
into our mind that we suddenly have access to that memory.
That leads to this false assumption that all problems with memory are recall problems.
But that's not the only problem at all.
Some memories never form.
We may experience something but never consolidate it from short-term into long-term memory.
Memories also degrade over time.
There is actual loss of information.
It's not just difficult to access the memory.
The memory is actually not there anymore.
But even worse than just pure recall, our memories can fuse together.
Two different memories can be fused into one memory.
Or they morph.
The memories change over time.
They alter in details and in generalities over time.
But let's talk about recall first.
There is one type of long-term memory that is called a flash bulb memory.
This is a memory that we have for an unexpected emotional event as opposed to the everyday
mundane events of our lives, what you had for breakfast.
Flash bulb memories tend to be vivid.
They tend to be very long-lasting memories.
And they are reinforced by the emotion of the event.
In fact, a strong emotional experience does strongly reinforce a memory.
We tend to remember emotional things more than events that do not carry with them emotions.
And specifically trauma, traumatic events generally lead to very strong long-term memories.
There is a 1992 study by Nessar and Harsh where they questioned 106 students right after
the Challenger explosion.
So what they experienced when they heard that the Challenger, the space shuttle that exploded
as it was launching.
They heard that that represents a flash bulb memory, a sudden unexpected and emotionally
laden event.
They then re-questioned 44 of the 106 students two and a half years later.
Those are the ones that were available for follow-up.
And they scored those students on the accuracy of their memory of where they were and what
they were doing during the Challenger explosion two and a half years earlier.
It's not that much time, two and a half years is a fairly recent long-term memory.
25% one quarter of those students scored zero out of seven in terms of details, accuracy
for details of that flash bulb memory.
Half scored two or less.
Recall in general in the entire group was very bad.
And it wasn't an all or nothing problem.
