At the end, we have a consistent narrative, even though it may be completely inaccurate.
UFO witnesses therefore, if you have three or four people who all witness the same unexpected,
unusual event light in the sky as it were, they may all give a very consistent account.
That consistent account may be interpreted as evidence that they experienced something
real.
However, if they talked with each other about what they saw, they have contaminated each
other's memory.
Now, they will have incorporated the details that the other person suggested to them into
their own memory, and they may have vivid, detailed memories of seeing things that were
simply the result of the communication they had among them.
We can even make up details entirely.
We tend to invent details to fill in the gaps in order to create a consistent story and
reinforce the emotional themes.
This gets back to the fact that memory is a construction.
It's not a passive recording.
We are constructing memories.
Our brains have to do this in many trivial ways.
For example, when we blink, we miss a little bit of visual information, and our brains
stitch together the visual information, so we have one continuous stream.
We do that cognitively as well.
We stitch together the different bits of things that we perceive about an event and that we
remember about an event, and we stitch it together in a thematic narrative, and we fill
in all the gaps.
This is called confabulation.
We make up details as needed in order for the narrative to be seamless.
There are lots of experiments into the human tendency for confabulation.
For example, there's one famous study in which there is a staged theft.
You go to a public area where there are a couple of confederates.
Confederates are subjects that are participating in a psychological study.
They're carrying out the scenario.
A person simply says, hey, somebody stole my radio, and then police officers who are
also confederates come in and they take eyewitness testimony.
People who were there will describe the radio.
They will describe a suspicious person who probably took it, when in fact there never
was a radio, no one ever came in and took it.
The entire scenario was made up, but the witnesses were told there was a radio.
They were told it was stolen.
They were being asked to recall what happened, so they invent all the details they need to
in order to make the narrative make sense.
There is also what's called forced confabulation, where leading questions are asked, say, about
a film that was viewed.
A week later, subjects can remember seeing a non-existent scene that was never in the
film that they were asked about.
