Imagine a witness who recalls an extraordinary event.
They're very confident, sincere.
They're a reliable witness.
Their recall is vivid and detailed.
This may be an event of a crime, a UFO, an unidentified object in the sky, a ghost or
a bigfoot sighting, or some other rare or weird event.
How reliable is the testimony of such a witness?
Also think of your most cherished childhood memory.
Chances are the memory is almost entirely a fiction.
I know most people don't want to think that their memories can be so unreliable or flawed,
but that's my task during this lecture is to convince you of how utterly flawed human
memory is.
Like perceptions, memory is not a passive recording.
We don't have tape recorders in our head.
Our memories are constructed.
They're constructed entirely by our brains.
They are in fact part of our internal narrative.
They're tied together with everything that we think and everything that we believe with
our internal model of reality.
There are various different types of memory.
For example, there's short term memory, a several minute window of memory, the anatomical
structure in our brain where that occurs is called the hippocampus.
There is also working memory.
Working memory is our ability to hold a few bits of information in our minds and manipulate
it in some way.
So when you're adding a couple of numbers together, you're using your working memory
to hold on to those numbers and do the calculation.
There is also long term memory.
Long term memory, as the name implies, are stored more diffusely throughout the brain
for a long period of time.
This lecture will focus almost entirely from this point forward on long term memory.
But actually before I begin to tell you how terrible our memory is, it is worth pointing
out that human memory can be incredibly powerful.
There is a classic experiment which was recently replicated by a colleague of mine, Richard
Wiseman, who is a psychologist, in which they take two subjects and expose them over a few
days to 10,000 different photographs.
They then showed them photographs and asked them whether that was one of the 10,000 photographs
they had recently witnessed or not.
And the subjects on average were able to correctly identify 68% of the 10,000 photographs that
they were recently exposed to.
So in terms of raw capacity, and in terms of just being familiar with objects that we
have seen, especially visual memory, human memory can be quite powerful, although again
there are lots of ways in which it has limits.
