So again, we make up these details to fill in our internal narrative, and they become
indistinguishable from, quote, unquote, real memories.
A memory of something we made up or confabulated feels like a memory of something we really
experienced.
We don't have a way of telling the difference.
This is sometimes referred to as the Rashomon effect.
This is based upon a 1950 Kurosawa film about a rape and murder where the story, the same
story was told from four different accounts, and it was a very artistic depiction of how
different accounts can be.
Everyone has their own perspective, their own filter, and their own memory, and therefore
when they compare notes later, there may be striking differences in how they each constructed
the same event that they were all experiencing at the same time.
You probably have experienced this yourself many times.
Imagine a time when you had a very heated argument or discussion with other people.
Over a course of 30 minutes or an hour or so, you may have been heatedly discussing something.
And then afterwards, when things have calmed down and you're comparing notes about who
said what, you may find that you and the others have very different accounts about what just
happened previously.
You might even say, oh, I wish we had a camera rolling when this conversation was happening
because what you're claiming now is completely not what happened.
But you have to recognize that your memories are as biased, constructed, and flawed as
everyone else is in the room, and that's why none of them fit together.
You all had different perspectives and different filters.
The ability to confabulate can lead to what we call false memories.
In 1988, Ellen Bass and Laura Davis wrote a book called The Courage to Heal.
In this book, they promoted the idea that there is an epidemic of what they call the
repressed memory syndrome.
They believe that many people, mostly women, were abused as children, often sexually abused,
and even the victims of bizarre, ritualistic, satanic torture.
They felt that the memories of these highly traumatic events were repressed and that they
manifested themselves later on in life as adults as anxiety, depression, and eating disorders
or other problems.
What they created, however, Bass and Davis, was an epidemic of what is now known as false
memory syndrome.
Therapists who followed their prescription, in fact, encouraged clients to remember details
of abuse.
They said, the first thing you have to do is recognize that your eating disorder or whatever
is a manifestation of a childhood abuse.
They started with that premise, and they said, I want you to imagine yourself being abused,
what was happening, imagine the details, who was doing it.
They essentially came up with a very good prescription for manufacturing false memories,
and this led to many, many thousands of people manufacturing these memories of intense abuse
as children and believing that they were real, again, having these confabulated memories.
