location unless I absolutely have to.
You may not remember all the details of exactly what kind of predator, exactly what happened,
the gist of the memory is enough for you to act upon it in a survival way, in a meaningful
way.
In fact there are different brain patterns for each of these types of memory, we can
look at functional MRI scanning which is a way of imaging real time brain activity and
we can have people remember the themes of a memory of an event versus focusing on remembering
specific details and different parts of their brain will light up during those different
types of memory tasks, so remembering details is neurologically, it's anatomically different
than remembering the theme of a memory.
We also tend to focus on stimuli and ignore peripheral details, for example a witness
will tend to remember the weapon that an alleged assailant was holding, they tend to focus
on an emotionally laden detail, they remember that he was holding a gun and they remember
again the emotional gist of the event, that he was an assailant, he was holding this weapon
and he was threatening, but then when the police asked them to remember details what
color was his eyes, what was he wearing, what was the color of his clothes, think those
kind of details, they may not remember those details at all, so here there is this tradeoff
between remembering the emotional gist of an event and remembering the details and unfortunately
we're simply not very good at remembering details.
But the situation is even much worse than that, it's much worse than just the fact that
we don't have a good memory for details, we're very good at familiarity, we're good at thematic
gist, we're bad at details, but worse than that we actually alter the details.
This gets back to the notion I described earlier that memories are not passive, they're constructed.
When you remember a memory, you're not just experiencing this stored memory, you're actually
reconstructing the memory as you recall it, you're updating the memory, you're bringing
it up to date with everything that you learned since the last time you remembered or thought
of that memory.
We construct a narrative, a story in our heads about what happened to us in the past, what
is happening in the world.
That narrative has emotions and themes to it and we actually alter the details in order
to be in line with our narrative, the thematic narrative.
If we think that we remember an event where an assailant was being threatening, we may
remember them as being larger than they were, being more threatening than they were.
We may even remember them doing things that they didn't do, but that are all in line with
the emotional theme of the memory.
Details are not only inaccurate, they're biased thematically.
We invent details and we change details in order to make a story more emotionally punchy.
Here is an excellent example that is fairly well documented.
Jane Hill was a famous witness to the JFK assassination.
She was standing very close to the vehicle when the shots were fired.
We have recorded her report on the day of what she saw, as well as photographic and
other video evidence for corroboration.
Yet her story slowly morphed over the years to fit the narrative theme that she had developed
