the information itself.
So it's interesting to think that our brains simply do not dedicate a lot of resources,
a lot of memory resources, in order to note what the source of information is.
Perhaps it wasn't that big a deal in terms of our everyday survival in what we would
call the evolutionary milieu, living in tribes on the African plains, for example.
But now in our much more complicated civilization where we're dealing with multiple sources
of information and we have to assess the sources, the reliability of a source of information
in order to say something meaningful about that information itself, this source amnesia
is a major problem.
Knowing that you heard something somewhere just is not that helpful if you have no way
of assessing how reliable the source was because you don't remember the source.
Similar to source amnesia is truth amnesia.
We remember a claim much more easily than we remember the distinct fact of whether or
not that claim is a myth.
There is now the famous Scumic et al. study of 2005 which showed that as many as 27% of
young adults misremembered a false statement as being true only three days after they were
told and 40% of older adults misremembered a false statement as true.
They remembered that they had heard the statement before but they didn't remember that it was
false.
They didn't remember the truth aspect of that claim.
So truth status appears to fade faster than familiarity as does source status.
Familiarity leads therefore to a truth bias which gets reinforced with repetition.
This is even worse, the effect of not remembering the truth status of a claim is worsened when
the truth status is not revealed until the end.
This has a lot of implications for myth busting, for information campaigns.
So for example, if we say that this specific claim is a myth, it's a myth that there is
a causal link between vaccines and autism.
People remember something about vaccines and autism, I don't remember what the details
were, they don't remember that it's a myth, they don't remember where they heard it from,
they just have this familiarity with this association between vaccines and autism.
Recently it was in the news that there was concerns about apple juice and arsenic.
It turns out when you investigate the details that there is no concern, that the levels
are well below safety limits.
But now it's out there in the public, yeah there's something about apple juice and arsenic,
they may not remember where they heard it from, they may not remember the details that
the FDA said the levels are well below safety limits and that it's really a non-issue, but
they just remember that there's something out there.
Psychologists also distinguish thematic versus detail memory, these are also different types
of memory that we have for an event.
By thematic we mean the gist of the overall event, its overall emotional content.
Again to use an example from our evolutionary history, if you go to a certain location and
there's a predator there of some sort, all you may remember is when I was in that location
there was something dangerous there that made me afraid, I don't want to go back to that
