It's not as if the students either remembered everything that they were doing or had no memory
for the event.
Most had some memory, but their memory for the details was simply appalling.
This type of experiment was replicated with the 9-11-2001 terrorist attacks.
Tallarico and Rubin did a similar flash bulb memory recall study.
They found that the accuracy and consistency of everyday and flash bulb memories degraded
equally over time.
So they took the prior study one step further.
They not only assessed the accuracy of a dramatic flash bulb memory, the 9-11 events, but they
also had the subjects recall everyday events, like what they had done a couple of days before.
And then they compared the ability to recall the two types of memory, everyday versus flash
bulb.
They degraded it at the same rate over time.
However, subjects with everyday memories, their confidence also decreased at about the
same rate as their accuracy did.
But for the flash bulb memories, their confidence remained high.
And the memories remained vivid and emotional.
So the memories differed in those two respects.
Now interestingly, the confidence in the memory was not a good predictor of the accuracy
of the memory.
We tend to naively assume that if we're very confident in the memory, if it feels vivid
to us, if we can recall it easily, it must therefore be accurate.
But the research does not bear that out.
They were uncertain if the results from similar or distinct processes.
In other words, what causes us, how do we assess our own confidence in our memories
versus how do we form those memories in the first place?
So it's still not certain if that's the same process or if there's a distinct neurological
process somewhere else in the brain where we assess our confidence in our memories.
Memories of details tend to increase confidence.
Having a vivid memory for detail does not necessarily predict accuracy.
So again, this can result in the overall result of all this is a vivid memory that you feel
very confidently about, but which is extremely inaccurate, perhaps even zero out of seven
in terms of its accuracy.
Overall familiarity did not increase confidence that much, but better correlated with accuracy
in some experiments.
So the overall familiarity with the memory may predict accuracy a little bit, vivid recall
of details not so much.
The bottom line of all of this is that confidence itself is not a good predictor of accuracy.
In relation to the disconnect between accuracy and confidence, there is also something with
memory psychologists called source amnesia.
How often do you say or do you hear someone else say, I read somewhere or I heard somewhere
and then they relay some fact or some story?
We have a particularly bad memory for the source of information, even when we can recall
