It decides whether or not something is acting
as if it's acting with will, has agency,
and then it assigns emotional meaning to it as if it's an agent.
Something else that we have a tendency to detect is called essence,
that things have an essence which make them what they are.
It's kind of a magical thinking that's built into our brains.
Psychological research, for example,
looked at how children respond to toys.
How a child feels about a toy
will depend upon whether or not they imbue that toy with essence.
So for most toys, children understand that they're just things.
They will happily accept an exact duplicate of that thing
because they realize that it doesn't matter.
However, if a child has a favorite toy,
a toy that they have had for a long time
and that they talk about and talk to and treat
as if it's an actual person, a being,
then if you ask the child,
would it be okay to substitute that toy with an exact duplicate?
They very emotionally refuse.
They do not like that at all.
So what's different?
What's different about a favorite toy versus another toy?
The difference is that the favorite toy is imbued with essence.
They think there's something essential about that toy that would be missing
even an exact replica.
An exact replica is not good enough.
We can speculate again as to why that is.
It would make sense that, for example,
a parent would not accept an apparent exact replica
or duplicate of their child.
Another child that looks just the same,
they would want to have their own child,
and that's very important.
So we could again imagine that there would be an adaptive advantage
to having this sense of individuality and essence.
Problems can arise, however,
when we see agency where it does not exist.
So not only do we see agency in how individual objects behave,
but we may also see agency collectively behind events.
We may see a quote-unquote invisible hand controlling events.
This leads to conspiracy thinking.
When we see a pattern,
so this is now we're going to tie in pattern recognition and agency detection,
we see a pattern in events that we think can't be a coincidence.
These separate things could not have all happened by coincidence alone.
The pattern seems too compelling
because we're making the lottery fallacy
and we're underestimating how often such patterns should emerge by chance alone.
Then we further assume that if there is a pattern,
there must be an agent behind that pattern.
