there is one particular formation that vaguely resembles a human face
especially when it's suggested to you.
The face however is largely an illusion.
Half of it is in shadow.
One of the nostrils is actually just a missing pixel of data.
It's not even real data in the image itself.
It's a complete artifact of the picture.
But our brain puts these details together and gives us the impression of a human face.
This subsequent NASA mission took much more high resolution pictures of this same structure
and that shows a normal geological formation.
There doesn't appear to be any face whatsoever.
The low resolution face was completely an artifact of shadowing, etc.
However, to those who are inclined to believe that there are alien artifacts for example
on the face of Mars like a researcher Richard Hoagland
he believes that the face is real despite the follow-up pictures that are higher resolution.
He rationalized away these higher resolution pictures by saying that it was a conspiracy of NASA
that they doctored the photos or perhaps they even dropped an atom bomb
on the structure to destroy it before taking the higher resolution pictures.
Patterns also have emotional meaning to us as I said.
We are especially good at inferring emotion from minimalist visual cues.
We have a lot of hard wiring in our brain dedicated to doing this.
We understand for example the emotion that a stick figure or a cartoon is supposed to have
and a skilled artist with just a few lines can convey an emotion
that would make a stick figure seem angry or happy or scared, many different emotions.
In fact we can personify animals and cartoon characters
and imbue them with the full range of human emotions even again with these very minimalist cues.
Emoticons are another fun example of this in the computer age and especially with texting
and other forms of communicating with texts like emails for example.
People began to realize that it's difficult to convey the full emotion in just text.
We rely heavily on nonverbal cues.
When we look at somebody we can tell by the inflection in their voice
and by the expression on their face if they're being sincere or sarcastic for example.
You can't tell that when you're texting to somebody or sending them an email.
So people use emoticons which are little expressions comprised of keyboard characters
like a colon and a parentheses closure will equal a smiley face
and now you know that I'm making a joke rather than being serious.
It's interesting that emoticons are different in different cultures.
The emoticons that people in the west are familiar with
are different than the emoticons used in eastern cultures.
Eastern cultures tend to pay more attention to the eyes when interpreting emotions
and research has borne this out.
When asked to tell what emotion a picture of a person is displaying
they spend more time looking at the eyes whereas westerners spend more time looking at the mouth.
This is reflected in emoticons where western emoticons tend to vary the mouth shape
whereas eastern emoticons tend to vary the eyes in order to alter the emotion
that is supposed to be represented.
In addition to seeing patterns in visual stimuli
we can see patterns in other types of stimuli as well like audio stimuli
so-called audio pareidolia.
The brain has a limited number of phonemes of components of spoken speech
that it can distinguish.
