This has been documented experimentally as well.
You can expose people to deliberately generated random noise,
noise generated as random,
and then ask them if they hear anything.
They may or may not recognize some words in the random noise
but if you say now this is what you're supposed to hear
and then you give them the speech
or you simply have the words that they're supposed to hear as text,
then it's a lot easier.
Then their brain will make the connection.
It'll make the fit to the words.
For example, an engineer has created a piano
that is controlled by a computer
and by doing a rapid sequence of keystrokes
you can approximate human speech.
In this way, the computer can speak through the piano.
It's a little bit eerie but it works very well.
However, it's a lot easier to understand what the piano is saying
when you have the text to read along with it.
Your brain makes the match much more easily
once it's suggested to you.
An example of this that became a problem
for a particular company was the baby cuddle and koo doll.
This doll makes essentially random cooing noises.
Some people, however, thought that they heard the words
Islam is the light or Satan is king in the cooing.
Once that idea got out there,
then people listening to the random cooing
could hear the same phrases,
Islam is the light or Satan is the king.
The doll eventually had to be pulled from the shelves
for this accidental bit of audio pareidolia.
I mentioned data mining earlier,
sifting through large amounts of data looking for patterns.
We are good at doing just that.
This is a legitimate exercise, by the way, for generating hypotheses.
When scientists have large amounts of data,
they may literally mine the data using computer models
or other algorithms to look for any apparent patterns.
The problem, critical thinking-wise, that comes in
is when you assume that the patterns you see are real.
When you use the data mining as a way of confirming an idea,
rather than as just a way of generating hypotheses,
it's okay to data mine when you're just generating a hypothesis,
but then you need to confirm that the patterns are real
by testing it against an independent set of data.
That's another mistake that's commonly made,
is to recognize a pattern through data mining,
whether deliberate or inadvertent,
and then to see if it holds up,
but to include the original data in later analysis.
