There must be a conspiracy.
There is some organization or some power
or perhaps even we might get into magical thinking
and we might think that there is some magical agent at work
or some force of nature that is making things happen the way they are
because otherwise we wouldn't see this pattern.
The ability to see patterns, even abstract patterns,
is one of the human brain's greatest strengths.
It gives us a lot of our creativity.
It gives us a lot of our ability to problem solve.
The ability to see the commonality among different things
but it's also potentially one of our greatest weaknesses.
Again, as we see over and over again in this course,
our brain's abilities are often a double-edged sword.
They are great strengths but also the source of great flaws
if we're not aware that that's how our brains work.
We need to filter this hyperactive pattern recognition
and agency detection through some kind of reality testing filter.
We all have that reality testing filter in us to some degree
but that's not quite enough.
It's critical to understand that pattern recognition,
agency detection, belief in essence,
the tendency to imbue meaning onto objects and to events and to things,
data mining all conspire together to create the powerful illusion
that we are seeing something real in the world
even when we are not seeing something real in the world,
even when it's just random noise.
But the illusion is emotionally very compelling to us.
It's very gripping. It screams for our attention
and it takes a lot of critical thinking, skills and discipline
to step back and say, wait a minute, is this real?
Is this really real?
And maybe even my intuition, my internal reality testing isn't enough.
I need to systematically test these apparent patterns
in some rigorous way to really know if it's real or not.
We recognize illusory patterns all the time.
Paradolia, data mining, hyperactive agency detection
and superstitious thinking are all manifestations of it.
But that is not all.
There is something quite similar in our overall sense of self
and in our sense of reality.
We have a sense of what we think is real.
But again, I will conclude with the good news,
is that critical thinking skills are a way of sifting through all of this noise,
transcending above our evolved tendency to over detect patterns in agency
and to sort out what's really real from what only appears to be real.
