Have you ever laid on your back on a lazy summer afternoon with a friend seeing how many shapes
you could spot in the clouds?
Humans are particularly good at this sort of thing, seeing patterns that is.
In fact, we're so good at seeing patterns, we're too good.
We sometimes see patterns that are not even there.
Brain processing is based largely on pattern recognition, probably has something to do
with the fact that our brains are massive parallel processors, many neural networks or
circuits in parallel, neurons connecting to many, many other neurons.
We're therefore good at making connections between different ideas, visual patterns,
words, events, and objects.
We're good, for example, at metaphor, at representative and abstract thinking.
Our art is a good example of this based upon the human talent for metaphor and making
abstract connections, thinking creatively.
This is one of our strengths as cognitive beings.
Additionally, we imbue meaning and emotion into those patterns that we see, into the abstract.
So not only do we make connections, but we feel things about those connections.
It has an emotional connection to us.
It makes the patterns that we think we see seem real and meaningful to us.
In fact, our brains are wired to do just that, to assign meaning and emotions to things.
This pattern recognition is, however, filtered through a distinct part of the brain, or a
different module, if you will, that undertakes what we call reality testing.
It is like a filter.
We see lots of apparent patterns in the world around us, and then we run those perceptions,
those patterns through a reality testing algorithm.
Essentially, we ask the question, does it make sense?
Which literally means, does it agree with our internal model of reality?
We each have inside of our brains a model of how we think the world is, and how we think
the world works, and any new belief is tested against that internal model of reality.
If it fits, then it feels right, it makes sense, and we accept it.
If it conflicts with our model of reality, then we think, well, this doesn't make sense.
It's probably not true, or at the very least, we will be suspicious of it.
Interestingly, while we're dreaming, the reality testing module is turned down a little bit.
It's not as active as when we are fully awake.
This is why bizarre things can happen in your dream that your dreaming self accepts.
It doesn't have the same reality testing filter that your waking self has.
And then when you're awake and remembering the dream, it no longer makes sense to you
and you may puzzle over why you accepted such a thing while you were dreaming.
There is a pathological condition known as psychosis, which is essentially a lack of reality testing
and decreased ability to test the patterns that we see against reality.
This makes those patterns that we see seem far more real and compelling.
Even very bizarre patterns can seem real and compelling to us,
even if they require abject magical thinking, because the psychotic brain doesn't have
as strong a reality testing filter in it.
But let's get back to talking about the average functioning brain.
There is a phenomenon known as pareidolia, which is a tendency to see a pattern in random noise.
The cloud example I gave at the beginning of this example is probably just the most familiar example of this.
We see either faces or animals or familiar objects in the random shape of the clouds.
Nobody thinks that some force is actually sculpting the clouds to look like something.
We recognize that it's completely random, but it still looks like something to us.
Visual pareidolia is the most obvious example of the more general phenomenon of pareidolia.
The brain seeks patterns to fit the stimuli.
