then we're probably more likely to survive
and have offspring.
One way to look at it is that we evolved
from those ancestors who had hyperactive agency detection
because that was a survival strategy.
We didn't evolve from those who went to investigate
to see whether or not the rustling bushes
actually was a predator or not.
This hyperactive agency detection
is actually reflected in our neuroanatomy
and in the way that we process visual information.
Visual information is separated into various streams
after it comes into the primary visual cortex
which just assigns an image to it.
That's when we just see our raw visual data
that then gets processed so that we have
strong edge detection and we recognize an object.
We can see that it's three-dimensional.
We have some sense of how far away it is.
We can see some basic things about just seeing
something in our environment.
But then that information needs to be assigned
specific meaning by our brains.
Our brains will then take that object
and assign it a known object.
So if we see a hammer, for example,
part of our brain will see all the details of the hammer,
but then that information goes to another part
of the visual cortex which says that's a hammer
and assigns a meaning to it.
Then there's another layer of visual processing
in which that's further specialized,
in which we separate out those things which have agency
from those things which do not have agency.
For those things that do have agency,
we assign emotional meaning to them.
That visual stream connects to the emotional part of our brain
and then we feel something about that object that has agency.
So when we see a rock, it goes to a non-emotional part
of our visual processing and we see that's a rock.
If we see a person that we know,
that goes to the agency part of our visual structures
and then we feel something about what we see.
We take that for granted,
but that is just built into how our brains are functioning.
This is how we can see agency in non-living things
like cartoon characters which we know are not living,
but we respond to them as if they are.
In other words, our brains do not decide
whether or not something is alive
and then assign emotion to things that are alive.
