This gets back to what I discussed in previous lectures that our experiences are constructed.
Our brain is constructing what we think we see and remember.
It's also trying to make a pattern fit to patterns it's already familiar with.
We may experience this as a picture clicking into place when suddenly something is there.
Previously we were just seeing random noise, whether it's in the bark of a tree or in a stain or in a cloud,
and then suddenly an image clicks into place.
Our brain finds a similar enough pattern and makes the match and then we see it.
It's also interesting that once that happens, it's very difficult to impossible to unsee it.
You now can no longer not see the pattern that your brain has clicked into place.
There are many common examples of this.
For example, there is a stain on a bank window in Florida that was there for a couple of years
and nobody took any particular notice of it until somebody thought that the outline of the stain
looked like the typical image of the Mother Mary.
Once that suggestion was then published in the press and was put out there,
then of course anyone looking at it goes, yes, I can see this pattern.
It looks like an image of the Mother Mary.
And of course to believers, it was not just an image or a pattern,
they imbued that with a very specific meaning.
There is also another example, Medicine Hat Canada.
This is a natural geological formation that creates a very compelling image of a human face in profile.
The face is not really there.
It hasn't, as I said, been constructed in reality.
It's constructed in your brain.
You're filling in some of the gaps and the details and your brain forces the fit to make it seem like a face to you.
A lot of so-called ghost photographs are also based upon pareidolia.
For example, you may be taking a picture of just a wispy cloud
or you may be bouncing a flash off of some dust in the room
and you get an overexposed cloudy image on the film
and our brains are very good at looking at the random noise of that cloudy photograph
and seeing a face or the outline of a person.
It's also very frequently reported that there is either Jesus or Mary citing in this culture
on a paint stain or a tortilla chip, a grilled cheese sandwich that was sold on eBay
because of an image it was claimed of Jesus in the cheese or on the bark of a tree.
These have all been reported as apparitions of Jesus or Mary
when in fact they're just examples of pareidolia, the brain's tendency to see a pattern in random noise.
The human face is also the most familiar pattern that we will tend to impose.
It is the most familiar pattern to people.
This has to do with the fact that we have a large portion of our visual cortex
that is dedicated to seeing faces.
It's obviously very important to us as social creatures
to be able to recognize individuals very easily and very quickly.
Infants prefer to look at a human face to other visual but equally complicated or interesting stimuli.
This means even from the earliest age that we can detect it
there seems to be this inborn preference for looking at the human face.
We can in fact recognize tens of thousands of faces at a glance.
Our brains are very good at noticing, remembering individuals.
This tendency, this preference for faces, this preference for the pattern of the human face
results in pareidolia frequently resulting in a face.
The face on Mars is one such example.
When low resolution pictures were taken by NASA probes
you see in this particular region of Mars
