But if the pattern was there by random chance,
you're going to propagate forward that quirky random chance
into future analysis.
It's not a true independent verification.
So an independent analysis has to use completely fresh data
to avoid just picking up random patterns in the noise.
This is most dangerous when it's done subconsciously,
when data mining is subconscious,
rather than deliberately looking through stacks of data.
It's inadvertent because we don't realize that we're data mining.
Because we only tend to see the pattern,
we don't see all the data that the pattern is buried in.
This is sometimes called the lottery fallacy,
just a tendency to think about things the wrong way.
People might ask, for example,
what are the odds that I would see a specific pattern
when they should be asking,
what are the odds that I would see any pattern?
This is like asking,
what are the odds that John Smith would win the lottery?
Well, it's hundreds of millions to one against.
One might then assume that,
well, it could not have happened at random then.
It was hundreds of millions to one against.
But that's because they're asking the wrong question.
They should be asking,
what are the odds of anyone winning the lottery?
And it turns out it's pretty good.
We do the same thing when we see a random coincidence.
We ask, what are the odds that this coincidence would occur?
Well, that might be very small.
But what are the odds that any coincidence would occur
is actually very high.
In fact, it should happen on a regular basis.
That's because we're not aware of the fact
that we are mining the potential data
of all possible coincidences,
and we're seeing only the patterns that emerge,
the random coincidences.
Astrological researchers
famously fall into this trap all the time.
They crunch through actuary tables, for example,
looking for any pattern in the data
related to an astrological sign.
So they may conclude that
Virgos are more dangerous drivers.
They have more car accidents than other sun signs.
But what they don't realize is that
they were looking for any possible match,
any outcome to any astrological sign.
By odds alone, there's going to be random noise in that data.
