We mostly learn these by age four after which we tend to interpret
anything that we are trying to understand as speech
we will tend to sort it into one of our learned phonemes.
This is partially responsible for accents.
People who learn one language may not be sensitive to phonemes
that are not present in their language but present in a different language
and therefore they won't be able to make the proper distinctions
when speaking that other language and that will give them a recognizable accent.
The brain tends to slot what adheres into one of the finite phonemes
that are pretty much locked into place by age four.
It's not clear if there's a little bit of wiggle room in the future
but mostly our phonemes are locked into place.
There is a phenomenon called electronic voice phenomenon or EVP.
Believers think that they are able to tap into the spirit world
by listening to essentially static on tape recordings
or some other recording device.
What they do is they will listen through perhaps hours of recorded noise
in an alleged haunted location for example
and they will listen for words to pop out.
Essentially what they are doing is a form of data mining
which I will talk about more.
They are looking at large bits of data looking for random patterns
that will occur by chance alone.
The random patterns they are sifting for are audio patterns.
They are waiting for their brain to make a pattern fit to the random noise
that they are hearing on the tape and to fit it to some words.
Then when they think they hear a phrase
the believers in EVP make the false assumption that the phrase is real
that some spirit or a ghost is actually saying those words
rather than what has been demonstrated psychologically
which is your brain that is making those words.
Your brain is imposing those words onto that random pattern of noise.
A similar phenomenon that is essentially the same thing,
audio pareidolia is so called backward masking on music
listening to music backwards for secret messages.
This was popular for a while
especially in the era of tape to tape, deck to deck tape
when you could reverse the tape and listen to it backwards.
It is hard to do that today with CDs and MP3 files
but back when you could do it with tape decks
you could listen to music backwards
until it sounded like there were words being said
in essentially the random noise of the backward music.
Some groups and musicians did key into this phenomenon
and actually deliberately put messages backwards in their music
but a lot of the time and especially initially
it was just random noise in the backwards music
that the brain fit to a familiar audio pattern.
We also tend to be highly suggestible in this regard.
For example, it's easier to hear what you're supposed to hear
after you are told that that's what you're supposed to hear.
