This is a tricky philosophical question that I really can't delve into thoroughly in this
lecture, but there are those who use all of this information to question the very concept
of what they call non-causal free will.
Essentially, what they say is that everything we do is deterministic, or the result of a
deterministic physical process.
Our brains are physical, and they are just as susceptible to the laws of physics as anything
else in the world.
They are just machines, albeit very, very complicated machines.
Therefore, everything that we think, believe, and do is the result of these mechanical processes
in the brain, not any kind of extra-causal or non-causal free will.
One example of this, of this notion that we may not have as much free will as we like
to think, is that research overwhelmingly shows that human beings generally have poor
self-control.
We are very bad at consciously changing learned behavior or old habits.
Generally speaking, depending on some details, about 95% of the time people will fail to
alter their own behavior through conscious effort alone, for example, in order to lose
weight or to quit a bad behavior or habit.
It simply takes too much mental energy and vigilance.
Yes, the frontal lobes can inhibit your learned behaviors or your more instinctive or emotional
behaviors, but that's a high energy process, and it's hard to keep that energy up all the
time.
Having said that, we do make decisions, whether or not you believe in non-causal free will
or the degree to which our decisions are made subconsciously versus consciously.
At the end of the day, we are able to make a conscious decision, and understanding our
psychology and the way our brain works will help us do just that.
Perhaps it just gives more evolved, higher parts of our brain better control over the
more primitive parts.
The brain is plastic, and habits of thought can change.
Therefore, if over time you practice and you make a concerted effort to behave in certain
ways, ways that you feel are more advantageous to your long-term interest, those behaviors
will become ingrained and will become easier over time.
Practicing the habit of exhibiting executive control or executive function over your more
primitive parts of the brain can be a learned skill.
This is why we need and can benefit from formal reality testing, critical thinking.
We need formal logic and the methods of science to carefully and reliably sift through the
myriad potential patterns that we see.
This is a central concept to critical thinking.
We have the tools to do just that, and these tools I will cover in more detail in upcoming
lectures.
