only look at the brain but to see how the brain is functioning in real time.
It is a functional scan of the brain.
The other is transcranial magnetic stimulation which is a technique for either increasing
or decreasing different regions or circuits within the brain.
This way we can tell what they contribute to the overall functioning of the brain.
In essence what modern neuroscience researchers are finding are the neural correlates to what
in some cases psychologists have been demonstrating for decades.
We can see different brain regions in conflict.
We can see the conflict resolution and then we experience that we experience as a decision
or a rationalization.
In other words our decisions seem like they are conscious.
We experience consciously making a decision.
However decisions are often made subconsciously.
They are made by a calculus and evolutionary neurobiological calculus that we are not aware
of.
For example a 2008 study published in Nature magazine used fMRI scanning to look at brain
activity while subjects were undergoing a decision making task.
What they found is that the decisions were often evident in the brain up to 10 seconds
prior to the subjects being consciously aware that they even made the decision.
About 60% of the time the researchers were able to tell what decision the subject was
going to make based upon the pattern of brain activity that was lighting up.
It wasn't 100% and fMRIs are tricky to use but this is giving an indication that there
is this subconscious processing that is leading up to the decision making process and in some
cases may even make the decision for us before we're even consciously aware of it.
Intuition is another form of subconscious processing.
Now I'm not talking about any magical or psychic insight just a sense of a decision that pops
into your head.
For example, emotional processing, social cues or our monitoring of our internal state
these largely are subconscious processes especially for example social cues.
We respond quite a bit to body language, facial expression and other things in ways that we're
not consciously aware of.
We just know that we feel a certain way about someone or about a situation without being
able to consciously deconstruct exactly why we feel that way.
Explanations are involuntary and subconscious.
We don't choose to feel angry, we just feel angry.
We then invent a reason to explain why we feel a certain way with varying degrees of
insight.
Explanations we invent by the way are typically highly self-serving.
We're very easy on ourselves when we're explaining our own feelings and behavior.
This subconscious processing goes beyond emotions however it also extends to other types of
processing like searching for a particular memory or even problem solving.
For example, have you ever had the experience of looking for something that you misplaced
and then at some time when you're not even consciously focusing on the problem anymore
