way.
Alcohol, for example, inhibits all brain function, but especially the frontal lobes, mainly
because the frontal lobes are just a very active energy-demanding part of the brain.
They feel the effects of alcohol more acutely than perhaps other parts of the brain do.
The ability to inhibit our behavior, social inhibitions, all decrease significantly under
the effects of alcohol.
We're still conscious, but the brain is just functioning differently.
Hypnosis is yet another example of a quote-unquote altered state.
In hypnosis, however, we're not in a trance.
It's actually a state of hyper-awareness.
However, the goal of hypnosis is to give the subject some sensory information that they're
not fully conscious of.
They are in a highly suggestible state, and they're not processing all of the sensory
information that is being given to them.
Some of that sensory information is being processed subconsciously, so it can affect
their thoughts and behavior in a way that they're not aware of.
Kind of like the split-brain subjects who reach for the bottle of Coke but don't know
why.
Now, these various brain regions perform very complex processing.
This results in our desires, our motivations, and even our decisions.
The frontal lobes are involved in decision-making, but also in rationalizing those decisions
in order to remove cognitive dissonance, conflict among the various committee members.
But that is also undergoing its own calculus.
It's not simply inhibiting the decisions made by other parts of the brain.
It's making its own decisions that we call executive function.
However, to varying degrees, we can enact upon our will.
We can enact upon our frontal lobe function.
Or there are situations in which we actually can be motivated to turn off, if you will,
our critical thinking.
Research has demonstrated that when subjects are confronted with a very charismatic person,
for example, especially when that person is identified with our own in-group, if we think
that they are quote-unquote one of us, that subjects will tend to turn off their critical
thinking.
In a very real sense, they will surrender their will to the charismatic person.
For whatever reason, we evolved to do just that.
A recent fMRI study, in fact, could see this happening, could see different parts of the
brain being inhibited when confronted by a charismatic person.
In a similar process to being hypnotized, so it may turn out that when somebody uses
the phrase that the crowd was hypnotized by the speaker, they may be literally correct.
That's not just a metaphor, that a charismatic person may be able to hypnotize a crowd by
turning off their critical thinking, making them susceptible to suggestion in the same
way that a hypnotist does.
All of this brings up the question of free will.
