My goal for this first section of the course is to give you an appreciation for the extent
to which what we perceive of as reality is really an illusion constructed by our brains.
In previous lectures we saw how perception is not only highly filtered but also constructed.
Memories are also not only constructed but reconstructed every time we access a memory.
And our brains further assign patterns to what we perceive and then assign meaning to
those patterns.
But the rabbit hole of this constructive process goes all the way down and in this lecture
we're going to see how far down it really goes.
Our very sense of self and what we perceive of as reality is also a constructed illusion
by our brain.
Perhaps the most persistent illusion is that our minds, that we are one cohesive consciousness.
But the reality is closer to the analogy that it is really a noisy committee.
There are little committee members inside our brain all talking to each other and in
the aggregate they form this illusion of this one consciousness that we think of as
ourselves.
There is in fact frequent conflict among these various brain regions as they each undergo
their purpose.
For example the neocortex or the frontal part of our brain has what we call executive function
whereas more primitive parts of the brain are the seats of emotion and instinct.
The neocortex is the most recently evolved part of our brain.
It's involved with social behavior, long term planning and inhibition or restraint.
Often however rather than imposing this long term planning and restraint on our more primitive
desires the neocortex may rationalize decisions that were made for us by these more primitive
regions.
For example let's say you want to eat a particularly delicious looking piece of cheesecake.
More primitive parts of your brain are motivating you with hunger and are telling you that it's
going to taste good.
You're going to feel good when you eat that cheesecake.
You want to eat it.
Your neocortex however might say wait a minute I really shouldn't have those extra calories.
This is not in my long term best interest in terms of my health etc.
And so these two brain regions come into conflict and some resolution will come out of that.
The neocortex will win and be able to restrain your behavior or it may rationalize the decision
made by the more instinctive part of the brain.
It may for example say well I'll exercise a little bit harder tomorrow or I really didn't
eat that much today so it's okay for me to have a cheesecake.
Or I've already worked so hard so I deserve a little reward.
The conflict will be resolved one way or the other.
And when it is our brains will then give us a little shot of dopamine which is the reward
neurotransmitter and it will make us feel good about resolving that conflict.
Throughout this lecture I'm going to refer to a couple of pieces of modern technology
that we use to investigate brain function.
The first is functional MRI scanning using a magnetic resonance imager in order to not
