Now, the researchers are asking the left hemisphere why the right hemisphere chose the bottle
of Coke.
The left hemisphere doesn't know because it wasn't involved in that decision.
It didn't see the bottle of Coke previously.
It's not privy to that information because of the lack of communication.
What the left hemisphere does is it confabulates or makes up a reason.
The subjects typically say something like, I was thirsty.
That's why they chose the bottle of Coke.
They don't say because I typically do strange things while I'm in this lab and you're experimenting
on me.
They don't say, I don't know.
I just felt like that was the right choice.
They invent a reason that they actually believe is the reason why they chose the Coke.
When we know experimentally that it wasn't, they chose it because their right hemisphere
was just shown a picture of the Coke.
There's more evidence that our everyday sense of reality is constructed beyond this classic
experiment of the split brain experiments.
Everything we take for granted about our concept of existence is specifically constructed
by the brain.
The sense that we are separate from the rest of the universe, for example.
We take for granted that we feel as if we are a self-contained entity.
But infants actually do not appreciate, as far as we could tell, where they end and the
rest of the universe begins.
They feel, in other words, one with the universe.
There are drugs that can inhibit brain regions, like the temporal lobes, that are involved
in this feeling of separateness, that we are a separate entity from everything else.
When those brain regions are inhibited, that can give an individual a powerful sense of
being one with the universe, which is often interpreted as a profound spiritual experience.
But it's really just inhibiting a very fundamental way in which our brains construct our sense
of self and reality.
The sensation of being inside your body, usually we feel as if not only do we occupy
our bodies, but we exist somewhere behind the eyes.
There's also a specifically constructed experience inside the brain, and researchers are developing
a model of what parts of the brain contribute to that process.
These parts of the brain also can be inhibited by drugs, by transcranial magnetic stimulation
more precisely, or more generally by oxygen deprivation.
What we find is that when you do this, this causes subjects to have an out of body experience.
They feel as if they are not inside their body, but they are floating usually somewhere
above their body.
Again, this is just a manifestation of turning off the part of your brain that makes you
feel as if you're inside your body.
That's probably something you didn't realize the brain had to do, but it does.
It's not just a passive thing that automatically happens because we are our bodies.
