paralyzed, but it doesn't disrupt the ownership module circuitry, then that ownership module
still functions, but it doesn't have a limb to control.
So it, in essence, manufactures a virtual limb that it can control.
It creates the illusion of an extra arm perhaps emerging from the middle of my body.
I will see that extra limb that's not really there.
I will feel it.
I will be able to control it by my own perceptions.
If it itches, I'll be able to scratch it and relieve the itch.
Of course, the only thing I won't be able to do with it is to manipulate external reality
because this limb only exists as a construct in my brain.
There is even one case in the literature of a man after suffering a stroke who had six
supernumerary limbs emerging from his body.
These later did disappear.
The brain is plastic and can adjust to these lesions.
So this is often a temporary phenomenon.
I mentioned previously alien hand syndrome.
This is the opposite disconnection from a phantom limb where the sensory information
does not match the motor intentions.
And this is often a fascinating syndrome.
For example, subjects who suffer from this may feel as if their hand is acting on its
own accord.
There is one case, for example, in which a woman was emptying the contents of her purse
onto the ground and had no awareness that her hand was doing this.
To her perceptions, it was acting all on its own.
Here, however, is a more everyday example of a little bit of a disconnect between our
consciousness and our motor control.
It's called the idiomotor effect.
The idiomotor effect is essentially subconscious motor control.
Little motor movements that serve a purpose but that we are not fully conscious of.
Probably one of the most common examples of this is when you're driving to a location
and most drivers will have this experience.
You arrive at your destination and you can't really even remember having driven there.
You were distracted, you were lost in thought, but you went through all of the motor movements
to drive, which can be fairly complicated without really expending any conscious effort
to do so.
It all happened more in the subconscious parts of your brain.
The Ouija board is another common example where you have three, four, five or so people
all with their hands on a little planchette which then moves across a board on which are
written letters and numbers and the game is that you're supposed to ask the spirits
or whatever a question and then the planchette will appear to move by itself in order to
spell out an answer.
Of course, each of the people who have their hands on the planchette are actually controlling
it, but their control may be so subtle and because it's shared that they may not be aware
