was impaired by magnetically decreasing the function of a specific piece of the brain.
Cravings are another example.
The insular cortex is often responsible for translating physical sensations into emotions.
For example, interpreting a rapid heartbeat as feeling anxious.
But also interpreting the symptoms of physical withdrawal into cravings for the thing that
we're withdrawing from.
A study showed that patients with damage to their insular cortex lost these cravings,
lost the emotional desire to engage in drug seeking based upon their physical withdrawal
symptoms.
In many of these cases, patients who had been lifelong smokers who had made multiple attempts
to quit smoking unsuccessfully found that after they had a stroke, for example, in the
insular cortex, that they were able to immediately and easily quit smoking.
They essentially lost all of their cravings.
Let me discuss the split brain experiments.
This is a classic type of neuroscience experiment that demonstrates, I think, very nicely the
manner in which different parts of the brain construct our aggregate consciousness.
These experiments were first done by Roger Sperry and Ronald Myers in the late 1950s
and then later were reproduced by many other researchers.
This research involves patients who have had the right hemisphere and the left hemisphere
of their brain separated surgically, usually to treat epilepsy, to prevent seizures from
spreading from one part of the brain to another part of the brain, decreasing the number and
severity of those seizures, hopefully.
These patients, about 90% of the communication between the two halves of their brain is therefore
separated.
This creates a wonderful opportunity to test the aggregate consciousness of one hemisphere
separate from the aggregate consciousness of the other hemisphere.
This means that the two hemispheres contribute their own bit of consciousness but are not
combining them together.
For example, in one classic experiment, the experimenters would show a series of objects
to the right hemisphere of the subject with the split brain.
The right hemisphere in most people is the non-dominant hemisphere and the one that is
not engaged in language.
The right hemisphere, in essence, is mute.
It doesn't have the ability to speak or to understand language.
The left hemisphere is where language is, but because the two hemispheres of the brain
were separated, they were able to show only the right hemisphere and object and then see
how the individual responded to that information.
In one example, they would show a subject something like a bottle of Coca-Cola and then
just the right hemisphere and then they would immediately after that show the subject a
series of objects, of 20 objects or so, one of which is a bottle of Coca-Cola and they
would tell the subject to pick one of those objects.
The subject would then pick the bottle of Coca-Cola.
They would then ask, why did you choose the bottle of Coke?
