It's an experience that's constructed by the brain.
We further know this because we can trick the brain into locating our sense of self somewhere
outside the body.
There is now a series of experiments in which visual and tactile or touch cues are used
to trick the brain into making us feel as if we are somewhere else.
For example, subjects can be made to wear virtual reality goggles where they see an
image of themselves.
For example, there might be a camera that's videotaping them in real time and showing
the subject the image of themselves.
Then the virtual image will be touched at the same time that the subject is physically
touched in the same location.
The person will see the figure standing in front of them being touched on the right shoulder
while they feel their right shoulder being touched.
That conciliance of the visual input and the tactile input tricks the brain into suddenly
making the person feel that they are occupying this virtual avatar that they're seeing.
They now feel that they're in the body that appears to be standing 10 feet in front of
them.
There is also something that neuroscientists call the ownership module, again something
that you may not have thought your brain needs to do.
This creates the sense that we own and control the different parts of our body.
What these networks in the brain do is compare sensory information, which is both visual
and proprioceptive in addition to muscle feedback, to our intentions.
For example, the motor planning part of our brain may say that I want to raise my left
arm up and then I see that my left arm is being raised up.
I feel my arm moving through three dimensional space and the muscles are telling me that
they're executing the commands that I just gave to them.
When these all match up, then the ownership module says, yes, I own and control my left
arm.
If, however, there is a disruption in this circuit by a stroke, for example, then we
do not feel as if we own or control the limb.
This will give us the sense that what is called alien hand syndrome, the arm will feel as
if it's moving of its own will, that I am not in control of my own arm.
This is very similar to the phantom limb phenomenon.
In this case, the ownership module still owns a limb, but the limb is either dead or
is even not there.
Amputees often experience this.
For example, that circuitry in the brain that is telling me that I own and control my left
arm might still be functioning even after my left arm is amputated, so I will perceive
as if there's a limb that's not there.
This can result bizarrely in what's called a supernumerary phantom limb.
This is a very rare syndrome that has been described numerous times, however, in the
neurological literature.
What happens is if a stroke eliminates the motor control of a limb so that the limb is
