of the contribution that they're giving to the movement and therefore it seems like it's
happening all by itself.
Moving is yet another example where people will hold divining rods and they will appear
to move when they get over a target area.
For example, if they're looking for running water when they walk over an underground location
of water, the rods will move together.
But it's been clearly demonstrated over and over again in research that the movements
of the rods are done by subconscious idiomotor control of the person holding them and that
they only really quote unquote work when the person using them knows when they're supposed
to move.
If they are blinded to the target, the effect of dousing disappears consistent with the
idiomotor effect.
Perhaps the most serious example of the idiomotor effect is facilitated communication.
In the late 1980s, some researchers felt that they had hit upon a method of communicating
with impaired children who did not have the ability to communicate whether or not they
were autistic or developmentally delayed or had some kind of a brain injury or developmental
problem that impaired their consciousness, their cognitive function and impaired their
ability to communicate.
The idea was that maybe some of these children actually are a lot brighter than they appear
to be.
They have a much more cognitive function than is apparent, but they simply don't have the
ability to speak and maybe they don't have the motor function to communicate with, for
example, a keyboard.
Therefore, a facilitator was employed.
The purpose of the facilitator was to simply hold the hand of the client and help them
point to letters on a keyboard or on a letter board.
It turns out, after the research was done in a blinded fashion, that it was the facilitator
who was doing all of the communication.
They were pointing at the letters even though they were not aware of it at all.
It was all just a manifestation of the idiomotor effect.
We also gain insight into the fact that our brain is comprised of a lot of different committee
members when we have altered states of consciousness, which might be, for example, a different subset
of those committee members contributing to the aggregate consciousness.
For example, when we dream, when we are dreaming the reality testing part of our brain, that
committee member is less active.
There are other things that we don't do well when we're dreaming, like reading, for example.
Those parts of the brain are just not as active.
We're still conscious, though.
We still have consciousness.
It's just a different consciousness than we're used to when we are fully awake.
Also, we may experience extreme sleep deprivation.
You may have experienced the intoxicating effect of certain drugs, for example.
These are all states in which you're conscious, but your brain is not functioning the same
