the answer just quote unquote pops into your head.
You suddenly remember where you left your car keys for example.
That's because your brain was continuing to try to solve the problem, to search your
memories for the location of whatever it is you were looking for even though you weren't
consciously paying attention to it and then when the pattern was found, the match was
made that information then popped into your conscious awareness, a good everyday example
of subconscious processing in the brain.
There is one theory that has emerged recently in order to explain how the brain works in
terms of consciousness called the global workspace.
The idea is that while all the different various brain regions are like different committee
members, their own little consciousness, that they all report to some central broadly distributed
network within the brain called the global workspace.
If anything could be said therefore to be the seat of consciousness it is this global
workspace, this part of the brain.
You could also look at it as a final common pathway of all decisions and all consciousness
goes through this one central organizing area.
However, recent evidence argues against the existence of a global workspace.
There appears to be only a committee and no boss or no central location that they all
report to.
They're all just talking to each other and consciousness therefore is just the aggregate
behavior of all of these little committee members all acting together.
For example, research shows that visual perception, that we could be conscious of visual perception
without the visual cortex having to report that information to any other part of the
brain.
The visual cortex appears to be conscious of what it perceives all by itself.
Consciousness can be altered by altering the function of different specific brain regions
as well.
So you could think of this as removing one of the committee members from the discussion
and therefore the aggregate decision of that committee is altered because it's missing
the input of that one piece of the brain.
For example, researchers have inhibited the right temporal parietal junction using TMS
trans cranial magnetic stimulation.
That part of the brain is involved with what we call the theory of mind.
The ability to think about the intentions of other people.
Essentially, this is the part of the brain that gives us the insight, understanding into
the fact that other people have their own mind, their own will, their own agency and
then therefore we can speculate about what someone else might be intending to do.
That would be a very adaptive thing to be able to do in a social species.
When that part of the brain was inhibited, it altered the ability of subjects to make
moral judgments.
Those moral judgments that specifically require a theory of mind in the calculus.
For example, if the intention of another person was important to deciding how guilty they
are, did they intend harm or was it an accident, then the ability to make that moral judgment
