better.
That may be true, but it's not necessarily true.
They may have gotten better all on their own.
As the old saying goes, if you don't treat a cold, it'll last for a week.
If you treat a cold, it'll last for only seven days.
Very similar to this is confusing correlation with causation.
Here, the former of the argument is not just that B follows A, but B correlates with A
in some way.
Where we see B, we see A. The assumption, therefore, is that, well, A must cause B.
That's why they occur together.
However, this is not logically the case.
It's possible that B causes A. It's also possible that some other factors, C or D, cause both
B and A. Those would all be explanations for why there is a correlation between A and B.
This is even assuming that the correlation is real and not itself a coincidence.
Random distributions tend to be clumpy, so there are a lot of false correlations, correlations
that are due to statistical flukes alone.
Even if the correlation is real, at the very least then, we have three hypotheses.
A causes B, B causes A, where both A and B are caused by some other factor.
Like with the argument from authority, the logical fallacy of confusing correlation with
causation or assuming causation from correlation can be over-applied to dismiss the very legitimate
significance of a correlation.
Once we establish that a correlation is real, that doesn't mean that there's no causal relationship
between the two things.
It means that there's a number of possible causal relationships, one of which may be
the simplest one that A causes B. For example, it was noted that cigarette smoking correlates
with certain types of lung cancer.
The assumption was that smoking probably is causing cancer to occur.
Smoking contains a lot of harmful chemicals.
We've demonstrated that some of those chemicals could be a carcinogen, so it makes sense.
It's the simplest explanation.
But the tobacco industry actually employed the correlation does not equal causation logical
fallacy argument to say that, well, we cannot assume that smoking causes cancer just because
the two are correlated.
At various times, they argued that this factor X, this mysterious third factor, causes people
to both smoke and get cancer.
Even for a while, they floated the idea that cancer causes smoking, that cancer causes
irritation in the lungs and anxiety, which is relieved by smoking, and therefore cancer
motivates people to take up smoking.
Those could be considered less plausible hypotheses to explain the correlation.
