In the first section of this course, I described how massively flawed our brains are as a tool
for understanding the universe.
But I also concluded on a positive note that we have our highly evolved frontal lobes,
the ability to abstract and to reason.
In this next section of the course, I'm going to go over some tools for how to use that reasoning
ability to override the flaws in our neurological function.
I'm going to start with the discussion of logic and arguments.
Now we use the term argument in a slightly different way than you may use it as a day-to-day
basis.
You probably argue every day.
By that I do not mean that you have a verbal fight with someone else, although you may
also do that.
What I mean is that you construct a logical argument in order to justify or reach a conclusion.
The purpose of an argument is often, we think, to convince others of your position.
But in reality, it's more than just that.
More broadly, it is to construct a statement that can be used to support a position or
a conclusion.
This is a primary tool that we have in exchanging thoughts and ideas with others, and also for
constructing our own beliefs about the world.
Yet many people do not know how to use this very important tool.
Despite the common usage, as I said, the purpose of an argument for a critical thinker is
not to win.
The goal is not to win the argument, although that is often the default mode of how we behave.
We pick a side and then defend that side at all costs, marshalling whatever arguments
we think can defend that position.
But the better approach, the critical thinking approach, is to value the process of developing
your arguments and reaching those conclusions.
A critical thinker should be willing to change any conclusion when new information or a better
argument is presented.
So the purpose of an argument is to discover which conclusions are most sound, are most
likely to be true, that are best supported by logic and the evidence.
It is primarily to improve our own beliefs and our own conclusions, not just a way of
defending them.
This gets to the difference between reasoning and rationalizing.
Rationalizing is a process of starting with the conclusion and then figuring out which
arguments can be marshaled in order to defend that conclusion.
Where reasoning focuses on the process going forward, where the conclusion flows from the
logic and not the other way around.
When we use the rationalizing process, which can seem very superficially like reason, that
