Assumptions or incomplete premises weaken an argument.
They don't make them wrong, but they weaken it because the argument is only as good as
the premises on which they are based.
Having said all that, when two or more people disagree over a factual statement, what that
means is that one side or both sides must be wrong in some way.
Obviously, two mutually exclusive conclusions, by definition, can't both be correct at the
same time.
So immediately, when you and another person disagree over a factual statement, immediately
you know that one or both of you is wrong.
The goal should therefore be not to, again, marshal whatever arguments you can to defend
your side, but to examine both of your arguments to find out where the assumptions are in the
premises, where the false premises are, or where the errors in logic are.
You know that there has to be one or more of those somewhere.
If the two of you can work together in order to discover the errors in assumptions or logic,
then you should be able to resolve your differences and come to a better conclusion.
That is a much more practical approach to a disagreement than simply defending whatever
side you happen to take at the beginning, regardless of the validity of logic or the
correctness of the premises.
I'm going to cover a little bit of jargon that I have been using and will continue to
use in this and the next lecture specifically.
The term true means that a claim is factually correct.
It is in line with reality.
Arguments themselves are not true or false.
Their conclusions are true or false.
I'll also note that in most cases we do not have access to truth with a capital T with
metaphysical certitude.
What we're really talking about is something that is established to a sufficient degree
that we can treat it as if it were a fact, although we know that all true statements
are tentative in some way because they are dependent upon our incomplete current level
of knowledge.
The term valid refers specifically to logic.
One or more premises may still be wrong or unjustified, but an argument is valid when
it is impossible for the conclusion to be false if the premises are true.
The term valid only refers to the logic, meaning that the logic works.
The term sound refers to the entire argument.
Argument is sound when all of the premises are true and the logic is valid.
The conclusion of a sound argument therefore must be true.
By definition, the argument is not sound otherwise.
The logic that is employed means that if the premises are true, the conclusion must also
