be true.
The conclusion of an unsound or invalid argument, however, may or may not be true.
Demonstrating that an argument is unsound or invalid does not prove the conclusion false.
It just removes that argument as justification for the conclusion.
For example, I might state that the sky is blue because the sun rises in the east.
The premise is correct, the sun metaphorically rises in the east.
The conclusion is true, the sky appears to be blue, but there is no logical connection
between those two statements, it's a non-sequitur, so therefore the argument is unsound despite
the fact that the conclusion is true.
The type of logic that I'm talking about in this lecture is deductive logic.
Deductive logic uses a premises to connect to a conclusion.
One goes from the general, therefore, to the specific.
You start with some general statements and then you deduce a specific instance that must
be true if those general premises, those general statements, are themselves true.
For example, this is like a classic textbook example, if we take as premise one, all men
are mortal and as premise number two, Socrates is a man, then we can arrive at the conclusion
that Socrates is therefore mortal.
The conclusion must be true if premise one and two are both true.
Conclusions of deductive logic are positive assertions, they are truth statements.
It's important to recognize that they are not valued judgments.
This is another way in which two or more people may disagree over a conclusion.
Some of the things that we hold that we believe are value judgments, they are aesthetic judgments.
They are not pure statements of fact or logic alone.
For example, there is no way to prove that Beethoven is better than Mozart, that Beethoven's
music is more enjoyable to listen to than Mozart.
There is a subjective artistic judgment involved there.
It's very useful to recognize this because oftentimes people have an argument where there
is one or more value judgments in the premises and when you identify that, then you can at
least agree to disagree.
You've at least identified the source of your disagreement and you realize that it's not
purely resolvable by facts alone and that it is your differing value systems or value
judgments that is leading to the different conclusions that you're arriving at.
For contrast to deductive logic, inductive logic goes from a specific observation to
general principles, so it goes in the opposite direction of deductive logic.
It's more of a statement of probability also than certainty, whereas the deductive conclusion
must be true, inductive logic is used to decide what is probably true based upon observations.
This is largely based on this mode of inductive logic or inductive reasoning.
As an example, if we take as a premise that every swan that has ever been observed is
white, we may come to the inductive conclusion that therefore all swans are white.
