But further, we can use other correlations to test the various hypotheses.
If smoking causes cancer, then we would expect that the more you smoke, the greater your
risk of cancer, that inhaling would cause more cancer than not inhaling, that smoking
unfiltered cigarettes would cause more cancer than filtered cigarettes, and that after quitting
smoking, your risk of getting cancer would then subsequently decrease.
All of those correlations turn out to be true also, and therefore we can use multiple correlations
to triangulate to the most likely causal hypothesis, smoking causes cancer.
But all of this evidence should not be dismissed as a logical fallacy.
It's only a fallacy if we assume one particular cause and effect from the mere correlation
itself.
Logical fallacy is special pleading.
This can also be called ad hoc or post hoc reasoning, meaning we're inventing reasons
as needed in order to explain certain aspects of the evidence or to jerry-rig problems with
an argument.
This logic is not formally invalid.
In other words, the arguments that are put forward may in fact be legitimate as far as
they go.
The fallacy comes in the process of just invoking these arguments after we know that they're
needed in order to jerry-rig a problematic conclusion.
For example, proponents of extrasensory perception, or ESP, may argue that the reason why well-controlled
studies of ESP fail to show any ESP effect is because of the presence of skeptics, that
a skeptical mind somehow prevents ESP from working.
They've actually generated hypotheses that believers in ESP allow the effect to occur,
and those with a skeptical worldview prevent ESP from happening, and that's why the researcher
researcher effect, where the attitude of the researcher affects the outcome of the study.
That may be true for other reasons in terms of biases and how well the researcher's conducted,
but the notion that just the mere presence of a skeptic keeps ESP from working was invented
ad hoc as needed to explain away the negative results of well-controlled studies.
There is no a priori or reason before such an explanation was needed in order to invoke
that concept.
Once again, what we see is with this kind of logic that this may be a way of generating
a hypothesis, but can't be used as a premise or as a conclusion in order to explain away
inconvenient evidence or the absence of evidence that should be there.
The special pleading fallacy is related to the fallacy of limited scope, introducing
a new element that is not a broadly applicable principle.
It narrowly addresses a single flaw in evidence or argument.
The perhaps most famous example of this is one that was given by Carl Sagan in his book
The Demon Haunted World.
He invited the reader to imagine someone claiming that they have a dragon living in their garage,
