However, this statement is falsifiable.
The observation of a single black swan will render the statement untrue.
Then the statement might have to be modified to most swans are white or perhaps all swans
except for the species of black swans are white.
In order to be valid, deductive logic means that the conclusion must flow from the premises.
If the premises are true, then the conclusion must also be true.
If not, then the logic is invalid.
In other words, even if the conclusion may still be true, that does not make the deductive
logic valid.
The conclusion absolutely has to be true in order for the logic itself to be valid.
As an example, an argument may take the form that all A are B, C is A, therefore C is B,
stating it in more of a mathematical term.
In other words, if A is contained within the set of B, anything that is a member of set
A must therefore also be a member of set B. This is a statement that absolutely has to
be true.
It's like a mathematical truth.
Logical fallacies are arguments in which the conclusion does not have to be true if the
premises are true.
The generic term for this type of invalid logic is the non-sequitur, which literally
means it does not follow.
The conclusion does not follow from the premises.
There are many specific types of non-sequiturs of logical fallacies, and in the rest of this
talk I'm going to review some of the more common types of these logical fallacies.
The first type is the argument from authority.
This usually takes the form of a conclusion is correct because an authority figure asserts
that it is correct, that it is true.
Dr. X says it's true, therefore it's true.
The more general form of this logical fallacy could be that a conclusion is correct because
a person or a group making the claim have some positive or admirable attribute.
John says it's true and he's a nice and kind man, therefore his conclusion must be correct.
This links to the tendency to surrender the will to a charismatic authority figure that
I mentioned in a previous lecture.
We have this evolved desire to get along with the social group and to follow a leader of
some sort.
Therefore we have this tendency to respect celebrities or officials or experts or professionals,
somebody who has some claim to authority.
That brings up the idea that logical fallacies derive from different things.
The argument from authority derives from this evolved tendency to surrender our will to
authority figures.
