Other logical fallacies, however, give us the ability to rationalize.
When we are defending a conclusion that isn't true, we can't use valid logic and premises
in order to support it.
We have to either use assumptions or false premises or we need to use invalid logic in
order to construct an argument to defend an incorrect conclusion.
That's what logical fallacies are.
They're essentially our mechanisms for rationalizing our own conclusions.
But getting back to the argument from authority, this logical fallacy can also be over applied,
meaning that we can dismiss legitimate arguments by the claim that they are the argument from
authority.
In other words, because the argument from authority is a logical fallacy, that doesn't
mean that we should be dismissive of the value of the consensus of expert opinion, for example.
That consensus does not have to be correct, but that doesn't mean that we shouldn't take
it seriously.
If a consensus derives from a robust program of research, of discussion, of a group of
experts going over a lot of evidence, hammering out their differences, hammering out their
objections, and finally arriving at a hard one consensus, that process of arriving at
that consensus of experts should be given some consideration.
It's at least a reasonable starting point, or at the very least you should have a good
reason for rejecting the consensus before doing so.
That doesn't mean that you're making an argument from authority, that a claim must be true
simply because an authority figure says so.
A different logical fallacy is the argument from final consequences.
The form that this fallacy typically takes is, well, some claim cannot be true if it
results in consequences that I don't like or that I find abhorrent, or the opposite
is something is true because it serves a positive purpose.
For example, those who deny the scientific conclusion that life on Earth arrived through
a process of organic evolution, so-called evolution deniers, will frequently make the
argument that, well, evolution can't be true because if it were, then we evolved from quote
unquote lower animals, then there would be no basis for morality.
Now I disagree with that premise that there would be no basis for morality, but even if
you did agree with that premise, it still doesn't mean that evolution isn't true.
The truth can sometimes have unwanted or bad consequences.
This form of argument is what's called a teleological argument because it reverses cause and effect.
In other words, it starts with the effect, the absence of morality, and says that that
somehow prevents or causes evolution to not be true.
Another more direct example of this teleological argument is the strong anthropic principle.
It is true, it is a true premise that the universe has all the physical attributes necessary
for life to exist.
