in fact is the point of rationalizing to make it seem as if your conclusions are reasonable.
We use that to rationalize decisions that we've already made or conclusions that we've
already arrived at.
When we have a conclusion that is discordant, that is not in line with the facts or is challenged
by a new argument or a new piece of information.
Our tendency is to rationalize away that new information in order to resolve the cognitive
dissonance that results and then our brains reward us for doing just that.
To avoid cognitive dissonance, we should focus rather on the process.
So in other words, if you don't tie yourself firmly to a conclusion, then you won't feel
any emotional dissonance when new data comes to light that shows that the conclusion is
wrong.
As long as your process is valid all the way through, it's okay to change your conclusion
when new data or arguments arise.
Specifically, in logic, the term argument is a set of statements used to support a conclusion.
An explanation is not an argument.
An assertion, simply asserting that something is true, is not an argument.
An argument must take the form of starting with specific premises and then logically
deriving a conclusion from those premises.
A premise is a starting point, a fact or assumption that we take as a given at the beginning of
an argument.
If a premise is false, then any argument that is based upon that premise is not sound.
This means that it's very important to examine all of the premises and to recognize what
the premises of an argument actually are.
Often that is a missing step in an argument.
It's easy to focus on the logic and to forget that that logic has to act on certain premises.
The hidden premise is perhaps the most pernicious aspect of an unsound argument.
If we don't even know that a fact or an assumption is a premise of an argument that we're making,
then we can't examine it.
Oftentimes, when two people disagree, they are not aware of the fact that they're starting
from different premises that they're just taking for granted.
There is no possibility of resolving their different conclusions until they drill down
to all the premises that go into the arguments that they're using to defend their conclusions.
Assumptions can be used as premises.
Some premises are assumptions, and we need to recognize when that is the case.
When you are starting with a statement that is not an established fact, it is not known
to be wrong, it is not a wrong or a false premise, it simply is an assumption.
It is not known whether or not it is true.
It may also not be wrong or it may be right to a degree, but it may be incomplete.
You may have an incomplete premise that does not fully capture the entire situation.
