It must because we exist.
The soft anthropic principle says just that.
Of course the universe has to have all of the physical attributes for there to be life
because we know that life exists in the universe.
The strong anthropic principle says that the universe has those physical attributes so
that life can exist, that the ultimate outcome of life caused the universe to have the attributes
that it does, or that the universe was designed to have those attributes so that life could
exist.
We often see this argument in conspiracy theories, for example.
Now I'll cover conspiracy thinking more thoroughly in a later lecture, but quickly the logic
that often goes into conspiracy theories is the principle of quibono, or who benefits.
If an event occurs, the conspiracy theorist might ask, well, who benefited from this event?
And then they would argue that therefore that person must have engineered or caused the
event through some hidden conspiracy.
For example, LBJ became president after JFK was assassinated, therefore he must have had
a hand in that assassination.
Or George W. Bush was able to justify a war in Iraq and a war in Afghanistan with the
events of 9-11, therefore he must have caused the events of 9-11, he must have had a hand
in it.
This ignores the fact that with any big event, any big world historical event, there are
going to be winners and losers.
There are going to be people who benefit from that event, even if it's a horrible or negative
occurrence, and there are going to be those who lose, and it doesn't always mean that
the winners were responsible for the event itself.
But I will say that that may be a reasonable basis for generating a hypothesis, maybe the
person who benefited from it was involved, because at least they have a motive.
But it can't be used to conclude that they were responsible for the event, that's the
logical fallacy.
A very common logical fallacy is the post hoc, ergo, proctor hoc fallacy.
Do this therefore because of this.
We tend to assume that if B follows A, that therefore A must have caused B. This logical
fallacy derives from innumeracy, a naivete about statistics and probability.
We are impressed with the pattern that B followed A, and we intuitively or instinctively don't
like the explanation that that was a statistical fluke or just random chance.
So we like to impose meaning on the patterns that we see.
One meaning is that, well, A must have caused B. For example, this very commonly comes up
in my own field of medicine.
If patients present with symptoms, with an illness, and then they take a treatment for
that illness, and then they get better, they often credit the treatment for making them
