and when you ask them to see their dragon, they say, well, the dragon is invisible so
you can't see him.
Well, perhaps we can spread something on the ground and look at his footprints.
Well, the dragon floats and wouldn't leave any footprints.
Well, maybe we can measure the heat of his fiery breath.
Well, this dragon breathes a heatless fire.
Well, can I touch the dragon?
Well, he's also insubstantial.
So, for every experiment that you can devise to test for the presence of the dragon, a
special, very narrow reason is invented that would explain away the absence of that evidence.
This type of argument has been invoked frequently to explain why there is no smoking gun evidence
for the existence of Bigfoot or Sasquatch.
Some have argued that, well, perhaps he can turn invisible at will, and that's why you
can never capture him on a photograph, or perhaps he can travel through other dimensions.
He can disappear when needed to, and that's why you could never trap him.
Other forms of special pleading include the notion that aliens don't want us to know that
they are here.
They therefore will give us ambiguous little bits of evidence, but not smoking gun definitive
evidence.
Billy Meyer, who was a Swiss farmer who has been claiming for decades that he has been
in constant contact with aliens, for example, uses this type of argument to explain why
his evidence looks as if it's been hoaxed.
For example, he presents a photograph of a pretty typical flying saucer, which appears
to be attached to a tree for support, and he argues that, well, for whatever reason,
the aliens chose to fly around that tree.
When the area of the photograph was later investigated, it was found that the tree was
not there, which is what you would expect if the tree were a model he used only for
that photograph, to which Billy Meyer explained, well, the alien had the tree removed for some
unknowable reason.
These are all just special pleading arguments in order to explain away why the evidence
makes it seem like he has been engaged in a hoax.
Arguments are an opportunity to resolve differences of opinion.
Discovering hidden premises, factual errors, and flaws in logic should be the goal.
But remember, it's important to use these tools to improve one's own beliefs, not just
to prove why other people are wrong.
In the next lecture, we will cover more of these logical fallacies.
