We like to reduce the world down to just two choices, a binary choice, when in fact the
world is much more complicated than that.
The flip side to the false dichotomy, logical fallacy, is the false continuum.
This denies the existence of extremes because there is a continuum in between.
You can apply this to all the examples that I gave previously.
Just because there is no sharp demarcation line between tall and short, that doesn't
mean that we cannot reasonably define some people as being tall and other people as being
short, or that we cannot reasonably define some practices as pseudoscientific while others
are legitimately scientific just because they blend in the middle between the two.
Another logical fallacy is inconsistency or applying different criteria to similar situations
when the same criteria really should apply.
This may create mutually exclusive conclusions, or this may be a manifestation of what we
call compartmentalization, where we apply one set of beliefs and criteria to one claim
or one conclusion and a completely distinct set of criteria or logic or judgements to
another claim that we also wish to believe in and not realizing that the two are mutually
exclusive.
They are not mutually compatible.
This often involves area where value judgments are being made because it's easy to alter
or tweak those value judgments in order to get to a desired conclusion.
An example of the application of inconsistency is the infamous kettle defense.
This comes up frequently in legal trials where a lawyer whose job it is to defend their client
at all costs may make mutually exclusive defensive arguments that don't have to be compatible
with each other, but if any one of them are true, their client can therefore get off.
The name comes from the accusation that someone borrowed a neighbor's kettle and broke it,
and then the person who was accused might claim simultaneously that they were never
given the kettle, that it was broken when it was given to them, and that it was in perfect
condition when it was returned.
All three of these claims are mutually exclusive, but if any one of them is correct, then they're
not guilty of having broken the kettle.
Similar to inconsistency is moving the goalposts, which occurs frequently enough to warrant
its own designation.
This comes from changing the criteria for acceptance of a claim to keep the criteria
just out of reach of whatever evidence is presented or is currently available.
This is a method for denying a claim that someone does not wish to accept or believe
in.
For example, there are those who even to this day believe that the United States landing
on the moon during the Apollo missions was a staged hoax, a grand conspiracy.
They have over the years asked for photos from either orbiters or telescopes that show
the landers on the moon and evidence of the artifacts that we left behind on the moon.
