However, when presented with these photos, they keep asking for higher and higher resolution
photos.
They're never satisfied with the photos that are available.
Recently, NASA has made available very high resolution photos that not only show the artifacts
that the Apollo missions left behind on the moon, but also showed the foot tracks of the
astronauts as they walked among the various locations.
The evidence is stunning.
Presented with this evidence, some moon landing hoax conspiracy theorists have claimed, well,
these photos must have been faked by NASA in order to support their claims.
So they keep moving the goalposts back so that no matter what evidence they're presented
is still not convincing enough.
The reductio ad absurdum is interesting because it's actually a legitimate form of logic.
It's not itself a logical fallacy.
This form of argument says that if these premises are assumed to be true, then it necessarily
follows or leads to an absurd and demonstrably false conclusion.
So this is a legitimate way of demonstrating that an argument is not sound because if the
premises were true, it would necessarily lead to a false conclusion or an absurd conclusion.
However, the logical fallacy can come in when this legitimate form of argument is abused
by forcing an absurd conclusion that doesn't flow from the premises.
One that I've actually personally encountered before is the claim that, well, you don't
believe in either fairies or aliens or bigfoot or ghosts.
You can insert your paranormal claim there because you've never seen them.
But you've also never personally seen the Great Wall of China, which is true.
I've never seen the Great Wall of China.
So therefore, I should be equally skeptical of the existence of the Great Wall of China.
For some reason, France is also often invoked as the thing that you've never personally
seen and as the existence of these other paranormal beliefs.
However, there is a false assumption in that argument.
The assumption is that the only reason for rejecting belief in fairies, for example,
is not having seen them personally.
This ignores the fact that there are other types of evidence that can be very compelling,
even more compelling in some cases than personal eyewitness testimony.
It also doesn't consider that there are alternate hypotheses.
What would be implied by the fact that the Great Wall of China doesn't exist?
That would imply a pretty elaborate hoax, maybe just on me or on Americans or on a
large part of the world, if the Great Wall of China didn't really exist.
What would be necessary for fairies to not exist?
Only that those people who believe in them are fooling themselves in some way.
But there is no compelling evidence that would then need to be explained away.
