The slippery slope argument is similar to the false reductio ad absurdum in that it argues
that if a position is accepted, then the most extreme version of that position must also
be accepted or will inevitably occur.
This is often used in political or persuasive arguments.
For example, if we ban assault rifles, this will inevitably lead to banning sports or
hunting weapons and will inevitably lead to imposing further restrictions on our rights.
However, these types of arguments do not necessarily follow.
It is possible to ban one type of weapons without going all the way to the final conclusion
of banning all weapons or maybe even imposing further unrights.
This argument has also been put forward as an argument against embryonic stem cells being
used in research.
The claim that I personally heard is that, well, if we allow for women to donate their
ovaries, for example, for embryonic stem cell research, that will inevitably lead to women
being strapped down against their will and their ovaries forcibly harvested from them.
But of course, that is not necessarily a consequence of embryonic stem cell research.
The tautology is a name in formal logic.
A tautology is a statement that must be true in all instances.
The logical fallacy, however, that I'm referring to is the rhetorical tautology, which is the
needless repetition of an idea in an argument.
It becomes a fallacious form of argument when it's used to justify a conclusion.
In other words, it takes the form X, therefore X, meaning that your conclusion and your premise
are the same thing, although the tautology may be disguised by stating the premise and
the argument in a slightly different way.
The patito principi, or principi, is the logical fallacy that is also called begging the question.
In common usage, the term begging the question is often misused to mean that something raises
the question.
But in logic, what we mean by begging the question is that it's assuming the conclusion
in the premise.
In other words, it's a form of circular reasoning.
For example, the therapeutic touch, which is an alternative modality not based upon
in scientific evidence or in our understanding of the human body, claims to be able to manipulate
the human energy field, something which itself has not been documented to exist scientifically,
in order to promote health and healing.
The argument that therapeutic touch is effective because it manipulates the human energy field
is begging the question, is there an energy field, does it in fact manipulate the human
energy field, and does that in fact have an effect on human health?
Another form of circular reasoning is called the no true Scotsman argument.
This is a semantic form of circular reasoning.
For example, if someone makes the claim that all Scotsman are brave, the counter argument
