In the last lecture, we covered the structure of argument, including the premises and the
logical connection leading to a conclusion.
In this lecture, we're going to delve further into logical fallacies or invalid logic, sometimes
used innocently, but often as part of motivated reasoning to get to a desired, even if invalid
conclusion.
The first logical fallacy I'm going to discuss in this talk is the ad hominem logical fallacy
or to the person.
This fallacy occurs when you attempt to counter the argument made by someone by focusing on
the person making the argument rather than the argument itself.
This is, in a way, the opposite of the argument from authority, which states that an argument,
the argument from authority states that an argument must be valid because of the positive
attributes of the person making it.
The ad hominem says the argument is rejected because of some negative attributes that that
person has.
As an example, people who may often be accused of being closed-minded for not accepting a
claim uncritically, especially if it's an extraordinary claim.
This is a frequent counter argument to skepticism, but really it is an ad hominem logical fallacy
saying that the objections are not valid or can be dismissed because the person making
them is closed-minded.
They're not open to the possibility that the claim that is being made is true.
This is a non sequitur, a logical fallacy, because it has nothing to do with the objections
themselves.
In fact, being open does not necessarily mean accepting all claims uncritically.
So the accusation of being closed-minded also comes, in my opinion, from a misunderstanding
of what it truly means to be open or closed.
Being open-minded means that you apply the same rules of evidence and logic fairly.
It may still be justified, though, at some point to reject a claim if that claim runs
counter to logic and evidence.
Reaching conclusions doesn't mean that you're closed-minded, it just could mean that you're
fairly applying logic and evidence.
Another example of the ad hominem argument is rejecting the scientific consensus as if
it's arrogant, arrogant to think that we can know anything.
This is often combined with an appeal to elitism, that it is the elite professionals
who are making a specific claim and therefore they can be dismissed because they're not
regular folk.
Or rejecting a claim could be based upon the assumption of conflicts of interest.
Those who disagree with me must be being paid off by some big corporate interest and therefore
I can dismiss their evidence and their scientific studies out of hand because they have this
conflict.
This doesn't mean that there aren't legitimate conflicts of interest, it's the casual assumption
of conflict in order to just dismiss arguments that is more the logical fallacy.
This can even lead into a conspiracy theory, that there is a vast conspiracy of some government
or corporate interest that is manufacturing fake evidence for example.
I will note as a side note that insults alone are not an ad hominem logical fallacy.
They may be ad hominem but they're not a logical fallacy.
It's only when the insult is used as the reason for being wrong.
Also, saying that someone has made a misstatement a fact or committed a logical fallacy is itself
not an ad hominem attack or statement because those are addressing the argument itself and
not the person.
That's the key difference.
A closely related logical fallacy is called poisoning the well.
And here you're not necessarily addressing the person directly but you're trying to taint
their argument by tying it to something else that is unsavory or unpopular.
A very classic example of this has its own name called Godwin's law or a Godwin argument
named after the person who first pointed out how frequently this comes up.
And that is to say that well Adolf Hitler believed the same thing as well.
Therefore it's tainted, it's wrong to believe in that claim.
It should be pointed out however that this fallacy too can be over applied, a theme that's
going to crop up a lot in this lecture.
It can be legitimate to put a person's claims into perspective.
Perhaps they have a legitimate conflict of interest.
Perhaps they have been previously convicted of fraud.
Pointing out that somebody who is offering you a too good to be true investment opportunity
has a prior conviction of fraud is not necessarily an attempt to poison the well of their new
claims so much as to put them in a very realistic perspective.
Another logical fallacy is the so-called too coque or you too logical fallacy.
This is an attempt to counter a legitimate criticism by pointing out that one other,
that the other person is also guilty of the same thing.
In other words this may take the form of well my claims may lack evidence but so do the
claims of these other people or so do your claims.
This frequently comes up in the promotion of unscientific or implausible medical modalities,
however they are labeled.
The claim is often made, well this particular medical treatment may lack evidence and plausibility
but mainstream medical treatments often lack evidence and plausibility also.
There's a bit of a false analogy there because the scale is not always the same but even
if it were completely analogous it doesn't matter.
Lacking evidence is lacking evidence regardless of which claim is guilty of that failing.
A very pernicious logical fallacy one that is very common in the promotion of supernatural
or paranormal beliefs is the argument ad ignorantum or the argument from ignorance using
a lack of evidence or knowledge as if it were a positive argument for a specific conclusion.
A very common form of this would be to say for example that I cannot identify that light
up in the sky, it is by definition an unidentified flying object, therefore it must be an alien
spacecraft.
What the person knows is they can't identify the object.
They make then the argument from ignorance to say that therefore it is something specific
an alien spacecraft rather than simply concluding that well it's therefore unknown.
It is not support for any specific claim that you want to believe.
Intelligent design is in fact one giant argument from ignorance.
Intelligent design is a term that's been around for a couple of decades or so to describe
what is presented as an alternate theory to the theory of organic evolution.
The notion is that life arose on this planet through the work of an intelligent agency,
the intelligent designer.
The arguments that are used in support of intelligent design are that we can't explain
how everything evolved.
Therefore the inability to explain that becomes an argument for this alternate hypothesis.
This strategy is often referred to as the God of the gaps strategy because the intelligent
designer, whether or not you think of that intelligent designer as a God or not, is often
put into the gaps in our current knowledge.
What proponents of intelligent design do not have is any positive evidence for their specific
model of how things occurred.
They simply point to current gaps in our knowledge, not even persistent gaps, just current gaps
in our knowledge in order to say that their process, their hypothesis fills that current
gap.
Conspiracy theories also frequently rely on the argument from ignorance.
The process of supporting a conspiracy theory often takes the form of shooting holes in
the standard explanation of events, shooting holes in the Warren Commission's construction
of the JFK assassination, for example, or shooting holes in the government's version
of what happened on 9-11 and emphasizing what we don't know or those facts that seem anomalous,
that seem out of place, unusual, or apparently to conflict.
That process is often called anomaly hunting, looking for things that don't seem quite
right.
They then go from not understanding the entire sequence of events to arguing for a specific
conspiracy theory, that their specific pet conspiracy theory is the answer to why we
can't explain every little detail of what happened, despite the fact that there is often
a lack of positive evidence specifically for their conspiracy theory.
They're basing it entirely on the argument from ignorance, the inability to explain every
detail of what happened.
Yet another logical fallacy is confusing currently unexplained with unexplainable.
This often ties into the argument from ignorance.
This assumes that our current knowledge represents the ultimate limits of our knowledge.
This is often combined with anomaly hunting in order to make, as I said, the argument
from ignorance, that therefore whatever pet theory you have or belief you have is therefore
justified because we don't currently know something, therefore it's unknowable.
This is often used also to support supernatural or paranormal beliefs.
If we don't currently understand how something is happening, maybe that's because the explanation
is outside of the natural world, it is supernatural.
For example, we may see a fuzzy image on a photograph, that if you look at it a certain
way, pareidolia kicks in and it looks like it could be a human form or a face, and the
inability to explain that is interpreted as it being unexplained a bull and therefore
it must be supernatural and maybe even specifically a ghost.
History shows us, however, that many of the mysteries of the past are now solved by scientific
inquiry.
It's more practical, in fact, to assume that mysteries can be solved and then look for
a solution.
That assumption that the world is ultimately knowable has been working out quite well.
Rather than to assume that they are unsolvable and then to insert a mystical belief into
the gap.
I'll give you an example of a personal discussion I got into with someone who was claiming that
the earth and the sun, therefore, were only a million or so years old, not the billions
of years old that scientists claim.
He cited the solar neutrino problem as an anomaly that could not be explained, that
was unexplainable.
Essentially, that there aren't as many neutrinos, a certain type of primary particle, coming
from the sun as there should be if the sun were being heated by nuclear fusion of hydrogen
and to helium.
This relative absence of neutrinos was called the solar neutrino problem.
His argument was that, well, that's because the sun's not powered by nuclear fusion, it's
powered by the kinetic energy of the sun collapsing, something which can only sustain the energy
of the sun for millions of years, not billions of years.
However, it was shortly after that that the solar neutrino problem was, in fact, solved
by scientists.
Some neutrinos changed their form on the way to the earth and therefore we were measuring
fewer neutrinos than the previous model had predicted.
This short-term ignorance or problem was rather rapidly solved.
It was not an unsolvable problem.
Another very common logical fallacy is the false dichotomy or false choice.
This results from prematurely or artificially reducing the number of possible outcomes or
possibilities to down to just two, and then making the false choice between those two.
If not A, then the answer must be B, but this ignores that, well, maybe C or D or even
E could be the answer.
Again, to use intelligent design or creationism as an example, often creationists make the
argument that, well, if we didn't evolve, if we can find anomalies or shoot holes in
the current theory of evolution, then we must have been created, as if that is the only
other possibility.
Also, the false dichotomy could be a false choice between two or more non-mutually exclusive
possibilities.
The classic example of this is nature versus nurture.
While it doesn't have to be entirely nature, meaning it's in our genes or entirely nurture,
it's in our environment, the way we were raised, perhaps our personality, our behavior, etc.,
is some combination of both nature and nurture.
This false dichotomy can also reduce a continuum to its extremes, as if you're either very
tall or very short and nothing in between.
For example, I will be talking in more detail about science versus pseudoscience.
Pseudoscience being science that is so bad it doesn't even qualify as legitimate science.
But these are really two ends of a continuum, two ends of a spectrum.
There isn't pristine science on one end and complete pseudoscience on the other.
There is everything in between.
This collapsing a continuum into two extremes also comes up when people try to decide or
define what the difference is between a cult versus a religion.
That difference also lies on a continuum.
A cult and religions may share a lot of features.
There may be religions that have certain cultish aspects and not every cult has every single
feature of a cult.
There is really just a continuum between these two extremes.
This also comes up as another example in the true believer versus con artist.
If somebody is making a claim that is not supported by science or evidence in order
to sell a product, do they really believe their claims?
Are they a true believer?
Or are they completely lying?
Are they simply a slick con artist?
Oftentimes, the reality is somewhere in the middle.
They may be cutting corners on the truth of their claims, but they may also believe in
some aspects of it as well.
There may be a more complicated combination of both of those features.
This logical fallacy relates to the need for simplicity.
We like to reduce the world down to just two choices, a binary choice, when in fact the
world is much more complicated than that.
The flip side to the false dichotomy, logical fallacy, is the false continuum.
This denies the existence of extremes because there is a continuum in between.
You can apply this to all the examples that I gave previously.
Just because there is no sharp demarcation line between tall and short, that doesn't
mean that we cannot reasonably define some people as being tall and other people as being
short, or that we cannot reasonably define some practices as pseudoscientific while others
are legitimately scientific just because they blend in the middle between the two.
Another logical fallacy is inconsistency or applying different criteria to similar situations
when the same criteria really should apply.
This may create mutually exclusive conclusions, or this may be a manifestation of what we
call compartmentalization, where we apply one set of beliefs and criteria to one claim
or one conclusion and a completely distinct set of criteria or logic or judgements to
another claim that we also wish to believe in and not realizing that the two are mutually
exclusive.
They are not mutually compatible.
This often involves area where value judgments are being made because it's easy to alter
or tweak those value judgments in order to get to a desired conclusion.
An example of the application of inconsistency is the infamous kettle defense.
This comes up frequently in legal trials where a lawyer whose job it is to defend their client
at all costs may make mutually exclusive defensive arguments that don't have to be compatible
with each other, but if any one of them are true, their client can therefore get off.
The name comes from the accusation that someone borrowed a neighbor's kettle and broke it,
and then the person who was accused might claim simultaneously that they were never
given the kettle, that it was broken when it was given to them, and that it was in perfect
condition when it was returned.
All three of these claims are mutually exclusive, but if any one of them is correct, then they're
not guilty of having broken the kettle.
Similar to inconsistency is moving the goalposts, which occurs frequently enough to warrant
its own designation.
This comes from changing the criteria for acceptance of a claim to keep the criteria
just out of reach of whatever evidence is presented or is currently available.
This is a method for denying a claim that someone does not wish to accept or believe
in.
For example, there are those who even to this day believe that the United States landing
on the moon during the Apollo missions was a staged hoax, a grand conspiracy.
They have over the years asked for photos from either orbiters or telescopes that show
the landers on the moon and evidence of the artifacts that we left behind on the moon.
However, when presented with these photos, they keep asking for higher and higher resolution
photos.
They're never satisfied with the photos that are available.
Recently, NASA has made available very high resolution photos that not only show the artifacts
that the Apollo missions left behind on the moon, but also showed the foot tracks of the
astronauts as they walked among the various locations.
The evidence is stunning.
Presented with this evidence, some moon landing hoax conspiracy theorists have claimed, well,
these photos must have been faked by NASA in order to support their claims.
So they keep moving the goalposts back so that no matter what evidence they're presented
is still not convincing enough.
The reductio ad absurdum is interesting because it's actually a legitimate form of logic.
It's not itself a logical fallacy.
This form of argument says that if these premises are assumed to be true, then it necessarily
follows or leads to an absurd and demonstrably false conclusion.
So this is a legitimate way of demonstrating that an argument is not sound because if the
premises were true, it would necessarily lead to a false conclusion or an absurd conclusion.
However, the logical fallacy can come in when this legitimate form of argument is abused
by forcing an absurd conclusion that doesn't flow from the premises.
One that I've actually personally encountered before is the claim that, well, you don't
believe in either fairies or aliens or bigfoot or ghosts.
You can insert your paranormal claim there because you've never seen them.
But you've also never personally seen the Great Wall of China, which is true.
I've never seen the Great Wall of China.
So therefore, I should be equally skeptical of the existence of the Great Wall of China.
For some reason, France is also often invoked as the thing that you've never personally
seen and as the existence of these other paranormal beliefs.
However, there is a false assumption in that argument.
The assumption is that the only reason for rejecting belief in fairies, for example,
is not having seen them personally.
This ignores the fact that there are other types of evidence that can be very compelling,
even more compelling in some cases than personal eyewitness testimony.
It also doesn't consider that there are alternate hypotheses.
What would be implied by the fact that the Great Wall of China doesn't exist?
That would imply a pretty elaborate hoax, maybe just on me or on Americans or on a
large part of the world, if the Great Wall of China didn't really exist.
What would be necessary for fairies to not exist?
Only that those people who believe in them are fooling themselves in some way.
But there is no compelling evidence that would then need to be explained away.
The slippery slope argument is similar to the false reductio ad absurdum in that it argues
that if a position is accepted, then the most extreme version of that position must also
be accepted or will inevitably occur.
This is often used in political or persuasive arguments.
For example, if we ban assault rifles, this will inevitably lead to banning sports or
hunting weapons and will inevitably lead to imposing further restrictions on our rights.
However, these types of arguments do not necessarily follow.
It is possible to ban one type of weapons without going all the way to the final conclusion
of banning all weapons or maybe even imposing further unrights.
This argument has also been put forward as an argument against embryonic stem cells being
used in research.
The claim that I personally heard is that, well, if we allow for women to donate their
ovaries, for example, for embryonic stem cell research, that will inevitably lead to women
being strapped down against their will and their ovaries forcibly harvested from them.
But of course, that is not necessarily a consequence of embryonic stem cell research.
The tautology is a name in formal logic.
A tautology is a statement that must be true in all instances.
The logical fallacy, however, that I'm referring to is the rhetorical tautology, which is the
needless repetition of an idea in an argument.
It becomes a fallacious form of argument when it's used to justify a conclusion.
In other words, it takes the form X, therefore X, meaning that your conclusion and your premise
are the same thing, although the tautology may be disguised by stating the premise and
the argument in a slightly different way.
The patito principi, or principi, is the logical fallacy that is also called begging the question.
In common usage, the term begging the question is often misused to mean that something raises
the question.
But in logic, what we mean by begging the question is that it's assuming the conclusion
in the premise.
In other words, it's a form of circular reasoning.
For example, the therapeutic touch, which is an alternative modality not based upon
in scientific evidence or in our understanding of the human body, claims to be able to manipulate
the human energy field, something which itself has not been documented to exist scientifically,
in order to promote health and healing.
The argument that therapeutic touch is effective because it manipulates the human energy field
is begging the question, is there an energy field, does it in fact manipulate the human
energy field, and does that in fact have an effect on human health?
Another form of circular reasoning is called the no true Scotsman argument.
This is a semantic form of circular reasoning.
For example, if someone makes the claim that all Scotsman are brave, the counter argument
might be that, well, here is an example of a Scotsman who is a coward.
However, the original person making the claim might say, well, then he's no true Scotsman.
What he's doing is including the claim in the definition and therefore the premise,
and that becomes a form of circular reasoning without any appeal to outside logic or evidence.
This is also referred to as making a semantic argument.
A false analogy also could be a tricky form of logical fallacy, and this is making a point
by analogy where the things compared are not similar in the ways that are being compared.
This renders the analogy misleading or false.
For example, the evidence for ESP, or telepathy, extra-century perception, is as statistically
robust as the evidence that aspirin prevents strokes and therefore both claims should be
accepted equally.
That's the argument.
However, that's a false analogy because the claim that we have telepathy or ESP is not
as plausible as the claim that aspirin, which has known physiological effects that should
reduce the risk of a vascular event like stroke, in fact does decrease strokes.
Further, while the statistics may be similar, the methods used in the research are completely
different and therefore the meaning of those statistics are different.
Also there are differences in the reproducibility of the research.
The aspirin preventing strokes and heart attacks for that matter is highly reproducible research
while ESP effects have turned out not to be reproducible.
So the analogy between ESP and the preventive effects of aspirin are a false analogy.
There is also the false-false analogy, logical fallacy, meaning that an argument may be dismissed
as a false analogy and a legitimate analogy may be dismissed as false because there are
differences that are ultimately trivial.
Of course, there's always differences between any two things that are compared through analogy,
otherwise they would be exactly the same thing and not simply analogous.
So pointing at incidental or trivial differences as if they invalidate the important or core
feature that is being compared as a way of dismissing the analogy is itself a logical
fallacy.
The genetic fallacy is somewhat, I think, confusingly named because we've forgotten
the, ironically, the semantic roots of the word genetic.
We use that term now to refer to genes or inheritance, but it really does just mean
the history that something has.
The genetic fallacy therefore is assuming the historical use of something, a word for
example, that it must still be relevant to the current use even when in fact it has changed
it.
It has changed.
So for example, the term sunrise, the history of that word comes from the outdated notion
that the sun literally was rising in the sky as opposed to the earth rotating on its axis.
However, when I say that the sun rose this morning, that doesn't mean that I am supporting
a geocentrist view of the universe.
The historical roots of that word are no longer relevant to its current meaning.
A strawman argument, one that I find is very, very common, is responding to an altered version
of an opponent's argument rather than the actual position that they're taking.
This is used to set up a version of the argument that is easy to knock down, a strawman.
This is, it's important to always understand an opponent's argument.
In fact, when you have a disagreement with somebody, your first order of business should
really be to truly understand where they are coming from, what their premises are, what
their logic is, and what their position actually is.
If you start to address or argue against a position that they don't actually hold,
you will be committing the strawman logical fallacy.
There is also what I call the, or what is called the fallacy, fallacy, which is a very
interesting one, and this is assuming that because an argument for a conclusion is unsound,
that the conclusion must be false.
I pointed out in the previous lecture, in fact, that this is not true.
An argument can be unsound, logic invalid, but the conclusion itself still just happened
to be true.
That argument is no longer an argument for the conclusion, but the conclusion may still
be true.
So your work is not done.
Just by pointing out that an argument is fallacious doesn't mean that you can therefore arrive
at the conclusion that the conclusion is false.
You have to come up with other reasons for concluding that.
Armed with the knowledge of legitimate logic as well as all the various logical fallacies,
the way in which our logic goes awry, I encourage you to go out and play a game I like to call
name that logical fallacy.
When confronted with arguments, try to deconstruct the premises that are being used, the assumptions
that are used, and the logic that is implied by the argument, and to see what is valid
and what is not valid.
But specifically, you need to apply that to your own arguments.
That's somewhat hard to do.
It's really fun to do it to other people's arguments, but you need to apply the same
deconstruction to your own arguments.
The goal of all of this, of course, is to arrive at conclusions which are more reliable
and more likely to be true.
Avoiding logical fallacies, using legitimate logic, and examining your premises is a good
way to do that.
