This doesn't mean that there aren't legitimate conflicts of interest, it's the casual assumption
of conflict in order to just dismiss arguments that is more the logical fallacy.
This can even lead into a conspiracy theory, that there is a vast conspiracy of some government
or corporate interest that is manufacturing fake evidence for example.
I will note as a side note that insults alone are not an ad hominem logical fallacy.
They may be ad hominem but they're not a logical fallacy.
It's only when the insult is used as the reason for being wrong.
Also, saying that someone has made a misstatement a fact or committed a logical fallacy is itself
not an ad hominem attack or statement because those are addressing the argument itself and
not the person.
That's the key difference.
A closely related logical fallacy is called poisoning the well.
And here you're not necessarily addressing the person directly but you're trying to taint
their argument by tying it to something else that is unsavory or unpopular.
A very classic example of this has its own name called Godwin's law or a Godwin argument
named after the person who first pointed out how frequently this comes up.
And that is to say that well Adolf Hitler believed the same thing as well.
Therefore it's tainted, it's wrong to believe in that claim.
It should be pointed out however that this fallacy too can be over applied, a theme that's
going to crop up a lot in this lecture.
It can be legitimate to put a person's claims into perspective.
Perhaps they have a legitimate conflict of interest.
Perhaps they have been previously convicted of fraud.
Pointing out that somebody who is offering you a too good to be true investment opportunity
has a prior conviction of fraud is not necessarily an attempt to poison the well of their new
claims so much as to put them in a very realistic perspective.
Another logical fallacy is the so-called too coque or you too logical fallacy.
This is an attempt to counter a legitimate criticism by pointing out that one other,
that the other person is also guilty of the same thing.
In other words this may take the form of well my claims may lack evidence but so do the
claims of these other people or so do your claims.
This frequently comes up in the promotion of unscientific or implausible medical modalities,
however they are labeled.
The claim is often made, well this particular medical treatment may lack evidence and plausibility
but mainstream medical treatments often lack evidence and plausibility also.
There's a bit of a false analogy there because the scale is not always the same but even
if it were completely analogous it doesn't matter.
Lacking evidence is lacking evidence regardless of which claim is guilty of that failing.
A very pernicious logical fallacy one that is very common in the promotion of supernatural
