Yet another logical fallacy is confusing currently unexplained with unexplainable.
This often ties into the argument from ignorance.
This assumes that our current knowledge represents the ultimate limits of our knowledge.
This is often combined with anomaly hunting in order to make, as I said, the argument
from ignorance, that therefore whatever pet theory you have or belief you have is therefore
justified because we don't currently know something, therefore it's unknowable.
This is often used also to support supernatural or paranormal beliefs.
If we don't currently understand how something is happening, maybe that's because the explanation
is outside of the natural world, it is supernatural.
For example, we may see a fuzzy image on a photograph, that if you look at it a certain
way, pareidolia kicks in and it looks like it could be a human form or a face, and the
inability to explain that is interpreted as it being unexplained a bull and therefore
it must be supernatural and maybe even specifically a ghost.
History shows us, however, that many of the mysteries of the past are now solved by scientific
inquiry.
It's more practical, in fact, to assume that mysteries can be solved and then look for
a solution.
That assumption that the world is ultimately knowable has been working out quite well.
Rather than to assume that they are unsolvable and then to insert a mystical belief into
the gap.
I'll give you an example of a personal discussion I got into with someone who was claiming that
the earth and the sun, therefore, were only a million or so years old, not the billions
of years old that scientists claim.
He cited the solar neutrino problem as an anomaly that could not be explained, that
was unexplainable.
Essentially, that there aren't as many neutrinos, a certain type of primary particle, coming
from the sun as there should be if the sun were being heated by nuclear fusion of hydrogen
and to helium.
This relative absence of neutrinos was called the solar neutrino problem.
His argument was that, well, that's because the sun's not powered by nuclear fusion, it's
powered by the kinetic energy of the sun collapsing, something which can only sustain the energy
of the sun for millions of years, not billions of years.
However, it was shortly after that that the solar neutrino problem was, in fact, solved
by scientists.
Some neutrinos changed their form on the way to the earth and therefore we were measuring
fewer neutrinos than the previous model had predicted.
This short-term ignorance or problem was rather rapidly solved.
It was not an unsolvable problem.
Another very common logical fallacy is the false dichotomy or false choice.
