might be that, well, here is an example of a Scotsman who is a coward.
However, the original person making the claim might say, well, then he's no true Scotsman.
What he's doing is including the claim in the definition and therefore the premise,
and that becomes a form of circular reasoning without any appeal to outside logic or evidence.
This is also referred to as making a semantic argument.
A false analogy also could be a tricky form of logical fallacy, and this is making a point
by analogy where the things compared are not similar in the ways that are being compared.
This renders the analogy misleading or false.
For example, the evidence for ESP, or telepathy, extra-century perception, is as statistically
robust as the evidence that aspirin prevents strokes and therefore both claims should be
accepted equally.
That's the argument.
However, that's a false analogy because the claim that we have telepathy or ESP is not
as plausible as the claim that aspirin, which has known physiological effects that should
reduce the risk of a vascular event like stroke, in fact does decrease strokes.
Further, while the statistics may be similar, the methods used in the research are completely
different and therefore the meaning of those statistics are different.
Also there are differences in the reproducibility of the research.
The aspirin preventing strokes and heart attacks for that matter is highly reproducible research
while ESP effects have turned out not to be reproducible.
So the analogy between ESP and the preventive effects of aspirin are a false analogy.
There is also the false-false analogy, logical fallacy, meaning that an argument may be dismissed
as a false analogy and a legitimate analogy may be dismissed as false because there are
differences that are ultimately trivial.
Of course, there's always differences between any two things that are compared through analogy,
otherwise they would be exactly the same thing and not simply analogous.
So pointing at incidental or trivial differences as if they invalidate the important or core
feature that is being compared as a way of dismissing the analogy is itself a logical
fallacy.
The genetic fallacy is somewhat, I think, confusingly named because we've forgotten
the, ironically, the semantic roots of the word genetic.
We use that term now to refer to genes or inheritance, but it really does just mean
the history that something has.
The genetic fallacy therefore is assuming the historical use of something, a word for
example, that it must still be relevant to the current use even when in fact it has changed
it.
It has changed.
So for example, the term sunrise, the history of that word comes from the outdated notion
that the sun literally was rising in the sky as opposed to the earth rotating on its axis.
