This results from prematurely or artificially reducing the number of possible outcomes or
possibilities to down to just two, and then making the false choice between those two.
If not A, then the answer must be B, but this ignores that, well, maybe C or D or even
E could be the answer.
Again, to use intelligent design or creationism as an example, often creationists make the
argument that, well, if we didn't evolve, if we can find anomalies or shoot holes in
the current theory of evolution, then we must have been created, as if that is the only
other possibility.
Also, the false dichotomy could be a false choice between two or more non-mutually exclusive
possibilities.
The classic example of this is nature versus nurture.
While it doesn't have to be entirely nature, meaning it's in our genes or entirely nurture,
it's in our environment, the way we were raised, perhaps our personality, our behavior, etc.,
is some combination of both nature and nurture.
This false dichotomy can also reduce a continuum to its extremes, as if you're either very
tall or very short and nothing in between.
For example, I will be talking in more detail about science versus pseudoscience.
Pseudoscience being science that is so bad it doesn't even qualify as legitimate science.
But these are really two ends of a continuum, two ends of a spectrum.
There isn't pristine science on one end and complete pseudoscience on the other.
There is everything in between.
This collapsing a continuum into two extremes also comes up when people try to decide or
define what the difference is between a cult versus a religion.
That difference also lies on a continuum.
A cult and religions may share a lot of features.
There may be religions that have certain cultish aspects and not every cult has every single
feature of a cult.
There is really just a continuum between these two extremes.
This also comes up as another example in the true believer versus con artist.
If somebody is making a claim that is not supported by science or evidence in order
to sell a product, do they really believe their claims?
Are they a true believer?
Or are they completely lying?
Are they simply a slick con artist?
Oftentimes, the reality is somewhere in the middle.
They may be cutting corners on the truth of their claims, but they may also believe in
some aspects of it as well.
There may be a more complicated combination of both of those features.
This logical fallacy relates to the need for simplicity.
