or paranormal beliefs is the argument ad ignorantum or the argument from ignorance using
a lack of evidence or knowledge as if it were a positive argument for a specific conclusion.
A very common form of this would be to say for example that I cannot identify that light
up in the sky, it is by definition an unidentified flying object, therefore it must be an alien
spacecraft.
What the person knows is they can't identify the object.
They make then the argument from ignorance to say that therefore it is something specific
an alien spacecraft rather than simply concluding that well it's therefore unknown.
It is not support for any specific claim that you want to believe.
Intelligent design is in fact one giant argument from ignorance.
Intelligent design is a term that's been around for a couple of decades or so to describe
what is presented as an alternate theory to the theory of organic evolution.
The notion is that life arose on this planet through the work of an intelligent agency,
the intelligent designer.
The arguments that are used in support of intelligent design are that we can't explain
how everything evolved.
Therefore the inability to explain that becomes an argument for this alternate hypothesis.
This strategy is often referred to as the God of the gaps strategy because the intelligent
designer, whether or not you think of that intelligent designer as a God or not, is often
put into the gaps in our current knowledge.
What proponents of intelligent design do not have is any positive evidence for their specific
model of how things occurred.
They simply point to current gaps in our knowledge, not even persistent gaps, just current gaps
in our knowledge in order to say that their process, their hypothesis fills that current
gap.
Conspiracy theories also frequently rely on the argument from ignorance.
The process of supporting a conspiracy theory often takes the form of shooting holes in
the standard explanation of events, shooting holes in the Warren Commission's construction
of the JFK assassination, for example, or shooting holes in the government's version
of what happened on 9-11 and emphasizing what we don't know or those facts that seem anomalous,
that seem out of place, unusual, or apparently to conflict.
That process is often called anomaly hunting, looking for things that don't seem quite
right.
They then go from not understanding the entire sequence of events to arguing for a specific
conspiracy theory, that their specific pet conspiracy theory is the answer to why we
can't explain every little detail of what happened, despite the fact that there is often
a lack of positive evidence specifically for their conspiracy theory.
They're basing it entirely on the argument from ignorance, the inability to explain every
detail of what happened.
