In the last lecture, we covered the structure of argument, including the premises and the
logical connection leading to a conclusion.
In this lecture, we're going to delve further into logical fallacies or invalid logic, sometimes
used innocently, but often as part of motivated reasoning to get to a desired, even if invalid
conclusion.
The first logical fallacy I'm going to discuss in this talk is the ad hominem logical fallacy
or to the person.
This fallacy occurs when you attempt to counter the argument made by someone by focusing on
the person making the argument rather than the argument itself.
This is, in a way, the opposite of the argument from authority, which states that an argument,
the argument from authority states that an argument must be valid because of the positive
attributes of the person making it.
The ad hominem says the argument is rejected because of some negative attributes that that
person has.
As an example, people who may often be accused of being closed-minded for not accepting a
claim uncritically, especially if it's an extraordinary claim.
This is a frequent counter argument to skepticism, but really it is an ad hominem logical fallacy
saying that the objections are not valid or can be dismissed because the person making
them is closed-minded.
They're not open to the possibility that the claim that is being made is true.
This is a non sequitur, a logical fallacy, because it has nothing to do with the objections
themselves.
In fact, being open does not necessarily mean accepting all claims uncritically.
So the accusation of being closed-minded also comes, in my opinion, from a misunderstanding
of what it truly means to be open or closed.
Being open-minded means that you apply the same rules of evidence and logic fairly.
It may still be justified, though, at some point to reject a claim if that claim runs
counter to logic and evidence.
Reaching conclusions doesn't mean that you're closed-minded, it just could mean that you're
fairly applying logic and evidence.
Another example of the ad hominem argument is rejecting the scientific consensus as if
it's arrogant, arrogant to think that we can know anything.
This is often combined with an appeal to elitism, that it is the elite professionals
who are making a specific claim and therefore they can be dismissed because they're not
regular folk.
Or rejecting a claim could be based upon the assumption of conflicts of interest.
Those who disagree with me must be being paid off by some big corporate interest and therefore
I can dismiss their evidence and their scientific studies out of hand because they have this
conflict.
