However, when I say that the sun rose this morning, that doesn't mean that I am supporting
a geocentrist view of the universe.
The historical roots of that word are no longer relevant to its current meaning.
A strawman argument, one that I find is very, very common, is responding to an altered version
of an opponent's argument rather than the actual position that they're taking.
This is used to set up a version of the argument that is easy to knock down, a strawman.
This is, it's important to always understand an opponent's argument.
In fact, when you have a disagreement with somebody, your first order of business should
really be to truly understand where they are coming from, what their premises are, what
their logic is, and what their position actually is.
If you start to address or argue against a position that they don't actually hold,
you will be committing the strawman logical fallacy.
There is also what I call the, or what is called the fallacy, fallacy, which is a very
interesting one, and this is assuming that because an argument for a conclusion is unsound,
that the conclusion must be false.
I pointed out in the previous lecture, in fact, that this is not true.
An argument can be unsound, logic invalid, but the conclusion itself still just happened
to be true.
That argument is no longer an argument for the conclusion, but the conclusion may still
be true.
So your work is not done.
Just by pointing out that an argument is fallacious doesn't mean that you can therefore arrive
at the conclusion that the conclusion is false.
You have to come up with other reasons for concluding that.
Armed with the knowledge of legitimate logic as well as all the various logical fallacies,
the way in which our logic goes awry, I encourage you to go out and play a game I like to call
name that logical fallacy.
When confronted with arguments, try to deconstruct the premises that are being used, the assumptions
that are used, and the logic that is implied by the argument, and to see what is valid
and what is not valid.
But specifically, you need to apply that to your own arguments.
That's somewhat hard to do.
It's really fun to do it to other people's arguments, but you need to apply the same
deconstruction to your own arguments.
The goal of all of this, of course, is to arrive at conclusions which are more reliable
and more likely to be true.
Avoiding logical fallacies, using legitimate logic, and examining your premises is a good
way to do that.
