We tend to also accept information and events that support our beliefs and we interpret
them favorably.
This may be literally interpreting a scientific study.
If the conclusion of the study is something that we agree with, we accept it as a good
solid study.
If the conclusion of the study is something we disagree with, we're going to look much
more carefully at potential flaws in the study to try to find some way to dismiss the conclusion.
We in fact, research shows, expend a great deal of time and effort to do just that.
We tend not to ignore disconfirming data that we notice.
We actually expend a lot of energy to find reasons to rationalize away that data.
Here's an example again from my personal experience.
There are those who believe that in the so-called lunar effect that when the moon is full, that
will affect people's behavior.
People will act a little bit more crazy.
Maybe there will be more crime or emergency rooms will be more busy.
One time I was working in an emergency room when it was a particularly busy night and
a nurse that I was working with looked up and said, wow, this is a crazy busy night.
Is there a full moon out?
It turns out there wasn't a full moon.
She promptly said, oh, and then forgot the event entirely.
It was a non-event.
She didn't notice it.
There wasn't a full moon.
If there were by coincidence a full moon, that would have confirmed her prior belief
in the lunar effect.
That would have been powerful confirmation for her that that belief was correct.
In essence, confirmation bias is also a way of cherry picking data.
We notice, accept, and remember data which confirms our beliefs.
We do not notice or explain away data which doesn't confirm our beliefs.
We underestimate the degree to which there is a vast noisy data set out there in the
world that we are cherry picking from.
We are by noticing things which confirm our beliefs.
We are picking out bits of data from a lot of potential data that's out there.
That's why we need to systematically look through data in order to draw any meaningful
or reliable conclusions about it.
Just going about our everyday lives, we are likely to be influenced powerfully by confirmation
bias.
Yet another example of this bias is the exception that quote unquote proves the rule.
This is actually often a misinterpretation of the phrase.
Proof in this phrase does not mean to actually confirm as is often misinterpreted.
It means to test.
The exception tests the rule.
It doesn't mean that the rule is correct.
But often I hear it used as a way of taking disconfirming evidence as if it confirms the
