It's like confusing a schematic, which is a representative drawing or a diagram of a
complex machine for the actual complexity of the machine itself.
Let's explore a few common examples.
The first heuristic I want to discuss is called anchoring.
We have a tendency to focus or anchor on a prominent feature of an object, a person,
or an event, and then make decisions or judgments based upon that one feature alone.
Again, this is a way of simplifying or oversimplifying the complexity that we're confronted with.
Often, the feature that we anchor on is the first piece of information that we encounter,
especially if it's something that we learned at a very young age.
We tend to persist in those perceptions.
For example, an inexperienced computer purchaser may focus excessively on clock speed.
Their computer is 2.4 megahertz.
Advertisers take advantage of this anchoring by prominently advertising the increasing megahertz
of their product.
However, this is only a single feature, and it is used inappropriately as a measure of
overall computer performance.
Advertisers may focus less specifically on other features like RAM, the design of the
chipset, and the hard drive speed that also have a dramatic effect on computer performance.
They simplify their calculations by anchoring to one feature, one feature that they can
deal with.
There are similar examples in other technologies as well, like buying a digital camera.
The number of options can be dizzying, and therefore, advertisers typically will boil
it all down to megapixels.
How many megapixels is the camera, ignoring other very important features like the quality
and size of the lens or the CCD receptor?
There is also what is called anchoring and adjustment, which is an aspect of the anchoring
heuristic.
We may anchor to numbers and then use the number that we anchor to as a starting point
for later estimations or adjustments.
When exposed to numbers, we do tend to anchor to them, and then that biases our later judgments.
In other words, the first number we encounter tends to bias all of our later thinking on
that subject subconsciously in a way that we're not aware.
A classic example comes from a study by Tversky and Kahneman.
They asked subjects, what percentage of African nations do they believe are members of the
United Nations, the UN?
To one group, they first asked, is it more or less than 10 percent?
Then they asked them to give a specific number.
The average number of the response was 25 percent.
To a second group, they first asked, is it more or less than 60 percent?
Then they were asked to give a specific number, the average of which was 45 percent.
The researchers were able to dramatically affect the estimation that the subjects were
making just by a little bit of suggestion, just by asking a bit of a leading question,
more or less than 10 percent versus more or less than 60 percent.
The subjects were not aware of the fact that they were anchoring on that number that was
