rule that we have an a priority or a preexisting belief in.
While events that seem to confirm the prior belief are taken as evidence, evidence that
disconfirms the prior belief are taken as just the exception that proves the rule rather
than as evidence against the belief itself.
Another example of this is called the toupee fallacy.
This is a classic example of confirmation bias.
Some people believe that, for example, this is just a representative example, they can
always tell when a man is wearing a toupee.
Because when they notice a man wearing a toupee, they take that as confirmation of their ability.
However, they're not accounting for the fact that they don't notice when they don't recognize
a toupee.
That data is completely missing from their data set.
They would have to systematically survey sequentially 100 or 200 or so men and then decide who's
wearing a toupee and who isn't and compare their judgments to some gold standard objective
outcome like asking the men or having them demonstrate whether or not they're wearing
a toupee.
Just by naively taking in the data, confirmation bias will lead us to the false conclusion
that we, for example, can always detect a toupee.
There is also another bias called a congruence bias.
This also can be a very subtle one that can powerfully lead to confirmation bias.
This is the tendency to test our own theories about things, but not to also test alternative
theories.
We tend to avoid this, you know, in order to avoid this rather, we need to conduct observations
that are designed to test multiple hypotheses, not just our own.
Let me give you an example from, again, my own background in medical diagnosis.
I may have the hypothesis based upon previous experience that lack of sleep or a sleep disorder
leads to migraines or significantly increases the frequency of migraines.
Let's say I start asking my migraine patients how their sleep is and I find that many of
my migraine patients have impaired sleep or poor sleep.
I might take this as powerful confirmation that my hypothesis must be true.
However, there's a tendency not to do what I should be doing, which is to also ask people
who don't have migraines whether or not they have poor sleep.
It may turn out that the rate of poor sleep is the same among patients with migraine or
without migraine.
I also might ask my migraine patients if they have other stresses in their life and I may
find that they equally well have other factors that could be contributing to their migraines
in addition to the sleep.
But the tendency to simply test your own hypothesis and take a positive result as confirmation
is a powerful cognitive bias that leads people to firmly hold conclusions which may really
have no statistical basis in reality.
The exposure effect is a form of familiarity bias.
We tend to rate things more highly the more familiar we are with them.
That's why repetition is often used in marketing.
The more you are exposed to a brand, the more familiar with it, the more likely you are
