to purchase it.
This also explains the familiarity effect in early elections.
The front runners are typically those candidates that the public is simply most familiar with.
This can be turned to an advantage, for example, amusement park rides with names that are difficult
to pronounce were judged to be much more risky and adventurous because of a lack of
familiarity.
So the flip side can be used if your intention is to create the impression that something
is risky.
A choice supportive bias is a bias where once we make a decision we then assess that decision
much more favorably.
This is a way of relieving perhaps some of the anxiety or angst over whether or not we
made the right decision.
When we buy something we therefore then have a tendency to rate what we purchased much
more favorably than we did prior to deciding that that's what we were going to purchase.
In essence we're trying to justify a decision that we already made.
This leads to a very interesting effect.
We may also downgrade our assessment of the number two item on our list.
Let's say we were trying to decide among five items to purchase and our choice came down
to our first and second choice and we ultimately decided to go with what became our number one
choice.
We then will justify that decision by increasing our assessment of our first choice and downgrading
our assessment of the second choice.
If this is done experimentally and subjects are then told all right well number one is
no longer available to you what now are you going to take as a replacement.
Many people will skip over their second choice and then take their third choice their prior
third choice as an alternate because they've already invested mental effort in downgrading
their assessment of the number two second choice which lost out to their previous number
one choice.
Another very powerful bias is what psychologists call the fundamental attribution error.
This is an actor observer bias or a tendency to explain the actions of others according
to their personality traits while downplaying situational factors.
However we explain our own behavior with situational factors and downplay personality
traits.
For example if someone trips while walking down the sidewalk if we see someone else do
this we're likely to conclude that's a clumsy person.
If we trip when walking down the sidewalk however we say oh there was a crack in the
sidewalk there was this external factor that led to me tripping.
Racial thinking is yet another bias towards favorable ideas that are emotionally appealing
to us regardless of the logic and evidence this is also called an optimism bias.
This for example motivates people to seek highly implausible even magical treatments
for their ailments even over warnings that such treatments do not work.
Their desire for the treatment to work overwhelms their logic in that case.
We tend to favor the optimistic possibility that the treatment works because we wish it
to.
