The lottery industry is largely based upon this bias.
People know how phenomenally unlikely it is that they'll win but their wishful thinking
becomes determinative in the end in terms of their decision.
I'm going to read for you now a psychic reading this could be an astrological reading or perhaps
a palm reading but I'm going to right now personally to you divine your personality.
Think about how accurately you think this describes you.
You have a great need for other people to like and admire you.
You have a tendency to be critical of yourself.
You have a great deal of unused capacity which you have not turned to your advantage.
While you have some personality weaknesses you are generally able to compensate for them.
Disciplined and self controlled outside you tend to be worrisome and insecure inside.
At times you have serious doubts as to whether you have made the right decision or done the
right thing.
You prefer a certain amount of change and variety and become dissatisfied when hemmed in by
restrictions or limitations.
You pride yourself as an independent thinker and do not accept other statements without
satisfactory proof.
You have found it unwise to be too frank and revealing yourself to others however at times
you are extroverted, affable, sociable while other times you are introverted, wary, reserved.
Some of your aspirations tend to be pretty unrealistic.
Security is one of your major goals in life.
How did I do?
Was that a pretty accurate description of your personality?
Most people rate that very description very highly.
This is known as the Forer Effect after the psychologists who first described it back
in 1948 also called the Barnum Effect.
It reflects a tendency to make judgments about vague or general descriptions and interpret
them as being specifically tailored for us.
Vague statements in fact tend to be rated much more highly accurate than more specific
statements.
Essentially confirmation bias and familiarity heuristics and availability heuristics kick
in.
We look for examples that support the statements that we are being told and when we can find
them, we take that as confirmation that they're accurate.
What I've just described is really the tip of the iceberg.
These are I think the most common and pervasive cognitive biases that plague our thinking
but there are many others.
They do lose much of their power however over our thinking when we're aware of them.
We can step outside of ourselves a little bit and engage in metacognition, thinking
about the process of our own thinking and that loosens the grip that these cognitive
biases have on our thinking.
