presented to them as part of the question.
Anchoring is used widely in negotiation and marketing.
Anything that you can use to manipulate another person's choices or behavior, you will find
that the marketing industry will hit upon that as a way of influencing your purchasing
decisions, for example.
In negotiations, it's common to start with an initial extreme bid in the direction that
you desire, in the hopes that that will anchor future negotiation.
Start high and then when the person brings you down to a lower number, you're still going
to be ultimately higher than if you started with where you ultimately thought you would
end up.
Or marketers may sell products, for example, labeled as three for 1995.
This subtly encourages shoppers to buy three of the item, even though they don't have to.
They could purchase one or two, but they anchor to the three for 1995 because that's what
they're offered.
Anchoring and negotiation and marketing comes up in many other ways as well.
Let me give you a personal example.
I recently bought a car and was told that the value of my trade-in was between $2,000
and $3,000.
This made the ultimate offer of $3,000 for my trade-in seem like the high end of the
range that was being offered and therefore more desirable, when in fact it could have
been a low figure or it could have simply been what the car was worth.
If the salesperson had said that my car was worth $3,000 to $4,000, I probably would have
felt very different about the $3,000 figure, even though it was the exact same figure.
Another heuristic is what is called the availability heuristic.
This one could be very subtle and powerful in its influence over our thinking.
Essentially, what is immediately accessible to us, what we can think of, we assume, must
be important and influential.
We tend to reach for the familiar.
The assumption is that if we can think of an example of something, then that thing must
be common or representative.
It also gives weight to events that are recent, vivid, personal, and emotional.
This concept comes up frequently in medicine and we teach medical students not to fall
prey to the availability heuristic, meaning that we tend to remember our recent patients,
especially recent dramatic cases, and we shouldn't assume that what happened with that patient
is representative of patients with that condition in general.
It is a biased data set.
It just happens to be a recent example.
This is related to anecdotal evidence.
I'm going to cover the notion of anecdotal or personal uncontrolled observations more
in future lectures on science and scientific methods.
Essentially, anecdotes are things that we personally experience in our everyday lives
that are not part of a controlled or experimental condition.
We use them as a method for estimating probability.
For example, if we're trying to estimate, well, how common are allergies to strawberries?
