For example, we will spend $100 that we earned through hard work much more carefully than
we will spend $100 that we found lying on the sidewalk.
This is what psychologists call the found money effect.
If we come by money easily, we feel like we can spend it easily as well.
Another cultural example is the people of Yap who use a very bizarre system of currency.
They use large carved stones, stones that may be 3, 4, 5 feet in diameter or larger.
They are far too heavy to carry around, but this is their currency.
The value of these Yap money stones depends upon the difficulty in obtaining them.
Islanders have to travel to a distant island by canoe, a hostile island.
They have to then fight off the natives of that hostile island, gather their stone and
bring it back in their canoes.
The extreme difficulty in obtaining these rocks is why they are valued as much as they
are.
This system was noticed by Europeans who then tried to import large numbers of rocks that
they easily obtained.
Interestingly, even though these rocks were identical to the much more difficult to obtain
rocks, the Yap people did not value them as highly because they were obtained much too
easily.
I am now going to talk about one of the most pervasive biases in our thinking.
This is a really important one to understand thoroughly, and that is confirmation bias.
There are more strict heuristics, but I am going to move to other types of biases, like
cognitive biases.
Again, I think this is probably the one that has the most pervasive influence on people's
thinking.
Remember the example that I gave at the beginning of this lecture about the toilet seats?
Well, how is that possible?
How is it possible that a husband and a wife, for example, would come to completely different
conclusions about a very factual event, is the man putting the toilet seat down on average
or not?
Well, what happens is that each member of the couple is noticing events that support
their prior beliefs.
They may have argued about it in the past, and the husband takes the stance that I do
put the toilet seat down.
Therefore, every time he remembers to put the seat down, he notices that event.
It becomes data which confirms his belief that he always puts the seat down.
When he forgets to put the seat down, he doesn't register or notice that non-event.
Almost by definition, if he forgot to do it, he probably also forgot to notice.
If he noticed it, he would have then put it down.
The wife, on the other hand, will notice every time the husband doesn't put the toilet seat
down and probably will not notice when he does remember to put it down.
It's a non-event.
They are both falling prey to confirmation bias, which is leading them to opposite conclusions.
But the confirmation bias is more powerful than simply remembering the hits and forgetting
or not noticing the misses.
