Tomorrow, an example from Thomas Gilovich's excellent book, How We Know It Isn't So.
Let's consider a male and female in a couple relationship.
Oftentimes the male firmly believes that he always puts down the toilet seat.
While the female might believe that he never puts down the toilet seat.
Both people are dealing with the exact same set of data, and yet they come to diametrically
opposed and extreme conclusions.
How is this possible?
And chances are both of them are actually wrong.
In this lecture, we're going to talk about cognitive biases, the many ways in which our
thinking is inclined or biased, often in very subtle or subconscious ways.
Whether or not you believe the evolutionary explanations for those biases, psychologists
have documented their existence over countless experiments.
Of course, the worst kind of bias is the one that you're not aware of.
Cognitive biases affect the way we argue, the way we think.
It's like water following the path of least resistance or flowing downhill to a lower
energy state.
This is the way our minds will tend to think unless we make a specific high energy effort
to step out of these processes and think in a more clear and logical manner.
In fact, these biases are often related to logical fallacies.
They lead us into invalid or fallacious thinking rather than into clear and correct formal logical
ways of thinking.
These biases are numerous, they're pervasive, and they can have a very powerful influence
on how we think.
The term heuristics is applied to one type of cognitive bias.
A heuristic is a rule of thumb that we subconsciously apply, a mental shortcut if you will.
The conclusions that we arrive at through these heuristic methods may be correct much
of the time.
A little bit of accuracy has been sacrificed for the efficiency of decision making.
We often think of these heuristics as simple common sense, but they are not strictly logically
correct which means some of the time they can lead us to incorrect conclusions.
You can also think of them as rules for making decisions or making judgments or even for
solving problems.
They may be practical like the trial and error approach is a common heuristic.
However, in our complex modern world, heuristics of which we are not aware can lead us astray.
When we use that to deal with probability, I will leave for a later lecture on enumeracy.
In psychology, the man credited with developing the concept of heuristics is Herbert Simon.
Much of the developmental work, however, was done by Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman.
Kahneman, along with another psychologist, Shane Frederick, theorized that heuristics
are a way of substituting a simple computational problem for a more complex one without being
aware that we're doing this.
It's a way of simplifying a very complex world, simplifying a very complicated decision-making
process.
Again, this could be very practical and very useful as long as we're aware that it's
first approximation of the truth and not strictly true.
