Once we have committed to a decision, we tend to stick to that commitment.
We feel like we have invested in it and therefore that biases all later judgments about that
commitment.
We're overly influenced by what we have already committed to even if further commitment is
a losing proposition.
This includes money, time or other resources that we might invest.
Even lives of soldiers in a war.
The saying do not throw good money after bad is a recognition that there is a tendency
to do just that, to escalate our commitment once we have already gone in a certain direction.
The representative, the representativeness heuristic is the assumption that causes typically
resemble effects.
There really isn't any specific logical or scientific reason to believe this, but this
is definitely a bias in our thinking.
Emotionally charged effects, for example, we assume must have emotionally charged cause.
The assassination of John F. Kennedy is one example.
This was a big world changing event.
Many people felt that it must have an equally big cause.
It seemed incongruous.
It just didn't make sense.
It didn't feel right that the so-called lone nut hypothesis or theory could be true.
Could it really be that one deranged man acting on his own caused something so momentous?
Just doesn't feel right.
This needs to a number of other fallacies as well, such as a failure to consider the
base rate, which we'll discuss in a further lecture.
The representativeness heuristic also leads to magical thinking.
This is the source of the belief in what is known as sympathetic magic.
Some cultures have beliefs that are, in essence, what we call sympathetic magic, that items
that resemble something will have an effect that relates to that thing.
For example, many cultures believe that an item like the horn of a rhinoceros, something
that resembles the erect male penis, can be used to promote virility.
The basis of that claim is based upon this notion of sympathetic magic, of the representativeness
heuristic.
Homeopathy is also based largely on sympathetic magic.
The homeopathic law of like cures like that something has an essence which can be used
in order to treat something similar to it, for example, a substance which causes symptoms
can be used to treat those same symptoms because it's affecting the essence of that thing.
It also derives from this representativeness type of thinking.
The effort heuristic, this is similar to the escalating investment heuristic, tells us
that we value items more if they require greater effort to obtain.
Again, this is a good example, I think, of how this is a mental shortcut.
It's likely to be true in some cases that the more difficult it is to obtain something,
the more rare it is and the more valuable it is.
However, this is not necessarily strictly, logically true.
We may obtain something easily which happens to be highly available.
