The approach that we will tend to take is to see if we can think of examples of people
who have allergies to strawberries.
Well, my cousin Vinnie has an allergy to strawberries, therefore we conclude, using
the availability heuristic, that strawberry allergies must be common.
We don't appreciate the fact, naively, that this is anecdotal.
It just happens to be that I have a cousin with a strawberry allergy.
This doesn't mean that they're common.
They could be very uncommon and it could be just a minor coincidence that I happen to
know somebody with a strawberry allergy.
But we have this innate tendency to be very compelled by our personal experience as opposed
to abstract statistical numbers, reviewing data about 1,000 random people in the culture
to see how many have strawberry allergies would be a much better approach.
But we tend to follow the availability heuristic because it speaks to us more emotionally.
This has implications for the effects of the media on how we think and believe about things.
If the media shows stories of disasters and crimes over and over again, we will tend to
think that they are more common, even if they are showing rare events.
This has huge implications for viewers watching news outlets, for example, that have particular
biases.
Research has also showed, for example, that this has an actual effect, that news outlets
covering disasters tends to cause people to overestimate the frequency of those disasters
or those events.
Similarly, research shows that people who watch soap operas, for example, tend to overestimate
and have much higher estimates of things like the percentage of the population that are
doctors or lawyers because those professions are very commonly depicted in soap operas.
Another example of a common heuristic that we fall prey to is that of exemplars.
Those are cases that represent a phenomenon and are vivid and dramatic examples.
And they tend to have a greater influence on our judgments than statistical information
about the base rate, the statistical rate at which things occur.
This is a reflection of the availability heuristic.
It also reflects our storytelling bias.
We are social creatures programmed to respond to stories, especially emotional stories.
This is why marketers, whether for selling a product or influencing your voting decisions,
for example, will use a dramatic story to make a point rather than just giving you dry statistical
information.
A classic example from a presidential election from a couple decades ago is the Willie Horton
example.
Willie Horton was presented as an example of a criminal who was convicted and put in
prison and then who was let out of prison on furlough who then committed a crime while
on furlough.
Willie Horton was prominently displayed in commercials in order to criticize the candidate
who allowed Willie Horton out on furlough.
This however was a very emotional and exemplar type of approach that did not really give
a fair consideration of the statistical data on how likely such things are to occur.
Another heuristic is the escalation of commitment.
