He should have been asking, what's the probability of any individual having any two rare diseases?
It is, of course, much higher.
It's so much higher that it should happen on a regular basis.
And of course, those patients will likely present to physicians for treatment having
two diseases.
And therefore, doctors should see on a regular basis patients who individually may have an
extremely rare condition or set of conditions.
This all plays into confirmation bias.
Again, as I said previously, confirmation bias, which will come up again and again in
this course, is a powerful influence on our thinking.
Because we can think of, or perhaps we have personally experienced, events that support
our beliefs, we take that as confirmation that those beliefs are correct.
But that's because we are mining a vast set of personal experiences, a vast set of data
for just those bits of data that appear to confirm beliefs that we have.
This is also part of what I have described as the availability heuristic, because examples
of something are easily available to us, we assume we feel as if that phenomenon must
therefore be commonplace or representative, when in fact it could just be the quirkiness
of our own individual experience.
We therefore underestimate the probability of events occurring at random.
Let me give you a common example that comes up frequently, especially with things like
alleged psychics.
Magicians understand that cold reading is a technique.
It's a technique that you can use, you can learn.
It can even be used unconsciously.
Regardless of the mechanism that a psychic and alleged psychic uses, whether it's tarot
card reading or an astrological reading or palmistry, the underlying technique that they're
using is called cold reading, or at least it's indistinguishable from a cold reading.
This also counts heavily on confirmation bias.
The psychic will throw out a lot of statements and they count on the subject remembering
all the apparent hits and then forgetting all of the misses, but also the subject or
the client will search for connections that seem to confirm the psychic's guesses, and
then they will take that as confirmation.
All the hard work in a cold reading is really being done by the subject.
They're the ones who are searching their vast memories of all the things that involve their
lives and looking for connections to what the alleged psychic is saying.
The person doing the reading is actually not doing the hard work.
Of course, we can test this hypothesis by systematically evaluating the statements made
by alleged psychics to see if they do have quote-unquote hits more often than we would
expect from just educated guessing.
