for a while, but then will tend to come back to an average outcome.
Or if you think of the bell curve, a distribution curve of probable events where most average
events cluster in the middle and then to either side, there are progressively less likely
and less frequent events.
We can, for example, use the performance of a professional sports star.
Let's say, for example, a baseball star and their ability to get hits.
They may have an exceptional season.
They may, just at random alone, perform to one side of the bell curve.
Whenever that happens, whenever we have a statistical effect that deviates from a statistically
average effect, it is likely that that will be followed by a more average effect.
It will regress to the mean.
This is just random chance alone.
That's because two statistically unlikely events are unlikely to occur in a row.
Therefore players doing statistically above their average are likely to regress to their
average performance.
However, this doesn't feel like the answer to us.
So we invent all kinds of magical thinking to explain this illusory effect of just randomness.
For example, there is something called the sports illustrated curse.
After a player gets on the cover of sports illustrated for having an above average performance
year, they will then falter.
They will then have a bad year following the year they had that got them on the cover.
But regression to the mean alone explains that occurrence.
We don't need to hypothesize that the player got cocky or sloppy, or perhaps they were
distracted by all the media attention.
Having an above average year, you're almost guaranteed by regression to the mean in order
to have a more average year following that.
Knowledge of mathematics and probability are critical for making sense of the world.
In many ways, we live in a mathematical universe.
It is the language of explaining how things work.
But we have to simultaneously recognize how terrible we are at doing so naively.
We did not evolve to have a really highly developed sense of mathematics.
The solution to this weakness, however, is two-fold.
The first is metacognition, understanding the flaws in our natural cognitive tendencies
and then substituting formal mathematical analysis for our naive senses.
We will see this pattern again and again in this critical thinking course.
We see and recognize the cognitive flaws in our naive brain processes, and then we substitute
a formal process of logic or analysis in its place, liberating us from those very flaws.
