How many times have you heard or said, what are the odds?
As a reaction to a seemingly unlikely event.
We then search for an explanation, some meaning to those events, because randomness or just
dumb luck doesn't seem to cut it.
This may even lead to a belief that numbers themselves hold some mystical meaning, a belief
called numerology.
The fact is that humans are terrible at probability.
Our brains are very good at certain tasks like pattern recognition and many other things,
but we have a horrible sense, innate sense of probability.
We especially have difficulty dealing with large numbers.
We appear to have evolved an intuitive sense of small numbers, up to four, five or six
or so, but can only deal with large numbers in the abstract language of mathematics.
This enumeracy, as it has been called, leads to a number of probability-based cognitive
biases.
For example, the sense of coincidence.
When two events seem to coincide with each other, we tend to notice this.
That is part of confirmation bias, another bias I discussed in a previous lecture.
We see this coincidence as highly improbable.
This has led some people to speculate that there are no coincidences, that everything
happens for a reason.
This is part of another cognitive bias, the meaning bias, the need for the world to make
sense or have some meaning.
This naive assessment, however, ignores all the misses, all the many events that happen
in our lives that do not line up.
We experience, hear, see, dream, thousands of things every day.
By random chance alone, events should appear to line up occasionally.
You dream of a friend you haven't seen in ten years and they call the next day.
In isolation, it seems amazing, but if there were never any such coincidences, that would
be unusual and that would demand some explanation.
The law of large numbers makes coincidences like that inevitable.
Also, that belief in coincidences neglects the fact that there are many people in the
world.
For example, in a city with one million people, a million to one coincidence should happen
to someone every day.
Such stories are likely to propagate as they are compelling.
They seem to hint at a deeper meaning to reality.
So they spread and you're likely to hear stories of really improbable coincidences
occurring.
This is also an example of what we call the lottery fallacy, which I mentioned in a previous
