And since there are so many potential coincidences that could happen, the answer is, over time
it is certain that very low probability coincidence, like the Shakespeare one I just described,
will happen on a regular basis.
Early Psi research, or extra-century perception research, also fell prey to inadvertent data
mining.
And this kind of thing can crop up even in very legitimate and well-meaning research.
It is something that researchers need to learn how to specifically avoid.
There was a practice called optional starting and stopping.
Again, this was a naive method of data mining.
It occurred because ESP researchers who were testing subjects to see if they could predict
what a target subject was looking at, typically these used the Zener cards, remember the
cards with, for example, a star, wavy lines, a square circle, et cetera, on it.
And then a target subject would look at a card and concentrate while the subject who
was being studied for their psychic ability would try to guess that card.
When the researchers looked through the data, they found that there were strings of excess
hits where the subject guessed greater than chance the card that the target was looking
at.
Now they hypothesized that, well, maybe psychic ability needs a warm-up period.
And then maybe further, the psychic ability will tire out.
So after a while, the researcher, the alleged psychic who was being tested, their ability
would wear off or would turn off.
So this is what led to optional starting and stopping.
They would look for a string of hits in the series of data.
They would discard everything before that as the warm-up period.
They would discard the data after that as the ability wearing off.
And they would just count the string of excess positives.
But this was a way of mining a larger data set for a random cluster of hits.
If you look at the entire data set, there is no excess of hits.
If there really were a string of psychic guesses in the middle of random guessing, there would
still be an excess of hits to misses greater than probability alone.
But there wasn't.
And that pretty much killed the hypothesis of optional starting and stopping.
Again, it is a very telling historical example of using data mining in bad research.
Notre-Dame is another classic example of retrofitting, of looking after the fact for some kind of
pattern recognition as a way of mining inadvertently a large data set.
Nostradamus was famous for his quatrains, most of which are vague poetic predictions.
These have come from the first century.
Here is an example of one.
A coffin is put into the vault of iron, where seven children of the king are held.
