For example, what are the odds of this connection, not what are the odds of any connection?
This may crop up innocently, a doctor seeing patients who happen to have a similar pattern
of exposure and ailments, for example, may think that he has hit upon some risk in the
environment.
Hey, I've seen three patients in the last month who have this disease and all who had
a similar exposure.
They then ask the question, what are the odds of that happening by coincidence alone?
Rather than asking the question, what are the odds of me seeing any cluster of symptoms
at some point in time by chance alone?
Apparent patterns seen with data mining need to be confirmed with independent data sets.
So that doctor seeing that cluster of patients with the same ailments shouldn't ignore that
anecdotal evidence, but he should use it only as a method of generating a hypothesis.
Perhaps this is a real pattern.
All he could really say is that there is an apparent pattern here and recognize that
apparent patterns are going to crop up all the time by random clustering alone.
Then he then has to ask, well, if this is a real pattern, we should see it in an independent
data set.
The hypothesis then needs to be tested in a more rigorous or systematic way.
A fun example of this pattern searching through large sets of data or a data mining exercise
is a book that was published called The Bible Code.
What the authors did was look for hidden codes in the Bible, although you could do this with
any large book, any book really, by stringing together disconnected letters.
They used a computer algorithm to look for patterns of letters spaced out in the Bible.
And then they were amazed to find phrases appear that these disconnected letters could
be put together in a pattern, a pattern of words and phrases that they then further pattern
matched to events in world history.
Now this practice underestimates the probability that some pattern would be found by random
chance alone.
It also grossly underestimates the human ability to find meaningful patterns in randomness.
For example, these random phrases were then matched to all of world history, and of course
you can find something that will seem to fit.
But again, our intuition is once we seem to see the fit, it seems very compelling to us.
Here's a funny example of just this.
Some 46th of the King James Bible published in the 46th year of William Shakespeare's
life.
The 46th word is shake, and the 46th word from the end is spear.
What are the odds of that occurring?
Well, of course, it's vanishingly small.
But we really have to ask what are the odds of some weird coincidence happening?
