Players are confident, and that confidence makes them perform better.
Of course, when they miss, that's because they were overconfident.
When they're missing, then they get shaken.
They are now, their confidence is down, and therefore they're more likely to make a mistake.
However, you can use the opposite reasoning.
When they've missed a few baskets in a row, you might say, well, they're due.
They're due to make a basket.
Or when they've made a few baskets in a row, they're due to miss one.
We can use this contradictory reasoning to explain anything that happens, but our intuition
is to apply some meaning to what is statistically proven to be a random sequence of events.
This crops up frequently in gambling as well.
Gambling is, in fact, a giant exercise in probability.
Those count on the fact that people are terrible at probability.
There is, in fact, a fallacy called the gambler's fallacy.
If you just flipped a fair coin heads 10 times in a row, what is the chance of flipping heads
on the next toss?
Our intuition often tells us, well, it's probably less than 50-50.
If you just flipped heads 10 times in a row, then tails is due.
Or you may ultimately think that, well, you're on a streak of heads, so the chances increased.
Again, you could easily use mutually contradictory reasoning to explain any outcome.
However, the answer is 50%.
If it's a fair coin, there's a 50% chance of heads and a 50% chance of tails on any flip.
The gambler's fallacy is in not recognizing the fact that each coin flip is a completely
independent event.
What has happened previously therefore does not have any influence on the future events.
In fact, again, assuming the premise that it's a fair coin and a fair flip, thinking
that what has occurred previously affects future flips is akin to magical thinking.
But gamblers, just like sports fans and players, engage in a lot of superstitious magical thinking
in order to gain some sense of control over the randomness of events.
We tend to think that we are on a streak of heads.
Again, this streak is a consequence of assuming that events are connected.
Or we may think, again, that tails are due.
These are mutually exclusive or contradictory.
But it gives us the ability to assign an explanation to any possible outcome.
Another statistical effect that, when we're not aware of it, can bias our thinking or
cause us to invent an explanation for an event that is a statistical event is called regression
to the mean.
What this means is that in what we call the drunken walk of randomness, a random walk
like a drunkard will lurch at random to the left or to the right, they may go to the left
