When you do that, it turns out that they have many, many more misses and far more misses
than the subjects remember.
After a reading, the subjects do tend to remember the hits and vastly overestimate the accuracy
of the reading, but when it's recorded and counted, there are many more misses than
hits.
Further, we underestimate how high probability some guesses are.
This gets back to the forer effect I also described in a previous lecture where we tend
to take vague statements and then apply them in detail or directly to something about our
lives or our connections.
How many people know a woman whose first name begins with the letter M?
This may sound like a specific statement, but it's actually a very high probability guess
or a date that has the number three in it.
Sometimes a psychic, while doing a cold reading, will throw out the number three.
If they don't initially get a hit, they'll say it could be the day of the month or it
could be a number in the month.
They will expand it until some connection is made.
This is a technique identical to the one used by mentalists or stage magicians who do the
same thing for entertainment.
Or they might throw, as another example, the statement out that there is something to
do with water or I see a red door or a person in uniform.
Again, it seems specific, a person in uniform, but actually if you think of all the number
of different kinds of uniforms, everyone is likely to know somebody who has a connection
to some kind of uniform.
Let me talk also now about anecdotes.
These are essentially uncontrolled observations and scientists use the term anecdote in a
deliberately pejorative way to mean that, well, this is very dubious form of evidence
because the variables are not controlled and the observations are not systematic in any
way.
The reason why that is a problem is because anecdotes are a way of subconscious data mining,
again, subject to confirmation bias and memory effects and other cognitive biases as well.
We are not aware of the fact, like with coincidences, that we are mentally searching through large
amounts of data from our everyday lives looking for patterns.
Therefore, seeing a pattern should not be surprising.
We should expect, in fact, to see patterns all the time.
Humans are excessively good at doing just that.
So our anecdotes are a way of remembering hits and forgetting misses and seeing patterns
in a vast, perhaps, unappreciated set of data.
Sometimes bad research will use data mining techniques deliberately.
They make a what are the odds lottery type fallacy.
