The ancestors and forebears will come forth from the depths of hell, lamenting to see
thus dead the fruit of their line.
Now that sounds very poetic.
It may sound very profound.
And if you search through all human history to look for a connection, you may be able
to find matches to some of the phrases that are said.
But the problem with Nostradamus' predictions is that they predict too much.
You could look at any segment of world history and find some events that seemed to match
what he was saying.
However Nostradamus made his predictions specific by mentioning specific names, locations,
or dates, his predictions failed miserably.
People can only find matches after the fact, so-called retro-dicting.
And as we will see in science in general, being able to explain things after the fact
is not a good predictor of a correct theory.
You have to be able to predict things in the future, and that's something that no
one has been able to do with Nostradamus' predictions.
Let me turn now to the topic of randomness, which I've brought up already in this talk.
So quick, think of a random string of 10 digits from 0 to 9.
Got it?
Chances are the string is not random.
We have such a poor intuitive sense of randomness that we are incapable of even generating
a mathematically random set of numbers.
We tend, for example, to alternate numbers more often than a random string would.
We avoid lumping or clustering numbers together because clusters of numbers don't look random
to us.
Again, our naive intuition about randomness is different than true mathematical randomness.
Let's take the night sky, for example.
The stars in the night sky are fairly randomly distributed.
They're not evenly distributed, and even distribution of stars would make it look like a grid pattern.
And we probably would recognize that as not being truly random.
The point is that the stars in the sky tend to cluster.
They cluster in a way that a random pattern does.
Further, we recognize patterns in that those random clustering of stars.
We call them constellations.
Every culture has recognized constellations in the night sky and assigned patterns meaningful
to their culture, to their time in history, to those patterns.
This is what mathematicians call the clustering illusion.
We have a poor naive sense of the degree to which randomness clusters.
To give another example, diseases tend to cluster.
