They're not evenly distributed throughout society.
They're randomly distributed.
The Center for Disease Control and other organizations whose job it is to track diseases like cancer,
for example, will find that there are clusters that crop up from time to time.
After investigation, they determine that most such reported clusters are statistical
flukes, not a real effect.
It is simply the clustering effect of randomness.
But people who experience the cluster have a strong belief, a powerful belief that they
must be real.
If you have an uncommon disease and your next door neighbor gets the same uncommon disease,
like leukemia, for example, it's very difficult to shake the sense that that can't be a coincidence.
Something must be going on.
That is, we are hardwired to feel that, that that must be the case.
But only objective, thorough, rigorous, systematic analysis can really tell you if this is just
a random cluster or a real effect out there in the world.
Let me give you a more common example that from sports.
Many people watch sports or play sports, and we develop a lot of statistically based biases
and false assumptions based upon that.
There is, for example, a belief in the hot hands effect.
In basketball, for example, we believe that when a shooter, a basketball shooter is doing
well, he's made a few baskets, that he's on a streak.
He is more likely to make more baskets.
However, when statistically analyzed, there's a clear answer to this, and that answer is
no.
There is no real effect of hot hands.
Shooting streaks in professional basketball tend to follow a random pattern.
If players had hot and cold streaks, real hot and cold streaks, and effect other than
randomness, there would be more and longer streaks than is predicted by randomness alone.
But when large sets of data are looked at rigorously, we find that there just isn't
these longer streaks.
The amount of streakiness that we see in making and missing baskets is exactly what we would
predict by randomness alone.
Yet the belief in the hot hands effect among players and fans is very hard to shake.
I've had this experience myself, where I've tried very emphatically to explain to a basketball
fan that there is no hot hands effect.
Even when they eventually understand the statistics, they cannot bring themselves to believe that
there is no effect there.
Something must be going on, and they also fall prey to the availability heuristic and
that they can easily reach for explanations for the effect.
