lecture.
We tend to ask the wrong questions.
What are the odds of John Smith winning the lottery?
Well, it's hundreds of millions to one against.
So when John Smith wins, we might think that it couldn't have happened by chance alone.
However, the real question is, what are the odds of anyone winning the lottery?
Well, it turns out it's pretty good.
Someone wins a particular lottery every few weeks.
It's a statistical certainty that eventually someone will win.
This also relates to the law of large numbers.
We are bad at intuitively understanding the probability of very large numbers.
What are the odds of someone winning the lottery twice?
This seems vanishingly small.
It's hundreds of millions to one against squared.
But when we consider all people playing all lotteries, the probability is actually quite
good.
And this, in fact, happens on a regular basis.
For example, Valerie Wilson, who works at a Long Island deli or used to, said she won
another $1 million on a lottery scratch-off game just recently.
The first time, I couldn't believe it, she told Newsday.
This time, she said, God's on my side.
She felt compelled to look for a deeper meaning to the fact that she personally won the lottery
twice.
And it was difficult for her to intuitively understand that this is something that can
happen by chance alone.
In fact, statisticians Stephen Samuels and George McCabe of Purdue University calculated
the odds of anyone winning any US lottery twice to be something like 1 in 30 for just
a four-month period and better than even odds over a seven-year period.
And this matches the number of times that it, in fact, happens that someone wins the
lottery twice or more than once.
This comes up in other contexts as well.
This is more than just about playing the lottery.
For example, what are the odds of a patient having two rare diseases?
A resident I was instructing recently expressed disbelief that a patient that we were treating
together could have two very rare diseases.
He calculated the odds of a specific patient having those two specific rare diseases as
very low, millions to one against based upon the incidence of those two diseases.
But he was asking the wrong question.
He was committing the lottery fallacy.
