simply enough overestimation. We also overestimate our relative ability or worth compared to others.
This psychologists call over placement. This is the classic sense that in this town,
everyone is above average. Also, there is what psychologists call overprecision. So we
overestimate our own ability, absolutely. We overestimate our own ability in relation to
other people. And we overestimate the accuracy of our own knowledge. In one study, researchers
asked subjects to give a range of answers to a question so that they were 90% likely to be correct.
If their calibration, if you will, was correct, meaning that they gave a range that actually was
90% likely to contain the correct answer, then 90% of their answers should have been correct.
However, on average, people score only about 50%. Interestingly, I took a short version of this
test myself just to see how I would do, and I scored 20%. So I'm not sure what that says about
my confidence level. The overconfidence effect relates to our need for esteem that we discussed
in lecture two. It seems to be universal. This is a universal human trait, the tendency to be very
kind to ourselves and to overestimate our own abilities. However, researchers have found very
persistent cultural and also gender differences as well. For example, Chinese subjects tend to
significantly overestimate their own abilities greater than subjects from Japan or the United
States. The research hasn't clearly delineated exactly why this is the case. This is one of those
situations where there are so many variables, it's hard to control for them all. So we don't know what
the reason for that is, in other words. But that signal is persistently there. There's no question
that confidence varies by culture. So it's not just something that is genetically inborn. There
is a certain amount of cultural programming going on as well. Let's turn our attention now to
probability puzzles. This is a good way to demonstrate our inherent lack of intuition about
probability. Here's an example. How many people would you need to have in a room together in
order to have a greater than 50% chance that two of them share a birthday? Think of an answer in your
own head. Well, the real answer is only 23. But this is much lower than what we naively might
guess. Most people guess that the number is much higher. Similarly, what are the odds or how many
people would you need to have in a room together for there to be a 97% chance that two of them share
