other. When a player loses all of their available money, that's an absorption wall. They have to
stop gambling. However, when they're winning, there is no point at which the casino goes broke
and they have to stop gambling. They're always free to continue to gamble until inevitably they
regress back to the mean and they lose their winnings. Another statistically-based cognitive
bias is what statisticians call base rate neglect. This was first described in classic
experiments by Kahneman and Tversky in 1973. You might remember them from a previous lecture.
They did a lot of work describing what we call heuristics or modes of thought that we tend to
fall into. Here's an example from this specific study that they did. The subjects of the study
are given the following description. Tom W. is of high intelligence, although lacking in true
creativity. He has a need for order and clarity and for neat and tidy systems in which every detail
finds its appropriate place. His writing is rather dull and mechanical, occasionally enlivened by
somewhat corny puns and by flashes of imagination of the sci-fi type. He has a strong drive for
competence. He seems to feel little sympathy for other people and does not enjoy interacting with
others. He is self-centered. He nonetheless has a deep moral sense. Now, is it more likely that
Tom's major is a business administration, computer science, engineering, humanities education, law,
library science, medicine, physical life sciences, or social science, social work? This is the
question put to the subjects. Most people said that it is most likely that Tom's major is engineering.
This is because of the representative heuristic. Tom's personality profile is representative of
what we typically think of as an engineer. However, saying that it's statistically more likely that
Tom is an engineer ignores the base rate. How many students have each major? A far better approach
than the naive representativeness approach that I just described would be to take what's called a
Bayesian approach. The Bayesian approach starts with the prior probability, the base rate. In this
example, 1% of all of the students are engineering majors. It then adjusts that probability based
upon new information, like the personality profile that was provided. The probability then may get
it may get adjusted upwards. For example, if the base rate of all students is being engineers is 1%,
then we say, but Tom has a personality profile that's typical of engineers. Maybe that increases the
