tend to increase our bets over time as we win. This is because we have the sense that now we're
not playing with our own money, we're playing with the house's money that we just won. Our risk
aversion therefore goes down and we increase the size of our bets. However, the odds have not
changed. The gambling results are still what we call a drunker's walk of randomness. You're still
just as likely to lose these higher bets as you were the previous bets that you were making. This
comes from the tendency to link previous events with future events as if there is some connection,
even when they are completely statistically independent events. Related to the house money
effect is the break-even effect. After losing, we also tend to increase our bets in order to win
back our losses. We would rather break even than end a night of gambling in the red having lost. We
are more averse to losing than we are to taking a further risk, strangely enough. In both cases,
however, the house money effect and the break-even effect, interestingly, we tend to increase our
bets over time, chasing what has happened previously, even though the odds are completely still
independent. I used the term the drunkard's walk and that is a statistical term to explain a random
event, a random binary event, winning or losing or a drunkard lurching to the left or lurching to
the right. When gambling over a course of time, you will win sometimes and lose sometimes. Again,
if the house isn't cheating, this will be a random event. There is usually a small statistical
advantage to the house, but even if we put that aside and ignore that, essentially, winning and
losing will occur in a random pattern. There will be streaks, therefore, clustering of wins and
clustering of losses and for a time you will be up and then eventually it's statistically certain
that your quote-unquote luck will turn and you will start to regress towards the statistical mean.
However, when the player is winning, they are free to keep playing until they start losing. However,
when they are losing, there is no point at which the house is forced to stop. In other words,
when a player is losing, they can't keep playing indefinitely. At some point, they're going to
run out of money. In fact, even if there were no statistical advantage to the house, if the odds
of winning or losing against the house were always exactly 50-50, casinos would still rake in lots
of money. That's because there is what statisticians call an absorption wall at one end, but not the
