negative. Let's now say that John tests positive for disease A. What is the probability that he
actually has disease A? Our naive sense might be that it's 99% because that's the accuracy of the
test, but that is not the answer. The answer depends on the base rate, the base rate of disease A.
Again, there is a tendency to fail to consider the base rate when thinking about probability or
statistics. Let's say, for example, that one person in 1,000 has disease A. Then 10 people per
thousand will test false positive with test X. A 1% false positive rate over 1,000 people means
that there will be 10 false positives in 1,000 people, and there will be 0.99 people who will test
true positive. One person with the disease in the 1,000 plus a 1% false negative rate, 1% of
one person is 0.01. There will therefore be about 10 false positives for every true positive. Therefore,
if John tests positive, there is a 1 in 11 or only about a 9.09% chance that he is true positive.
But again, that's not our naive sense. There's a greater than 90% chance that John does not have
a disease he tests positive for, even with a highly accurate test that only has a 1% false
negative and a 1% false positive. This has huge implications for screening programs.
In the general population, the false positive count may vastly exceed the true positive count,
depending on the base rate of the disease. This can lead to follow-up tests, which may be more
invasive and more risky than the screening test that is being recommended. It may cause more harm
from unnecessary tests and treatments than it actually is beneficial from early detection.
This seems counter-intuitive. How could a screening program that gives us more information
that detects disease early? How could this actually hurt people? But this comes up all the time.
When the base rate is low enough, the false positive rate can vastly outnumber the true
positive rate, leading to unintended consequences of complications and side effects from further
testing and interventions that result from those false positive tests. So when designing a screening
program, you always have to consider the base rate. There are other biases in estimating probability.
For example, we tend to be favorable to ourselves. This gets back to the need for self-esteem that
I described in an earlier lecture. We like to think positively about ourselves and to present
ourselves positively to others. We therefore tend to overestimate our own ability. This is called
