probability to 3%, 4%, or 5%, but that still makes it very unlikely statistically that Tom is an
engineer, just because statistically the base rate of engineering students is much lower than the
other majors. Another classic experiment by Tversky and Kahneman went as follows. Again, subjects
were given the following description. Linda is 31 years old, single, outspoken, and very bright. She
majored in philosophy as a student. She was deeply concerned with issues of discrimination and social
justice and also participated in anti-nuclear demonstrations. Now, what do you think is more
probable that Linda is a bank teller or that Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist
movement? Well, our naive sense is that Linda's personality profile is representative or typical
for somebody who might be involved in such a movement. Therefore, we commit what's called the
conjunction fallacy. The probability of A must be greater than the probability of A and B. When
stated in that way as a mathematical equation or expression, it seems obvious. A of A alone has to
be greater than A plus B. However, your gut instinct leads us to the wrong conclusion. We
conclude that Linda must be B because she's representative of us. That sense overwhelms the
mathematics of this inclusion in one or both groups. Related to this is the disjunction
fallacy. Let's say that Mary is into crystals, new age beliefs, and spiritualism. What is greater,
the probability of being either a tarot card reader or an accountant or just the probability of
being a tarot card reader? The probability of A or B has to be greater than the probability of A
alone or B alone. Again, when expressed as a mathematical equation, it seems obvious. However,
we tend to make naively the wrong conclusion. The Mary's personality description is representative
of somebody who might be a tarot card reader. Therefore, our sense is that that probability is
greater. Probability also comes up frequently in diagnosis. In fact, in medical school, most
physicians will learn about formal statistics about how to think about probability as it relates to
disease. That's extremely important because our naive sense of probability would lead us astray.
Let's take, for example, test X for disease A. Let's say that it has a false positive rate of
1% and a false negative rate of 1%. That sounds very good. Therefore, in the affected population,
99% of people will test positive, and in the unaffected population, 99% of people will test
