community, a city, a region, even the world with any multi-level marketing program.
It's also very easy to lie with statistics, to use the public's naive sense of statistics in
order to create an impression that is misleading. A very common one that crops up with medical issues
is the difference between relative risk and absolute risk. Let's say one person in 10,000
gets disease A and an environmental risk factor increases that to two in 10,000. The relative
risk is 100% or double. You may therefore read newspaper headlines that reveal that this environmental
exposure doubles the risk of developing this disease or 100% increase in the risk of developing
this disease. It sounds dramatic. However, the absolute risk only increases to two out of 10,000
or 0.02%. Reading a headline that says 0.02% increase in the risk of developing this disease
wouldn't have nearly as much of an impact as 100% increase of the risk of getting the disease.
The relative risk can be used to exaggerate effects, therefore, the effects of both risk factors
and of treatments. And if it's not made clear exactly what type of risk you're dealing with,
it could be extremely misleading. Another common statistical type of fallacy is what's
called the sharpshooter fallacy. It is using the name derived from an analogy to shooting a gun
at the broad side of a barn and then going up and drawing a target around the hole and claiming
that you got a perfect bullseye. Of course, it's easy to do that when you draw the target after
you know where the bullet hits. Again, that's a good analogy because it seems obvious, almost absurd,
but it's amazing how often that exact kind of behavior occurs but just hidden in more subtle
ways. This relates to choosing criteria or interpreting the significance of those criteria
after the fact, after you know what the outcome is. This is also called post hoc analysis.
This relates further to what I described previously as our really developed ability to
mine data for patterns. We look for patterns, we're really good at making connections.
For example, one fun example is the connections between the assassination of Lincoln and John F.
Kennedy. There are researchers who found all sorts of apparent connections between these two.
For example, the assassin who killed Lincoln shot him in a theater and then ran to a book
depository, whereas JFK's assassin shot him from a book depository and then ran to a theater.
