a birthday? The answer is only 50 people. Here is my favorite probability problem that some people
just cannot wrap their heads around. It's very interesting. It's called the Monty Hall problem.
Let's say you're playing the old game Let's Make a Deal with Monty Hall, where the name of the
problem comes from. You have three doors in front of you. Behind one door is a new car. Behind two
doors are goats. You are asked to select a door. Of course, you are trying to select a door that
has the new car behind it because then you win it and get to take it home. Now, Monty Hall knows
where the car is. That's a very important piece to this puzzle. You make your guess and then Monty
Hall, regardless of what door you guess, Monty Hall will open up one of the other doors to reveal
a goat. There's always a goat behind the door that Monty Hall reveals. He then asks you if you
would like to change your choice to the remaining door or stick to your original choice. What should
you do and does it matter? The intuitive answer that many people give is that, well, it doesn't
matter either way. Your chance of winning is 50-50. There are two doors left. One has a goat.
One has a car. Whichever door you choose, there's a 50-50 chance of you winning. However, the truth
is if you keep your door, your chance of winning is one-third. If you switch to the new door,
your chance of winning increases to two-thirds. This is honestly the correct answer to this
puzzle. But how is it possible? Well, there are many ways to explain this answer. Different people
respond to different explanations. It's key to remember that Monty Hall is giving you new information
by opening up one door and revealing a goat, since he knows where the goats and the car are.
Your chance with your initial pick, when you pick one of the three doors,
it's one-third. And it remains one-third if you stick with that choice. If you don't change your
initial choice, your odds do not alter. However, if you wish to switch to the other door, in essence,
you are switching to the other two doors, because no matter what you chose, Monty Hall will reveal
a goat. You're in essence choosing both remaining doors at the same time, and therefore your odds
increase to two-thirds. If you run this through a quick computer simulation, for example,
that's exactly how the odds shake out. Another way to envision this, and this is how I find it
most useful to explain it to other people, imagine that instead of three doors, there are a thousand
