What do you think is more likely? Getting killed by a shark attack or getting struck
by lightning? What about getting hit on the head by a falling coconut? What are you using
in order to determine what the relative risks are of these various things?
Well for example, in the United States, dying from a shark attack happens about once a year.
Your lifetime risk of dying in a shark attack is 1 in 3.7 million. The risk of dying from
lightning is a bit higher. This happens about 47 times a year in the U.S. which means that
your individual lifetime risk of dying by lightning strike is 1 in 79,000. Following coconuts,
that depends on where you live. On islands with lots of coconut trees, there are about three
to nine annual injuries and one to three deaths per year. But we tend to overestimate the probability
of something happening if we see it. This relates to the availability heuristic I described in the
lecture on cognitive biases. We tend to latch on to examples that are available to us, that we
are aware of. This has a huge effect in the media. If the media presents shark attacks in dramatic
documentaries, then we will tend to think that such occurrences must therefore be common. We
tend to worry in fact about insignificant risks, those risks that are available to us or that are
dramatically portrayed or perhaps risks that relate to some deep-seated fear, which may be
cultural, may be evolved, it doesn't really matter. However, we tend to ignore risks that are much
more likely and much more real, but that just don't capture our attention or are not dramatically
portrayed in the media. For example, the chance of dying from accidental poisoning in the U.S.
is, this occurs 19.4 thousand times per year. Many orders of magnitude greater than shark attacks
or lightning strikes. In the previous lecture on enumeracy, I talked about some gambling fallacies
among other errors in the way we think about statistics and streakiness, the tendency to see
streakiness in random events when in fact it's just a clustering illusion. We might think for
example that a number that hasn't come up yet on a roulette wheel is due, or if it has come up a
couple of times that it is coming up more often than chance predicts, therefore there's some
streakiness involved. There are other gambling fallacies as well. One is called playing with
house money. There is a documented tendency after winning in a casino, for example, that we will
