doors. And Monty Hall opened up every door to reveal a goat, except for one remaining door.
So let's say out of the thousand doors, you choose door 173. Monty Hall then opens up every single
other door except door 520. And then he asks you, do you want to switch to door 520 or stick with
your original door? Now what would you do? I think it's a little bit more intuitive at this time,
since Monty Hall knew where the car was, that he was able to open up every other door that had a goat.
The chance of your original choice having the car is one in a thousand. Your chance of the
new door having the car is 999 out of a thousand. Let's take another example. You have a newspaper
that is one two-hundredth of a centimeter thick. That's pretty thin. Suppose, hypothetically,
you can fold it in half as many times as you want without limit. If you folded it 30 times,
how thick would it be? Again, one two hundredth of a centimeter folded 30 times. The answer
is that it would be 54 kilometers or 34 miles thick. That is a lot greater than we intuitively
might think. The reason for this is that we underestimate intuitively the effect
of geometric progressions. It's simply not something that we have an evolved intuitive sense of.
Let's say we folded the newspaper 43 times. How thick would it be then? Just 43 times,
and the folded newspaper would make its way all the way to the moon, about a quarter of a million
miles. Multi-level marketing schemes also prey upon our enumeracy. This is again a failure to
appreciate the power, the statistical power of geometric progressions. In order to maintain the
pyramid structure of a multi-level marketing company or scheme, you would have to recruit
geometrically more people. For example, if each level of a pyramid has 10 people,
then with only 10 levels, you would exceed the population of the earth. What typically happens
in a multi-level marketing program is that a salesman is encouraged to build their downstream,
to increase the number of people they recruit who then sell for them. Sometimes they're required
to recruit a certain minimum number of people in order to make back their investment. It may be
five people or six or whatever. Those people then, in order to make back their investment,
have to recruit the same number of people, five people, six people, whatever. But these
progressions are inherently unsustainable. We underestimate how quickly you can saturate a
