of delusions.
Like many things we all have this tendency to a little bit and as it gets more and more
severe at some point we may consider it a disorder.
At another point we may consider it a personality trait.
But delusions are with us all to some degree.
In essence a delusion is impaired reality testing or not engaging our reality testing.
A tendency to jump to conclusions or as I described in previous lectures to be very
compelled by the patterns that we see in events around us.
There are various types of delusion.
There is a paranoid delusion in which we think that people or organizations or events are
conspiring against us.
We see a pattern of action that is against our own interests out there somewhere.
There are also grandiose delusions.
These are fixed beliefs about our own ability.
I mentioned also in a previous lecture that we have a tendency all of us to overestimate
our own ability.
Well a grandiose delusion takes that to a new height.
There are also personal empowerment delusions such as the delusion that one might have the
ability to fly.
And there are delusions of hopelessness which occur with severe depression.
One fascinating manifestation of this type of delusion is the belief that a person is
dead.
Some people who are very depressed actually suffer from the delusion that they themselves
are dead.
It is the only way they can make sense of the physical sensations that they have.
But delusions can affect more than just an individual person at one time.
There are delusions that can involve more than one person and I'm going to describe
these types of delusions in increasing number of people.
The so-called foley adieu is a delusion shared by two people.
Usually there is a dominant person.
The dominant person is the one with the fixed delusion.
This is the one in which the delusion originates.
And there is also a more passive partner who is considered to be the recipient of the delusion.
This may happen frequently for example in a parent and a child where the parent is the
dominant person with the fixed delusion that they then impose upon their more passive and
receptive child.
This will tend to occur in isolation meaning the two individuals are relatively socially
isolated from others and with a very close or intimate relationship.
The delusion usually resolves in the induced or passive individual with separation although
it does not resolve in the dominant or originating person because they're the ones again with
