If you were accused of being a communist, then it was assumed that you were a communist.
There was also guilt by association.
If you hung out with somebody who was accused and therefore assumed to be guilty of being
a communist, well, then you must be guilty also.
Intimidation was also used to coerce confessions.
Your career will be destroyed if you don't confess.
But if you do confess and tell us who the other people that you associate with that
are also communists are, then you'll get off the hook, or at least the consequences will
be softened.
This then leads to a string of further accusations, and this self-perpetuating witch hunt continues
on.
This particular witch hunt fed on a fear that already existed in the community, like witch
hunts typically do.
In medieval Europe, it was fear of evil in the community.
In Salem, it was the same thing.
In this, it was the fear of communism, of a foreign form of government, at which we
were having or waging a cold war.
A different type of mass delusion entirely is so-called collective wish fulfillment.
This is similar to a symbolic community scare, but it involves something desirable rather
than a deep-seated fear.
One classic example of this are fairy sightings, which were common in Europe.
This again typically is culturally specific.
There are specific manifestations or beliefs that are shared by many people in the culture,
whether it is something to be afraid of or now, in this case, something that is either
fascinating, interesting, or desirable, such as encountering fairies.
In other cultures, this may be a Virgin Mary sighting, if that is in line with the religious
belief of a culture.
And probably more recently in the United States and other countries are waves of UFO sightings.
People can have, in many ways, the belief that there are these very intelligent alien
creatures, members of an advanced civilization who are here for benign purposes to save us
from ourselves, to give us information.
This fills the same psychological role that either religious sightings have played and
continue to play, or magical creatures like fairies or leprechauns played in previous
centuries.
The New England airship hoax is also an example of a collective wish fulfillment mass delusion,
the belief that we were on the brink of some exciting new technological breakthrough that
was going to usher in the age of airship travel.
The term mass hysteria is similar to mass delusion, but it is different in that it specifically
involves physical symptoms.
The term hysteria has fallen out of favor recently because of its cultural misogynist
