roots.
The term mass psychogenic illness means essentially the same thing and has largely taken its place.
What these mass psychogenic illness episodes are characterized as, as having a rapid onset
and resolution of symptoms, they tend to spread by social information contact.
So you can follow the spread not necessarily through physical contact or through contact
with the same environmental exposure, but spread follows a pattern of information spread.
In essence, the information is considered to be the contagion that spreads the psychogenic
illness.
Often, the alleged illness lacks biological plausibility and the symptoms tend to be vague
and nonspecific, what we might call the so-called symptoms of life, the kind of symptoms that
even a healthy person can have from time to time.
A now classic example of the mass psychogenic illness is the Pokemon Panic of 1997.
On Tuesday night, December 16, 1997, a Pokemon episode, this is a Japanese cartoon, episode
number 38, titled Denow Asenshi Poragon, forgive my pronunciation, or translated into Computer
Warrior Polygon.
This aired in Japan at 6.30 p.m.
The program involved a battle in which there was an electrical attack and that was portrayed
by flashing lights, which created a literal strobe effect.
It is true that some children with seizures who have epilepsy have what we call photosensitive
epilepsy.
You can trigger a seizure by flashing lights.
In fact, when we test people for epilepsy for seizures, we will exploit this.
We will actually expose them to a strobe light in order to see if it provokes either seizures
or just seizure-like activity on their electroencephalogram.
So this is apparently what happened.
A small number of children who had photosensitive epilepsy while viewing the program had seizures.
There were then reported cases of seizures which spread through the media.
Some even replayed the flashing lights as part of their news report which led to a second
wave of report of seizures.
However, these few cases of probable legitimate seizures led to hundreds of children reporting
seizure-like episodes.
There were thousands of reports of just feeling sick after reviewing the program.
Most had no prior history of seizures.
Many of the children reported symptoms such as visual changes, dizziness, headache, vomiting,
and shortness of breath.
These symptoms are not really typical for seizures.
They are, however, typical of anxiety and they are actually fairly classic psychogenic
symptoms.
Therefore, in reviewing the reports and reviewing the cases, it seemed like the symptoms spread
more through the information contagion with the symptoms being typical for hysteria or
