the disorder.
And more than two people share a delusion it's called a group delusion which occurs
in a small group three to four or five or six people.
This could be a family or perhaps even an isolated cult.
Often there is a charismatic or totalitarian leader to the group.
Group dynamics is the dominant factor in group delusions.
What tends to happen is that the individual members of the group surrender their will
to the charismatic leader.
Again I described in a previous lecture that we have a tendency to do this to surrender
our will turn off our critical thinking capacity when we are confronted with a charismatic
leader that we believe in.
Also in such groups conformity is emphasized conformity with the social group.
Again this is a natural tendency that humans share but in this situation it is emphasized
beyond normal amounts.
This may also involve a theme of us versus them, of purity or of salvation.
Being a member of the group requires purity which also requires conformity to the beliefs
of the group and to the will of the charismatic leader and this will lead to some type of
salvation from the rest of the world which is tainted in some way.
The Heavens Gate cult is one recent example of this type of group delusion.
The leader Marshall Applewhite was the charismatic cult leader.
He led a group of about 40 members who engaged in a suicide pact.
39 of the 40 members eventually did in fact commit suicide.
They believed that they needed there to leave their physical bodies so that they could ascend
to a UFO, an alien guided spacecraft which was passing by the earth behind the hail
bop comet.
They needed to kill themselves in order to leave their physical bodies and hitch a ride
on the UFO.
A mass delusion is when more than just a small group is involved.
This is in similar episodes are termed mass delusions where there are several specific
types which I will discuss with specific examples of each.
There are psychological factors at work, perceptive illusions and fallacies as I discussed in
the third lecture.
There also may be fantasy creation and social conformity.
All of these factors contribute to these various types of mass delusion.
The first type of mass delusion is called a community threat.
In this type of delusion there is an exaggerated sense of danger which can persist for weeks
or even months.
It will tend to come and go in waves so the level of panic is not always persistent or
constant.
It does not however result in a panic or a fleeing from the community.
