psychogenic anxiety and not actual seizures, although the panic was triggered by what were
probably some real seizures.
Another common example is called the sick-building syndrome, buildings in which many people report
symptoms, often over a period of years.
This has even led to buildings being torn down and rebuilt to get rid of whatever it
was in the building that was causing the illness.
There may be genuine environmental cases of something in the building that isn't irritant
and can cause symptoms.
However, many of the cases, upon careful investigation, reveal no environmental contaminant or cause
of the symptoms.
The symptoms often follow the pattern that I described before as vague, non-specific,
common symptoms of life, either dizziness, headaches, blurry vision, or shortness of
breath.
There are also many product rumors.
For example, the idea spread that silicon breast implants could cause autoimmune diseases.
This led to the belief among many women who had the silicon breast implants and had autoimmune
diseases that it was the implants that caused their illness.
Now, in this case, they weren't misinterpreting common everyday symptoms or symptoms of anxiety
over being sick with the illness itself.
In this case, there were women, patients who genuinely had a serious, sometimes even life-threatening
autoimmune disease.
The fear, however, was that it was triggered or caused by a specific product, silicon breast
implants.
This led to multiple lawsuits and, in fact, eventually led to companies becoming bankrupt
under the mass suits accusing their silicon product of causing the autoimmune disease.
In retrospect, after all the data was carefully analyzed epidemiologically, it turns out that
there was no increased risk of getting any autoimmune disease in women who had breast
implants.
This was simply the background rate of these diseases, which was no different to implant
or no implant.
Therefore, with 2020 historical hindsight, we can see this episode as one in which there
was no real risk.
But the rumor alone was enough to spread the firm belief that the risk was there, even
to the point of bankrupting a company.
Another similar episode, which crops up from time to time, is the sudden acceleration claim
that cars can suddenly accelerate out of control.
This even got to the point where journalists attempting to investigate the case went to
car engineers to see if they could reproduce the acceleration, which they could but only
under highly contrived situation.
It turns out that you can't or that cars were not suddenly accelerating of their own
