In a remarkable historical case, reports of a strange aircraft flying under cover of darkness
began to spread throughout New England.
Tens of thousands of ordinary citizens reported seeing the craft, including police officers,
politicians and judges, respected members of the community.
The media breathlessly reported these eyewitness accounts, causing them to spread even further.
The government and even foreign dignitaries became interested in these events, hoping
to discover the craft and harvest its technological secrets.
A massive search for physical evidence to corroborate these eyewitness accounts was
undertaken.
This is not the story of a flying saucer, however, even though you may have assumed
that from the description, but rather this was the great airship hoax of 1909.
People thought they were seeing the first heavier-than-air aircraft, but it turns out
that it was simply a hoax perpetrated by Wallace E. Tillingast of Worcester, Massachusetts.
The story was plausible because of the recent Wright Brothers invention.
The Wright Brothers succeeded in developing their first aircraft in 1903, but in 1909
they were still tinkering in Kitty Hawk.
Alex Rendell of Revere, who is considered an expert or was at the time in aeronautics
and motors, was interviewed by a journalist and he had this to say.
I saw not only the lights of the airship, but I saw the frame quite plainly, and it seems
to be of unusual size.
I should say the wings have a sweep of 70 feet and the tail and propeller seemed about
45 feet in length.
I could plainly hear the engines were and from the explosions of the motor, I should
say it was either a six or eight cylinder.
Now we know that there were no planes flying in the skies of New England in 1909.
So what's going on here?
How is it possible that there were so many reliable people, so-called reliable people,
giving these eyewitness testimonies that they were so completely wrong, even inventing
detailed accounts out of their own imagination or perhaps misinterpreted perception fueled
only by press reports and word of mouth?
Well what we're talking about in this lecture is delusion.
A delusion is a fixed belief that is not changed even in the face of overwhelming contradictory
evidence.
When delusions occur in an individual and the tendency to form delusions is considered
a symptom of a mental illness.
The most common example of a mental illness that is described as a tendency to form delusions
is schizophrenia.
But in reality delusions occur on a spectrum with schizophrenia being only at the most
severe end of that spectrum.
To varying degrees even healthy, normal if you will, individuals can have some degree
