For example, in the United States, we had the Salem witch trials of 1692, during which
19 people were convicted of witchcraft and were executed.
However, we sometimes tend to forget that the same thing happened in Europe between
1470 and 1750 on a far grander scale.
This spanned almost 300 years, during which an estimated 4,200,000 witch executions took
place.
There are several features of a so-called witch hunt that are worth pointing out.
One is that accusation is equaled to guilt.
Once you're accused of being a witch, it is assumed that you must be guilty.
There is the reliance upon so-called spectral evidence.
The name derives from a literal type of evidence that was given at many witch trials, where
the witness had a dream or a vision, perhaps of the accused consorting with the devil.
And their vision was accepted as if it were eyewitness testimony, which is itself unreliable,
but this was imagined eyewitness testimony, hence the name spectral evidence.
Magical beliefs and ad hoc reasoning also come into play, explaining anomalous events
or weird events as if they have some kind of a magical cause, and then assigning that
to the accused.
The focus of such accusations usually falls upon outcasts and unusual citizens.
They become targeted.
So the loner, the person maybe living on the edge of town who is socially awkward or just
doesn't interact very much, or perhaps they are unusual in some way, this would probably
include in previous times many people who had mental illness, for example, or maybe
people who were just outspoken against the authority of the community.
They would be the ones to get targeted early.
In addition, torture or extreme methods of persuasion were used to coerce confessions,
leading to a string of accusations which then justify itself.
But of course, when people succumb to the torture and confess that they are a witch,
that is taken as confirmation of the overall belief system, the overall delusion.
A more recent example that doesn't deal with literal witches, but which had all the features
that I just described as a witch hunt is the McCarthyism that took place in the 1950s.
In 1950, Senator Joseph McCarthy began to spread fears of a communist infestation in
the United States.
The wheeling speech is credited for launching this McCarthyism scare.
He claimed that he had a list of known communists in the State Department.
He never actually revealed this list.
He just used the rumor, the claim that it existed, in order to spread fears that there
not only were communists in the country, but they had infiltrated our government for their
own nefarious purposes.
McCarthy used witch hunt tactics in order to spread this fear.
For example, equating accusation of guilt with guilt.
