So it is essentially a low to moderate level of continuous anxiety or sense of danger that
is increasing and decreasing over time.
An example of this is the Seattle windshield pitting epidemic of 1954.
There was widespread belief that pitting damage was being done to windshields.
This was first blamed on vandals but then became too widespread to be blamed on just
a few individuals.
There were fears of whatever was going on to cause these pits to occur in windshield
and windshields began to spread and some thought that it might be due to something very dangerous
like radioactive fallout.
Reports of the windshield pitting were reinforced by the media.
Authorities gave attention to it saying that they were investigating these events lending
more credibility and raising anxiety and fear levels further.
Investigation however revealed that people were just noticing pits that were there all
along.
In essence this windshield pitting epidemic was created out of just social means and contamination.
Somebody notices that there was pitting in their windshield.
Maybe there was a little bit of a statistical cluster a clustering fallacy occurring where
the person's next door neighbor noticed that there was some pitting in their windshield.
They think that can't be a coincidence.
They start asking around and then people start looking for things that may have always been
there but they never noticed previously.
The idea spreads, this somehow gets attached to fears.
Maybe there's something toxic in the environment.
Maybe there are vandals roaming the streets.
Maybe there's radioactive fallout.
At the time radioactive fallout was a big fear in the community.
So it may also have been just a specific manifestation of a persistent fear that was already there.
The fear of this new age of the threat of nuclear warfare.
A community flight panic is similar to this type of panic but is more short term and acute.
It typically lasts for hours to days as opposed to weeks to months.
Panic spreads very quickly resulting in some people actually fleeing the local area.
The panic will then subside when it becomes apparent that whatever the fear is did not
exactly manifest.
So because the fear is about something that is imminently about to happen, when it doesn't
happen after a few days, the fear then will subside.
Perhaps the most iconic example of the community flight panic is the story of the Orson Welles
and the telling of a story by H.G. Wells.
This occurred on Halloween Eve in 1938.
A radio broadcast of War of the Worlds was dramatized by Orson Welles.
He however reconfigured the story so that it was given in the form of dramatic news
