flashes and the story was transposed so that the locations were in contemporary America
as opposed to the original setting of the story in England.
Many people however tuned in late to the broadcast.
They missed Orson Welles' introduction to the story.
There also may have been a factor due to the tensions at the time leading up to World War
II.
So the community may have been primed for this kind of panic.
It may also have been due some speculate to the newness of radio as a form of mass media.
People were not used to hearing entertainment necessarily on the radio and distinguishing
it from real newscasts.
Here is a description of events from Mrs. Thomas from Trenton.
She is quoted as saying, we were petrified.
We just looked at each other, scared out of our wits.
Someone was banging on our front door.
It was our neighbor across the street.
She had packed her seven kids in their car and she kept yelling, come on, let's get
out of here.
That sounds like a pretty good description of a community flight panic.
This sort of thing probably also has its roots in the notion that as a social tribal if you
will species, we are programmed to respond to the fears and the panic of other people
in our community.
This is an early warning system if you will.
If there is a threat of a predatory attack for example, there is a huge evolutionary
advantage to responding to the fear and the panics in other.
This is simply that defensive or adaptive mechanism going out of control in response
to a false or a delusional panic.
There are also larger delusions still that go beyond just a single small community.
These are called symbolic community scares.
These tend to wax and wane over years.
These can involve entire countries, even continents.
They often involve fears of a moral or existential threat.
These are deriving from some cultural fear that is held by many people in a broad culture
or community.
For example, threats from immigration represent this type of community scare where there is
the perception that out of control immigration is allowing unsavory or perhaps criminal segments
into our society.
The purity, the safety, the very makeup of our society is being threatened by this long
term phenomenon.
The witch hunts again are perhaps the most iconic example of this type of mass delusion.
I think it's probably the best example.
