In a remarkable historical case, reports of a strange aircraft flying under cover of darkness
began to spread throughout New England.
Tens of thousands of ordinary citizens reported seeing the craft, including police officers,
politicians and judges, respected members of the community.
The media breathlessly reported these eyewitness accounts, causing them to spread even further.
The government and even foreign dignitaries became interested in these events, hoping
to discover the craft and harvest its technological secrets.
A massive search for physical evidence to corroborate these eyewitness accounts was
undertaken.
This is not the story of a flying saucer, however, even though you may have assumed
that from the description, but rather this was the great airship hoax of 1909.
People thought they were seeing the first heavier-than-air aircraft, but it turns out
that it was simply a hoax perpetrated by Wallace E. Tillingast of Worcester, Massachusetts.
The story was plausible because of the recent Wright Brothers invention.
The Wright Brothers succeeded in developing their first aircraft in 1903, but in 1909
they were still tinkering in Kitty Hawk.
Alex Rendell of Revere, who is considered an expert or was at the time in aeronautics
and motors, was interviewed by a journalist and he had this to say.
I saw not only the lights of the airship, but I saw the frame quite plainly, and it seems
to be of unusual size.
I should say the wings have a sweep of 70 feet and the tail and propeller seemed about
45 feet in length.
I could plainly hear the engines were and from the explosions of the motor, I should
say it was either a six or eight cylinder.
Now we know that there were no planes flying in the skies of New England in 1909.
So what's going on here?
How is it possible that there were so many reliable people, so-called reliable people,
giving these eyewitness testimonies that they were so completely wrong, even inventing
detailed accounts out of their own imagination or perhaps misinterpreted perception fueled
only by press reports and word of mouth?
Well what we're talking about in this lecture is delusion.
A delusion is a fixed belief that is not changed even in the face of overwhelming contradictory
evidence.
When delusions occur in an individual and the tendency to form delusions is considered
a symptom of a mental illness.
The most common example of a mental illness that is described as a tendency to form delusions
is schizophrenia.
But in reality delusions occur on a spectrum with schizophrenia being only at the most
severe end of that spectrum.
To varying degrees even healthy, normal if you will, individuals can have some degree
of delusions.
Like many things we all have this tendency to a little bit and as it gets more and more
severe at some point we may consider it a disorder.
At another point we may consider it a personality trait.
But delusions are with us all to some degree.
In essence a delusion is impaired reality testing or not engaging our reality testing.
A tendency to jump to conclusions or as I described in previous lectures to be very
compelled by the patterns that we see in events around us.
There are various types of delusion.
There is a paranoid delusion in which we think that people or organizations or events are
conspiring against us.
We see a pattern of action that is against our own interests out there somewhere.
There are also grandiose delusions.
These are fixed beliefs about our own ability.
I mentioned also in a previous lecture that we have a tendency all of us to overestimate
our own ability.
Well a grandiose delusion takes that to a new height.
There are also personal empowerment delusions such as the delusion that one might have the
ability to fly.
And there are delusions of hopelessness which occur with severe depression.
One fascinating manifestation of this type of delusion is the belief that a person is
dead.
Some people who are very depressed actually suffer from the delusion that they themselves
are dead.
It is the only way they can make sense of the physical sensations that they have.
But delusions can affect more than just an individual person at one time.
There are delusions that can involve more than one person and I'm going to describe
these types of delusions in increasing number of people.
The so-called foley adieu is a delusion shared by two people.
Usually there is a dominant person.
The dominant person is the one with the fixed delusion.
This is the one in which the delusion originates.
And there is also a more passive partner who is considered to be the recipient of the delusion.
This may happen frequently for example in a parent and a child where the parent is the
dominant person with the fixed delusion that they then impose upon their more passive and
receptive child.
This will tend to occur in isolation meaning the two individuals are relatively socially
isolated from others and with a very close or intimate relationship.
The delusion usually resolves in the induced or passive individual with separation although
it does not resolve in the dominant or originating person because they're the ones again with
the disorder.
And more than two people share a delusion it's called a group delusion which occurs
in a small group three to four or five or six people.
This could be a family or perhaps even an isolated cult.
Often there is a charismatic or totalitarian leader to the group.
Group dynamics is the dominant factor in group delusions.
What tends to happen is that the individual members of the group surrender their will
to the charismatic leader.
Again I described in a previous lecture that we have a tendency to do this to surrender
our will turn off our critical thinking capacity when we are confronted with a charismatic
leader that we believe in.
Also in such groups conformity is emphasized conformity with the social group.
Again this is a natural tendency that humans share but in this situation it is emphasized
beyond normal amounts.
This may also involve a theme of us versus them, of purity or of salvation.
Being a member of the group requires purity which also requires conformity to the beliefs
of the group and to the will of the charismatic leader and this will lead to some type of
salvation from the rest of the world which is tainted in some way.
The Heavens Gate cult is one recent example of this type of group delusion.
The leader Marshall Applewhite was the charismatic cult leader.
He led a group of about 40 members who engaged in a suicide pact.
39 of the 40 members eventually did in fact commit suicide.
They believed that they needed there to leave their physical bodies so that they could ascend
to a UFO, an alien guided spacecraft which was passing by the earth behind the hail
bop comet.
They needed to kill themselves in order to leave their physical bodies and hitch a ride
on the UFO.
A mass delusion is when more than just a small group is involved.
This is in similar episodes are termed mass delusions where there are several specific
types which I will discuss with specific examples of each.
There are psychological factors at work, perceptive illusions and fallacies as I discussed in
the third lecture.
There also may be fantasy creation and social conformity.
All of these factors contribute to these various types of mass delusion.
The first type of mass delusion is called a community threat.
In this type of delusion there is an exaggerated sense of danger which can persist for weeks
or even months.
It will tend to come and go in waves so the level of panic is not always persistent or
constant.
It does not however result in a panic or a fleeing from the community.
So it is essentially a low to moderate level of continuous anxiety or sense of danger that
is increasing and decreasing over time.
An example of this is the Seattle windshield pitting epidemic of 1954.
There was widespread belief that pitting damage was being done to windshields.
This was first blamed on vandals but then became too widespread to be blamed on just
a few individuals.
There were fears of whatever was going on to cause these pits to occur in windshield
and windshields began to spread and some thought that it might be due to something very dangerous
like radioactive fallout.
Reports of the windshield pitting were reinforced by the media.
Authorities gave attention to it saying that they were investigating these events lending
more credibility and raising anxiety and fear levels further.
Investigation however revealed that people were just noticing pits that were there all
along.
In essence this windshield pitting epidemic was created out of just social means and contamination.
Somebody notices that there was pitting in their windshield.
Maybe there was a little bit of a statistical cluster a clustering fallacy occurring where
the person's next door neighbor noticed that there was some pitting in their windshield.
They think that can't be a coincidence.
They start asking around and then people start looking for things that may have always been
there but they never noticed previously.
The idea spreads, this somehow gets attached to fears.
Maybe there's something toxic in the environment.
Maybe there are vandals roaming the streets.
Maybe there's radioactive fallout.
At the time radioactive fallout was a big fear in the community.
So it may also have been just a specific manifestation of a persistent fear that was already there.
The fear of this new age of the threat of nuclear warfare.
A community flight panic is similar to this type of panic but is more short term and acute.
It typically lasts for hours to days as opposed to weeks to months.
Panic spreads very quickly resulting in some people actually fleeing the local area.
The panic will then subside when it becomes apparent that whatever the fear is did not
exactly manifest.
So because the fear is about something that is imminently about to happen, when it doesn't
happen after a few days, the fear then will subside.
Perhaps the most iconic example of the community flight panic is the story of the Orson Welles
and the telling of a story by H.G. Wells.
This occurred on Halloween Eve in 1938.
A radio broadcast of War of the Worlds was dramatized by Orson Welles.
He however reconfigured the story so that it was given in the form of dramatic news
flashes and the story was transposed so that the locations were in contemporary America
as opposed to the original setting of the story in England.
Many people however tuned in late to the broadcast.
They missed Orson Welles' introduction to the story.
There also may have been a factor due to the tensions at the time leading up to World War
II.
So the community may have been primed for this kind of panic.
It may also have been due some speculate to the newness of radio as a form of mass media.
People were not used to hearing entertainment necessarily on the radio and distinguishing
it from real newscasts.
Here is a description of events from Mrs. Thomas from Trenton.
She is quoted as saying, we were petrified.
We just looked at each other, scared out of our wits.
Someone was banging on our front door.
It was our neighbor across the street.
She had packed her seven kids in their car and she kept yelling, come on, let's get
out of here.
That sounds like a pretty good description of a community flight panic.
This sort of thing probably also has its roots in the notion that as a social tribal if you
will species, we are programmed to respond to the fears and the panic of other people
in our community.
This is an early warning system if you will.
If there is a threat of a predatory attack for example, there is a huge evolutionary
advantage to responding to the fear and the panics in other.
This is simply that defensive or adaptive mechanism going out of control in response
to a false or a delusional panic.
There are also larger delusions still that go beyond just a single small community.
These are called symbolic community scares.
These tend to wax and wane over years.
These can involve entire countries, even continents.
They often involve fears of a moral or existential threat.
These are deriving from some cultural fear that is held by many people in a broad culture
or community.
For example, threats from immigration represent this type of community scare where there is
the perception that out of control immigration is allowing unsavory or perhaps criminal segments
into our society.
The purity, the safety, the very makeup of our society is being threatened by this long
term phenomenon.
The witch hunts again are perhaps the most iconic example of this type of mass delusion.
I think it's probably the best example.
For example, in the United States, we had the Salem witch trials of 1692, during which
19 people were convicted of witchcraft and were executed.
However, we sometimes tend to forget that the same thing happened in Europe between
1470 and 1750 on a far grander scale.
This spanned almost 300 years, during which an estimated 4,200,000 witch executions took
place.
There are several features of a so-called witch hunt that are worth pointing out.
One is that accusation is equaled to guilt.
Once you're accused of being a witch, it is assumed that you must be guilty.
There is the reliance upon so-called spectral evidence.
The name derives from a literal type of evidence that was given at many witch trials, where
the witness had a dream or a vision, perhaps of the accused consorting with the devil.
And their vision was accepted as if it were eyewitness testimony, which is itself unreliable,
but this was imagined eyewitness testimony, hence the name spectral evidence.
Magical beliefs and ad hoc reasoning also come into play, explaining anomalous events
or weird events as if they have some kind of a magical cause, and then assigning that
to the accused.
The focus of such accusations usually falls upon outcasts and unusual citizens.
They become targeted.
So the loner, the person maybe living on the edge of town who is socially awkward or just
doesn't interact very much, or perhaps they are unusual in some way, this would probably
include in previous times many people who had mental illness, for example, or maybe
people who were just outspoken against the authority of the community.
They would be the ones to get targeted early.
In addition, torture or extreme methods of persuasion were used to coerce confessions,
leading to a string of accusations which then justify itself.
But of course, when people succumb to the torture and confess that they are a witch,
that is taken as confirmation of the overall belief system, the overall delusion.
A more recent example that doesn't deal with literal witches, but which had all the features
that I just described as a witch hunt is the McCarthyism that took place in the 1950s.
In 1950, Senator Joseph McCarthy began to spread fears of a communist infestation in
the United States.
The wheeling speech is credited for launching this McCarthyism scare.
He claimed that he had a list of known communists in the State Department.
He never actually revealed this list.
He just used the rumor, the claim that it existed, in order to spread fears that there
not only were communists in the country, but they had infiltrated our government for their
own nefarious purposes.
McCarthy used witch hunt tactics in order to spread this fear.
For example, equating accusation of guilt with guilt.
If you were accused of being a communist, then it was assumed that you were a communist.
There was also guilt by association.
If you hung out with somebody who was accused and therefore assumed to be guilty of being
a communist, well, then you must be guilty also.
Intimidation was also used to coerce confessions.
Your career will be destroyed if you don't confess.
But if you do confess and tell us who the other people that you associate with that
are also communists are, then you'll get off the hook, or at least the consequences will
be softened.
This then leads to a string of further accusations, and this self-perpetuating witch hunt continues
on.
This particular witch hunt fed on a fear that already existed in the community, like witch
hunts typically do.
In medieval Europe, it was fear of evil in the community.
In Salem, it was the same thing.
In this, it was the fear of communism, of a foreign form of government, at which we
were having or waging a cold war.
A different type of mass delusion entirely is so-called collective wish fulfillment.
This is similar to a symbolic community scare, but it involves something desirable rather
than a deep-seated fear.
One classic example of this are fairy sightings, which were common in Europe.
This again typically is culturally specific.
There are specific manifestations or beliefs that are shared by many people in the culture,
whether it is something to be afraid of or now, in this case, something that is either
fascinating, interesting, or desirable, such as encountering fairies.
In other cultures, this may be a Virgin Mary sighting, if that is in line with the religious
belief of a culture.
And probably more recently in the United States and other countries are waves of UFO sightings.
People can have, in many ways, the belief that there are these very intelligent alien
creatures, members of an advanced civilization who are here for benign purposes to save us
from ourselves, to give us information.
This fills the same psychological role that either religious sightings have played and
continue to play, or magical creatures like fairies or leprechauns played in previous
centuries.
The New England airship hoax is also an example of a collective wish fulfillment mass delusion,
the belief that we were on the brink of some exciting new technological breakthrough that
was going to usher in the age of airship travel.
The term mass hysteria is similar to mass delusion, but it is different in that it specifically
involves physical symptoms.
The term hysteria has fallen out of favor recently because of its cultural misogynist
roots.
The term mass psychogenic illness means essentially the same thing and has largely taken its place.
What these mass psychogenic illness episodes are characterized as, as having a rapid onset
and resolution of symptoms, they tend to spread by social information contact.
So you can follow the spread not necessarily through physical contact or through contact
with the same environmental exposure, but spread follows a pattern of information spread.
In essence, the information is considered to be the contagion that spreads the psychogenic
illness.
Often, the alleged illness lacks biological plausibility and the symptoms tend to be vague
and nonspecific, what we might call the so-called symptoms of life, the kind of symptoms that
even a healthy person can have from time to time.
A now classic example of the mass psychogenic illness is the Pokemon Panic of 1997.
On Tuesday night, December 16, 1997, a Pokemon episode, this is a Japanese cartoon, episode
number 38, titled Denow Asenshi Poragon, forgive my pronunciation, or translated into Computer
Warrior Polygon.
This aired in Japan at 6.30 p.m.
The program involved a battle in which there was an electrical attack and that was portrayed
by flashing lights, which created a literal strobe effect.
It is true that some children with seizures who have epilepsy have what we call photosensitive
epilepsy.
You can trigger a seizure by flashing lights.
In fact, when we test people for epilepsy for seizures, we will exploit this.
We will actually expose them to a strobe light in order to see if it provokes either seizures
or just seizure-like activity on their electroencephalogram.
So this is apparently what happened.
A small number of children who had photosensitive epilepsy while viewing the program had seizures.
There were then reported cases of seizures which spread through the media.
Some even replayed the flashing lights as part of their news report which led to a second
wave of report of seizures.
However, these few cases of probable legitimate seizures led to hundreds of children reporting
seizure-like episodes.
There were thousands of reports of just feeling sick after reviewing the program.
Most had no prior history of seizures.
Many of the children reported symptoms such as visual changes, dizziness, headache, vomiting,
and shortness of breath.
These symptoms are not really typical for seizures.
They are, however, typical of anxiety and they are actually fairly classic psychogenic
symptoms.
Therefore, in reviewing the reports and reviewing the cases, it seemed like the symptoms spread
more through the information contagion with the symptoms being typical for hysteria or
psychogenic anxiety and not actual seizures, although the panic was triggered by what were
probably some real seizures.
Another common example is called the sick-building syndrome, buildings in which many people report
symptoms, often over a period of years.
This has even led to buildings being torn down and rebuilt to get rid of whatever it
was in the building that was causing the illness.
There may be genuine environmental cases of something in the building that isn't irritant
and can cause symptoms.
However, many of the cases, upon careful investigation, reveal no environmental contaminant or cause
of the symptoms.
The symptoms often follow the pattern that I described before as vague, non-specific,
common symptoms of life, either dizziness, headaches, blurry vision, or shortness of
breath.
There are also many product rumors.
For example, the idea spread that silicon breast implants could cause autoimmune diseases.
This led to the belief among many women who had the silicon breast implants and had autoimmune
diseases that it was the implants that caused their illness.
Now, in this case, they weren't misinterpreting common everyday symptoms or symptoms of anxiety
over being sick with the illness itself.
In this case, there were women, patients who genuinely had a serious, sometimes even life-threatening
autoimmune disease.
The fear, however, was that it was triggered or caused by a specific product, silicon breast
implants.
This led to multiple lawsuits and, in fact, eventually led to companies becoming bankrupt
under the mass suits accusing their silicon product of causing the autoimmune disease.
In retrospect, after all the data was carefully analyzed epidemiologically, it turns out that
there was no increased risk of getting any autoimmune disease in women who had breast
implants.
This was simply the background rate of these diseases, which was no different to implant
or no implant.
Therefore, with 2020 historical hindsight, we can see this episode as one in which there
was no real risk.
But the rumor alone was enough to spread the firm belief that the risk was there, even
to the point of bankrupting a company.
Another similar episode, which crops up from time to time, is the sudden acceleration claim
that cars can suddenly accelerate out of control.
This even got to the point where journalists attempting to investigate the case went to
car engineers to see if they could reproduce the acceleration, which they could but only
under highly contrived situation.
It turns out that you can't or that cars were not suddenly accelerating of their own
accord that what was likely happening was that people were simply stepping on the accelerator
when they thought that they were stepping on the brake.
Often such rumors are promoted by poor investigations and media reports.
Poor questionnaires that ask leading questions, for example, or selective anecdotes.
The media may seek out dramatic stories and ignore other stories.
For example, with an alleged sick building syndrome, if there are 100 people working
in the building, the journalist is likely to interview the person who very emphatically
and dramatically is claiming that they have symptoms, not the people who don't have any
symptoms to report.
There are also other factors that I've described elsewhere in the course such as recall bias
and the tendency for suggestibility.
If someone suggests to you that maybe there is something causing shortness of breath going
on, that may be enough for you to perceive, or in some people anyway, that you have shortness
of breath yourself.
Yet another cause or form of these types of rumors or mass delusion is urban legends.
These represent cultural fears and anxiety.
They spread by word of mouth and now with the internet, they spread by the word of internet.
One example of this is the claim that a fast food restaurant accidentally served a customer
a fried rat.
This has never been documented to occur.
It always occurs to a friend of a friend.
There's always some distance between the person to whom it happened and the person who's taking
the story.
Journalists will often report the rumors that this occurred without ever getting to the
actual person that it allegedly occurred to.
This is based probably on our fears of being served food by others that we don't completely
control.
This is probably a persistent low level fear that manifests in these urban legends that
then spread quickly.
The fact is that people are social as well as emotional creatures.
We respond to the beliefs of others, to our social group, and to the broader culture.
It's important to keep, however, your critical thinking active and not to surrender to these
group dynamics.
