accord that what was likely happening was that people were simply stepping on the accelerator
when they thought that they were stepping on the brake.
Often such rumors are promoted by poor investigations and media reports.
Poor questionnaires that ask leading questions, for example, or selective anecdotes.
The media may seek out dramatic stories and ignore other stories.
For example, with an alleged sick building syndrome, if there are 100 people working
in the building, the journalist is likely to interview the person who very emphatically
and dramatically is claiming that they have symptoms, not the people who don't have any
symptoms to report.
There are also other factors that I've described elsewhere in the course such as recall bias
and the tendency for suggestibility.
If someone suggests to you that maybe there is something causing shortness of breath going
on, that may be enough for you to perceive, or in some people anyway, that you have shortness
of breath yourself.
Yet another cause or form of these types of rumors or mass delusion is urban legends.
These represent cultural fears and anxiety.
They spread by word of mouth and now with the internet, they spread by the word of internet.
One example of this is the claim that a fast food restaurant accidentally served a customer
a fried rat.
This has never been documented to occur.
It always occurs to a friend of a friend.
There's always some distance between the person to whom it happened and the person who's taking
the story.
Journalists will often report the rumors that this occurred without ever getting to the
actual person that it allegedly occurred to.
This is based probably on our fears of being served food by others that we don't completely
control.
This is probably a persistent low level fear that manifests in these urban legends that
then spread quickly.
The fact is that people are social as well as emotional creatures.
We respond to the beliefs of others, to our social group, and to the broader culture.
It's important to keep, however, your critical thinking active and not to surrender to these
group dynamics.
