Well then we can employ a philosophical rule of thumb called Occam's Razor, or the rule
of parsimony.
This theory says, or this rule of thumb states, that the theory that introduces the fewest
new assumptions is preferred.
That a more elaborate theory or a gerry-rig theory that introduces a lot of new assumptions
is, just by chance alone, more likely to be incorrect, because we had to ad hoc invent
those assumptions in order to make the theory work.
The less we have to do that, the more likely we are to be correct.
Now this doesn't mean that the theory that has the fewest new assumptions is the correct
answer, but it at least should be ruled out before we entertain more elaborate ideas that
force us to make new assumptions.
Otherwise, we could endlessly generate ad hoc theories to explain any phenomenon.
This is limited only by human creativity, which is pretty extreme.
If you can eliminate an element from a theory, and it makes no difference to the predictions
or observations, then it's a good idea to do so.
This is like trimming the fat away from scientific theories.
Let me give you an example of the ghost in the machine.
Dualism is a philosophical belief that what we perceive of as our mind, our consciousness,
actually does not come entirely from the brain or from the brain at all.
It comes from some other thing, whether it's spiritual or some other fundamental principle
of nature that we do not currently understand.
This is opposed to the current neuroscientific view that the mind is what the brain does.
One theory of dualism is that the brain is a receptor, that the brain is not generating
our thoughts, mood, beliefs, and activity, that it is simply receiving it from somewhere
else and then acting upon it or translating it into the material world.
However, most forms of this brain as receptor philosophy does not make any predictions that
distinguish it from the signals arising from the brain itself.
If the predictions are all the same, for example, if you damage a part of the brain, you lose
that ability.
Well, the dualist theory might say, well, you lose the receptor for that ability.
But essentially what this does is simply remove the functionality of the mind one step from
the physical brain by introducing a completely unnecessary notion of a mind originating outside
the brain that, again, in some forms doesn't make any predictions that distinguish it from
the mind as the brain.
Therefore, Occam's razor tells us it's unnecessary and should be eliminated.
Science also needs to be understood as a provisional endeavor.
All conclusions in science are subject to further evidence and new ways of interpreting
the data.
