into developmental biology, for example, the basic fact that DNA is the molecule of inheritance
is not going to be overturned.
That is solid scientific knowledge.
I also like to caution against artificial dichotomies within science, so-called hard
versus soft sciences.
It is sometimes argued that some scientific fields like physics, for example, are harder,
therefore more legitimate, while others like the social sciences are soft and squishy.
While there are certain differences, of course, among the various fields of science, different
strengths and weaknesses, the hard versus soft division is unnecessary and counterproductive.
Any discipline can be scientifically hard as long as rigorous methods are followed.
The social sciences do not do have additional challenges because the subject of their study
is a chaotic system in which all the variables cannot be controlled.
Social scientists therefore need to be more cautious in their conclusions.
Look at experiments from multiple angles and be very careful about what they measure
and how they are measuring it and what outcomes they choose to follow.
These challenges are not present, for example, when dealing with the mass of an electron.
However, physicists do have their own challenges when dealing with the subject of their study.
Electrons don't typically decide to change their fundamental properties on a whim, so
physicists do not have to deal with that challenge.
In other words, humans are complex systems with many uncontrollable variables.
This doesn't mean they cannot be studied scientifically, however, as long as rigorous methods of hypothesis
testing are being used.
When it comes to whether or not a discipline is scientific, the subject matter is not the
issue.
Using your rigorous methods, outcomes that are as objective as possible, and systematic
observation is all that's necessary.
If you're doing that, you're doing hard science.
Whether or not you're doing good science is a separate question.
In this lecture, we essentially described science at its best.
In a future lecture, we're going to describe science at its worst.
