There's no metaphysical certitude.
That means that scientists and critical thinkers need to be comfortable with uncertainty.
All data has error bars on it.
But this does not mean that we do not know stuff, that we cannot know anything.
We can use the methods of science to build reliable models about how the world works.
And those models can be so reliable that it's reasonable to treat them as if they're
true, even though we always have that little question mark next to all scientific knowledge.
We can also now look back over centuries or more of scientific progress and ask questions
about how does science typically progress?
Well, it depends on where along the progressive model a scientific theory is.
Early on, the progress of science is more like the paradigm shift model that Cune told
about, where scientific ideas wholesale replace pre-scientific or unscientific ideas.
However, the more a scientific discipline develops, the less it resembles this dramatic
paradigm shift, and the more it resembles a process of refinement.
For example, even the paradigm shift that Einstein brought about of relativity replacing
classic physics did not prove Newton's classic ideas wrong.
Newton's mechanics just became a special case of a deeper understanding of how the universe
works that was described by Einstein.
Einstein was more of a refinement to Newton, not a wholesale replacement of Newton's ideas.
Here's a very illustrative example that I think is helpful.
The ancient Greeks knew that the Earth was a sphere.
They knew this based upon some basic observations.
However, once explorers could sail around the world and measure it more accurately, we realized
that it's actually an oblate spheroid.
It bulges more around the equator than around the poles.
This method was later replaced by modern satellite measurements that were able to detect that
it is also an asymmetrical oblate spheroid.
The southern hemisphere is slightly larger than the north.
That doesn't mean, however, that the notion that the Earth is the sphere is wrong.
It is still right as far as it goes.
The newer measurements were refinements.
We will not discover tomorrow as the paradigm shift model might suggest that, for example,
the Earth is a cube.
That's simply not going to happen.
Many sciences are established, for example, to such a high degree that while refinements
are always possible, fundamental knowledge will not be overturned.
Another example is that of DNA, the molecule that is the substrate of inheritance.
Although we are learning more and more about the details of genetics and how DNA translates
