Methodological naturalism states that material effects must have material causes, that's
the materialism part.
By the word material, we mean the stuff of the universe.
This is not limited to macroscopic matter, it's not even limited to matter itself.
It includes all forms of energy and even now the hypothesized dark matter and dark energy.
These are all considered to be the stuff that the universe is made from.
In addition, methodological naturalism follows natural laws.
In other words, we cannot invoke and then a miracle happens as an explanation for why
something happens in an experiment or observation, for example.
Methodological naturalism is similar to methodological naturalism, but it goes one step further.
This is the philosophical stance that the material universe and the natural laws is all that
there actually is.
Science however does not require such a belief or a philosophy.
It doesn't require that we believe or accept the notion that there is nothing beyond the
natural world.
But it does require that we follow the methods that assume there is nothing beyond the natural
world or that we, in other words, do not rely upon any supernaturalism, anything beyond
the natural world.
It does however make assumptions about the world.
The philosophical underpinnings of science are based upon some assumptions.
There is, for example, an objective reality out there somewhere.
If we weren't living in an objectively real universe, then it would not be possible to
investigate how that universe works.
Science also assumes that the world is predictable and therefore ultimately knowable.
If the laws of nature, for example, were changed on a whim, then it would be impossible to
extrapolate from observations to general laws about how the universe works.
The inductive reasoning that science is largely based upon.
Again, science does not say that these things are true, that the world is predictable and
knowable, but it requires the assumption that they are true.
Science proceeds as if the world is objective, predictable, and knowable.
The methods of science are many and various.
There is not a single scientific method.
It's a collection of methods.
I think, though, at the core of the scientific methods is the notion of hypothesis testing,
formulating an idea in a manner that it can be theoretically and practically subjected
to some kind of objective testing.
This includes the notion that the idea must be able to be proven false.
Testing is also not limited to laboratory experimentation.
