In Stephen Hawking's latest book, The Grand Design, he argues that quote-unquote philosophy
is dead.
He treats philosophy as the discipline that asks the question why, whereas science addresses
questions of how.
But he says philosophers have simply not kept up with the science.
Modern physics and cosmology, the topic of his book, can address why questions, hence
philosophy is no longer needed.
Well, with all due respect to Professor Hawking, I greatly respect him as a scientist, I've
read all his books and love them, but perhaps he is taking too narrow a view of philosophy
in this case.
He also fails to account for the fact that science can only exist within a specific philosophical
framework.
The philosophy of science, the topic of this lecture, defines the assumptions, methods,
and the limits of science.
In other words, if you are doing science, you are practicing philosophy.
In this way, philosophy and science are complementary intellectual disciplines.
I think it's counterproductive to say that we don't need philosophy if we're doing science.
In fact, you are.
By the same token, I think that philosophers benefit from having a basic or fundamental
understanding of science, otherwise when thinking about the philosophy of science, they could
be led astray as well, as we will see later in this talk.
Why is science important?
Well, science is the foundation of critical thinking, the methods for testing our beliefs
about the natural world.
The strengths of science as a series of methods is that it is transparent, there's no special
knowledge or hidden factors.
It's rigorous, which is a generic intellectual virtue, it just means you're thorough, systematic,
and quantitative.
In other words, science is a system of methods that seeks to compensate for all of the failings
of human thinking and perception and memory, etc., that we've been talking about up to
this point in the course.
The discipline of philosophy that deals with knowledge is called epistemology.
Epistemology is about how we know what we know, the nature of human knowledge itself.
It addresses questions about what can be known, even theoretical.
It sets the limits on what human beings can know, and it discusses the relationship between
the methods that we use, the information that we have, and our knowledge.
The specific philosophy under which the methods of science practice is called methodological
naturalism.
