However, science can follow many pathways.
It doesn't necessarily always follow in that same order.
For example, a hypothesis may come before even a single observation is made.
It's all okay as long as in the end the hypotheses are being tested in some objective way.
For example, we may make observations in the light of existing theories and those theories
may bias the way in which we make those observations.
We may find inspiration from many sources which are chaotic, culturally dependent and
determined.
There is no pristine single method of science.
This led philosophers like Thomas Kuhn to think about the nature of scientific progress
over time.
It is messy.
It isn't reduced to this simple pristine textbook caricature.
Thomas Kuhn developed the idea of paradigms in science.
A paradigm is a large overarching idea.
It's like a theory but maybe a little bit bigger.
It's a way of explaining a lot of things in science.
Scientific progress, he argued, is divided into periods of normal science where there
is slow progress and refinement of ideas within a paradigm, within a bigger idea.
Then punctuated by periods of scientific crisis where problems cannot be solved by tweaking
an existing paradigm.
This leads to a paradigm shift where one explanatory model is entirely replaced by a new model
or a new paradigm.
Kuhn's ideas were used to further develop what is now called the postmodernist view
of science, that it is culturally dependent and not progressive.
Now while, as I had previously discussed, there is some truth to that notion, science
is culturally dependent and it's not always progressive.
But postmodernists took that view to the extreme that there was no progress in science.
That one paradigm, in Kuhn's words, was equivalent to the next paradigm.
That when one paradigm got replaced by the next, this was not an inherently progressive
process, that paradigms can only be assessed within their own framework.
Kuhn himself, however, rejected this idea.
He said there is copious evidence that progress does occur in science.
Some ideas in science are better than others and the long history of science is characterized
by this slow, continuous grinding forward of producing better and better models of how
the world works.
Kuhn's model was further criticized as a false dichotomy.
In reality, there isn't necessarily periods of normal science and paradigm shifts.
