It doesn't mean that you have to be in a lab with test tubes, etc.
It could be any way in which we can gather objective information that can have implications
for whether or not a hypothesis is likely to be true or not.
This can include just further observations of the world around us.
It can also include inferences based upon direct evidence.
As long as evidence is gathered in a systematic way and that that evidence can be for or against
one hypothesis or theory, then the notion is testable and you're doing science.
Historical science has often come up in this context.
We cannot, for example, rerun the Big Bang in a laboratory.
We cannot be subjected to direct experimentation in that way.
However, we can ask questions about the existence and the nature of the Big Bang and then make
observations that test those predictions, those theories.
For example, observations of the cosmic background radiation, the radioactive noise that's left
over after the Big Bang.
We cannot go back also in time to witness evolution happening before our eyes or make
evolution of one species into another happen in the laboratory necessarily.
But we can make inferences from the fossils that we find and observe in the world.
We can make inferences from the pattern of genetic evidence that we find in living creatures
and on our observations of what happens during the developmental period from a single cell
to a mature organism.
We can see components of evolution in a lab also, so it's a combination of experimental
and observational data that we're using.
Science also needs to be understood as a human endeavor.
It's not something that occurs only in the abstract or only as a philosophy.
Science is something that people do.
It is therefore imperfect, messy, has many false steps and is plagued with bias and error.
That doesn't mean, however, that it's hopeless because science is also self-correcting.
That is perhaps its strongest feature.
It tends to slowly grind forward as ideas and beliefs are tested and then retested by
one group and then another and then another generation.
And only those ideas which survive repeated attempts at proving them wrong tend to survive
over time.
There's also no one pathway of this process of science.
Textbooks may give a simplified view of how science progresses.
An observation leads to a hypothesis, which is a guess about what is responsible for the
observation, which is then tested by an experiment.
After the result of the experiment, the hypothesis is refined and then the experimental phase
is repeated and this then goes further.
