So science at its best is what I'd like to describe.
Now it is a human endeavor, as I've said, which means that often humans fall short of
the theoretical ideal of how science should proceed.
But at its best, scientific methods are used to develop a model of how the world works.
Hypotheses and theories are only useful to the extent that they explain how nature works
and that they generate predictions that can be tested.
But explanation is not enough.
The ability to explain what we already know is nice.
It is a prerequisite for a scientific theory.
But as I described in earlier lectures, we're really good at seeing patterns, making connections,
and making explanations.
The fact that we can weave a theory to explain observations is a reasonable starting point
for science, but it's not enough.
In order to be a truly scientific theory, a notion has to make predictions about things
we don't already know.
And that will either involve observations that we will make in the future or the results
of specific experiments.
There are also competing theories in science.
And when there is more than one theory, more than one explanation that can account for
the data that we already have, there must be a way to separate them experimentally.
A theory is therefore only useful if it makes predictions that are different than existing
or other theories.
If the predictions made by two theories are exactly the same, then that's a distinction
without a difference.
Even the most challenging aspect of science, in fact, is figuring out how to test something.
Again, we're really good at being at creatively generating ideas, but figuring out a way to
test an idea often, that's where all the hard work of science is really done.
There is a phrase that scientists will use to explain a theory which is meant to be the
highest form of criticism, and that is not even wrong.
By saying an idea is not even wrong, that means the theory does not make any specific
predictions.
It is therefore of no use to science.
An idea that can be proven wrong is highly useful to science.
We learn a lot when we come up with a theory and then prove that it is wrong.
But an idea that can't be tested isn't even wrong.
In other words, it's useless.
What if we have more than one theory that can explain all of the data that we have,
and there is no empirical way to, at least at the moment, separate out those theories?
