it should be.
There is also what was called the ultraviolet catastrophe, meaning that our models of how
atoms work didn't quite pan out, that if our model of say an electron orbiting around
a nucleus is like a planet orbiting around a star, if that simplistic model and atom
were correct, then atoms should collapse.
They should not be able to exist as they do.
Also there was an absence of an ether.
Physicists were trying to figure out what light moves through.
At the time, mathematics told us, the Maxwell equations specifically, that light travels
at a constant speed C, but light moves at speed C with respect to what?
Well maybe there's an ether through which it propagates.
However, research showed that the ether essentially did not exist.
The earth was neither stationary nor moving with respect to the ether, and the only way
to make sense of that was by concluding that there was no ether.
So then what was light moving at speed C with respect to?
Henry Poincaré worked off of the Lorenz transformations, which was just a mathematical
way of describing observations at the time.
He introduced the concept of relativity.
He essentially realized that he could make sense of the mathematics of physics by assuming
that distance and time were relative and that the speed of light was constant.
But he considered this to be a mathematical fix only.
He could not conceive of a universe in which space and time were actually relative.
This kept him from making the tremendous insight or discovery that was later made by Albert
Einstein.
Einstein's true genius was being the first to consider that the universe actually worked
that way.
Space and time are relative, and the speed of light is constant with respect to everything.
It's always moving at C, no matter what your frame of reference or what you're measuring
it with respect to.
He completed his special theory of relativity in 1905.
Perhaps this was the most dramatic paradigm shift in scientific history, from a classical
universe to a relativistic universe.
However, despite the power and the explanatory power of his theories, Einstein's relativity
was not accepted until it was later confirmed by observation and experiment.
So again, we see that while the context of discovery was fascinating, the real credit
goes to the context of later justification.
That's when the real science was done.
That's when Einstein's theories were finally accepted and when he became a household name.
