In fact, there is a continuum of degrees of progress within science.
There are tiny steps, larger steps, and bigger and bigger major shifts in our scientific
thinking.
Those of science have largely now moved beyond the postmodernist view, or at least the extreme
postmodernist view, that science is not even progressive and is not a privileged way of
looking at the world.
It has no privileged relationship to the truth that it's just essentially another form of
philosophy or of cultural ideas.
Philosophers of science now understand that this view was extreme and not really an accurate
description.
In fact, the specific criticism that has been leveled against the extreme postmodernist
view of science is that it confused the context of discovery, which is chaotic and culturally
dependent, with the context of later justification.
Regardless of how new ideas are generated in science, they are eventually subjected
to systematic and rigorous observation, experiment, and critical review, and it is that later
justification which gives science its progressive nature.
Another philosophical objection raised sometimes to the notion that science can actually tell
us something about the way the world actually is, is that science cannot prove itself.
Now, philosophically speaking, this is true, but it's irrelevant because the philosophy
of science doesn't claim that it has objective metaphysical certitude.
Science works within the philosophical framework of science, and that's all it claims to do.
However, we can say that there has been a meta-experiment of science, if you will, that
the assumptions of science, that the world is knowable, that it is predictable, and that
there is an objective reality, and that the methods of science are able to improve upon
our ideas and models of how the world works.
If all of those assumptions are correct, then the endeavor of science should produce
some objective positive results over time, and I think many people think, looking back
at the history of science, that it has in fact done so.
We can send probes to distant planets, and we in fact get back pretty pictures of Jupiter
or Saturn, and that's a pretty good validation of the assumptions of the entire scientific
enterprise.
The theory of relativity is a good example of how scientific knowledge progresses in
reality.
In classic physics, by the end of the 19th century, there was a Cunean crisis.
The physics of the time, what we now call classic physics, could not explain several
observed phenomena.
It could not explain the orbit of Mercury.
There were perturbations, and Mercury was not moving exactly where models predicted
