How then can we operationally define paranormal or supernatural?
Well, anything within the natural world, by definition, is natural and not supernatural.
That part of the equation, I think, is pretty easy and straightforward.
For anything that has an effect on the world, that effect can be theoretically detected and measured.
If ghosts are interacting with the physical world, then they must have some physical material aspect to them,
and that should be observable and testable.
One could argue that any phenomenon that is unknown is simply currently unknown and is not necessarily paranormal.
Could we then define paranormal as any phenomenon that is not just unknown but actually does not follow the laws of nature?
But this is not confined by the known universe and, again, is unfalsifiable.
The normal laws of nature are suspended or violated in the phenomenon that is therefore supernatural.
So we can't say supernatural is anything that's currently unknown.
That's not an adequate definition.
If we then go one step further and say, well, it's things that specifically defy the laws of nature,
then that would be a reasonable definition of supernatural.
But then the next question is, well, then how can we know about such things?
Let's assume, hypothetically, for example, that we live in a paranormal world.
What if the natural world were not all to the reality in which we find ourselves?
Could science ever know about it?
Could it investigate it?
Since, by definition, a paranormal phenomenon could not be explained by the regular laws of nature,
that would mean in a truly paranormal world, any paranormal or supernatural phenomenon would create an anomaly as far as science was concerned.
Now, scientists confront anomalies all the time.
They love anomalies.
An anomaly is something that cannot be explained by our current understanding of the laws of nature.
Therefore, they point to undiscovered laws of nature.
That is where research and new discoveries take place.
So anomalies are great for the advancement of science.
Well, if we lived in a paranormal world, however, where there were phenomena that were supernatural,
these would create anomalies because they would be outside of the known laws of physics or of science.
And these anomalies would be persistent.
They would never be solvable within methodological naturalism because they cannot, by definition, be explained by natural laws.
So the best science could do in a genuinely supernatural world would be to identify anomalies that could never be solved, that were persistent.
But if there were long-standing persistent anomalies, that would be interesting.
