which was to separate faith and science into different magisteria,
different intellectual worlds or realms.
He said that science deals with empirical knowledge of nature,
and that faith or religion, religion's a little bit more of a problematic term,
but we'll say faith, dealt with areas of morality and judgment,
things that could not be ultimately decided with empirical evidence.
This would mean that faith should not be used to address questions that can be answered by science,
according to Gould's NOMA approach,
nor should faith be used to limit what science can investigate.
And at the same time, scientific methods should not be used to address questions
that cannot be investigated scientifically because they are not falsifiable.
The taking the approach that science can answer all questions has been termed philosophically as scientism.
Now, of course, I'm a strong supporter of science,
but you have to recognize the epistemological limits of science.
Science can only be agnostic towards untestable claims.
The important thing, in my opinion, is to define what questions can and should be addressed by science
and not to confuse the two, not to confuse scientific and unscientific questions.
As long as you keep these two arenas separate, I think there is no philosophical problem there,
and people are free to make their own choices about whether or not they should engage in beliefs that are outside the realm of science.
Problems arise, however, when there isn't a clear understanding of how to define the limits of both science
and beliefs that are unscientific.
In the end, it's important to, again, keep these questions separate.
Otherwise, if science tramples on questions that are ultimately not scientific,
then that actually decreases trust and belief in the methods of science.
And when questions of faith or religion trample upon questions that should be scientific,
one might argue that that violates the personal religious freedoms of other people.
Therefore, we shouldn't defend bad science by saying that it cannot be tested by science.
For then, such propositions are outside the realm of science.
They become faith.
Certain beliefs, such as an extra-century perception or creation,
try to straddle these two different worlds, to be science at some times and then faith at others.
And that is the real problem.
At the end of the day, you simply cannot have it both ways.
