Are ghosts real?
Do miracles sometimes happen?
Can science prove the existence of God?
Can science even address these types of questions?
In the last lecture, I discussed the philosophy of science and mentioned the fact that science
is dependent upon a philosophical position known as methodological naturalism, which
holds that material effects must have material causes.
This is not an arbitrary choice, as some may claim.
The methods of science simply do not work without this underlying philosophical basis.
This is because non-material causes cannot be falsified, they cannot be proven to be
untrue.
They therefore fail to meet unnecessary criterion for science.
The reason they can't be falsified is that they are not constrained in any way.
There is no limits to what they can potentially do because they are not, by definition, following
the laws of nature, the laws of material cause and effect.
Now we are not concerned about the ability to falsify things because we are trying to
be negative.
That is simply how critical thinking and science works.
That is how we separate out what is likely to be true from what is likely not to be true
by looking for observations, experimental or otherwise, that can show that an idea is
wrong, it cannot be true.
And when an idea, theory, survives multiple repeated attempts at showing that it can't
be true, then scientists begin to take that theory seriously and consider that it's a
reasonable model for how the natural world works.
Let's take ghosts, for example, whatever you think a ghost might be.
How are their characteristics constrained?
How could we falsify, for example, the hypothesis that ghosts are responsible for any particular
observed phenomenon?
Let's take a photograph, for example.
Many people present photographs of orbs or splotches of light on film as evidence for
a ghost.
That splotch of light, that's a ghost.
Well, how could we test that hypothesis?
How could we more specifically prove that it cannot be true?
In order to do that, we would have to say, well, ghosts are incapable of producing certain
features or characteristics or certain specific phenomena.
But what is it that would keep a ghost from being able to do that?
That would mean that they are in some way following the laws of nature.
They are following methodological naturalism in a way.
If they are not, if they are outside of what we understand as the laws of nature, then they
could do, theoretically, anything.
And if they could do anything, they're unconstrained, then they are untestable by the methods of
science.
In other words, you have to ask the question, is there any observation or experiment that
is not potentially compatible with the hypothesis that ghosts exist?
If the answer is no, then ghosts are simply an unscientific notion.
Other examples of claims that cannot be falsified might include the notion that life is the
result of creation.
This is often defended by saying that the world was created recently, in fact, but it
was made to look as if it is ancient.
We could likewise argue that the world was created five minutes ago, but was created
to appear as if it is ancient, as if it has a history.
For a specific example, we might question, well, if the world and the universe is 6,000
years old, how is it that light from a galaxy a million or two million light years away
has already reached us?
Well, you could make the argument that the light was created already on the way, so that
it appears to have been traveling for millions of years.
But with that type of special pleading strategy, you essentially render the hypothesis of a
recent creation that looks ancient completely unfalsifiable, untestable by science, you
are putting it therefore outside of methodological naturalism.
Another example or such notions are not falsifiable in the way that they are constructed.
There is a difference between some ideas that are inherently unfalsifiable, they could never
be falsified just simply by the nature of the claim themselves.
Others are rendered unfalsifiable by the way they are constructed, meaning the ad hoc
special pleading is used in order to insulate them from falsification.
This is done ironically as a way of defending the belief, but what it really does is just
remove it from the arena of science.
Another way in which creation beliefs are unfalsifiable is that the creator itself as
an entity is not constrained in any way scientifically, right?
So a creator by definition and by the way it's typically conceived is an entity that
lies outside of the constraints of the physical laws of the universe, a supernatural being.
The creator could potentially therefore have created life to look like anything, like any
thing that we might observe in nature.
It could even look as if it had evolved.
Therefore any observation of the natural world is compatible with creation.
Creation is therefore unfalsifiable and not a science.
In fact proponents of creation science or a newer version of that intelligent design
have often been challenged to specifically state a type of observation that would falsify
intelligent design or creation.
Give me some specific feature that the intelligent designer or the creator could not have created
and they are unable to do so.
They are unable to say how creation can be falsified, which is an admission whether they
like it or not that it is not a science.
As an example of this is Philip E. Johnson.
Now he is a lawyer who is credited with founding the intelligent design movement.
He argues for what he calls theistic realism.
Essentially he has been on a campaign since the early 1990s to allow supernatural explanations
back into the realm of science.
He and others that follow him argue that the rejection of supernatural explanations is
nothing more than prejudice.
Scientists are rigging the game from the beginning, not allowing supernatural explanations into
the formulation of scientific theories.
However Johnson and others miss the point that again this is not an arbitrary choice
by scientists, it is necessary for the methods of science to even function.
This philosophical debate was also fought in previous centuries.
Philosophers already wrangled with this idea of the relationship between supernaturalism
and scientific methodology and it was realized by these philosophers of science that well
you can't have it both ways.
You cannot introduce supernatural or miraculous causes, non-material causes, into scientific
explanations because they are not constrained and not falsifiable.
In fact in the recent Dover vs. Kitzmiller trial when the teaching of intelligent design
in the public schools was tested constitutionally, Judge John Jones found that the claim by the
defendants, those promoting the idea that intelligent design was a legitimate science,
that supernatural explanations are admissible in the arena of science.
Judge Jones ruled that this is not correct.
This has already been decided by philosophers of science.
This is a battle that was fought and won a couple of hundred years ago and it is no
longer valid to consider this as a legitimate philosophical position.
Philosopher Bertrand Russell also came up with an analogy to explore the relationship
between testable and untestable claims when making theories and hypotheses.
His analogy is now known as Russell's teapot.
What he said was imagine someone claiming to believe that there is an ordinary teapot
in orbit around the sun somewhere between the orbits of the Earth and Mars.
Now this would be a small dark object not visible by any instrument we have on Earth.
We do not have any probes in outer space that could theoretically detect such a thing.
And even if we did, space is an awfully big place.
The amount of territory between the orbits of the Earth and Mars are so great that we
can have dozens of probes looking for centuries and would still have an insignificant chance
of detecting Russell's teapot in a lonely orbit around the sun.
Therefore what can we say about the existence of this teapot?
It cannot in practical terms be proven not to exist.
But does that mean that it's reasonable to conclude that it therefore does exist
and to promote a belief in this teapot?
Russell used this example also to make the point that the burden of proof for any particular claim,
at least within the arena of science, lies with those who are making the claim.
The inability to prove that Russell's teapot is there, or to prove that it's not there,
to prove the claim false, is not a sufficient justification for believing that there is a teapot
orbiting the sun outside the orbit of the Earth.
There are also endless potential such claims that we can think up.
Again, humans have great creativity.
We can weave endless such claims that cannot either practically or theoretically be proven false.
Philosophically speaking, should we therefore believe in every such contention that somebody can dream up?
This also raises the issue of proving a negative in science.
Well, it's not possible to absolutely prove a negative in terms of proving the non-existence of something.
You might be able to demonstrate that something is impossible given what we know about the laws of science
and the laws of nature, and that's reasonable.
But something like, is there a teapot orbiting the sun, is practically an impossibility to prove.
Conclusions that something like Russell's teapot does not exist
can only be as good as the extent to which a thorough search for that thing has been conducted.
Such searches are typically always going to be incomplete,
and by the time you've completed a planned search, well, things have changed,
and you can argue that the pot, for example, may have moved, so now you have to go back and search again.
So therefore, the searching for the existence of something and proving it does not exist could be an endless task that is never complete.
Still, this is not a justification for a positive claim, claiming that the pot does in fact exist,
and that was Bertrand Russell's point.
Well, what if, rather than just the fact that we can't prove something doesn't exist,
what if all other explanations for a phenomenon have been ruled out?
Let's go back to our example of a photograph of a splotch of light on film, and someone claims that this is a ghost.
One argument that might be put forward for that is that, well, all other explanations for how that light got on that film have been ruled out.
Therefore, the only argument that we're left with is that it's a ghost.
Well, as we discussed in the lectures on logic and logical fallacy, this is what we call the argument from ignorance.
If we don't know what caused the light on the film, then we don't know.
That doesn't mean that it's any particular cause, such as a ghost.
This also commits what I described as the false dichotomy logical fallacy.
If it's not any known phenomenon, then it therefore is a ghost.
When, in fact, there could be other things that we are currently unaware of that could potentially explain that.
Ruling out competing hypotheses means the phenomenon is simply unknown.
There can always be other possibilities that we are currently unaware of, which is related to yet another logical fallacy,
and that is confusing, currently unknown with unknowable.
Not knowing what caused the light to be on the film doesn't mean we will never be able to come up with a naturalistic explanation for it,
and therefore need to appeal to a supernatural explanation.
Let's discuss now what philosophers call the epistemological limits of science.
As I stated in the previous lecture, epistemology is the philosophical study of the scientific method,
of scientific methodology, how we know what we know, and how science relates to our knowledge.
Science only deals with scientific claims, meaning any claim that can be theoretically rendered scientific
by being stated in a way that is testable and falsifiable.
Not only does it have to be theoretically testable, it has to be practically testable as well.
You have to formulate an observation or an experiment that could either support or refute, more importantly, the particular hypothesis.
Interestingly, almost any claim can be rendered scientific if it is systematically insulated from falsification.
Remember Carl Sagan's floating invisible, heatless, incorporeal dragon that I talked about in an earlier lecture.
If you take any idea and remove any ability to falsify it by ad hoc special pleading,
you don't prove that the idea is true, all you do is render it outside of the arena of science.
Then there are those ideas that cannot be falsified even in principle.
There is a comedian who tells the joke that he suspects that all of the furniture in his house has been secretly replaced with exact duplicates.
We understand that as funny because, well, how would you possibly know?
That's an inherently unfalsifiable claim as stated.
There are many notions like that, they cannot even in theory be falsified.
Another example of that would be the Earth was created five minutes ago to look exactly as if it were 4.5 billion years old with all of the natural history that implies.
That's an inherently unfalsifiable claim.
Paranormal researchers or those who promote beliefs in the supernatural often try to have it both ways, however.
They will claim scientific evidence for the paranormal and therefore they treat paranormal claims as if they are empirical scientific claims.
Then they will argue, however, that the paranormal cannot be disproved. How can you prove there aren't ghosts?
They therefore are trying to have it both ways.
They step one foot into the arena of science when they try to bolster their claims with evidence,
but then they remove it from the arena of science in order to prevent their claims from being falsified by those same scientific methods.
Again, they employ special pleading in order to insulate their claims from falsification.
What then is the stance of science, of scientific methodology and epistemology towards those claims that cannot be falsified?
Towards Russell's teapot, for example.
A claim must either be within or without the boundary of scientific investigation.
Again, you can't have it both ways.
If it is within the realm of scientific investigation, then it should be treated as any other scientific claim.
If it's outside the realm of science, meaning that it's not falsifiable, then science can only be agnostic towards such claims,
meaning that the position of science is it's unknown and unknowable by science because it's not investigated within the methods of naturalism.
Although philosophically, you can then make other statements about that claim.
They're just not scientific conclusions.
You might employ, for example, Occam's razor to say that, well, such a hypothesis is unnecessary.
I can't prove that it's wrong.
It's not empirically testable, but it's also unnecessary in order to explain the natural world that we observe.
How then can we operationally define paranormal or supernatural?
Well, anything within the natural world, by definition, is natural and not supernatural.
That part of the equation, I think, is pretty easy and straightforward.
For anything that has an effect on the world, that effect can be theoretically detected and measured.
If ghosts are interacting with the physical world, then they must have some physical material aspect to them,
and that should be observable and testable.
One could argue that any phenomenon that is unknown is simply currently unknown and is not necessarily paranormal.
Could we then define paranormal as any phenomenon that is not just unknown but actually does not follow the laws of nature?
But this is not confined by the known universe and, again, is unfalsifiable.
The normal laws of nature are suspended or violated in the phenomenon that is therefore supernatural.
So we can't say supernatural is anything that's currently unknown.
That's not an adequate definition.
If we then go one step further and say, well, it's things that specifically defy the laws of nature,
then that would be a reasonable definition of supernatural.
But then the next question is, well, then how can we know about such things?
Let's assume, hypothetically, for example, that we live in a paranormal world.
What if the natural world were not all to the reality in which we find ourselves?
Could science ever know about it?
Could it investigate it?
Since, by definition, a paranormal phenomenon could not be explained by the regular laws of nature,
that would mean in a truly paranormal world, any paranormal or supernatural phenomenon would create an anomaly as far as science was concerned.
Now, scientists confront anomalies all the time.
They love anomalies.
An anomaly is something that cannot be explained by our current understanding of the laws of nature.
Therefore, they point to undiscovered laws of nature.
That is where research and new discoveries take place.
So anomalies are great for the advancement of science.
Well, if we lived in a paranormal world, however, where there were phenomena that were supernatural,
these would create anomalies because they would be outside of the known laws of physics or of science.
And these anomalies would be persistent.
They would never be solvable within methodological naturalism because they cannot, by definition, be explained by natural laws.
So the best science could do in a genuinely supernatural world would be to identify anomalies that could never be solved, that were persistent.
But if there were long-standing persistent anomalies, that would be interesting.
But what it really means, could we then know that we lived in a supernatural or paranormal world?
It would at least be a little bit compelling.
But that then creates the question, well, what does that mean to be persistent?
The scientific endeavor is only really a few centuries old and has only been institutionalized and robust for the last one to two hundred years, realistically.
That's not much of human history.
We don't have a long enough experience with systematic scientific investigation of the natural world to have a sense of,
well, how long would a really difficult problem or anomaly persist before we might solve it?
There have been questions in science that vexed scientists for decades, but then we ultimately did solve those problems.
For example, I gave in an earlier lecture the example of classical physics being unable to explain things like the orbit of Mercury.
During that forty or so year period where physicists had no idea why Mercury wasn't obeying the orbit that we thought it should,
would it have been reasonable to assume that there were fairies that were altering the orbit of Mercury
or to introduce some other paranormal explanation or to simply say, well, we don't understand this yet.
There must be some deeper law to nature that science has not yet figured out.
But what if such anomalies persisted for not just decades but for centuries or perhaps even millennia?
Is there any point at which we would say, okay, this anomaly will never be solved by science?
It must point to a supernatural or a paranormal world?
Well, again, that's really a philosophical question I don't think I'm going to be able to answer.
What I would say is that the history of science is one of fairly steady progress,
and this speaks well for the philosophy of methodological naturalism.
These of yesterday have largely been solved, replaced by new, more subtle or deeper anomalies.
As science progresses over time, our answers get more and more subtle and our knowledge gets deeper and deeper.
Progress over time is a more telling feature of science than the fact that at any given time there are anomalies we can't explain.
There are always going to be anomalies until science has explained absolutely everything about the universe,
and that's a different philosophical question.
I would also say that the scientific approach is very practical.
Concluding that a phenomenon, an anomaly, is paranormal or supernatural, can be looked at as a kintube giving up.
Essentially saying, well, this is unknowable, we're never going to figure this out, so let's just label it as supernatural.
The scientific approach, however, is to never give up, to assume that anomalies are ultimately understandable,
and then to proceed along the empirical path of scientific investigation.
At least so far, this approach has worked out to be very practical and useful.
Whether or not it's absolutely philosophically correct is something that we can arguably never know.
What about miracles? I've been talking about supernatural and the paranormal.
What about alleged miracles, a phenomenon that appear to defy the laws of nature?
Well, they're pretty much the same thing that I've been describing.
Something that happens that cannot be explained, it's anomalous.
But still, this requires simply an argument from current ignorance in order to label it as a miracle.
This lecture has been dancing around so far the question of faith and science.
Faith is belief without knowledge, by definition.
It's believing in something for reasons other than empirical evidence, logic, and philosophy.
At least in the scientific sense.
So, are faith and science incompatible?
Well, that depends upon how you define and approach each.
If faith is belief outside of the empirical arena of science, then it is certainly not scientific.
And therefore, faith cannot be reasonably used in order to address scientific questions.
At the same time, since science has epistemological limits, there is an arena of science,
it cannot address every single conceivable question.
There are some beliefs about the ultimate nature of reality that are not just currently unknown,
they're unscientific in the way they are formulated.
Is it reasonable to then have a position of faith in a position about which science can only be agnostic?
These are actually more personal and philosophical questions, although people certainly have a lot of very strong beliefs,
in my opinion, about this.
On both ends of the spectrum, there are those who feel that science can prove their faith correct,
and there are those who feel that every question is ultimately scientific, or at least should be.
Whereas I say that, well, I agree that science has its realm and its limits,
and what people do outside of that realm is more the arena of personal choice.
In fact, this does fall under the realm of freedom of religion.
People are free to believe what they will about these unanswerable questions,
questions that are outside the realm of science and to which science can only be agnostic.
There are also certain kinds of questions that are inherently outside the realm of science,
questions of value, aesthetics, and moral judgments.
These things are not objectively resolvable by empirical evidence.
That doesn't mean that science cannot inform these arenas.
Science can inform questions of moral judgments, for example,
but they cannot ultimately decide them in a completely objective, empirical way.
Stephen J. Gould, who was a paleontologist, coined the term non-overlapping magisteria,
or NOMA, to describe his approach to this question,
which was to separate faith and science into different magisteria,
different intellectual worlds or realms.
He said that science deals with empirical knowledge of nature,
and that faith or religion, religion's a little bit more of a problematic term,
but we'll say faith, dealt with areas of morality and judgment,
things that could not be ultimately decided with empirical evidence.
This would mean that faith should not be used to address questions that can be answered by science,
according to Gould's NOMA approach,
nor should faith be used to limit what science can investigate.
And at the same time, scientific methods should not be used to address questions
that cannot be investigated scientifically because they are not falsifiable.
The taking the approach that science can answer all questions has been termed philosophically as scientism.
Now, of course, I'm a strong supporter of science,
but you have to recognize the epistemological limits of science.
Science can only be agnostic towards untestable claims.
The important thing, in my opinion, is to define what questions can and should be addressed by science
and not to confuse the two, not to confuse scientific and unscientific questions.
As long as you keep these two arenas separate, I think there is no philosophical problem there,
and people are free to make their own choices about whether or not they should engage in beliefs that are outside the realm of science.
Problems arise, however, when there isn't a clear understanding of how to define the limits of both science
and beliefs that are unscientific.
In the end, it's important to, again, keep these questions separate.
Otherwise, if science tramples on questions that are ultimately not scientific,
then that actually decreases trust and belief in the methods of science.
And when questions of faith or religion trample upon questions that should be scientific,
one might argue that that violates the personal religious freedoms of other people.
Therefore, we shouldn't defend bad science by saying that it cannot be tested by science.
For then, such propositions are outside the realm of science.
They become faith.
Certain beliefs, such as an extra-century perception or creation,
try to straddle these two different worlds, to be science at some times and then faith at others.
And that is the real problem.
At the end of the day, you simply cannot have it both ways.
