Well, they're pretty much the same thing that I've been describing.
Something that happens that cannot be explained, it's anomalous.
But still, this requires simply an argument from current ignorance in order to label it as a miracle.
This lecture has been dancing around so far the question of faith and science.
Faith is belief without knowledge, by definition.
It's believing in something for reasons other than empirical evidence, logic, and philosophy.
At least in the scientific sense.
So, are faith and science incompatible?
Well, that depends upon how you define and approach each.
If faith is belief outside of the empirical arena of science, then it is certainly not scientific.
And therefore, faith cannot be reasonably used in order to address scientific questions.
At the same time, since science has epistemological limits, there is an arena of science,
it cannot address every single conceivable question.
There are some beliefs about the ultimate nature of reality that are not just currently unknown,
they're unscientific in the way they are formulated.
Is it reasonable to then have a position of faith in a position about which science can only be agnostic?
These are actually more personal and philosophical questions, although people certainly have a lot of very strong beliefs,
in my opinion, about this.
On both ends of the spectrum, there are those who feel that science can prove their faith correct,
and there are those who feel that every question is ultimately scientific, or at least should be.
Whereas I say that, well, I agree that science has its realm and its limits,
and what people do outside of that realm is more the arena of personal choice.
In fact, this does fall under the realm of freedom of religion.
People are free to believe what they will about these unanswerable questions,
questions that are outside the realm of science and to which science can only be agnostic.
There are also certain kinds of questions that are inherently outside the realm of science,
questions of value, aesthetics, and moral judgments.
These things are not objectively resolvable by empirical evidence.
That doesn't mean that science cannot inform these arenas.
Science can inform questions of moral judgments, for example,
but they cannot ultimately decide them in a completely objective, empirical way.
Stephen J. Gould, who was a paleontologist, coined the term non-overlapping magisteria,
or NOMA, to describe his approach to this question,
