remove it from the arena of science.
Another way in which creation beliefs are unfalsifiable is that the creator itself as
an entity is not constrained in any way scientifically, right?
So a creator by definition and by the way it's typically conceived is an entity that
lies outside of the constraints of the physical laws of the universe, a supernatural being.
The creator could potentially therefore have created life to look like anything, like any
thing that we might observe in nature.
It could even look as if it had evolved.
Therefore any observation of the natural world is compatible with creation.
Creation is therefore unfalsifiable and not a science.
In fact proponents of creation science or a newer version of that intelligent design
have often been challenged to specifically state a type of observation that would falsify
intelligent design or creation.
Give me some specific feature that the intelligent designer or the creator could not have created
and they are unable to do so.
They are unable to say how creation can be falsified, which is an admission whether they
like it or not that it is not a science.
As an example of this is Philip E. Johnson.
Now he is a lawyer who is credited with founding the intelligent design movement.
He argues for what he calls theistic realism.
Essentially he has been on a campaign since the early 1990s to allow supernatural explanations
back into the realm of science.
He and others that follow him argue that the rejection of supernatural explanations is
nothing more than prejudice.
Scientists are rigging the game from the beginning, not allowing supernatural explanations into
the formulation of scientific theories.
However Johnson and others miss the point that again this is not an arbitrary choice
by scientists, it is necessary for the methods of science to even function.
This philosophical debate was also fought in previous centuries.
Philosophers already wrangled with this idea of the relationship between supernaturalism
and scientific methodology and it was realized by these philosophers of science that well
you can't have it both ways.
You cannot introduce supernatural or miraculous causes, non-material causes, into scientific
