How could we more specifically prove that it cannot be true?
In order to do that, we would have to say, well, ghosts are incapable of producing certain
features or characteristics or certain specific phenomena.
But what is it that would keep a ghost from being able to do that?
That would mean that they are in some way following the laws of nature.
They are following methodological naturalism in a way.
If they are not, if they are outside of what we understand as the laws of nature, then they
could do, theoretically, anything.
And if they could do anything, they're unconstrained, then they are untestable by the methods of
science.
In other words, you have to ask the question, is there any observation or experiment that
is not potentially compatible with the hypothesis that ghosts exist?
If the answer is no, then ghosts are simply an unscientific notion.
Other examples of claims that cannot be falsified might include the notion that life is the
result of creation.
This is often defended by saying that the world was created recently, in fact, but it
was made to look as if it is ancient.
We could likewise argue that the world was created five minutes ago, but was created
to appear as if it is ancient, as if it has a history.
For a specific example, we might question, well, if the world and the universe is 6,000
years old, how is it that light from a galaxy a million or two million light years away
has already reached us?
Well, you could make the argument that the light was created already on the way, so that
it appears to have been traveling for millions of years.
But with that type of special pleading strategy, you essentially render the hypothesis of a
recent creation that looks ancient completely unfalsifiable, untestable by science, you
are putting it therefore outside of methodological naturalism.
Another example or such notions are not falsifiable in the way that they are constructed.
There is a difference between some ideas that are inherently unfalsifiable, they could never
be falsified just simply by the nature of the claim themselves.
Others are rendered unfalsifiable by the way they are constructed, meaning the ad hoc
special pleading is used in order to insulate them from falsification.
This is done ironically as a way of defending the belief, but what it really does is just
