But what it really means, could we then know that we lived in a supernatural or paranormal world?
It would at least be a little bit compelling.
But that then creates the question, well, what does that mean to be persistent?
The scientific endeavor is only really a few centuries old and has only been institutionalized and robust for the last one to two hundred years, realistically.
That's not much of human history.
We don't have a long enough experience with systematic scientific investigation of the natural world to have a sense of,
well, how long would a really difficult problem or anomaly persist before we might solve it?
There have been questions in science that vexed scientists for decades, but then we ultimately did solve those problems.
For example, I gave in an earlier lecture the example of classical physics being unable to explain things like the orbit of Mercury.
During that forty or so year period where physicists had no idea why Mercury wasn't obeying the orbit that we thought it should,
would it have been reasonable to assume that there were fairies that were altering the orbit of Mercury
or to introduce some other paranormal explanation or to simply say, well, we don't understand this yet.
There must be some deeper law to nature that science has not yet figured out.
But what if such anomalies persisted for not just decades but for centuries or perhaps even millennia?
Is there any point at which we would say, okay, this anomaly will never be solved by science?
It must point to a supernatural or a paranormal world?
Well, again, that's really a philosophical question I don't think I'm going to be able to answer.
What I would say is that the history of science is one of fairly steady progress,
and this speaks well for the philosophy of methodological naturalism.
These of yesterday have largely been solved, replaced by new, more subtle or deeper anomalies.
As science progresses over time, our answers get more and more subtle and our knowledge gets deeper and deeper.
Progress over time is a more telling feature of science than the fact that at any given time there are anomalies we can't explain.
There are always going to be anomalies until science has explained absolutely everything about the universe,
and that's a different philosophical question.
I would also say that the scientific approach is very practical.
Concluding that a phenomenon, an anomaly, is paranormal or supernatural, can be looked at as a kintube giving up.
Essentially saying, well, this is unknowable, we're never going to figure this out, so let's just label it as supernatural.
The scientific approach, however, is to never give up, to assume that anomalies are ultimately understandable,
and then to proceed along the empirical path of scientific investigation.
At least so far, this approach has worked out to be very practical and useful.
Whether or not it's absolutely philosophically correct is something that we can arguably never know.
What about miracles? I've been talking about supernatural and the paranormal.
What about alleged miracles, a phenomenon that appear to defy the laws of nature?
