This also raises the issue of proving a negative in science.
Well, it's not possible to absolutely prove a negative in terms of proving the non-existence of something.
You might be able to demonstrate that something is impossible given what we know about the laws of science
and the laws of nature, and that's reasonable.
But something like, is there a teapot orbiting the sun, is practically an impossibility to prove.
Conclusions that something like Russell's teapot does not exist
can only be as good as the extent to which a thorough search for that thing has been conducted.
Such searches are typically always going to be incomplete,
and by the time you've completed a planned search, well, things have changed,
and you can argue that the pot, for example, may have moved, so now you have to go back and search again.
So therefore, the searching for the existence of something and proving it does not exist could be an endless task that is never complete.
Still, this is not a justification for a positive claim, claiming that the pot does in fact exist,
and that was Bertrand Russell's point.
Well, what if, rather than just the fact that we can't prove something doesn't exist,
what if all other explanations for a phenomenon have been ruled out?
Let's go back to our example of a photograph of a splotch of light on film, and someone claims that this is a ghost.
One argument that might be put forward for that is that, well, all other explanations for how that light got on that film have been ruled out.
Therefore, the only argument that we're left with is that it's a ghost.
Well, as we discussed in the lectures on logic and logical fallacy, this is what we call the argument from ignorance.
If we don't know what caused the light on the film, then we don't know.
That doesn't mean that it's any particular cause, such as a ghost.
This also commits what I described as the false dichotomy logical fallacy.
If it's not any known phenomenon, then it therefore is a ghost.
When, in fact, there could be other things that we are currently unaware of that could potentially explain that.
Ruling out competing hypotheses means the phenomenon is simply unknown.
There can always be other possibilities that we are currently unaware of, which is related to yet another logical fallacy,
and that is confusing, currently unknown with unknowable.
Not knowing what caused the light to be on the film doesn't mean we will never be able to come up with a naturalistic explanation for it,
and therefore need to appeal to a supernatural explanation.
Let's discuss now what philosophers call the epistemological limits of science.
As I stated in the previous lecture, epistemology is the philosophical study of the scientific method,
of scientific methodology, how we know what we know, and how science relates to our knowledge.
Science only deals with scientific claims, meaning any claim that can be theoretically rendered scientific
