explanations because they are not constrained and not falsifiable.
In fact in the recent Dover vs. Kitzmiller trial when the teaching of intelligent design
in the public schools was tested constitutionally, Judge John Jones found that the claim by the
defendants, those promoting the idea that intelligent design was a legitimate science,
that supernatural explanations are admissible in the arena of science.
Judge Jones ruled that this is not correct.
This has already been decided by philosophers of science.
This is a battle that was fought and won a couple of hundred years ago and it is no
longer valid to consider this as a legitimate philosophical position.
Philosopher Bertrand Russell also came up with an analogy to explore the relationship
between testable and untestable claims when making theories and hypotheses.
His analogy is now known as Russell's teapot.
What he said was imagine someone claiming to believe that there is an ordinary teapot
in orbit around the sun somewhere between the orbits of the Earth and Mars.
Now this would be a small dark object not visible by any instrument we have on Earth.
We do not have any probes in outer space that could theoretically detect such a thing.
And even if we did, space is an awfully big place.
The amount of territory between the orbits of the Earth and Mars are so great that we
can have dozens of probes looking for centuries and would still have an insignificant chance
of detecting Russell's teapot in a lonely orbit around the sun.
Therefore what can we say about the existence of this teapot?
It cannot in practical terms be proven not to exist.
But does that mean that it's reasonable to conclude that it therefore does exist
and to promote a belief in this teapot?
Russell used this example also to make the point that the burden of proof for any particular claim,
at least within the arena of science, lies with those who are making the claim.
The inability to prove that Russell's teapot is there, or to prove that it's not there,
to prove the claim false, is not a sufficient justification for believing that there is a teapot
orbiting the sun outside the orbit of the Earth.
There are also endless potential such claims that we can think up.
Again, humans have great creativity.
We can weave endless such claims that cannot either practically or theoretically be proven false.
Philosophically speaking, should we therefore believe in every such contention that somebody can dream up?
