by being stated in a way that is testable and falsifiable.
Not only does it have to be theoretically testable, it has to be practically testable as well.
You have to formulate an observation or an experiment that could either support or refute, more importantly, the particular hypothesis.
Interestingly, almost any claim can be rendered scientific if it is systematically insulated from falsification.
Remember Carl Sagan's floating invisible, heatless, incorporeal dragon that I talked about in an earlier lecture.
If you take any idea and remove any ability to falsify it by ad hoc special pleading,
you don't prove that the idea is true, all you do is render it outside of the arena of science.
Then there are those ideas that cannot be falsified even in principle.
There is a comedian who tells the joke that he suspects that all of the furniture in his house has been secretly replaced with exact duplicates.
We understand that as funny because, well, how would you possibly know?
That's an inherently unfalsifiable claim as stated.
There are many notions like that, they cannot even in theory be falsified.
Another example of that would be the Earth was created five minutes ago to look exactly as if it were 4.5 billion years old with all of the natural history that implies.
That's an inherently unfalsifiable claim.
Paranormal researchers or those who promote beliefs in the supernatural often try to have it both ways, however.
They will claim scientific evidence for the paranormal and therefore they treat paranormal claims as if they are empirical scientific claims.
Then they will argue, however, that the paranormal cannot be disproved. How can you prove there aren't ghosts?
They therefore are trying to have it both ways.
They step one foot into the arena of science when they try to bolster their claims with evidence,
but then they remove it from the arena of science in order to prevent their claims from being falsified by those same scientific methods.
Again, they employ special pleading in order to insulate their claims from falsification.
What then is the stance of science, of scientific methodology and epistemology towards those claims that cannot be falsified?
Towards Russell's teapot, for example.
A claim must either be within or without the boundary of scientific investigation.
Again, you can't have it both ways.
If it is within the realm of scientific investigation, then it should be treated as any other scientific claim.
If it's outside the realm of science, meaning that it's not falsifiable, then science can only be agnostic towards such claims,
meaning that the position of science is it's unknown and unknowable by science because it's not investigated within the methods of naturalism.
Although philosophically, you can then make other statements about that claim.
They're just not scientific conclusions.
You might employ, for example, Occam's razor to say that, well, such a hypothesis is unnecessary.
I can't prove that it's wrong.
It's not empirically testable, but it's also unnecessary in order to explain the natural world that we observe.
