sizes in general of all the studies tend to shrink.
This is called the decline effect, and it exists even for real phenomena for things
that exist.
Again, the question is, does the decline effect cause the results to shrink down to zero or
do they shrink down to a persistent effect, although generally tending to be smaller than
the preliminary studies?
What this reflects is a researcher bias.
The less rigorous studies not only tend to be more variable in their results, they tend
to be more shifted or biased towards the positive, and then that positive bias gets worked out
as studies become more rigorous.
So truly, it takes time.
It may take years, more than a decade, for any specific research question to mature and
advance to the point where we're seeing reliable results.
Preliminary studies are very misleading and need to be considered preliminary.
One type of analysis that looks at many different studies that are addressing a similar question
or the same question is called a meta-analysis, and you may read that often, a meta-analysis
shows.
Now, this is not new data.
This is not a new observation or a new experimental study.
Rather, a meta-analysis is looking at previous studies, and then it's a mathematical method
of combining the results of multiple studies into a new statistical analysis.
This is a way of getting greater power.
If you combine 10 studies, each with 100 subjects on average, now you have one meta-study with
a thousand subjects and greater power.
However, the meta-analysis introduces new possibilities for bias.
It generally follows the rule of garbage in, garbage out.
If the preliminary studies were poorly designed and biased, the meta-analysis will just be
combining that biased and unreliable data.
So it still reflects the bias of these preliminary studies.
In fact, the predictive value of a meta-analysis has been looked at by researchers.
If you take any question that we consider we now know the answer to because large definitive
rigorous trials have been done, and then you look back at previous meta-analyses, you find
that a meta-analysis is a very poor predictor of the outcome of those definitive studies.
Maybe about 60 to 70 percent, which is not much better than chance or flipping a coin.
There are other types of systematic review that can be done as well.
Systematic reviews themselves look at all the evidence and they consider the quality
of each study.
That can also be done in a meta-analysis, but specifically a systematic review focuses
on this consideration of the quality of each study.
Looking for patterns in the literature, consistency, replication, relation to effect size and study
quality.
So for example, if we see when we look at all the literature that the results are very
