mixed, different outcomes seem to be positive in different studies rather than the same
outcomes occurring.
Or we see that there is an inverse relationship between the quality of a study and the size
of the outcome with the best studies tending to be negative.
That kind of pattern in the literature reflects the null hypothesis, a phenomenon that is
not real.
Systematic reviews are a great way to look at the evidence in the literature.
They themselves are also subject to bias.
For example, which studies do you include in your systematic review?
What methods did you use to find studies to include in the review?
What were your inclusion criteria?
All of these are choices made by researchers that can affect the outcome of the systematic
review.
It should also be noted that there are organizations dedicated to doing high quality systematic
reviews.
In my own area of medicine, for example, there is the Cochrane Collaboration, an evidence-based
medicine organization that specializes in producing very high quality and thorough systematic
reviews.
Though they are not always considered definitive, they are highly relied upon by the medical
community.
In the end, there is always a judgment call to be made and there is no replacement for
that judgment.
For example, as Andrew Lang wrote, an unsophisticated forecaster uses statistics as a drunken man
uses lamp posts for support rather than illumination.
You don't want to use scientific evidence in the same way to support ideas and beliefs
that you already have.
Rather you want to use the scientific evidence in order to determine what you should believe.
You should back away from any of your biases and your a priori conclusions and let the
evidence take you where it will by doing as unbiased an evaluation as possible.
All this complexity in designing studies, scientific studies and evaluating the literature
is a way of compensating for the flaws and weaknesses in our brains.
It's important to use the evidence to figure out what is true, not to defend what you already
wish to be true.
