Have you ever heard or used the phrase studies show?
It's often used as a vague reference to data or research that supports a position.
You've probably heard me use a similar phrase throughout this course.
I refer to studies that are backing up my points.
Although I'll point out that in this course, there is an accompanying book that has the
actual specific references to the studies I'm talking about.
But in casual conversation, people often will say, well, studies show this or that without
detailing which studies, what kind of studies or evidence, how powerful and rigorous they
are, et cetera.
If you want your beliefs and conclusions to be based on solid evidence, then you have
to know how to interpret that evidence.
It's not always easy or obvious how to do so.
There are different kinds of evidence, each with different strengths and weaknesses that
you need to know about.
Also on any complex topic, there's going to be contradictory evidence.
So you can't look at any single piece of evidence and get a full picture as to what's going
on.
Some methods of balancing and comparing the different kinds of evidence.
In order to make sense of the scientific evidence, you need to know how to assess an individual
study.
So we'll start there.
Then you need to be able to pull it all together to balance all of the available evidence,
to compare different studies to each other.
When confronted with an experiment or study that purports to demonstrate some theory or
conclusion, how do you analyze it?
Where do you begin?
What features do you have to look for?
There are some basic questions you should ask yourself.
The first is, what kind of study is it?
The different kinds of scientific studies are roughly divided into two broad categories,
experimental versus observational.
First to deal with experimental studies, they are designed to perform a specific intervention.
They do something to affect nature or people, and then they measure some specific outcome.
The goal of a well-designed experimental study is to control for as many specific variables
as possible.
Ideally, one variable will be completely isolated, so that the effects of that variable can
be determined.
Examples of experimental evidence are many, there are many different kinds of experiments
that scientists can do to answer various questions.
For example, injecting a drug versus a placebo, a fake drug, into lab rats and then measuring
some specific outcome, like their liver function or perhaps their strength or whatever biological
outcome the researchers are interested in.
