is being compared may be ineffective, making the new treatment seem more effective than
it really is.
You can also ask, is the survey group being studied representative of the population that
you're interested in?
The poster child for this fallacy is the famous 1936 literary digest poll.
This poll predicted a landslide victory for Republican Alph Landon over Franklin Roosevelt.
However, this survey, this poll, was systematically biased in two key ways.
First it was a straw ballot sent out to a list drawn from telephone books and driver
registrations.
This biased the study population to the more affluent.
Also, there was a very low return rate, which resulted in a self-selection bias.
Historians now agree that these two factors conspired together to create an outcome that
was very different than the actual election which took place.
So individual studies can be preliminary, flawed, or they can be rigorous and methodologically
sound.
But either way, it's still a single study.
Often in the media, these single studies are presented regardless of their quality and
size as if they're definitive.
Well, scientists now believe X because this one study shows it.
But very few studies are so large, rigorous, and unambiguous an outcome that they can stand
alone, that they are considered definitive studies.
You always have to put individual studies into the context of the overall research, the published
literature as we call it.
The first thing to therefore consider when evaluating an individual study, even if you
think that the design is adequate and the results are therefore solid, is has this study been
replicated by independent labs and researchers?
If so, is there a consistency to the results or are the results mixed?
Are they all over the place?
Were the replications appropriate?
Did they actually look at the same thing and control for the same variables?
For example, in the late 1990s, Andrew Wakefield published a preliminary study looking at the
association between autism and the MMR vaccine.
The results of this study caused a firestorm, especially in the UK, where the public heard
the bottom line is that there is concern about an association between the MMR, the Mumps,
measles, and rubella vaccine, and a serious neurological disorder of autism.
And this led to a decrease in compliance with the vaccine and the return of measles and
mumps to the UK.
However, this was a single study.
As soon as the study was replicated by other researchers and other labs, it became increasingly
clear that this correlation did not exist.
It was not real.
Different kinds of evidence were brought to bear, and even the very specific kinds of
