and outcome going forward.
A retrospective study looks back at events and outcomes that have already occurred.
Generally speaking, prospective studies are considered to be more rigorous because they
are subject to fewer confounding factors.
They also tend to be more systematic and the populations that are being looked at are
more representative.
With retrospective studies, there's already the opportunity for multiple sources of bias
to be introduced into the subjects or the objects that are being examined.
Another critical aspect of a study is was the study blinded or double-blinded?
In any rigorous study, the scientists that are recording the outcome of the results should
be blinded to whether or not what they're looking for is in the intervention or in the
control group.
In other words, no matter what feature they're measuring, they shouldn't know ahead of time
what result they're going for or what result they should be expecting.
This can introduce significant subconscious researcher bias into the results.
And historically, there are countless examples of research and studies that showed a phenomenon
that seemed robust and real when studied in an unblinded way.
And then as soon as the researchers were blinded to whether or not they were looking at intervention
or control, the effects vanish, they go away, meaning that all of their prior results were
due to nothing less than researcher bias, completely subconscious in many cases.
This does not only hold for studies with human subjects, even when measuring inanimate objects,
the person doing the measuring needs to be blinded to the status of what they're measuring.
All studies generally should be blinded in order to be reliable.
Observational studies, on the other hand, can only be partially blinded.
Again, if someone is counting up an outcome, or for example, they're looking through hospital
charts and trying to decide who had a complication or which patients had a stroke, they should
be blinded to whether or not the particular patient's chart they're looking through is
in the treatment or the control group, so that that can't bias any judgment calls they
make, how thoroughly they look, for example, for an outcome, or what they count as a complication,
how they score an outcome.
There's all kinds of possibilities to introduce error or bias when just looking at data.
Often we see that erroneous results disappear when proper blinding is put into place.
So that is a critical question to ask about any study, and essentially I don't trust
the results of a study that don't have at least the minimal proper blinding put into
place.
You can also ask about a controlled study.
Are the controls adequate?
What is the subject of the study being compared to?
Is the control treatment, for example, to use another medical example, truly inactive?
If you're using an active control, then that may obscure the comparison to the treatment,
or perhaps the placebo may actually cause a negative outcome, making the experimental
treatment seem artificially better, or the standard treatment to which a new treatment
