Or smashing particles into each other at relativistic speeds and then seeing what they
break into.
Or placing an unknown mineral into a jar of sulfuric acid to see if it dissolves.
These are all different kinds of experiments that scientists can do.
The strengths of experimental studies include controlling and isolating variables.
They also can be highly quantitative.
You can measure some specific feature or outcome.
You can come up with a number, and then you can perform specific statistics on those numbers
because there are comparison groups.
You could actually compare what happens under one condition versus another condition.
But there are also weaknesses to experimental studies.
They may not represent, for example, the real-world experience.
Controlling for variables is good, but it also introduces artifacts.
Artifacts are things that are inadvertently introduced in an experiment that make a system
behave differently than it does in nature or in the world at large.
Often they're not practical.
For example, we cannot withhold an effective, a known effective treatment or randomize people
to be exposed to some toxin or other risk.
So there are certain kinds of experimental studies that we simply cannot do.
What about observational studies or observational evidence?
Well, this is very different from an experiment.
Observational studies observe the world without doing any specific intervention or with only
minimal intervention, just whatever is necessary in order to gather data.
There are many types of examples of this.
For example, you can correlate a risk factor to a disease.
How many people who smoke get lung cancer compared to those who don't smoke does smoking
for a longer period of time correlate with a higher risk of lung cancer than smoking
for a shorter period of time.
Or you can dig up and examine fossils.
Here you're not comparing risk factors, you're just seeing what's out there in the world
and what kinds of fossils, at what depths, at what geological strata are there.
Or you could observe the light output from different types of stars of different ages
and compare their spectroscopic analysis.
These are all just observations that scientists are doing without specifically intervening.
The strengths of observational studies is that they can gather large amounts of data.
Because you're not having to do some kind of intervention or experiment, you're just
looking at the data that's already out there.
You can often gather orders of magnitude more data points than you can with experimental
studies looking at the same question.
You're also able to compare different groups and the minimal intervention reduces the risk
of affecting the natural behavior of the system that you're looking at.
But there are also weaknesses to observational studies.
