dilutions extreme dilutions diluting a substance beyond the point where any active ingredient
remains in fact could still retain the chemical properties of what was diluted in the water
and he published these results in Nature magazine.
He was studying specifically the triggering of activity in basophils a type of immune
cell in response to an allergic trigger.
Ben-Veniste found that the basophils would react even to homeopathic dilutions of the
substance meaning that there was literally nothing left.
Studying that all of chemistry and biology says should be impossible.
The results were dependent upon observations of a variable biological system again a system
where there will tend to be a lot of noise and even subtle biases in the researchers
may therefore have a profound effect.
They could not be replicated in many labs although some labs did report replication again a very
similar history to that of N-rays.
When Ben-Veniste's claims were met with skepticism he claimed he was the victim of closed-mindedness
that he was being persecuted for challenging the scientific dogma of the day that he was
a modern Galileo.
Ben-Veniste also invented fanciful explanations for how the diluted solutions might work that
the antibodies communicated their effects to the basophils perhaps not through direct
chemical interaction but remotely through radio waves and that perhaps water could
act as a template and remember these radio waves and give them off later.
This even led him to believe that he could record these effects and transmit them over
the phone or over the internet.
However, he never tested or tried to demonstrate these assumptions.
They simply were hand-waving explanations for how the impossible might be possible.
He could have designed fairly objective experiments to test these basic ideas to show if these
radio waves existed but he chose instead to stick with a much more tricky, noisy, variable
biological system in order to support his claim.
In an episode remarkably similar to the N-ray episode Nature Magazine in response to criticism
from the research that they published sent a team of investigators into Jacques Ben-Veniste's
lab including a magician and noted skeptic James Randy.
They imposed rigorous blinding on the experimental protocol and just like with N-rays with proper
blinding the positive effects vanished.
They proved as illusory as N-rays themselves.
Let's move on to yet another example of a famous scientific blunder that of ponds and
Fleishman and their cold fusion claims.
In March of 1989 Stanley Ponds and Martin Fleishman called a press conference in which
they announced that they had experimentally produced cold fusion.
If true, the announcement could mean Nobel Prize for these researchers.
