questions he wished.
We've spoken in this lecture about N-rays, homeopathy, cold fusion, Lord Calvin's calculations
for the age of the earth, and alien abductions.
There are many more scientific blunders that we can talk about as well.
But I think these are good examples to illustrate the lessons that we have talked about in this
course.
In each case, the researchers failed to be skeptical of their own conclusions.
They failed to learn the cautionary tales of scientists who came before them and committed
their own blunders.
They failed to adhere to principles of logic and to evaluate their evidence and their studies
in a properly skeptical way.
For example, by properly blinding studies in order to account for their evidence.
Or they too heavily relied upon their own expertise or their own stature and were not
sufficiently humble in the face of a genuine anomaly.
There's one more example that may or may not be a real blunder depending on your perspective.
But Albert Einstein himself called it the biggest blunder of his career, demonstrating
that even the great scientist himself can fall prey to these kinds of errors.
This is the incident of the cosmological constant.
Einstein published his general theory of relativity in 1916.
His prior special theory of relativity dealt with basically the speed of light.
In the general theory, he extended his concepts to deal with both gravity and mass.
It was more of a generalized relativistic theory.
Einstein believed, as many others did at the time, in a static universe.
But of the predictions of general relativity led to the conclusion that the universe must
be either expanding or collapsing.
Einstein, however, couldn't accept that.
He had fixed in his mind this concept that the universe, in order to be the billions
of years old that it is, or whatever was believed at the time, that it had to be self-sustaining.
It had to be static.
If the universe were either expanding or contracting, then how can it be as old as it is?
So he therefore introduced a fudge factor, the cosmological constant.
The cosmological constant is a repulsive force in the universe that he believed would exactly
balance the attractive force of gravity.
Therefore this made his equations of general relativity work in a static universe.
You have the gravity pulling everything in and this cosmological constant pushing everything
out to the exact same degree.
The two forces are therefore in balance and you have a perpetual static universe.
This accorded nicely with Einstein's preconceptions.
