It could also mean a revolution in energy production, an end to dependence on fossil
fuels, a supply of endless, cheap, clean energy.
You probably don't remember all of that happening, so what went wrong with these claims?
For some background on cold fusion, existing nuclear power plants use the process of nuclear
fission to make heat, which they then use to turn a turbine and generate electricity.
Fission is the process of splitting apart heavy radioactive elements like uranium.
Fission is the process of combining light elements into slightly heavier elements such
as fusing hydrogen into helium.
However, tremendous temperatures and pressures are required to get atoms to fuse together.
This process happens in the middle of our sun, for example, but it's difficult to generate
those kinds of pressures and temperatures here on Earth outside of a large hydrogen bomb,
but difficult to use for fuel.
We can create these explosions, but we just can't control the reactions.
We cannot do it in such a controlled way that we can use it to generate heat and produce
electricity.
Cold fusion, as the name implies, is fusion of light elements into heavier elements at
low temperatures.
This of course would handle the problems of having to deal with extremely high temperatures.
This would be ideal for energy production, but we currently simply do not know how to
accomplish cold fusion.
Many researchers have tried to make cold fusion happen in their labs, but no experimental
design so far has been reproducible.
Often the claims are based upon measuring excess energy in an experimental setup, but
there are potentially many sources of unaccounted for energy.
So again, they are relying upon measuring things that are difficult to measure and that
are tiny effects that are smaller than the noise of the systems that they're dealing
with.
There are potentially many sources of energy that are not accounted for, but any tiny bit
of excess energy is taken in some cases to be evidence of cold fusion.
It has been suggested, for example, that Pons and Fleischman's setup, using electrolysis
to induce cold fusion in heavy water, was contaminated with tritium and that this contamination
could account for the spikes in energy production that they saw that they claimed were due to
cold fusion.
Pons and Fleischman, perhaps under pressure from their institution, the University of
Utah, held a press conference on March 23, 1989 to announce their cold fusion findings.
Prior to publishing their results in peer-reviewed journals and having their peers carefully review
their results, what followed has been referred to as the fusion confusion.
There were many claims coming from labs trying to replicate their findings mostly negative.
