However, this was all blown apart when Edwin Hubble later observed the red shift of galaxies.
The light from distant galaxies were all shifted towards the red end of the spectrum because
they are moving away from us and that is what we call the Doppler effect or the Doppler shift.
This indicated that every galaxy that we could look at, except for those that are clustered
around us, are moving away from us.
The only way to really explain that observation is that the entire universe is expanding.
Edwin Hubble published his findings in 1929.
This means that Einstein was wrong and there is no need for a cosmological constant.
Einstein's blunder was in introducing this fudge factor to rig his equations, his results,
to comply with his preconceptions.
He had an opportunity, however, to see it for what it really was, an anomaly.
This anomaly was pointing to a new, stunning and dramatic fact about the universe.
This could have been a nice additional feather in Einstein's cap, not that he really needed
it.
His career was stellar, to say the least.
But he had an opportunity to say, hmm, my equations predict that the universe is not
static, that it is expanding or contracting, and make a prediction that could have later
been verified.
Instead, he robbed himself of that opportunity by introducing this fudge factor.
The cardiological constant, ironically, has recently been resurrected, although not in
the way that Einstein initially intended it.
In the 1990s, the observation was made that the universe is not only expanding, it's accelerating.
And this acceleration could not be explained by the Big Bang alone.
Cosmologists had to introduce something else.
There must be some repulsive force, some dark energy in the universe, which is causing it
to accelerate.
So in an ironic twist, Einstein's greatest blunder did happen to coincide, in a way,
with later scientific discoveries.
In this lecture, I gave you multiple examples of dramatic blunders in scientific history.
These researchers all made mistakes of critical thinking.
They put aside their critical thinking skills, and instead, they went for the biases of their
own beliefs and their own desires.
They didn't use good methods, they didn't properly blind their research, they didn't
try hard enough to prove their own ideas wrong.
The end result was history's examples, cautionary tales of scientific blunders that we should
try to avoid.
