So if it started as an initially molten state, one could calculate how long it would take
using thermodynamic principles to cool to its current temperature.
In 1862, he estimated the age of the earth using this technique as no greater than 100
million years, with a range of 20 million to 400 million years, given the uncertainty
in the measurements at the time.
He later refined his measurements and reduced his estimate to only 20 to 40 million years.
This did not leave enough time for the geological processes that geologists of the day were
saying were occurring to create the earth that we know today.
In fact, Lord Kelvin was highly critical of Charles Darwin and the geologists of his day,
including Sir Charles Lyle, not a lord mind you, just a lonely sir.
Lord Kelvin, while deservedly famous and respected, used his authority, in the view
of many, arrogantly, to push his calculations for the age of the earth.
He not only criticized geologists, he casually dismissed much of the contemporary geology,
which was simply incompatible with his calculations.
He was also hostile in the face of criticism of his calculations.
However, the deathblows to Lord Kelvin's calculations were eventually to come, and
they came in the guise of radioactivity.
At the time Lord Kelvin made his calculations, radioactivity had not yet been discovered.
When it was discovered, it was a triple threat to Lord Kelvin's position.
First, radioactive decay of elements in the earth's crust, like uranium and thorium, provide
extra heat to the earth.
Even using Kelvin's problematic equations, radioactive decay would extend the age of
the earth to 2.7 billion years old.
There are also other sources of heat that are not accounted for as well.
Also, radiometric dating allowed for a highly accurate method of dating the earth, actually
a collection of methods, with current results indicating that the earth is about 4.55 plus
or minus 0.02 billion years old.
This is consistent with the science of geology, which identifies many processes that would
take millions or billions of years to produce the effects, the geological features that
we see today.
It's also compatible with Charles Darwin's evolutionary theory, which also would require
hundreds of millions of years to unfold as it has.
Further, nuclear fusion also provided a heat source for the sun, allowing it to burn for
billions of years.
Prior to the discovery of nuclear fusion and nuclear processes, it was unknown how the
sun could have enough energy to exist and produce its light and heat for billions of
years.
There are several lessons to be learned from the history of Lord Kelvin.
