Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.
Those are the often quoted words of philosopher George Santayana.
Another way to look at this is that it is far better than learning from one's own mistakes
is to learn from the mistakes of others before you fall victim to them yourself.
In this lecture we are going to look at some of the greatest scientific blunders of the
past to see exactly what went wrong.
These cases demonstrate clearly why initial skepticism is the best response to any new
claims.
You will also see in these examples and the lessons we derive from them many of the principles,
the skills of critical thinking that I have reviewed up to this point in the course.
In each case the scientists involved made major cognitive blunders.
They were controlled by their own biases and blind spots or failed to question themselves.
I'm going to start with perhaps the most iconic example that I could think of and that is
N-rays.
This is I think a great example of a scientific blunder from the past.
René Prosper Blondlott, 1849-1930 was a French physicist who in 1903, shortly after discovery
of X-rays by Rentgen, claimed to have discovered another form of radiation he called N-rays
after his university and hometown of Nancy.
He believed they were emitted by most materials except green wood and metals that had been
treated with ether.
N-rays however were invisible.
They could only be detected by refracting the N-rays through an aluminum coated prism
which would then cause a thread coated with calcium sulfide to glow slightly.
Ultimately the detection of N-rays was dependent on the experimenter seeing this very subtle
glow in the thread.
Reports vary but about 30 research teams replicated Blondlott's experiments also seeing the glowing
in the thread.
There were about 300 papers total published about N-rays over a few year period involving
over 100 different researchers.
However, problems were evident from the very beginning.
Many prominent labs were unable to replicate the results.
N-rays appeared to have seemingly impossible characteristics.
The inability to see N-rays was often explained by those believers as the scientists not having
sensitive enough vision.
Alleged photographic evidence was also plagued with sources of error such as fluctuations
in exposure time.
Essentially the researchers were looking at subtle changes in the brightness of a filament
when the variability in things like just the exposure time of the film were far greater
