than the effect that they were claiming to see.
In 1903 Johns Hopkins physician Robert W. Wood was sent by Nature magazine to do a first
hand investigation of Blondlott's labs and his results.
Wood also had experience investigating spiritualists and in criminal investigations.
In other words he had experience not only as a scientist but as a skeptic.
In the lab he witnessed several experiments but could not see the effects of N-rays that
were claimed.
He also attempted to replicate the results himself in what he called a morning gone to
waste.
In one experiment he used his hand to block the path of the N-rays but this could not
be detected by the experimenters.
In another he removed the prism needed to refract the N-rays and in yet another he replaced
the N-ray source with a similarly shaped inert piece of wood unknown to the experimenter
in each case.
Each time the change was not detected.
So what are the lessons that we could derive from Blondlott and the other N-ray researchers
who believed that they had detected N-rays?
In retrospect we know that N-rays do not exist that the researchers were engaged simply in
self deception.
They relied on subjective outcomes their ability to see something very subtle and also at the
very edge of human detection.
They also relied upon very highly error prone measurements where the effect size was smaller
than the noise that was being measured.
And they used these tricky measurements in order to establish an entirely new phenomenon.
They were insufficiently skeptical of their own results.
They used special pleading to dismiss the negative results of other researchers like
not being sensitive enough to the glow in the thread and they did not use proper blinding
to eliminate the effects of their own bias.
In effect wood blinded the experiment for them and when he did the effects completely
went away they vanished.
Always an indication that the phenomenon you're dealing with is likely not true.
Even after N-rays were scientifically dead Blondlott spent years of research pursuing what was
ultimately a hopeless cause.
Let me turn to another eerily similar example that of Jacques Ben-Veniste.
You might think that scientists learned the lesson of N-rays a long time ago to be properly
self skeptical but while many certainly have there are still those scientists who have
not learned these lessons and are doomed to repeat them.
Jacques Ben-Veniste in 1988 as a researcher thought he had discovered proof that homeopathic
