One of the positive findings, the initial positive findings, also panned out.
After initial excitement, by the end of April 1989, the press were announcing that cold
fusion was dead and that Pons and Fleischman's experiments were an example of pathological
science.
They had made the extreme scientific blunder of doing what is now called science by press
release.
They took exploratory preliminary findings in a very difficult system that is prone to
error and bias and they presented that as a Nobel-winning discovery.
This turned out to be a massive embarrassment for both researchers and for cold fusion itself.
Even believers in the promise of cold fusion have to admit that Pons and Fleischman single-handedly
destroyed any scientific credibility.
Research now exists on the fringes of science.
Proponents use terms like low-energy nuclear reactions to refer to their research to avoid
the stigma of cold fusion.
The lesson here is that Pons and Fleischman appear to have gotten carried away with the
excitement of their potential findings.
They are now the poster children for this effect, the science by press conference.
It is far better to allow the wheels of peer-reviewed to grind away, to weed out the false hopes
before they become a disastrous embarrassment.
Let's turn to yet another example.
I'm going to give you a quote referring to this next bit of research.
Some of the great scientists carefully ciphering the evidence furnished by geology have arrived
at the conviction that our world is prodigiously old and they may be right, but Lord Kelvin
is not of their opinion.
He takes the cautious conservative view in order to be on the safe side and feels sure
it is not so old as they think.
As Lord Kelvin is the highest authority in science now living, I think we must yield
to him and accept his views.
This quote is by Mark Twain.
What was Mark Twain talking about?
Well William Thompson, 1824 to 1907, who would later be known as Lord Kelvin of the Kelvin
temperature scale fame, was the most famous physicist of his time.
His specialty was thermodynamics, the study of heat.
Darwin and other contemporaries argued for a very ancient earth.
Lord Kelvin, who was not impressed by the quote unquote soft sciences of biology and
geology, set out to calculate the age of the earth using the reliable hard principles of
physics.
He figured that the earth was cooling.
