At first, Mack thought they might be suffering from mental illness, but most of his patients
did not meet the criteria for a mental illness diagnosis.
They simply didn't have the signs or the symptoms that would warrant a diagnosis of schizophrenia
or any other specific mental illness.
He then, therefore, began to take their reports much more seriously.
In an interview, when asked if he took his patients' reports at, quote unquote, face
value, Mack responded, Face value, I wouldn't say.
I take them seriously.
I don't have a way to account for them.
Mack later believed that these alien encounters might be a spiritual or transcendental experience
in nature, perhaps related to the vision quests of the Native American cultures.
Mack seems to have fallen victim to his patients' own beliefs or delusions.
One mistake that he made was to commit the false dichotomy.
He concluded that, well, these patients aren't mentally ill, therefore there is something
incredible about their reports.
He ignored the fact that perfectly healthy individuals can, through flawed thinking and
other factors covered throughout this course, arrive at firmly held but false beliefs.
He ignored the fact that there was no corroborating evidence for the stories that they were telling.
And he engaged in special pleading and the argument from ignorance in order to justify
his conclusions.
Essentially, Mack was saying that his patients were reporting what they believed were encounters
with aliens, that they in fact were being abducted by aliens.
He was convinced by the fact that they were sincere.
They were not lying, in other words.
But sincerity is not a substitute for reliability.
People can be sincerely wrong.
And it's odd that as a psychiatrist, he did not consider all the many ways in which people
can delude themselves, even mentally healthy people, as we discussed in the lecture on delusions,
and can firmly hold to a belief, especially one that is encouraged by the culture, despite
evidence against their belief.
All of these factors conspired to lead Mack to believe that his patients were indeed being
abducted by aliens.
Or at the very least, something very interesting was going on.
And if it was not something physical, then it was something spiritual.
This of course led to a great deal of criticism of his conclusions, even an investigation
at his institution, Harvard University.
Although they ultimately concluded that Mack, what he was doing was academically reasonable
and that under the principle of academic freedom, he had the right to ask and pursue whatever
