The first is that scientific authority can never rest in one individual, no matter how
famous or successful their career.
This is something that is variable culturally within science and I think also over time.
Now we're more than a century later, the scientific establishment does not rest quite as much
authority in any individual.
And there's a good reason for this.
Any individual can be wrong, no matter how brilliant or how successful they have been.
Scientific authority is better to rest in the consensus of scientific opinion among
many scientists.
Further, Lord Kelvin was arrogant in dismissing the findings of a scientific discipline of
which he was not an expert.
He thought he could use physics to casually wipe away all of the carefully accumulated
arguments and evidence from geology.
This doesn't make him wrong, but it should have tempered his confidence in his conclusion.
This less lesson is more generally applicable.
Whenever a scientist or a researcher has a finding or a claim which seems to contradict
a very large body of established science, they shouldn't immediately assume that they
are correct and that a large body, even an entire discipline of science, is wrong.
That should, if anything, make them more skeptical of their own position.
And further, it would have been more reasonable to conclude from Lord Kelvin's calculations
that the inconsistency between the findings of thermodynamics and geology and also evolutionary
biology meant that there was a piece to the puzzle that was missing.
Rather, Lord Kelvin assumed that he was right and all of geology and evolutionary biology
was wrong.
It turns out that there was a piece to the puzzle missing and that piece was radioactivity.
This also is a further lesson about making arguments from ignorance, basing an argument
about based upon the current level of scientific knowledge or what we currently don't know.
Lord Kelvin really had no way of knowing that radioactivity was about to be discovered.
That was an entirely new phenomenon of nature.
He could therefore not account for it in his calculations, in his estimate of the age
of the earth.
What he really had was not evidence that all of geology was wrong, but an anomaly.
And if he recognized it as an anomaly, he would have seen it as an opportunity to discover
something new about how the world works.
And again, that something new was radioactivity.
In my final example, I'm going to discuss the research of John Edward Mack, a Harvard
psychiatrist who began in early 1990 to investigate patients who reported that they were abducted
by aliens.
