So for example, we often call these a theory of everything.
Now scientists are legitimately looking for more and more powerful and elegant theories
that can explain more and more of the natural world.
But when that process is taken to an extreme, and again leapfrogs over the evidence, where
one tiny little phenomenon is used to explain our entire understanding of the universe,
for example, then that becomes a theory of everything, a theory that's exceeding really
the justification.
In medicine we often see this as the cause for all disease or the cure for all disease.
One example of that is Hilda Clark.
She believed that liver flukes are the cause of all human disease.
Therefore all diseases can be cured by treating this liver fluk.
Therefore she has the cure for all disease, or at least she had before she died.
Pseudoscientists also often demonstrate hostility towards scientific criticism.
Science as we say is a harsh mistress.
I spoke about the process of peer review, where a community of scientists are essentially
highly critical of any new claims that are made.
They will pick over data, make sure that their colleagues are accounting for all the evidence,
are not making claims which go beyond the data, are being logical and rigorous that
they've gotten their math correct.
All of these things.
Publication in the peer review journal is a meat grinder, but it's supposed to be.
That is how science is supposed to work.
That's the only way to separate out those ideas that are useful and have potential from
those that are a dead end.
Now while no one likes to be criticized, scientists have to develop a thick skin because criticism
is part and parcel of the process of science.
Pseudoscientists however generally cannot accept this mainstream harsh criticism.
They often do not engage with the scientific community.
They claim that they are the victim of a conspiracy or a dedicated campaign against their ideas.
Perhaps because their ideas are simply too revolutionary.
They may appeal to anti-elitist sentiments to say that they're not on the inside in the
old boys network.
But these are all attempts to deflect the legitimate process of self-criticism that is supposed
to drive science forward.
They also may use pseudo-scientific terms, but in an imprecise or unscientific way.
Science does tend to be a bit overwhelmed with what we call jargon, and this can make
it inaccessible or difficult to understand for the non-expert.
But at its best jargon is the use of terms that have very precise and unambiguous definitions.
They are used so that experts can communicate to each other in an efficient and precise way,
