They are not systematic.
They are therefore plagued with confirmation bias and recall bias.
For example, if we are trying to assess the safety and effectiveness of a medical treatment,
we can't rely upon the testimonies of people, of patients who have taken that treatment.
Let's say, for example, we are trying to decide whether or not a particular treatment
helps to cure cancer.
And you may go to a meeting in which that treatment is being supported by anecdotes
or testimonies of people who took the treatment and are now alive and doing well, maybe even
cured from their cancer.
However, those testimonies are being systematically biased.
People who took the treatment and died are not there to tell their story.
Dead men tell no tales, literally.
Also, we don't know that they didn't take other treatments.
Variables were not controlled for.
Maybe they tried three or four or five different things, both standard and non-standard treatments.
How do we know which one is responsible for the fact that they're doing well?
So anecdote is a pejorative term that scientists use to mean evidence which is uncontrolled
and therefore plagued by biases, not systematic, subject to cherry picking, perhaps even systematically
biased, and therefore unreliable as evidence.
But pseudoscientists will often heavily rely upon this evidence because, essentially, they
could make it say whatever they want it to say.
Favoring such low-grade evidence over more rigorous evidence, because it gives the desired
results, can be used to support just about any belief, no matter how implausible it is.
And there is this tendency to feel or to be more compelled by this kind of evidence.
It takes critical thinking skills to understand that we shouldn't really listen seriously
to stories that other people tell us, at least not as confirmatory definitive evidence.
But people will often say things to the effect of, well, what are you going to believe, numbers
on a paper or real people, as if real people, quote-unquote, should be more compelling data?
That kind of emotional appeal is also common among pseudoscientists who are trying to defend
positions which the numbers on a piece of paper do not support.
Another feature to be wary of is the fact that core principles of a particular area
of pseudoscience may be based upon a single case or observation, rather than a large body
of carefully collected data.
They use preliminary evidence or even a single anecdote as a basis for then an elaborate
later system of belief.
They are essentially making the hasty generalization logical fallacy, basing far-reaching principles
on a single piece of perhaps unreliable evidence.
An excellent example of this is D. D. Palmer, the father of chiropractic.
He based the principles of subluxation theory on a single case, an alleged curing of a person
