This is similar to what I described in a previous lecture on reason and logic as the difference
between reason using logic and evidence to arrive at a valid conclusion and to make sure
that our conclusions are sound and rationalizing using biased logic and cherry-picked data
in order to defend a conclusion at all costs.
In essence, pseudoscientists use the processes of science, the superficial processes or similarities
of science to science in order to scientifically rationalize a conclusion that they wish to
be true rather than using the methods of science to determine if their belief is true or not.
What they fail to do is make a concerted effort, therefore, to prove their own theories wrong.
That should always be the first step of any scientist.
When you come up with a new idea, a new hypothesis, the first thing you should do is everything
possible in order to disprove your own theory.
Find every way possible to conduct an experiment or an observation that can falsify the theory.
When the theory or the hypothesis has survived every attempt you can think of to prove it
wrong, only then is it reasonable to give it provisional assent to think, all right,
now this is a theory that may be true.
Then it's a good idea to check with your colleagues, publish your results in peer-reviewed journals
and see what other scientists believe, other experts.
Can they think of any ways that maybe you missed that could be an alternate to the theory that
you have or that could potentially prove it wrong?
They also consider alternate theories and not just their pet theory, good scientists,
that is.
But pseudoscientists will often simply make attempts at proving their pet theory correct
and will only in a very perfunctory manner address other theories which might also explain
the observations that they're making.
Otherwise you fall prey to what I previously described as the congruence bias, the tendency
to only test your own hypothesis.
But this can easily lead to cherry-picking data that appears to support your theory because
you'll be missing the fact that the same data also can be used to support other theories
or that other ideas also can produce the same evidence without your theory being correct.
Only testing one's own theory by looking for positive evidence therefore is a typical
feature of pseudoscience, but not testing alternatives or evidence that might prove
one's own theory incorrect.
Pseudoscientists in fact endeavor to prove their theory correct.
They will in fact avoid or explain away disconfirming evidence.
They may engage in special pleading in order to explain why disconfirming evidence doesn't
in fact disprove their theory even though it may seem to.
They also do what we call shifting the burden of proof onto others.
They might say something like, prove my theory wrong.
Or if you can't prove my theory wrong then you must accept it as correct.
