of deafness with neck manipulation.
He then extrapolated from this all of chiropractic theory, at least the classic theory of subluxation,
the notion that a blockage in the flow of some essence or life force that he called innate
or innate intelligence through the spinal cord and through the nerves are what keep
the organs and the parts of the body healthy.
Blockage in that flow therefore causes illness, disease, and symptoms.
We believe that he freed up the flow of this life energy in this patient, enabling them
to hear, curing their deafness.
At the time though, he was not aware apparently that the nerves that subsume hearing at no
point pass through the neck.
So there really isn't any plausibility to the notion that manipulating the neck can relieve
the underlying neurological pathways that we need to hear.
Another example is the founder of iridology.
Iridology is the notion that the iris of the eyes reflect health and disease of the whole
body.
This is based upon a general approach called the homunculus approach to diagnosis, the
belief that the entire body is represented in one small part or piece of the body, in
this case the iris of the eye.
The founder of iridology made a single observation of an owl who had broken its wing, and he
observed that a gold fleck in the owl's eye went away when the wing was healed.
From this single observation, he elaborated the entire fanciful homunculus based notion
that all diseases and ailments can be diagnosed and even predicted by simply looking at the
random colors of flecks in a patient's eye.
Or principles may not be based on just a simple or a single observation, but on a philosophical
idea, a philosophy that itself has not been empirically tested or developed as a scientific
theory or discipline.
The notion of life energy, for example, that I mentioned in a previous example, is a pre-scientific
idea, but it forms the basis of many so-called alternative therapies like therapeutic touch
or Reiki, acupuncture, straight chiropractic, and even homeopathy to some degree.
In essence, prior to us having a thorough understanding of all of the physiology, anatomy, biochemistry,
all the processes that go to make up a living organism, it was hypothesized that there must
be some energy, a life energy that makes some things alive and other things not alive.
In the final analysis, it was really a placeholder, an argument from ignorance, if you will.
Whatever we currently didn't understand, that's what life energy did.
Eventually, we were able, however, to explain all the processes of life, at least to a reasonable
degree of detail, and there simply was nothing left for life energy to do.
It was a philosophy, a philosophical idea of how the body works, never supported or
tested by science.
Now it's an obsolete philosophical idea, but it still forms the core principle of many
