But in fact proving their theory wrong or at least attempting sincerely to do so should
be their job.
It's their theory, their claim.
The burden of proof is entirely upon them to show that their theory is correct because
it has survived attempts at falsification.
And that no alternate theory, especially a simpler one, can also explain the data that
they are presenting.
Pseudoscientists also commonly fall prey to confirmation bias, which as I described is
perhaps the most powerful bias that affects our thinking when we're assessing different
ideas.
Confirmation bias is the process of looking for supportive evidence that leads to conclusions
we wish to be true.
This gives us a false sense of where there's smoke, there's fire.
There's all this evidence circumstantial or maybe even direct or indirect that suggests
that my theory is correct.
If my theory weren't correct, how could this be?
How could there be so much evidence that appears to support my argument?
But confirmation bias leads to cherry picking of only the evidence which supports one's
own theory.
You have to collect data in a systematic way to know if it really does support a theory.
This favoring of positive evidence, regardless of quality, is therefore a key feature to
look out for in a pseudoscience.
The flip side of that is that negative evidence, regardless of quality, is also dismissed.
Or for example, a scientist may look at a study which confirms their belief and accept
it uncritically.
While looking at another study that seems to contradict their evidence, they will delve
into the details and look for subtle flaws, look for reasons to reject the study as solid
or conclusive because they don't want to accept its conclusions.
For any particular question, there is especially now that so much scientific evidence is out
there, thousands of new papers are being published every year in every field.
There is so much noise, if you will, that if you are truly dedicated to supporting any
notion, you can probably find studies in the peer-reviewed published literature that seem
to support that position.
Maybe by looking at all the data systematically, though, can you know if the bulk of evidence
or the consensus of evidence really supports your position?
There is also a tendency to rely upon anecdotal evidence and testimony.
This is part of the more general feature of relying upon weaker forms of evidence while
eschewing stronger or more reliable forms of evidence.
Now, anecdotes are uncontrolled or ad hoc observations.
