healing modalities.
Another feature that should send up a quote unquote red flag that you might be dealing
with the pseudoscientific end of the spectrum are grandiose claims based upon preliminary
or flimsy evidence.
We sometimes call this the Galileo syndrome for the frequent tendency to compare oneself
to Galileo.
In other words, far-reaching claims that overturn entire segments of well-established science
are extrapolated from very little research or small bits of evidence.
This tends to occur with pseudoscientific endeavors because when their theory conflicts
with established science, rather than saying, hmm, there must therefore be something wrong
with my theory, or at the very least there is some anomaly that is not understood or
I don't understand.
However, the pseudoscientist, rather, will simply broaden the implications of their own
theory claiming that, well, I guess all of this area of mainstream science must be wrong
because it conflicts with my theory.
One example of this kind of process, which leads all the way to what proponents even
call alternative science, is a book written by a researcher called Lloyd Pie called Everything
You Think You Know Is Wrong.
This results from this chain reaction of pseudoscientific claims.
Pie believes, for example, that there were ancient civilizations, unknown to modern archaeology,
that aliens were somehow involved in human history and even evolution, and that this
can tie into observations of Bigfoot and other humanoid creatures, again, unknown to
science.
In each case, when he has a specific explanation or a specific claim that conflicts with archaeology
or paleontology or biology or even modern physics, he simply dismisses the modern findings
of science and replaces them with yet another pseudoscientific belief system, in this what
I call chain reaction, until, by the end of it all, you have replaced all of science with
an alternative version of reality, or everything that scientists claim must therefore be wrong.
Another example is the comic book artist turned pseudoscientist, in my opinion, Neil Adams,
who is a proponent of the hollow or growing Earth idea.
This is the notion that the planet Earth was much, much smaller in the historical past
and has been slowly getting larger over time by the generation of new matter.
He believes this is true because the continents of the Earth fit together like puzzle pieces.
We know that they do fit together to some extent because of plate tectonics, but he
thinks they fit together all the way around, because at one point in time they were all
connected on a small Earth, which later expanded, the oceans filling in the cracks that emerged
in between.
However, there are major scientific problems with this theory.
Where is this new matter coming from?
