It is common to claim that one's beliefs are based upon legitimate science.
The mantle of good science is often used to market products or promote ideas, while the
counterclaim that a belief is pseudoscience or junk science is equally used to denigrate
beliefs and practices that one does not hold.
Science still carries a very high degree of respect in our society.
So many claims and beliefs label themselves as scientific, but are they?
For example, is anthropogenic global warming a legitimate science or a pseudoscience as
some claim?
What about cryptozoology, the study of unusual creatures unknown to current science such
as Bigfoot, the Loch Ness Monster, or the Chupacabra?
Or how about string theory that is held by prominent cosmologists of today?
Or ESP, thigh research.
Are these legitimate sciences?
Are they on the fringe of science?
Or are they pseudosciences?
The term pseudoscience refers to beliefs and practices that claim to be scientific,
but lack the true method and essence of science.
They have the patina of legitimate science, but something has gone terribly wrong.
Pseudoscience goes beyond just making a few errors or a few sloppy practices.
The methods are so flawed that the entire endeavor is suspect.
The practice doesn't even warrant the label of legitimate science.
But in reality, there is not a clean division between pristine science on one end and rank
pseudoscience on the other.
There is rather a continuum or spectrum between these two extremes.
Many legitimate sciences may incorporate one or more features normally associated with
pseudoscience.
A well-trained, respected, successful scientist may still make errors in judgment, poor methodology,
may overinterpret their results.
For example, they may commit all or many of the errors in cognitive thinking that I have
discussed in this course.
And some pseudoscientists may occasionally get something right.
They may in fact use some legitimate or valid scientific methods in order to promote their
ideas and beliefs.
In the middle between these two extremes of science and pseudoscience, there is a fuzzy
grazedone, the borderlands between legitimate science and what Carl Sagan has called the
cheap imitation.
Philosophers call the difficulty in drawing a sharp line between the two ends of this
spectrum the demarcation problem.
However, this doesn't mean that there aren't sciences that are mostly legitimate and other
