without misunderstanding exactly what they're talking about.
This gives legitimate science this jargony feel that we all recognize, talking in technical
highly sophisticated terminology.
Pseudoscientists exploit this to use fancy jargony terms, but not to make their claims
more specific, but to obfuscate, to hide what they're really saying.
They may use jargony terms that are vaguely defined or have a shifting meaning.
As an example, there are the intelligent design proponents who often use the term information
as if they were using it in a precise scientific way.
But in fact, there are many different specific kinds of information that mathematicians have
specifically identified and named, whereas intelligent design proponents simply use the
term information vaguely, and in fact they shift the definition around using it in different
ways at different times, in order to confuse, not in order to explain a specific point.
Pseudoscientists are also marked by a failure to progress.
Pseudoscientists that are legitimate and useful will tend to progress over time, whereas pseudosciences
tend to be stagnant, they're chasing their tail, or they are endlessly trying to establish
their basic principles, never moving off of even doing just that, or the very existence
of the phenomenon that they're studying.
There's still 100 years later, for example, trying to establish that Psi or ESP even exists,
not alone progressing to define how it works and what are the other principles of ESP.
Anomaly hunting is another feature that is common to pseudosciences.
Now I spoke previously about the fact that anomalies are very useful in science, because
they point to a shortage or a hole in our current understanding.
They point to the way to new discoveries.
However, looking for anomalies as a way of establishing a conclusion is what we call
anomaly hunting.
It does not seek to falsify or to explore alternatives, but just to say, look, there's
something unknown here, there is some anomaly, and of course it's easy, there's always anomalies
to find if you look hard enough.
Therefore, their view, their claim is true.
So the real fallacy they're committing is in using anomalies to prove or confirm a conclusion
rather than just as a starting point for later investigation.
In the next lecture, we will explore specific pseudosciences, and we will see how they manifest
all of the features that I described in this lecture.
