practices that are hopelessly pseudoscientific.
Remember, that's the false continuum logical fallacy.
The denial of two extremes of a continuum simply because there is no sharp demarcation
line in between the two of them.
This fuzziness in the middle does not mean that these two extremes do not exist and that
we cannot meaningfully speak about them.
The key is to know how to recognize the features of pseudoscience and the features of legitimate
science.
In a previous lecture, I discussed the philosophy of science and another of the types of evidence
I described in these lectures, those practices that go into good and rigorous science.
Examining extreme cases of pseudoscience is like a doctor studying an advanced form of
a disease.
The features will be much more obvious and extreme.
They will therefore help a doctor to recognize the more subtle signs and milder forms of
the pathology.
It's for this reason that I think it's very instructive to examine those belief systems
which, while they purport to be scientific, are on the fringe of science like cold fusion,
cryptozoology, belief in UFOs, for example.
Some people may denigrate spending any time on such beliefs because they're on the fringe
and they're unusual.
When I maintain they are excellent learning examples, by studying the fringes of science,
we will learn a great deal about legitimate science and how to do the best science possible.
In the same way, we can study these extreme pseudosciences and develop a picture of what
extreme pseudoscientific pathological features have in common.
We also will then see the patterns, the commonality among them.
What are the types of cognitive flaws that those practicing pseudoscience tend to make?
It is an excellent opportunity for studying the features of what are even called sometimes
pathological science.
So what are the features of a pseudoscience that we need to be on the lookout for?
I think the most prominent feature and the one that often determines much of what is
flawed about pseudoscience is that it tends to work backward from desired results rather
than following logic and evidence where it leads.
This is also referred to as motivated reasoning.
If we know where we want to get cognitively, human beings are very good at getting there,
but backfilling in justifications, making evidence fit into preconceived notions.
We saw this effect in many of the scientific blunders that I discussed in a previous lecture.
So essentially, pseudoscience starts with the conclusion and then works backwards from
there, rather than open-mindedly and fairly going forward from the evidence wherever it
may lead.
