How is gravity increasing on the Earth?
If all of the planets of the solar system were increasing as he believes, how could
their orbits be stable?
Each time one of these reasonable scientific objections is raised to this theory, he simply
waves his hand and wipes away an entire other discipline of science.
Well, perhaps it's magnetism, he says, that holds the planets in their orbits and not
gravity.
So now all of gravitation and magnetism has to be rethought just to fix this problem with
the growing Earth theory.
He also adds spontaneous creation of matter from nothing.
This is something that simply is unknown to physics.
There is the generation of virtual pairs of particles, but then they immediately annihilate
each other.
But the creation of new stable matter from nothing would violate the conservation of matter
and energy, a very well-established law of physics.
It would also, his growing Earth hypothesis, would violate much of what we know about from
modern geology and plate tectonics and volcanism, for example.
Again, he would overturn virtually all of modern science that touches on his theories in order
to protect or defend his one idea that he does not want to surrender.
Pseudoscientists are also known for making very bold claims, claims that are not just
bold but often absolute.
But the bottom line is that they go beyond the evidence.
It's okay to make big and grandiose claims as long as you have the evidence to back it
up.
And even modest claims could be pseudoscientific if they extend too far beyond what the evidence
can meaningfully support.
Good science, rather, is very careful and conservative.
It tends not to make claims which exceed the evidence.
For example, in the process of peer review when experts in a field will review a paper
submitted by one of their colleagues in the hopes of being published, one of the specific
things that they have to decide is, do the conclusions of the researcher extend from
the evidence?
Can they be supported by the actual data that is being presented in this study?
If the authors are making conclusions which are too bold, which go beyond the evidence,
they will often be required to fix that before the paper can be accepted for publication.
Another aspect of pseudoscience I think related to the boldness and the extravagance of their
claims are that simple answers are often offered to very complex or multifactorial problems.
While scientific process often leads to simpler, elegant solutions, pseudoscientists offer
simplistic solutions even to very, very complex phenomena.
