In the previous lecture, I described the difference between legitimate rigorous science and science
that is so fatally flawed it should be considered fake science or pseudoscience.
In this lecture, I'm going to give several specific examples of pseudosciences and then
deconstruct them in detail to illustrate some of the various features of pseudoscience.
First up is iridology.
This is a practice that was invented in 1800 by Ignats von Pezley.
He based his entire belief of iridology on a single observation.
He accidentally broke an owl's leg, the story goes, and noticed a black stripe in its iris,
the iris of its eye, when the owl's leg later healed that black speck went away.
He concluded from this that the iris of the eye reflects the health and illness of a living
organism, an owl or a person.
In fact, the iris is a map of the entire body where the flecks and color reflect the state
of health or illness of each different part of the body.
This belief follows a more general belief known as a homunculus or a homunculus paradigm,
this notion that the entire body is mapped in some way to a smaller subset of the body.
In this case, there is a map of the entire body, including all the internal organs in
the iris of the eye.
Another example of this might be reflexology, where there is a health and illness map of
the organs of the body and the different body parts on the sole of the feet.
Then in such systems, it is believed that either you can diagnose illness simply by
looking at a small part of the body or that you can actually affect health and illness.
You can improve the health of a part of the body by massaging the foot or in a regular
acupuncture, sticking a needle into a part of the ear.
There is, however, no scientific basis for this whatsoever.
There is no chain of research.
There are no independent lines of evidence.
There's no underlying anatomy that shows how one part of the body maps to or connects
all the other parts of the body in this way.
Or there's no underlying anatomical structure that could explain how the kidney, for example,
could affect one tiny piece of the iris.
What iridologists do is essentially what we would call a medical cold reading.
Remember, a cold reading is making vague and common guesses about someone, in this case,
their symptoms.
Then using that give and take to hone in and to give the impression that you have detailed
knowledge about their symptoms when, in fact, you're just using guesses and feedback in
order to create the illusion that you have knowledge about their symptoms.
They also use methods that cold readers use in order to compensate, for example, for guessing
wrong.
If you ask someone, for example, do you have any lung disease based upon your reading of
their iris?
And they say that they don't.
