You could say, well, you have a susceptibility for lung disease.
So this is something that might become a problem in the future.
And that way they turn a miss into a hit and give the impression, the false impression,
that they have some knowledge about their health.
There have, surprisingly, been scientific studies looking at the accuracy of iridology,
of practitioners of iridology, in diagnosing health and illness in individuals.
A 2,000 review by Edzart Ernst of studies that were deemed to be of sufficient quality
concluded that iridologists perform no better than chance when they are properly blinded.
In essence, they were getting no information from looking at the iris in the eye of the
subjects that they were attempting to diagnose.
It's a significant evidence that there is no underlying reality to iridology whatsoever.
However, the practice of iridology persists as a so-called alternative practice.
Current practitioners engage in special pleading, which you'll remember from the logical fallacy
lectures.
For example, here is a quote from an iridology website explaining what iridology can and
cannot do.
It reads, Iridology will not show or name a specific disease, but provides information
about the body tissues which indicate tendencies towards condition of disease.
Often before symptoms appear, iridology will not reveal surgery performed under anesthesia
as nerve impulses are discontinued.
Iridology cannot locate parasites, gallstones, or germ life, but will indicate the presence
of inflammation and toxic conditions which are a refuge for their development.
It will not show pregnancy as that is a normal function of the female body.
In other words, iridology will not reveal anything that is testable, anything objective
that could prove whether or not iridology works.
It can only show vague tendencies that cannot be specifically tested.
So the believers in iridology have successfully insulated or isolated their claims from the
scientific evidence which shows that it in fact provides no information.
Let's turn now to ghost hunting.
This is a fun example of a pseudoscience.
Have you, for example, ever had an unusual experience?
Perhaps you have woken up in the morning, paralyzed, unable to move, maybe even sense
that there is a presence in the room with you.
Some people report feeling a heaviness on their chest, might even feel panic at the
helplessness of their situation.
Are these experiences evidence of encounters with demons or spirits or perhaps aliens as
some interpret them?
We'll get back to that in a moment, but first let's talk about the science behind ghost
hunting.
In this talk, I'm not going to be talking about what people believe, but in what the
scientific evidence shows.
