People may have belief in spirits or ghosts, and that's okay, but is there scientific evidence
that they exist?
What are the so-called ghost hunters doing who claim to be scientifically investigating
ghosts as a phenomenon?
Do they have the evidence that they claim to have?
Ghost hunting science shows are now and recently have been very popular on reality TV, for
example.
Therefore, many people are exposed to the practices of ghost hunting, and it is presented
as if it is a science.
I have personally investigated a number of ghost hunting groups and a few allegedly haunted
houses.
I think it is an excellent example of pseudoscience.
Ghost hunters go through the motions of doing science, but they don't engage in the true
nature of scientific inquiry.
Let's turn, for example, to the types of evidence that they present that ghosts are a real phenomenon.
The most common of which is ghost photographs.
They often present what are called orbs, which are circles of light on photographic film,
or ghost globules, sometimes streaks or coils.
At times, more interesting photos appear to have ghostly figures or people on the picture.
This is all a good example of anomaly hunting.
Ghost hunters look for anything unusual and then conclude that it is evidence of something
specific, ghosts.
They therefore make the argument from ignorance in doing so.
They may take the time to dismiss a token alternative or two, but they do not engage in the true
practice of science, which is hypothesis testing, a controlled experiment in order to
distinguish one cause for the alleged anomaly versus something else.
For example, are the things that appear on photographs that I have been describing, globules
and streaks, are they photographic artifacts, an artifact of the process of taking or perhaps
developing the picture, or are they a picture of something real in the outside world?
And they have no gold standard or basis for what a ghost photograph should look like with
a basic science understanding of what that should be.
And so they can declare any anomaly a ghost.
There are however explanations for the photographs that are presented by ghost hunters.
For example, you may notice that most photos with light effects use a flash.
One ghost hunting website, in fact, advised people to use a flash because you get a lot
more ghost photographs when you do that.
Orbs are a known photographic artifact of the lens.
It's a lens flare or some other lens reflective or refractive artifact.
Sometimes light can reflect off of dust modes, things that you won't see with the naked eye,
but the camera will pick it up when a flash reflects off of the dust mode.
Streaks are often the result of the so-called camera cord effect, which could be due to
