These episodes have been documented, in fact, in many cultures throughout history, often
giving rise to specific mythological beliefs about creatures that visit people late at
night, sit on their chest, and steal their energy and paralyze them.
But now we know this to be a neurological phenomenon.
However, it is still interpreted by many pseudoscientists as either a ghost or demon encounter,
and sometimes in modern culture as an alien encounter.
This turned to a completely different type of pseudoscience, free energy.
Now, of course, it would be great if we could find a clean, renewable, cheap, abundant,
and efficient source of energy.
Our civilization would be greatly enhanced by this.
Our civilization runs on energy.
Right now, much of that is fossil fuel because fossil fuels are cheap and abundant and a
very efficient store of energy, although it is not clean or renewable.
The strong need and desire for cheap energy leads to a lot of free energy or energy pseudoscience.
The most extreme versions are referred to as free energy because they promise not just
a abundant but limitless energy.
A common version of this is a motor that generates more power than it consumes.
These motors are called over-unity machines because they produce more energy than they
consume.
Usually, these are demonstrated on a small scale with the claim that they are able to
scale up.
However, but at small scales, it is easy to miss a small energy source and confuse that
with anomalous or free energy production, just a failure to account for a little bit
of extra heat in the system or an extraneous source of a little bit of kinetic or mechanical
energy may produce the false impression, the false calculation that there is extra energy
in the system.
There is then the assumption that this can scale up without limit.
Of course, when free energy proponents try to do that, that's when their claims fall
flat because they're not generating limitless energy from nothing.
Such devices ultimately never work.
They don't scale up because they can't generate free energy.
Often, however, there are deliberate scams.
There are companies that claim to be on the verge of a breakthrough in clean energy or
free energy machines using these small-scale demonstrations in order to trick investors
into sinking lots of money into their invention, which they say is about to break through.
Of course, they keep running into one hurdle after the other and need just a few more tens
of thousands of dollars to do the research to fix those technical problems.
But of course, there are more than technical problems with these devices.
There are serious underlying theoretical issues.
Many of these devices use magnets.
They neglect the fact that the magnets themselves are providing a finite source of energy to
