of fire, may be sedated on medication, a setup for somebody setting themselves on fire, not
to be discovered until after the fire has run its course.
Researchers have explained even the really strange cases.
Some researchers have discovered what we call the wick effect, that the body fat can act
like the wax in a candle with the clothing acting like a wick, although on the outside.
This can create a situation where, especially in a closed room where oxygen levels will
drop quickly from a fire, where the body will slowly be consumed by a smoldering fire that
will not consume the surrounding building.
It will cause some smoke damage to the building and some heat damage, but the building that
the person is in will not burst into flames itself.
Therefore, firefighters will find a body almost completely turned to ash inside an unburned,
although damaged, room.
That phenomenon may seem strange, but it has now been thoroughly explained through scientific
investigation.
Believers, however, wildly speculate about what may cause spontaneous human combustion.
You shouldn't, as a rule, attempt to invent an explanation for a phenomenon before you
documented that the phenomenon actually exists.
In one book, a blaze, author Larry Arnold invents a new primary particle that he calls
the pyrotron.
He is inventing new physics out of whole cloth without any evidence in order to provide
a fanciful mechanism for spontaneous human combustion.
He does this because there is no plausible physical or medical mechanism by which the
body can heat up to the degree by itself that it can burst into flames.
These are just a few examples of the thousands of pseudosciences out there, but they illustrate
many of the common features.
Believers think they are doing science, but they all have one common fatal flaw.
They are insufficiently skeptical of their own claims.
They are dazzled by what they think they have discovered, by the patterns they see, by the
apparent confirmation, but they have failed to ask the key question, is it really true?
And then set out to prove their own ideas false.
Instead, they set out to prove their ideas correct.
There are also some special categories of pseudoscience that are worth pointing out,
such as grand conspiracy theories and denialism.
I will tackle these specific types of pseudoscience in upcoming lectures.
