that the same pattern won't keep occurring over and over again.
When randomness clumps, though, it's different each time.
So therefore, those studies will not be reproducible.
And in fact, that's what we see when SI researchers finally think that they have found a research
protocol that shows a SI phenomenon, and then others try to reproduce the work, it turns
out that they can't.
So fluke-positive studies can be chosen among many unpublished negative studies, kind of
like optional starting and stopping but for studies.
If the effect is real, it should be consistently reproduced.
The key flaw in the SI literature is this failure of reproducibility.
Real impressive results tend to diminish over time as tighter and tighter controls are introduced.
This is a more general effect that we see in the literature.
As the research gets more and more rigorous, effect sizes tend to shrink.
The question is, do they shrink down to a small but real effect, or do they shrink down
to nothing, to no effect?
The Gansfeld experiments are one example of this.
This is a series of rigorous experiments looking at remote viewing.
As the details of the studies came under scrutiny and follow-up studies were done with more
and more rigor, the magnitude of the effect being measured shrank all the way down to
essentially zero.
There being no effect left.
The precognition studies of Daryl Bem, to take a more recent example, are another example
of this, of the so-called decline effect and the failure of reproducibility.
Daryl Bem conducted a series of psychological experiments in which he concluded that subjects
were able to see into the future.
However, now multiple attempts at replication have shown that the results are completely
negative, that this effect does not exist.
One more example is spontaneous human combustion.
You may have heard that scientists believe that people can spontaneously burst into flames
and be completely consumed by the resulting fire.
This is based almost entirely on unusual cases of death by fire, on anomalies that may defy
easy or immediate explanation.
The spontaneous human combustion phenomenon combines this anomaly hunting with the argument
from ignorance.
If we can't come up with an easy or obvious explanation for how someone died in a fiery
death, then maybe they spontaneously burst into flames.
Most of the cases, however, have an easily identifiable external source of flame that
seems to be a consistent feature of spontaneous human combustion cases.
Victims are often infirmed so they could not readily move.
Many of the times they're on the dating medication, they live alone and they are smokers.
Those all seem to imply a tendency for someone who is infirmed, unable to move, has a source
