anything that's in front of the lens and very close, especially when a flash is used.
Even a black plastic camera cord, when in front of the lens, will reflect the light
and cause a white streak across the film.
Or they may be due to unfamiliar settings on digital cameras.
I recently investigated a photograph that turned out to be the twilight mode.
This is a new setting on digital cameras that uses a flash, but then keeps the shutter open
in order to expose more distant or dark areas of the field that would not have been illuminated
by the flash, such as taking a picture at twilight.
This however creates the potential for camera movements to cause streaks of light across
the picture, resulting in strange effects that you may not be able to imagine how they
got there if you're not familiar with the operation of the twilight mode.
Other photographic effects might include an actual image of a ghostly person or figure
in the film or on the picture.
This is not a streak or a globule, so this can't be a simple artifact.
There's got to be something else going on.
Older cameras often created accidental double exposures.
If the film did not advance and a subsequent picture was taken, there could be a ghostly
faint image of a person from one exposure on the other.
Sometimes the ghostly image is just pareidolia.
It is a fog effect either because of literal smoke or fog in the environment or just an
overexposure from using a flash too closely creates this blurry image.
And pareidolia, the tendency to, for example, see a face in a cloud to impose a pattern
on random stimuli, may allow you to see what appears to be a distorted ghostly body or
face in the fog or in the image.
Or it's possible that a real live person was simply in the field of view but wasn't
noticed at the time that the picture was taken.
Perhaps they were just walking through in the background or a person was in a window
and their face appears in the window in the background in the photograph.
Ghost hunters also use scientific instruments to take readings and then declare any apparently
anomalous readings as further evidenced for ghosts.
For example, they use, they are fond of using electromagnetic detectors to look for electromagnetic
or EM fields.
Typically, they are using off the shelf EM detectors.
Most of the ones that they use are not directional.
Experts use EM detectors that are directional.
They want to know what direction an electromagnetic field is coming from.
But a lot of the ones that are used by ghost hunters are omnidirectional EM detectors.
This means they could detect fields coming from any location and can't really be used
therefore to conclude that an EM field is coming from one specific direction.
They also don't control for the range of these EM detectors or the frequencies.
They tend to use whatever frequency and distance range was available on the off the shelf EM
