detectors.
Without any particular underlying scientific reason why that frequency would be the one
that correlates with ghost activity, for example.
But more importantly, in our modern society electromagnetic fields are everywhere.
You could find them in every house.
Even if there is no electricity, just a concentration of iron, for example, can produce an EM field.
The ghost hunters, however, do no controlled studies which are determined, which are designed
to determine what the source of the EM fields are and to rule out mundane explanations.
Another phenomenon often presented by ghost hunters as evidence for ghost activity is
so-called ghost cold.
Cold spots that are alleged to be the evidence of a ghostly presence.
Calling it ghost cold, however, doesn't make it evidence for ghosts.
It is, in fact, just a cold spot in a house.
Many houses have drafts and cold spots, especially older houses, the kind that ghost hunters
are fond of investigating.
Despite the fact that no one has been able to produce any reliable, compelling evidence
that ghosts are a real phenomenon, people do have many ghostly or just anomalous experiences.
Of course, not dismissing that people have these experiences.
The question is, how best to interpret them?
There is ample evidence that these experiences result from errors in perception.
We learned in a previous lecture how flawed our perception can be.
Or from pattern recognition, hyperactive agency detection, or simple errors in memory.
All of the types of errors that we discussed earlier in this course come into play.
When ghost encounters occur under poor observing conditions, they may occur when people are
sleep deprived, up late at night.
That's when ghosts come out, right?
Or when anxiety or just expectation levels are very high.
What about what I described earlier in this lecture?
The experience of waking up paralyzed, feeling that there is a menacing entity in the room
with you, maybe feeling a heaviness on your chest.
This can be a very scary, very compelling experience.
This is what we call, what neurologists call, hypnagogic hallucinations, or hypnagogia.
This is a known neurological phenomenon.
It is a fusion of the sleep-wake cycle and an intrusion of dreams of a dream-like state
into the waking state, producing hallucinations.
And this sense of being paralyzed, essentially because when you're dreaming, your brain paralyzes
your body so that you don't sleepwalk, you don't act out your dreams.
And this sleep paralysis persists into this pseudo-waking state.
This can be a very intense experience.
I've had many patients with it, and they're often frightened by it, and they don't know
how to interpret it.
