the process.
You can get magnets to create so-called perpetual motion, although that motion is using up the
energy in the magnets, and eventually that energy will wear down.
This also gets to the fact that when you try to scale up, you run into serious problems,
and you also run into problems when you try to use these motors not just as a way of spinning
a wheel indefinitely because of the magnetic energy, but actually using it as a source
of energy.
Try running your house on the electricity being generated by such a device.
They never seem to be able to do that.
The most significant scientific problem with the free energy claims is that they violate
the laws of thermodynamics.
The first law of thermodynamics essentially states the conservation of energy.
Energy can change form, but cannot be created out of nothing.
The second law of thermodynamics states that in any thermodynamic process, some energy
will be lost to entropy.
So you might say the first law says that you cannot get more energy out of a process than
you put in, and the second law says that you can't even get that.
You can't even get the energy you put in because some has to be lost to entropy.
Let's move on now to psi phenomenon or psychic abilities, the ability to read other people's
minds.
This is sometimes called extrasensory perception or a more technical term that has been used
recently, anomalous cognition.
The very name contains the concept of an anomaly.
Other forms of this include precognition, the ability to perceive things before they
happen or remote viewing, the ability to perceive things that are remote from your location.
These various phenomena have been actively researched over the last century.
However, the plausibility here is extremely low.
That's a red flag.
It doesn't mean that these phenomena do not exist.
It just means that we need to be especially skeptical.
We need to require a degree of evidence that is in proportion with the implausibility of
these claims.
But even if we put the plausibility issue aside, researchers have not been able to get
off of the first step, showing convincingly that psi phenomena even exist.
In the past, psi research has produced, in fact, some classic examples of pseudoscientific
methods.
Now, they have admittedly moved beyond these types of errors, although I still see them
crop up from time to time.
One such phenomenon is called psi missing.
This is the notion that sometimes somebody with ESP may guess the incorrect answer more
often than would be predicted by chance.
