After a while, this self-reinforcing effect convinces the conspiracy theorists that they
must be correct, and it makes them incredibly resistant to change.
Conspiracy theorists often commit what is called the fundamental attribution error, the
tendency to blame other people's behavior on internal rather than situational factors.
The conspiracy theorist tends to think that all actions and outcomes are deliberate and
intended, nothing is a coincidence, nothing happens by chance.
They ignore downplay, the quirky nature of history or of individual action.
People may be innocently responding to the situation rather than deliberately orchestrating
events in every detail.
For these reasons and others, the conspiracy theory tends to become immune to refutation.
This is its biggest cognitive problem or flaw.
It quickly becomes what we call a closed belief system, a belief system that contains the
mechanisms of its own insulation from external refutation, from facts and evidence.
All evidence against the conspiracy, all evidence that could prove the conspiracy is not true,
can be explained away as being part of the conspiracy itself.
For example, any evidence that links Oswald to the JFK assassination could be seen to
have been planted in order to frame Oswald, including the gun that he used, the bullet
recovered from Connolly's stretcher, and the picture of Oswald training with the gun before
the assassination.
Further, any evidence that is lacking for the conspiracy can be claimed to have been removed
or covered up by the conspirators.
Also to give a separate example, the Men in Black, the shadow organization that is alleged
to be in contact with aliens and engaged in a very powerful and detailed cover-up of the
existence of aliens and the government's knowledge of them, can be said to swoop in and eliminate
any evidence that would prove the presence of aliens on earth.
Therefore, conspiracy theorists can explain away the existence of any disconfirming evidence
or the lack of any evidence that we think should be present for their preferred conspiracy
theory.
They render themselves immune to any possibility of refutation, hence it's a closed belief
system.
They also render themselves immune to any burden of proof.
The burden of proof, of course, should fall upon anyone who is making a specific claim.
Trying to shift the burden of proof off of oneself onto others, you have to believe what
I claim unless you can prove my claim false, is a common logical fallacy employed to maintain
a belief that lacks evidence.
They frequently attempt to shift this burden of proof onto anyone who does not accept their
