theory.
They challenge others to prove them wrong when they have the burden of proof.
They combine this shifting of the burden of proof with the moving the goalpost logical
fallacy.
So, they say it's your job, someone else's job, to prove that their conspiracy is false
or that the standard interpretation of events is correct.
However, they can always simply move the goalpost out of range of any evidence that is provided.
No matter how much evidence is provided to support a non-conspiracy interpretation of
events, it is never enough.
For example, unless every quirky little detail of the events of 9-11 can be explained to
an arbitrary level of detail, conspiracy theorists can claim that there are still holes in the
standard explanation and those holes equal their conspiracy.
Conspiracy theorists then do is anomaly hunting.
Remember, we discussed this on the previous lecture on pseudosciences.
Anomaly hunting is just looking for anything that seems out of the ordinary or quirky or
that defies an immediate or obvious explanation.
Anomaly hunting can therefore be used to say, see, there are problems or there are holes
in the standard explanation without having to provide any specific evidence of a specific
conspiracy.
If you take any complex historical event, however, the Lincoln assassination, the JFK
assassination, the events of 9-11, there will be many anomalous details.
That's just the way history works.
Events that cannot be fully explained.
This is because for no other reason than simply the law of large numbers.
The number of variables is so high that quirky events and strange coincidences are not only
bound to happen, they're inevitable.
It would be remarkable if you could explain to arbitrary detail every tiny aspect of any
large complex historical event.
Plus, we can't possibly know all the situational factors that have contributed to how events
unfolded.
Who may have had a cold on one day or woke up late, for example.
The little quirky events of everyday life intrude and play a part in the larger event.
But you cannot possibly know all of them, and therefore there will always be anomalies
to find.
The presence of anomalies, therefore, doesn't really tell us anything.
But conspiracy theorists use that in order to cast a sinister light on events and imply
