to feel more powerless.
Conspiracy thinking potentially meets other psychological needs as well, such as self-esteem.
It may be a reaction to an inability to attain one's goals.
It may, being part of an army of light, for example, offers not only self-esteem but a
way to channel feelings of anger.
It makes one feel as if they are part of a privileged enlightened view.
This can have a powerful effect on self-esteem.
If you remember back to the lecture on the psychology of belief, conspiracy theories
fit well into that notion.
There is a struggle happening, in fact, inside of our brains between two inherent tendencies,
reality testing and pattern recognition.
Conspiracy thinking, which is a form of pattern recognition, is filtered through the reality
testing module, if you will, or part of our brains.
We see an apparent pattern and then we ask ourselves, well, does this pattern make sense?
Is it plausible?
Does it conform to my internal model of reality?
That's reality testing.
Many apparent conspiracies are rejected by our brains, sometimes even subconsciously,
because they just don't feel right.
They fail our internal reality testing.
People vary, however, in terms of the strength of their tendency to see patterns, their pattern
recognition and the strength of their reality testing.
For example, the psychiatric disease, known as schizophrenia, is understood largely as
a condition marked by diminished reality testing.
Therefore, any conspiracy or paranoid notion that occurs to a severe schizophrenic, for
example, bypasses the reality testing module and is accepted as very compelling, seems
to be real to that person.
There are various cognitive traps that conspiracy thinking falls into.
One is confirmation bias, which we've also discussed already, a tendency to see evidence
which confirms what we believe and to ignore or more likely explain away evidence which
disconfirms the illusion.
Any bit of evidence can be cast in a sinister light, and therefore, conspiracy theorists
rather than having a reality testing filter, they can apply a sinister filter to reality,
making everything seem as if it's part of a conspiracy.
Therefore, ambiguous and even negative evidence can tend to reinforce the conspiracy and the
conspiracy theorists' certainty and confidence in their conspiracy.
