up details of a recovered crashed flying saucer in Roswell, New Mexico from 1947.
People who believe the government is engaged in this conspiracy to hide the contact with
aliens claim that evidence of a cover-up is proof of their alien claims.
However, the government, the U.S. government, was engaged in a cover-up surrounding the
events of the crash at a ranch in Roswell, New Mexico in 1947.
They were hiding the fact that they were engaged in a secret spy program now made public and
known as Project Mogul, which was the U.S. spying on Soviet nuclear weapons testing.
So, yes, the government was engaged in a cover-up.
Governments do engage in secrecy.
So from the fact that the standard explanation that what crashed was a simple weather balloon
with a corner reflector on it, that that does not explain everything and that the government
was being secretive, doesn't necessarily mean that they were covering up a crashed
alien spaceship.
They were covering up a spy program that was occurring in the middle of the Cold War.
Another cognitive trap that conspiracy theorists fall into is widening the conspiracy.
This is another mechanism by which to render a conspiracy immune to contradictory evidence.
For example, the existence of a massive U.S. conspiracy responsible for the events of
9-11 raises a lot of questions.
How come the liberal-leaning part of the media have not exposed this?
There were certainly no supporters of the Bush administration who is alleged to have
carried out an inside job on 9-11.
Why wouldn't they be diligently investigating this conspiracy or this cover-up?
Yet the mainstream media has never published any such story.
How come the Democrats in the Congress, even when they had control of both houses, never
launched an investigation that revealed the Bush administration's involvement in the events
of 9-11?
What about the military tracking of the jets of 9-11?
The Flight 77 never crashed into the Pentagon.
What happened to it and everyone on board?
The more questions we ask, the larger the conspiracy seems to grow because the conspiracy
theorists simply say, well, they were part of the conspiracy.
The media, they were in on it.
The Democratic Party, even though they were the opposition party at the time, they must
have been in on it as well.
Everyone in a position to have tracked the jets at the time must also be part of the
conspiracy.
