the official version of events.
For example, there have been those 9-11 conspiracy theorists who have hypothesized that some of
the more outrageous 9-11 conspiracy theories were in fact perpetrated by the government
who is withholding evidence that can prove the conspiracy wrong.
They're waiting for the time when it is ripe to reveal that evidence, conclusively proving
that some 9-11 conspiracies are false.
By this, they hope to delegitimize all 9-11 conspiracies, even the true ones or the legitimate
ones.
The conspiracy conspiracy allows conspiracy theories to, in fact, be turned on their head
and to maybe hurt the cause of transparency and honesty by shrouding the entire enterprise
of questioning the government with the broad brush that all conspiracy theories are nutty
or kooky.
Conspiracy theories also often have a very simplistic or unidimensional approach to complex
problems.
They are sometimes often framed in very racist or bigotive terms.
For example, the conspirators may themselves be an ethnic group.
Or that ethnic group is tarred with the reputation of being part of a dark, evil group that
is trying to perpetrate a nefarious conspiracy on the world or perhaps take control over
segments of society.
This both results from the underlying bigotry, but also reinforces that bigotry and racism
itself.
For good or for bad, conspiracy thinking is a type of pseudoscience that demonstrates
many of the principles discussed in the previous lectures on science and pseudoscience.
They meet many psychological needs.
They are built on cognitive biases and maintained with logical fallacies.
They are further fueled by errors in perception and memory.
The entire process is fatally flawed, what some psychologists have called epistemologically
crippled, because it is a manifestation of circular reasoning that immunizes itself,
immunizes the conspiracy theory from any possibility of refutation.
This is a huge red flag.
The lesson from this is that you should always be on the lookout for subtle mechanisms by
which you are insulating your own beliefs from facts or evidence.
We shouldn't think, in fact, that conspiracy thinking is restricted to just the lunatic
fringe.
As I said at the beginning of this lecture, we all have a little conspiracy theorist hiding
inside each of us.
