Do you think it's more likely that JFK was assassinated by a lone gunman, Lee Harvey Oswald,
acting completely by himself, or that JFK was the target of a larger conspiracy?
Are you perhaps among the one-third of Americans who believe that the events of 9-11 were an
inside job?
Or perhaps you have been told that big oil is keeping free energy technology from reaching
the market?
To some extent, we all have a little conspiracy theorist inside each of us.
The notion that dark and powerful forces are working against our interests grips our attention
and can seem very compelling.
This is in fact an adaptive trait, like anxiety, for example.
It is useful in moderate amounts, but counterproductive and even debilitating when extreme.
While there are certainly conspiracies in the world, conspiracy thinking can be a cognitive
trap that is easy to fall into but very difficult to get out of.
So-called grand conspiracies are not just an ordinary conspiracy where two or more
people conspire together to engage in some secret or nefarious purpose.
Grand conspiracies are very large.
They involve many people across multiple organizations acting for long periods of time.
Grand conspiracy theories tend to divide the world into three groups.
The conspirators are a vastly powerful organization with incredible resources, evil intentions,
up to and including taking over the world.
They also, however, at the same time make silly or simple mistakes or are incredibly
careless.
Otherwise, how would anybody know that they exist?
The second group are the conspiracy theorists themselves.
They have the ability, in their own view, to see the conspiracy for what it is.
They can read between the lines and recognize the hand of the conspirators at work.
They often envision themselves as being part of an army of light whose goal it is to save
the world from the dark conspiracy.
Everyone else in the world, 98, 99 percent of everyone, falls into the third group which
are the naive dupes, the people who are not engaged in the conspiracy and don't see that
it exists either.
A classic example of a grand conspiracy theory is the belief in the Illuminati.
The Illuminati are alleged to be a shadow world government.
Their goal is to bring about a new world order in which they rule and control the entire
world.
Conspiracy theorists see them behind everything that happens in the world.
The Illuminati apparently, according to conspiracy theorists, reveal themselves through symbolism.
For example, the seal on the US dollar.
The all-seeing eye, they claim, is a symbol of the Freemasons who, according to conspiracy
theorists, are connected to the Illuminati.
So innocent symbolism, such as the eye on the back of the dollar, becomes evidence that
the Illuminati are behind much of what happens in the world.
The paranoid style in American politics by Richard Hofstadter in 1966 is considered to
be the first scholarly essay on conspiracy thinking.
Hofstadter looked at conspiracy thinking as a psychopathology, a paranoid delusional disorder.
But the popularity of conspiracy theories is not fully explained by this.
There must be more going on than a psychopathology if it's so common.
Conspiracy thinking is a way to make sense of a complex or mysterious world.
More likely, when people feel that they lack control or are powerless or being victimized,
studies show that people who generally have a sense that they lack control over their lives
or over their world are much more likely to engage in conspiracy thinking.
In fact, we often lack detailed information about important political events or other
events that occur throughout the world.
This opens the door even further to conspiracy thinking because we can fill the gaps in our
knowledge with ideas or notions that are comforting or useful in some way.
Conspiracy thinking offers the illusion of certainty.
In this way, it's very much like superstitious thinking, which provides the illusion of control.
Therefore, these two types of thinking meet a basic psychological need.
One of the forms of thinking that is inherent to conspiracy thinking is pattern recognition.
A conspiracy theory is often just that.
It is a pattern.
In this case, it's a pattern imposed upon disconnected events.
You may recall that we discussed pareidolia, the tendency of our brain to impose patterns
on random data such as seeing an image or a face in an oil stain or the bark of a tree
or a cloud.
Well, conspiracy thinking is like pareidolia but cognitively.
It is seeing a pattern or hyperactive pattern detection in events that are occurring.
The conspiracy theorists will connect the dots and see an invisible hand operating behind
the scenes.
Pattern recognition is also more common in response to feelings of powerlessness, supporting
the notion that conspiracy thinking in part serves this emotional need.
Even visual pareidolia becomes more likely in research scenarios where subjects are made
to feel more powerless.
Conspiracy thinking potentially meets other psychological needs as well, such as self-esteem.
It may be a reaction to an inability to attain one's goals.
It may, being part of an army of light, for example, offers not only self-esteem but a
way to channel feelings of anger.
It makes one feel as if they are part of a privileged enlightened view.
This can have a powerful effect on self-esteem.
If you remember back to the lecture on the psychology of belief, conspiracy theories
fit well into that notion.
There is a struggle happening, in fact, inside of our brains between two inherent tendencies,
reality testing and pattern recognition.
Conspiracy thinking, which is a form of pattern recognition, is filtered through the reality
testing module, if you will, or part of our brains.
We see an apparent pattern and then we ask ourselves, well, does this pattern make sense?
Is it plausible?
Does it conform to my internal model of reality?
That's reality testing.
Many apparent conspiracies are rejected by our brains, sometimes even subconsciously,
because they just don't feel right.
They fail our internal reality testing.
People vary, however, in terms of the strength of their tendency to see patterns, their pattern
recognition and the strength of their reality testing.
For example, the psychiatric disease, known as schizophrenia, is understood largely as
a condition marked by diminished reality testing.
Therefore, any conspiracy or paranoid notion that occurs to a severe schizophrenic, for
example, bypasses the reality testing module and is accepted as very compelling, seems
to be real to that person.
There are various cognitive traps that conspiracy thinking falls into.
One is confirmation bias, which we've also discussed already, a tendency to see evidence
which confirms what we believe and to ignore or more likely explain away evidence which
disconfirms the illusion.
Any bit of evidence can be cast in a sinister light, and therefore, conspiracy theorists
rather than having a reality testing filter, they can apply a sinister filter to reality,
making everything seem as if it's part of a conspiracy.
Therefore, ambiguous and even negative evidence can tend to reinforce the conspiracy and the
conspiracy theorists' certainty and confidence in their conspiracy.
After a while, this self-reinforcing effect convinces the conspiracy theorists that they
must be correct, and it makes them incredibly resistant to change.
Conspiracy theorists often commit what is called the fundamental attribution error, the
tendency to blame other people's behavior on internal rather than situational factors.
The conspiracy theorist tends to think that all actions and outcomes are deliberate and
intended, nothing is a coincidence, nothing happens by chance.
They ignore downplay, the quirky nature of history or of individual action.
People may be innocently responding to the situation rather than deliberately orchestrating
events in every detail.
For these reasons and others, the conspiracy theory tends to become immune to refutation.
This is its biggest cognitive problem or flaw.
It quickly becomes what we call a closed belief system, a belief system that contains the
mechanisms of its own insulation from external refutation, from facts and evidence.
All evidence against the conspiracy, all evidence that could prove the conspiracy is not true,
can be explained away as being part of the conspiracy itself.
For example, any evidence that links Oswald to the JFK assassination could be seen to
have been planted in order to frame Oswald, including the gun that he used, the bullet
recovered from Connolly's stretcher, and the picture of Oswald training with the gun before
the assassination.
Further, any evidence that is lacking for the conspiracy can be claimed to have been removed
or covered up by the conspirators.
Also to give a separate example, the Men in Black, the shadow organization that is alleged
to be in contact with aliens and engaged in a very powerful and detailed cover-up of the
existence of aliens and the government's knowledge of them, can be said to swoop in and eliminate
any evidence that would prove the presence of aliens on earth.
Therefore, conspiracy theorists can explain away the existence of any disconfirming evidence
or the lack of any evidence that we think should be present for their preferred conspiracy
theory.
They render themselves immune to any possibility of refutation, hence it's a closed belief
system.
They also render themselves immune to any burden of proof.
The burden of proof, of course, should fall upon anyone who is making a specific claim.
Trying to shift the burden of proof off of oneself onto others, you have to believe what
I claim unless you can prove my claim false, is a common logical fallacy employed to maintain
a belief that lacks evidence.
They frequently attempt to shift this burden of proof onto anyone who does not accept their
theory.
They challenge others to prove them wrong when they have the burden of proof.
They combine this shifting of the burden of proof with the moving the goalpost logical
fallacy.
So, they say it's your job, someone else's job, to prove that their conspiracy is false
or that the standard interpretation of events is correct.
However, they can always simply move the goalpost out of range of any evidence that is provided.
No matter how much evidence is provided to support a non-conspiracy interpretation of
events, it is never enough.
For example, unless every quirky little detail of the events of 9-11 can be explained to
an arbitrary level of detail, conspiracy theorists can claim that there are still holes in the
standard explanation and those holes equal their conspiracy.
Conspiracy theorists then do is anomaly hunting.
Remember, we discussed this on the previous lecture on pseudosciences.
Anomaly hunting is just looking for anything that seems out of the ordinary or quirky or
that defies an immediate or obvious explanation.
Anomaly hunting can therefore be used to say, see, there are problems or there are holes
in the standard explanation without having to provide any specific evidence of a specific
conspiracy.
If you take any complex historical event, however, the Lincoln assassination, the JFK
assassination, the events of 9-11, there will be many anomalous details.
That's just the way history works.
Events that cannot be fully explained.
This is because for no other reason than simply the law of large numbers.
The number of variables is so high that quirky events and strange coincidences are not only
bound to happen, they're inevitable.
It would be remarkable if you could explain to arbitrary detail every tiny aspect of any
large complex historical event.
Plus, we can't possibly know all the situational factors that have contributed to how events
unfolded.
Who may have had a cold on one day or woke up late, for example.
The little quirky events of everyday life intrude and play a part in the larger event.
But you cannot possibly know all of them, and therefore there will always be anomalies
to find.
The presence of anomalies, therefore, doesn't really tell us anything.
But conspiracy theorists use that in order to cast a sinister light on events and imply
that there is some dark conspiracy going on.
They often combine anomaly hunting with naive assumptions about how things should happen.
Things are anomalous because they don't fit their idea of how events should have unfolded.
For example, what should the debris field look like after a large commercial jet crashes
into a reinforced building like the Pentagon?
It's naive to assume that we can know with any detail what precisely would result from
such an event.
A large impact like that is unprecedented.
The physics of high energy impacts are not always intuitive.
But 9-11 conspiracy theorists premise their claims, partly on the notion that they should
be able to predict what the debris field should look like.
And therefore, anything that doesn't fit their assumptions, such as how big the pieces of
the plane should be, they call an anomaly.
And evidence that the standard explanation is flawed and not true.
They combine this with then the false dichotomy.
For example, they say, well, there are problems with the standard explanation.
I can find anomalies.
The events don't quite add up or make sense.
The debris field doesn't look like I would naively predict it to look like.
Therefore, the standard explanation is wrong.
Then they present the false dichotomy.
And therefore, my conspiracy theory is correct.
They give that false choice.
So that means that they don't have any burden of proof to prove that their conspiracy theory
is correct.
All they have to do is find anomalies, cast a doubt on the standard story, and then use
the false dichotomy logical fallacy to replace the standard story of events with their conspiracy.
Of course, anomaly hunting in and of itself is not persuasive, because we expect to see
anomalies.
But there are many possibilities for why there may be unusual or unexplainable or unknown
aspects to complex historical events.
There may be other aspects to this story that are not being made public, for example.
That doesn't necessarily mean that the specific conspiracy being offered must be true.
That's the false choice or false dichotomy aspect of this.
Let's give the events surrounding Roswell, New Mexico in 1947 as an example.
There are many UFO conspiracy theorists who claim that the U.S. government is covering
up details of a recovered crashed flying saucer in Roswell, New Mexico from 1947.
People who believe the government is engaged in this conspiracy to hide the contact with
aliens claim that evidence of a cover-up is proof of their alien claims.
However, the government, the U.S. government, was engaged in a cover-up surrounding the
events of the crash at a ranch in Roswell, New Mexico in 1947.
They were hiding the fact that they were engaged in a secret spy program now made public and
known as Project Mogul, which was the U.S. spying on Soviet nuclear weapons testing.
So, yes, the government was engaged in a cover-up.
Governments do engage in secrecy.
So from the fact that the standard explanation that what crashed was a simple weather balloon
with a corner reflector on it, that that does not explain everything and that the government
was being secretive, doesn't necessarily mean that they were covering up a crashed
alien spaceship.
They were covering up a spy program that was occurring in the middle of the Cold War.
Another cognitive trap that conspiracy theorists fall into is widening the conspiracy.
This is another mechanism by which to render a conspiracy immune to contradictory evidence.
For example, the existence of a massive U.S. conspiracy responsible for the events of
9-11 raises a lot of questions.
How come the liberal-leaning part of the media have not exposed this?
There were certainly no supporters of the Bush administration who is alleged to have
carried out an inside job on 9-11.
Why wouldn't they be diligently investigating this conspiracy or this cover-up?
Yet the mainstream media has never published any such story.
How come the Democrats in the Congress, even when they had control of both houses, never
launched an investigation that revealed the Bush administration's involvement in the events
of 9-11?
What about the military tracking of the jets of 9-11?
The Flight 77 never crashed into the Pentagon.
What happened to it and everyone on board?
The more questions we ask, the larger the conspiracy seems to grow because the conspiracy
theorists simply say, well, they were part of the conspiracy.
The media, they were in on it.
The Democratic Party, even though they were the opposition party at the time, they must
have been in on it as well.
Everyone in a position to have tracked the jets at the time must also be part of the
conspiracy.
Other governments that may have been able to track what was going on, they too must
be part of the conspiracy.
The conspiracy grows and grows as widening the conspiracy is used to answer any of the
implications of such a large conspiracy.
Eventually, the power and resources attributed to the conspirators must also grow until you
have to believe that they are part of a world-spanning shadow government with their hands in everything
in order to be able to pull off such a colossal event.
In this way, grand conspiracy theories tend to collapse under their own weight.
To give another example, if the US never really landed astronauts on the moon, then why didn't
the Soviet Union call us on it?
They certainly could have tracked our rockets while they must have been in on it as well.
What are the implications of the US and the Soviet Union both being in on the same conspiracy
during the Cold War?
The number of people and organizations that would need to be involved becomes far too
great to be plausible.
Plausibility is not maintained with the grand conspiracy theory.
What is the harm, if any, of conspiracy thinking or of conspiracy theorists?
There is some scholarly debate as to whether the existence of conspiracy theories is a
net positive or a net negative.
On the positive side, the conspiracy theories do serve the purpose of challenging the powers
that be.
They do showcase deficiencies in these sometimes inadequate explanations that the government
gives for their actions.
And they further promote the need for transparency and full disclosure, the extreme secrecy by
which many governments operate lends themselves to conspiracy theorists.
Many conspiracy theorists, for example, also engage in freedom of information or FOI requests
that bring information to the public's attention, even if it's not evidence for their pet conspiracy
theory.
On the other hand, conspiracy theories tend to erode confidence in government and democracy.
Some argue they may even hurt the cause of transparency due to the conspiracy conspiracy.
In other words, the existence of absurd and implausible conspiracy theories can be used
to dismiss any questioning of conventional explanations.
Reasonable questions or attempts at keeping governments and corporations accountable and
honest can be lumped in with the lunatic fringe of crazy conspiracy theories.
Some conspiracy theorists have even hypothesized that the government is responsible for some
of the worst conspiracy theories out there in order to delegitimize any questioning of
the official version of events.
For example, there have been those 9-11 conspiracy theorists who have hypothesized that some of
the more outrageous 9-11 conspiracy theories were in fact perpetrated by the government
who is withholding evidence that can prove the conspiracy wrong.
They're waiting for the time when it is ripe to reveal that evidence, conclusively proving
that some 9-11 conspiracies are false.
By this, they hope to delegitimize all 9-11 conspiracies, even the true ones or the legitimate
ones.
The conspiracy conspiracy allows conspiracy theories to, in fact, be turned on their head
and to maybe hurt the cause of transparency and honesty by shrouding the entire enterprise
of questioning the government with the broad brush that all conspiracy theories are nutty
or kooky.
Conspiracy theories also often have a very simplistic or unidimensional approach to complex
problems.
They are sometimes often framed in very racist or bigotive terms.
For example, the conspirators may themselves be an ethnic group.
Or that ethnic group is tarred with the reputation of being part of a dark, evil group that
is trying to perpetrate a nefarious conspiracy on the world or perhaps take control over
segments of society.
This both results from the underlying bigotry, but also reinforces that bigotry and racism
itself.
For good or for bad, conspiracy thinking is a type of pseudoscience that demonstrates
many of the principles discussed in the previous lectures on science and pseudoscience.
They meet many psychological needs.
They are built on cognitive biases and maintained with logical fallacies.
They are further fueled by errors in perception and memory.
The entire process is fatally flawed, what some psychologists have called epistemologically
crippled, because it is a manifestation of circular reasoning that immunizes itself,
immunizes the conspiracy theory from any possibility of refutation.
This is a huge red flag.
The lesson from this is that you should always be on the lookout for subtle mechanisms by
which you are insulating your own beliefs from facts or evidence.
We shouldn't think, in fact, that conspiracy thinking is restricted to just the lunatic
fringe.
As I said at the beginning of this lecture, we all have a little conspiracy theorist hiding
inside each of us.
Keeping on the lookout for genuine conspiracies is important, which is partly why conspiracy
thinking persists.
The ability and the tendency to ask, is there a conspiracy against me?
Are people doing things in such a way to work against my own interests?
That's clearly an adaptive way of thinking, otherwise it would not have persisted as it
did.
There was a conspiracy, for example, on 9-11.
The conspiracy was orchestrated and carried out by Al Qaeda.
This is one that was missed and the government failed to prevent it.
Perhaps it could have been prevented if there was a higher level of curiosity, even paranoia.
There was a conspiracy also, for example, to assassinate Abraham Lincoln, a conspiracy
that succeeded and was eventually uncovered.
The difference between searching for genuine conspiracies and the grand conspiracy theory
is similar to the difference between science and pseudoscience.
When a conspiracy is hypothesized, you have to treat it like any other scientific hypothesis,
not just assume the conspiracy is true, look for confirming evidence, insulate it from
disconfirming evidence, shift the burden of proof, and then support the theory with anomaly
hunting.
That's the pseudoscience of grand conspiracy theories.
Rather, you should ask scientific skeptical questions.
Is this really true?
Is there another way, a more innocent way, to interpret this evidence?
What do we really say?
What can we really say and what do we really know?
Is there evidence for this particular conspiracy, for this interpretation of events?
What else is implied?
If the conspiracy were true, what else would have to be true and can we investigate that?
You can engage in a scientific skeptical investigation of any conspiracy theory to determine which
conspiracy theories are likely to be true and which ones are not true.
By examining the extreme conspiracy theories, the pseudoscientific conspiracy theories,
we hope to identify those patterns of thought and cognitive traps that we all fall into
to a lesser degree.
Being familiar with grand conspiracies will help us identify the more subtle flaws in
our own day-to-day reasoning.
