The Illuminati apparently, according to conspiracy theorists, reveal themselves through symbolism.
For example, the seal on the US dollar.
The all-seeing eye, they claim, is a symbol of the Freemasons who, according to conspiracy
theorists, are connected to the Illuminati.
So innocent symbolism, such as the eye on the back of the dollar, becomes evidence that
the Illuminati are behind much of what happens in the world.
The paranoid style in American politics by Richard Hofstadter in 1966 is considered to
be the first scholarly essay on conspiracy thinking.
Hofstadter looked at conspiracy thinking as a psychopathology, a paranoid delusional disorder.
But the popularity of conspiracy theories is not fully explained by this.
There must be more going on than a psychopathology if it's so common.
Conspiracy thinking is a way to make sense of a complex or mysterious world.
More likely, when people feel that they lack control or are powerless or being victimized,
studies show that people who generally have a sense that they lack control over their lives
or over their world are much more likely to engage in conspiracy thinking.
In fact, we often lack detailed information about important political events or other
events that occur throughout the world.
This opens the door even further to conspiracy thinking because we can fill the gaps in our
knowledge with ideas or notions that are comforting or useful in some way.
Conspiracy thinking offers the illusion of certainty.
In this way, it's very much like superstitious thinking, which provides the illusion of control.
Therefore, these two types of thinking meet a basic psychological need.
One of the forms of thinking that is inherent to conspiracy thinking is pattern recognition.
A conspiracy theory is often just that.
It is a pattern.
In this case, it's a pattern imposed upon disconnected events.
You may recall that we discussed pareidolia, the tendency of our brain to impose patterns
on random data such as seeing an image or a face in an oil stain or the bark of a tree
or a cloud.
Well, conspiracy thinking is like pareidolia but cognitively.
It is seeing a pattern or hyperactive pattern detection in events that are occurring.
The conspiracy theorists will connect the dots and see an invisible hand operating behind
the scenes.
Pattern recognition is also more common in response to feelings of powerlessness, supporting
the notion that conspiracy thinking in part serves this emotional need.
Even visual pareidolia becomes more likely in research scenarios where subjects are made
