Do you think it's more likely that JFK was assassinated by a lone gunman, Lee Harvey Oswald,
acting completely by himself, or that JFK was the target of a larger conspiracy?
Are you perhaps among the one-third of Americans who believe that the events of 9-11 were an
inside job?
Or perhaps you have been told that big oil is keeping free energy technology from reaching
the market?
To some extent, we all have a little conspiracy theorist inside each of us.
The notion that dark and powerful forces are working against our interests grips our attention
and can seem very compelling.
This is in fact an adaptive trait, like anxiety, for example.
It is useful in moderate amounts, but counterproductive and even debilitating when extreme.
While there are certainly conspiracies in the world, conspiracy thinking can be a cognitive
trap that is easy to fall into but very difficult to get out of.
So-called grand conspiracies are not just an ordinary conspiracy where two or more
people conspire together to engage in some secret or nefarious purpose.
Grand conspiracies are very large.
They involve many people across multiple organizations acting for long periods of time.
Grand conspiracy theories tend to divide the world into three groups.
The conspirators are a vastly powerful organization with incredible resources, evil intentions,
up to and including taking over the world.
They also, however, at the same time make silly or simple mistakes or are incredibly
careless.
Otherwise, how would anybody know that they exist?
The second group are the conspiracy theorists themselves.
They have the ability, in their own view, to see the conspiracy for what it is.
They can read between the lines and recognize the hand of the conspirators at work.
They often envision themselves as being part of an army of light whose goal it is to save
the world from the dark conspiracy.
Everyone else in the world, 98, 99 percent of everyone, falls into the third group which
are the naive dupes, the people who are not engaged in the conspiracy and don't see that
it exists either.
A classic example of a grand conspiracy theory is the belief in the Illuminati.
The Illuminati are alleged to be a shadow world government.
Their goal is to bring about a new world order in which they rule and control the entire
world.
Conspiracy theorists see them behind everything that happens in the world.
