that there is some dark conspiracy going on.
They often combine anomaly hunting with naive assumptions about how things should happen.
Things are anomalous because they don't fit their idea of how events should have unfolded.
For example, what should the debris field look like after a large commercial jet crashes
into a reinforced building like the Pentagon?
It's naive to assume that we can know with any detail what precisely would result from
such an event.
A large impact like that is unprecedented.
The physics of high energy impacts are not always intuitive.
But 9-11 conspiracy theorists premise their claims, partly on the notion that they should
be able to predict what the debris field should look like.
And therefore, anything that doesn't fit their assumptions, such as how big the pieces of
the plane should be, they call an anomaly.
And evidence that the standard explanation is flawed and not true.
They combine this with then the false dichotomy.
For example, they say, well, there are problems with the standard explanation.
I can find anomalies.
The events don't quite add up or make sense.
The debris field doesn't look like I would naively predict it to look like.
Therefore, the standard explanation is wrong.
Then they present the false dichotomy.
And therefore, my conspiracy theory is correct.
They give that false choice.
So that means that they don't have any burden of proof to prove that their conspiracy theory
is correct.
All they have to do is find anomalies, cast a doubt on the standard story, and then use
the false dichotomy logical fallacy to replace the standard story of events with their conspiracy.
Of course, anomaly hunting in and of itself is not persuasive, because we expect to see
anomalies.
But there are many possibilities for why there may be unusual or unexplainable or unknown
aspects to complex historical events.
There may be other aspects to this story that are not being made public, for example.
That doesn't necessarily mean that the specific conspiracy being offered must be true.
That's the false choice or false dichotomy aspect of this.
Let's give the events surrounding Roswell, New Mexico in 1947 as an example.
There are many UFO conspiracy theorists who claim that the U.S. government is covering
