Other governments that may have been able to track what was going on, they too must
be part of the conspiracy.
The conspiracy grows and grows as widening the conspiracy is used to answer any of the
implications of such a large conspiracy.
Eventually, the power and resources attributed to the conspirators must also grow until you
have to believe that they are part of a world-spanning shadow government with their hands in everything
in order to be able to pull off such a colossal event.
In this way, grand conspiracy theories tend to collapse under their own weight.
To give another example, if the US never really landed astronauts on the moon, then why didn't
the Soviet Union call us on it?
They certainly could have tracked our rockets while they must have been in on it as well.
What are the implications of the US and the Soviet Union both being in on the same conspiracy
during the Cold War?
The number of people and organizations that would need to be involved becomes far too
great to be plausible.
Plausibility is not maintained with the grand conspiracy theory.
What is the harm, if any, of conspiracy thinking or of conspiracy theorists?
There is some scholarly debate as to whether the existence of conspiracy theories is a
net positive or a net negative.
On the positive side, the conspiracy theories do serve the purpose of challenging the powers
that be.
They do showcase deficiencies in these sometimes inadequate explanations that the government
gives for their actions.
And they further promote the need for transparency and full disclosure, the extreme secrecy by
which many governments operate lends themselves to conspiracy theorists.
Many conspiracy theorists, for example, also engage in freedom of information or FOI requests
that bring information to the public's attention, even if it's not evidence for their pet conspiracy
theory.
On the other hand, conspiracy theories tend to erode confidence in government and democracy.
Some argue they may even hurt the cause of transparency due to the conspiracy conspiracy.
In other words, the existence of absurd and implausible conspiracy theories can be used
to dismiss any questioning of conventional explanations.
Reasonable questions or attempts at keeping governments and corporations accountable and
honest can be lumped in with the lunatic fringe of crazy conspiracy theories.
Some conspiracy theorists have even hypothesized that the government is responsible for some
of the worst conspiracy theories out there in order to delegitimize any questioning of
