Keeping on the lookout for genuine conspiracies is important, which is partly why conspiracy
thinking persists.
The ability and the tendency to ask, is there a conspiracy against me?
Are people doing things in such a way to work against my own interests?
That's clearly an adaptive way of thinking, otherwise it would not have persisted as it
did.
There was a conspiracy, for example, on 9-11.
The conspiracy was orchestrated and carried out by Al Qaeda.
This is one that was missed and the government failed to prevent it.
Perhaps it could have been prevented if there was a higher level of curiosity, even paranoia.
There was a conspiracy also, for example, to assassinate Abraham Lincoln, a conspiracy
that succeeded and was eventually uncovered.
The difference between searching for genuine conspiracies and the grand conspiracy theory
is similar to the difference between science and pseudoscience.
When a conspiracy is hypothesized, you have to treat it like any other scientific hypothesis,
not just assume the conspiracy is true, look for confirming evidence, insulate it from
disconfirming evidence, shift the burden of proof, and then support the theory with anomaly
hunting.
That's the pseudoscience of grand conspiracy theories.
Rather, you should ask scientific skeptical questions.
Is this really true?
Is there another way, a more innocent way, to interpret this evidence?
What do we really say?
What can we really say and what do we really know?
Is there evidence for this particular conspiracy, for this interpretation of events?
What else is implied?
If the conspiracy were true, what else would have to be true and can we investigate that?
You can engage in a scientific skeptical investigation of any conspiracy theory to determine which
conspiracy theories are likely to be true and which ones are not true.
By examining the extreme conspiracy theories, the pseudoscientific conspiracy theories,
we hope to identify those patterns of thought and cognitive traps that we all fall into
to a lesser degree.
Being familiar with grand conspiracies will help us identify the more subtle flaws in
our own day-to-day reasoning.
