Further, humans are much more sensitive to cyanide than lice.
It takes about a hundred times as much cyanide to kill lice than it does a human.
Therefore we would expect the delousing chambers to have a higher concentration of cyanide
residue than the chambers that were used to kill humans.
The cyanide residue further washed off those walls in the ruins of these camps that were
exposed to the elements for years.
Walls that were less exposed contain cyanide residue consistent with their use as gas chambers.
None of this addresses the other lines of evidence for the use of Zycon B in the gas
chambers, evidence from documents and from eyewitness testimony, for example.
That's a good example of how you can collect together what I call factoids, little facts
taken out of context, to build any picture that you wish to build rather than digging
deeply and putting each fact into its proper context in order for a more consistent or
reliable picture to emerge.
In the end, the goal of denial is to sow doubt and confusion.
This is done by pointing out apparent inconsistencies, current gaps in knowledge, sometimes to legitimate
dissent just because an argument is legitimate doesn't mean that it can't be marshaled for
illegitimate or pseudoscientific purposes.
And also, the campaign of doubt and confusion exploits the messiness of science.
There's always contradictory data and false starts, blind alleys.
You can point to this messiness in order to, again, cast a sinister eye onto a legitimate
claim and make it seem in doubt.
Scientists make mistakes all the time.
They pursue dead ends.
They use bad arguments and evidence.
And sometimes they even commit fraud.
That doesn't mean that the entire enterprise, however, or any specific claim is wrong.
At the end of the day, you have to just objectively look at the evidence.
It is therefore easy to find ways to call any scientific claim into doubt if that's your
goal.
Healthy skepticism, on the other hand, fairly considers all the evidence and puts it into
a proper perspective.
It acknowledges that all knowledge is incomplete, that scientists are imperfect people, but
we can still come to reliable conclusions with sufficient evidence.
Deniers often combine their program of doubt with the false dichotomy.
I mentioned this specifically with the conspiracy theories in the previous lecture.
If the accepted version of events is not true, then their alternate claim or version must
