Are there any mainstream scientific beliefs that you do not accept?
For example, depending on exactly how you conduct the survey, about 40 to 50 percent
of Americans report that they do not accept the scientific consensus that life on Earth
arrived at its present form through a process of organic evolution.
There are communities in the world who deny that HIV causes AIDS, that vaccines are effective
in preventing infectious disease, that millions of Jews were systematically slaughtered during
World War II, that mental illness even exists, or even the germ theory of infectious disease.
And of course, there are many who believe that there is a campaign of denialism about
anthropogenic global climate change.
Just like with grand conspiracy thinking covered in the last lecture, denialism is a category
of pseudoscientific thinking worthy of separate consideration.
Now, this is not to say that the conventional wisdom on any topic is always correct or is
beyond error.
Sometimes the consensus of opinion is flawed or not correct, nor is the term denialism
an attempt to morally equate any one form of denial with all others.
But there is often a commonality among the various forms of denial, the same cognitive
and logical errors are being committed.
And just as with conspiracy thinking, examining some of the extreme examples will perhaps shed
light on the more subtle forms of denial that we are all vulnerable to.
What do we mean by denial of science or denialism as it is increasingly being called?
Like any pseudoscientific thinking, denialism begins with a desired conclusion.
Rather than supporting a controversial or rejected claim like many pseudoscientists, denialists
maintain that a generally accepted scientific or historical claim is not true, usually for
ideological reasons.
This then engage in what is called motivated reasoning, rationalizing why the undesired
claim is not true or at least not proven.
They therefore are working backwards from their desired conclusion, filling in justifications
for what they believe, rather than following logic and evidence wherever it leads.
This is the same description I gave of pseudoscience in general and why denialism is a form of
pseudoscientific thinking.
This is probably a good time to pause in this course and this lecture to note that many
of the topics I will be covering can be highly ideological and emotionally and emotional.
It is difficult to cover critical thinking, especially the topic of denialism, without
occasionally challenging cherished or emotionally held beliefs.
Let me just say I expect it's okay if you don't agree with me on one or more topics.
I'm often in fact deliberately choosing topics that I know are provocative and controversial.
That's because I feel in order to really test your critical thinking skills you need to
consider topics where cherished beliefs may be at stake.
Of course it's easy to be critical of others' beliefs.
When we first practice critical thinking skills, we're very good at finding logical fallacies
and cognitive flaws in others.
It's difficult to shine the cold, hard light of reason on our own beliefs, however.
But let's get back to the topic of denialism.
Denialism has the same problem that we described previously with pseudoscience in general, the
so-called demarcation problem.
The line between denialism and healthy skepticism.
It's a similarly fuzzy line as that between pseudoscience and legitimate science.
There is a continuum, in fact, between these two extremes with only a very fuzzy border
in between.
But also like pseudoscience, there are a number of behaviors that characterize denialism.
The more of these behaviors one is engaging in, the more towards the denialism end of
the spectrum they are, whereas the more legitimate scientific processes one engages in, the more
legitimate skepticism one is engaged in.
Of course, everyone thinks that they are the true skeptics, that they are in the middle
of this continuum right where they should be, skeptical to just the right degree.
Anyone, therefore, who believes something that I do not, I can consider a true believer.
And anyone who rejects a belief that I find plausible and true is a denier.
It's natural to use ourselves as the touchstone or as the anchoring point, the calibration
reference for true scientific skepticism.
Therefore deniers often portray themselves as skeptics.
They believe that they are the true skeptics, sometimes even to the point of thinking that
the scientific community are true believers or are corrupt in some way.
While the labels are often convenient, skeptic versus denier, I don't want to get caught
up in the semantics of this issue.
Again, what's important is to focus on the specific behaviors that are denialist behaviors
or strategies versus those that are legitimate scientific behaviors.
So let's get to the strategies of denial.
What types of cognitive flaws and behaviors mark a belief system or a behavior as denialism?
The primary one, I think the bread and butter of denialism is moving the goalpost, always
demanding more evidence for a claim than is currently available.
When that burden of evidence is met, then simply move the goalpost back further and
demand even more evidence.
As an example, those who engage in evolution denial or creationism often say that there
are no transitional forms in the fossil record.
This is a very common claim, the claim of no transitional fossils.
They use however a vague definition of transitional fossil in order to move the goalpost away
from any possible evidence.
At first you might think that they are just asking for fossils that show characteristics
that are intermediary in morphology between two living or extant species or a descendant
of a species, an ancestor to another, a species that links two species in time.
When such examples are provided, such as one excellent example, Ambulocetus, a literal
walking whale that was aquatic, but still retained small legs, a beautiful example of
a specimen that was halfway between an extinct species, a terrestrial mammal and living whales.
For a long time, evolution deniers said, where are the half whales?
They were found, Ambulocetus among other fossils, beautiful transitional specimens.
They then move the goalpost by changing the definition of what a transitional fossil is.
Now they say, well, it's more than just being morphologically intermediate.
They demand a separate line of evidence that proves that Ambulocetus is an actual ancestor
to modern whales.
This is related to another denialist strategy called the unreasonable demand for evidence.
So as new evidence comes in, you can always nudge back the goalpost, keeping just out
of range of whatever evidence is provided.
But you can also simply begin by making a demand for evidence that you know can never
be provided.
No science is established down to every tiniest possible detail.
Nothing in science is known to 100%.
There are always gaps in our knowledge, gaps in our current understanding.
Even the most solid theory has these gaps.
The presence of incomplete knowledge or gaps in our knowledge therefore does not necessarily
call into question a specific scientific theory or claim.
What we do know may still be very well established.
HIV denial is an excellent example of the unreasonable demand for evidence.
This often demand to see, for example, a single study or paper that establishes that HIV causes
AIDS.
However, the role of HIV in AIDS is a complex scientific question.
It's not established by any one piece of evidence or any one research paper.
So you can't point to one paper that proves HIV causes AIDS.
That is a demand for evidence that nobody could possibly meet.
Rather, there's a large body of research, each providing one piece to the puzzle.
Taken collectively, they provide a compelling picture of the notion that HIV causes AIDS.
Evolution is a similar example in that evolution deniers may say, show me one fossil that proves
that evolution happened.
Well, of course, no such fossil can possibly exist.
Evolution is a pattern of events, a pattern of evidence that you have to see over time.
You need multiple, multiple pieces of evidence to create the picture, the bigger picture of
evolution.
HIV deniers further claim that the notion that HIV causes AIDS does not meet all of
the COCH criteria for proving that an infectious agent causes a specific disease or syndrome.
The COCH criteria were developed in the 19th century.
It is a series of experimental evidence that would establish that a bacteria, for example,
causes a specific disease.
Well, this is a claim by the HIV deniers that is true in that HIV does not meet all of the
COCH criteria.
However, the COCH criteria were designed to study bacterial diseases and they don't translate
to viral illnesses.
HIV is the human immunodeficiency virus.
It's a viral illness.
Therefore, the claiming or demanding that evidence be provided that shows that HIV meet
the COCH criteria is an unreasonable demand for evidence.
It's evidence we don't expect to be there.
It's an inappropriate criteria.
So because all scientific claims have gaps in knowledge, the presence or absence of gaps
isn't a way of distinguishing a legitimate scientific theory or a robust, well-supported
scientific theory from a shaky or false theory.
A much better way is to ask, how has this theory been changing over time?
A theory is a living dynamic thing.
It is a way in which we explain experiments, explain evidence, and make predictions about
what further evidence and further observations we will be making.
If a theory is onto something, if it's successful, then what we expect is as we look at that
theory and the evidence for it over time, we expect that the gaps will be shrinking,
that some gaps will be filled, the gaps in our knowledge, and our knowledge will be deepening.
This is a better understanding of whether or not a scientific theory is successful and
legitimate.
How is successful a scientific theory is in making predictions, leading to further and
deeper questions, and fitting together with other lines of evidence.
That tells us whether a scientific theory is legitimate and successful, not whether or
not it can answer to an arbitrary level of detail every tiny little detail.
Let's, for example, look at the notion of denialism from the other side by comparing
a legitimate science evolution to psi research.
I discussed psi research briefly in a previous lecture when discussing pseudoscience.
Well over the last 150 years, evolutionary theory has been remarkably successful.
It has tremendous explanatory power in terms of developmental biology, genetics, and paleontology.
It explains why we see the patterns in genes that we see.
In fact, genetics provides powerful independent support for common dissent that all life on
earth is related to each other, which in turn helps us make sense of genetics itself.
Further our understanding of the patterns and mechanisms of evolution has deepened.
It's not a static theory.
As we learn more about it, our theories get more complex, more nuanced, more subtle with
greater explanatory power and precision.
It is, undeniably, one of the most successful scientific theories ever developed.
Psi research, on the other hand, or research into extrasensory perception, ESP, precognition,
and those types of abilities, has not had the same history over the last 100 years.
It has rather been going around in circles and not progressing at all.
It has yet to develop a single repeatable experiment that demonstrates the existence
of Psi, let alone progressing beyond that to explaining how Psi might work.
It does not provide any predictive or explanatory power.
It has not gained support from any other field of science.
We have discovered nothing in neuroscience, for example, that makes Psi phenomena more
plausible or explains how they might work.
Or has the notion of Psi helped us to understand what we're finding in neuroscience?
Maybe you might say I'm just being a Psi denier, but I think a comparison between evolution
and Psi research is very illustrative of the difference between a legitimate, robust, successful
scientific theory and a pseudoscience that is stuck in neutral and simply not able to
progress or to get anywhere even over 100 years of research.
Related to the strategy of pointing to gaps in our knowledge, rather than considering
how useful and predictive a theory is, deniers will often point to disagreements within a
discipline often about small details, as if they call into question basic and well-established
conclusions.
Well, there's always disagreement within an active scientific discipline.
It doesn't mean that the science is not solid.
In fact, it points to the robustness of a scientific theory, the fact that there is
much debate.
For example, historians disagree about the precise number of Jewish people who were exterminated
in the concentration camps.
Deniers often exploit this disagreement to argue that maybe the number is actually zero.
Another example would be evolution deniers who point to disagreements among evolutionary
biologists about, for example, what species are related to what other species or perhaps
the pacing of evolution or how the different mechanisms of evolution work.
Then they exploit this disagreement about the details of evolution as if it calls into
question the fact of evolution, the fact that evolution occurred and that we are all related
through common descent.
Yet another very common tactic or strategy of denialism is to dismiss entire categories
of accepted scientific evidence.
For example, deniers may cite the logical fallacy of confusing correlation with causation.
Remember I discussed this in a previous lecture that we cannot assume that because two things
are correlated that therefore one causes the other.
It's possible, for example, you can't assume A causes B, maybe B causes A or maybe some
other third thing, C causes both A and B. Therefore, it is true that the assumption
of causation from correlation is a logical fallacy that does not mean that we can dismiss
all evidence of correlation.
And still is evidence.
We can, for example, use multiple different types of correlation in order to make very
high probability inferences about the causal connection.
Otherwise, the entire field of epidemiology, the study of disease incidents and the pattern
of diseases that occur in the world and in the community would go away.
It would be worthless if correlation was of no scientific value.
In a previous lecture, I gave the example briefly of the tobacco industry, who for
decades denied the scientific evidence that establishes that smoking is a significant
risk factor for certain kinds of lung cancer and other diseases.
They dismissed it with the argument that the data only showed a correlation and then they
specifically invoked the logical fallacy.
Well, correlation is not causation.
Sure, smoking correlates with getting lung cancer, but that doesn't mean that smoking
causes lung cancer.
They acknowledged the correlation but denied it as a legitimate category of evidence.
Perhaps they argued cancer causes smoking.
It may seem like an absurd claim today, but they actually tried that one.
They said, well, cancer makes you feel anxious and smoking is relaxing, so people who have
cancer even before it's diagnosed will turn to smoking.
Or perhaps there is a factor X, their term, for this mysterious third thing that causes
both smoking and cancer.
And that explains the correlation rather than the two being correlated.
But of course, the scientific evidence for smoking causes cancer is well established.
What they ignored is the fact that different causal hypotheses make different further predictions,
and those further predictions can be tested.
For example, if smoking causes cancer, it's not just correlated but actually causes cancer,
statistically, smokers will begin smoking before it is likely that the cancer has developed.
The duration of smoking will correlate with the increased risk, and smoking unfiltered
cigarettes will have a higher risk than smoking filtered cigarettes.
Further, quitting smoking will reduce cancer risk over time.
All of those predictions flow from the hypothesis that the correlation between smoking and cancer
is due to the fact that smoking causes certain kinds of cancer.
All of those predictions have turned out to be true.
In other words, multiple correlations can be used to triangulate onto the one specific
causal relationship that is resulting in the observed correlation.
And you cannot dismiss correlation as an entire category of scientific evidence.
But the tobacco industry did just that in a deliberate campaign to sow doubt and confusion
about the scientific evidence linking smoking to lung cancer.
Evolution denies use a similar strategy to deny that any historical science can be truly
a science.
They argue that since no one was around when life developed, we cannot know scientifically
what happened, or that since we cannot reproduce evolution in a laboratory, it is therefore
not a real science.
This however denies all historical sciences like geology, astronomy, forensics, and any
type of history.
Just because we can't reproduce a star in the laboratory does not mean that we cannot
scientifically investigate the astronomy and the physics of stars.
The core property that renders a science legitimate is that it engages in hypothesis testing.
It generates testable hypotheses that make predictions that can be practically and theoretically
falsified.
Those predictions do not have to be about an experiment in a lab.
They could be about what fossils we'll find when we look for fossils in the earth.
They could be about what spectra of light we expect to observe when we look at different
stars of different sizes.
For example, we can observe, we can gather observatory types of evidence, we can observe
nature around us, and those observations can test the hypotheses that we have.
For example, evolution makes predictions about what we'll find when we compare the genetic
sequence for various proteins among species.
So we can scientifically infer what happened in the past, even if we cannot go there and
see it for ourselves.
If horses and people share a common ancestor, then our genes should look similar to a certain
extent.
And since people and horses are both mammals, we should share a more recent common ancestor
than our combined common ancestor with lizards.
So our genes should look similar to lizards, but not as similar as they do to each other.
We can ask this question over and over again for every different protein in the body, and
they all show a consistent pattern of dissent, consistent with evolutionary history.
The predictive power of evolution in this respect is nothing short of staggering.
Yet another strategy is to use facts out of context that gives one the ability to marshal
a lot of facts that make it seem like there is a compelling or a strong reason to call
into question a specific claim or scientific theory.
But each fact is not being put into its proper context.
If you look hard enough, you can always find facts that, taken out of context, can seem
inconsistent or puzzling and can again sow doubt and confusion about a scientific theory.
Pile enough of them together and you can make it seem like your case is strong.
For example, those who deny the Holocaust of World War II have pointed out that Zycon
B, a form of cyanide gas, was used at Auschwitz and other camps for delousing, therefore evidence
of Zycon B at those camps is not evidence of human extermination.
They also point out that the delousing chambers contained much more cyanide, a greater, much
greater concentration of cyanide residue than the alleged gassing chambers, and that
some gas chamber ruins contain no cyanide residue at all.
Taken together, these facts may seem compelling in terms of calling into question the claim
that Zycon B was used in gassing chambers to exterminate humans at Auschwitz and elsewhere.
All of these claims are, in fact, true.
The specific facts themselves are correct.
They however are cherry-picked and they are taken out of context.
Zycon B was used for delousing objects at the camps.
That doesn't mean, however, it wasn't also used to kill inmates.
Further, humans are much more sensitive to cyanide than lice.
It takes about a hundred times as much cyanide to kill lice than it does a human.
Therefore we would expect the delousing chambers to have a higher concentration of cyanide
residue than the chambers that were used to kill humans.
The cyanide residue further washed off those walls in the ruins of these camps that were
exposed to the elements for years.
Walls that were less exposed contain cyanide residue consistent with their use as gas chambers.
None of this addresses the other lines of evidence for the use of Zycon B in the gas
chambers, evidence from documents and from eyewitness testimony, for example.
That's a good example of how you can collect together what I call factoids, little facts
taken out of context, to build any picture that you wish to build rather than digging
deeply and putting each fact into its proper context in order for a more consistent or
reliable picture to emerge.
In the end, the goal of denial is to sow doubt and confusion.
This is done by pointing out apparent inconsistencies, current gaps in knowledge, sometimes to legitimate
dissent just because an argument is legitimate doesn't mean that it can't be marshaled for
illegitimate or pseudoscientific purposes.
And also, the campaign of doubt and confusion exploits the messiness of science.
There's always contradictory data and false starts, blind alleys.
You can point to this messiness in order to, again, cast a sinister eye onto a legitimate
claim and make it seem in doubt.
Scientists make mistakes all the time.
They pursue dead ends.
They use bad arguments and evidence.
And sometimes they even commit fraud.
That doesn't mean that the entire enterprise, however, or any specific claim is wrong.
At the end of the day, you have to just objectively look at the evidence.
It is therefore easy to find ways to call any scientific claim into doubt if that's your
goal.
Healthy skepticism, on the other hand, fairly considers all the evidence and puts it into
a proper perspective.
It acknowledges that all knowledge is incomplete, that scientists are imperfect people, but
we can still come to reliable conclusions with sufficient evidence.
Deniers often combine their program of doubt with the false dichotomy.
I mentioned this specifically with the conspiracy theories in the previous lecture.
If the accepted version of events is not true, then their alternate claim or version must
be true.
That's often, in fact, the motivation behind denying a specific science.
It's because the deniers have an alternative that they are really promoting.
This, however, is nothing more than an argument from ignorance combined with the false dichotomy
logical fallacy.
What they rarely do is provide positive evidence that supports their alternative claim.
If they could do that, that's what they would be doing.
But since they don't have the evidence to support their claim, they must reside themselves
to attacking the accepted scientific alternative.
And when all else fails, simply claim that there's a conspiracy.
In this way, denialism and conspiracy thinking are related.
This is yet another way in which there is a connection between the two.
The ultimate fallback position for the denier is the conspiracy theory.
When the evidence does not support their position, they will simply claim that the scientific
evidence itself is all a fraud, a grand conspiracy, usually of their ideological opponents.
This allows them to dismiss all that pesky evidence, all the published studies that prove
that the science they do not want to acknowledge.
In the end, denial is just another form of pseudoscientific thinking.
Deniers violate multiple principles of critical thinking, logic, and scientific methodology
because of their a priori beliefs.
By studying the tactics of deniers, we also learn to recognize the more subtle versions
that we engage in every day.
Generally, we resist changing our beliefs that psychological studies show, that we marshal
a lot of cognitive energy in order to maintain what we already believe and what we want to
believe.
A little bit of motivated denial can save us from a lot of cognitive dissonance, unless
we deliberately engage our learned critical thinking skills.
