That's because I feel in order to really test your critical thinking skills you need to
consider topics where cherished beliefs may be at stake.
Of course it's easy to be critical of others' beliefs.
When we first practice critical thinking skills, we're very good at finding logical fallacies
and cognitive flaws in others.
It's difficult to shine the cold, hard light of reason on our own beliefs, however.
But let's get back to the topic of denialism.
Denialism has the same problem that we described previously with pseudoscience in general, the
so-called demarcation problem.
The line between denialism and healthy skepticism.
It's a similarly fuzzy line as that between pseudoscience and legitimate science.
There is a continuum, in fact, between these two extremes with only a very fuzzy border
in between.
But also like pseudoscience, there are a number of behaviors that characterize denialism.
The more of these behaviors one is engaging in, the more towards the denialism end of
the spectrum they are, whereas the more legitimate scientific processes one engages in, the more
legitimate skepticism one is engaged in.
Of course, everyone thinks that they are the true skeptics, that they are in the middle
of this continuum right where they should be, skeptical to just the right degree.
Anyone, therefore, who believes something that I do not, I can consider a true believer.
And anyone who rejects a belief that I find plausible and true is a denier.
It's natural to use ourselves as the touchstone or as the anchoring point, the calibration
reference for true scientific skepticism.
Therefore deniers often portray themselves as skeptics.
They believe that they are the true skeptics, sometimes even to the point of thinking that
the scientific community are true believers or are corrupt in some way.
While the labels are often convenient, skeptic versus denier, I don't want to get caught
up in the semantics of this issue.
Again, what's important is to focus on the specific behaviors that are denialist behaviors
or strategies versus those that are legitimate scientific behaviors.
So let's get to the strategies of denial.
What types of cognitive flaws and behaviors mark a belief system or a behavior as denialism?
The primary one, I think the bread and butter of denialism is moving the goalpost, always
demanding more evidence for a claim than is currently available.
When that burden of evidence is met, then simply move the goalpost back further and
demand even more evidence.
