In fact, it points to the robustness of a scientific theory, the fact that there is
much debate.
For example, historians disagree about the precise number of Jewish people who were exterminated
in the concentration camps.
Deniers often exploit this disagreement to argue that maybe the number is actually zero.
Another example would be evolution deniers who point to disagreements among evolutionary
biologists about, for example, what species are related to what other species or perhaps
the pacing of evolution or how the different mechanisms of evolution work.
Then they exploit this disagreement about the details of evolution as if it calls into
question the fact of evolution, the fact that evolution occurred and that we are all related
through common descent.
Yet another very common tactic or strategy of denialism is to dismiss entire categories
of accepted scientific evidence.
For example, deniers may cite the logical fallacy of confusing correlation with causation.
Remember I discussed this in a previous lecture that we cannot assume that because two things
are correlated that therefore one causes the other.
It's possible, for example, you can't assume A causes B, maybe B causes A or maybe some
other third thing, C causes both A and B. Therefore, it is true that the assumption
of causation from correlation is a logical fallacy that does not mean that we can dismiss
all evidence of correlation.
And still is evidence.
We can, for example, use multiple different types of correlation in order to make very
high probability inferences about the causal connection.
Otherwise, the entire field of epidemiology, the study of disease incidents and the pattern
of diseases that occur in the world and in the community would go away.
It would be worthless if correlation was of no scientific value.
In a previous lecture, I gave the example briefly of the tobacco industry, who for
decades denied the scientific evidence that establishes that smoking is a significant
risk factor for certain kinds of lung cancer and other diseases.
They dismissed it with the argument that the data only showed a correlation and then they
specifically invoked the logical fallacy.
Well, correlation is not causation.
Sure, smoking correlates with getting lung cancer, but that doesn't mean that smoking
causes lung cancer.
They acknowledged the correlation but denied it as a legitimate category of evidence.
Perhaps they argued cancer causes smoking.
