Rather, there's a large body of research, each providing one piece to the puzzle.
Taken collectively, they provide a compelling picture of the notion that HIV causes AIDS.
Evolution is a similar example in that evolution deniers may say, show me one fossil that proves
that evolution happened.
Well, of course, no such fossil can possibly exist.
Evolution is a pattern of events, a pattern of evidence that you have to see over time.
You need multiple, multiple pieces of evidence to create the picture, the bigger picture of
evolution.
HIV deniers further claim that the notion that HIV causes AIDS does not meet all of
the COCH criteria for proving that an infectious agent causes a specific disease or syndrome.
The COCH criteria were developed in the 19th century.
It is a series of experimental evidence that would establish that a bacteria, for example,
causes a specific disease.
Well, this is a claim by the HIV deniers that is true in that HIV does not meet all of the
COCH criteria.
However, the COCH criteria were designed to study bacterial diseases and they don't translate
to viral illnesses.
HIV is the human immunodeficiency virus.
It's a viral illness.
Therefore, the claiming or demanding that evidence be provided that shows that HIV meet
the COCH criteria is an unreasonable demand for evidence.
It's evidence we don't expect to be there.
It's an inappropriate criteria.
So because all scientific claims have gaps in knowledge, the presence or absence of gaps
isn't a way of distinguishing a legitimate scientific theory or a robust, well-supported
scientific theory from a shaky or false theory.
A much better way is to ask, how has this theory been changing over time?
A theory is a living dynamic thing.
It is a way in which we explain experiments, explain evidence, and make predictions about
what further evidence and further observations we will be making.
If a theory is onto something, if it's successful, then what we expect is as we look at that
theory and the evidence for it over time, we expect that the gaps will be shrinking,
that some gaps will be filled, the gaps in our knowledge, and our knowledge will be deepening.
This is a better understanding of whether or not a scientific theory is successful and
legitimate.
How is successful a scientific theory is in making predictions, leading to further and
