As an example, those who engage in evolution denial or creationism often say that there
are no transitional forms in the fossil record.
This is a very common claim, the claim of no transitional fossils.
They use however a vague definition of transitional fossil in order to move the goalpost away
from any possible evidence.
At first you might think that they are just asking for fossils that show characteristics
that are intermediary in morphology between two living or extant species or a descendant
of a species, an ancestor to another, a species that links two species in time.
When such examples are provided, such as one excellent example, Ambulocetus, a literal
walking whale that was aquatic, but still retained small legs, a beautiful example of
a specimen that was halfway between an extinct species, a terrestrial mammal and living whales.
For a long time, evolution deniers said, where are the half whales?
They were found, Ambulocetus among other fossils, beautiful transitional specimens.
They then move the goalpost by changing the definition of what a transitional fossil is.
Now they say, well, it's more than just being morphologically intermediate.
They demand a separate line of evidence that proves that Ambulocetus is an actual ancestor
to modern whales.
This is related to another denialist strategy called the unreasonable demand for evidence.
So as new evidence comes in, you can always nudge back the goalpost, keeping just out
of range of whatever evidence is provided.
But you can also simply begin by making a demand for evidence that you know can never
be provided.
No science is established down to every tiniest possible detail.
Nothing in science is known to 100%.
There are always gaps in our knowledge, gaps in our current understanding.
Even the most solid theory has these gaps.
The presence of incomplete knowledge or gaps in our knowledge therefore does not necessarily
call into question a specific scientific theory or claim.
What we do know may still be very well established.
HIV denial is an excellent example of the unreasonable demand for evidence.
This often demand to see, for example, a single study or paper that establishes that HIV causes
AIDS.
However, the role of HIV in AIDS is a complex scientific question.
It's not established by any one piece of evidence or any one research paper.
So you can't point to one paper that proves HIV causes AIDS.
That is a demand for evidence that nobody could possibly meet.
