deeper questions, and fitting together with other lines of evidence.
That tells us whether a scientific theory is legitimate and successful, not whether or
not it can answer to an arbitrary level of detail every tiny little detail.
Let's, for example, look at the notion of denialism from the other side by comparing
a legitimate science evolution to psi research.
I discussed psi research briefly in a previous lecture when discussing pseudoscience.
Well over the last 150 years, evolutionary theory has been remarkably successful.
It has tremendous explanatory power in terms of developmental biology, genetics, and paleontology.
It explains why we see the patterns in genes that we see.
In fact, genetics provides powerful independent support for common dissent that all life on
earth is related to each other, which in turn helps us make sense of genetics itself.
Further our understanding of the patterns and mechanisms of evolution has deepened.
It's not a static theory.
As we learn more about it, our theories get more complex, more nuanced, more subtle with
greater explanatory power and precision.
It is, undeniably, one of the most successful scientific theories ever developed.
Psi research, on the other hand, or research into extrasensory perception, ESP, precognition,
and those types of abilities, has not had the same history over the last 100 years.
It has rather been going around in circles and not progressing at all.
It has yet to develop a single repeatable experiment that demonstrates the existence
of Psi, let alone progressing beyond that to explaining how Psi might work.
It does not provide any predictive or explanatory power.
It has not gained support from any other field of science.
We have discovered nothing in neuroscience, for example, that makes Psi phenomena more
plausible or explains how they might work.
Or has the notion of Psi helped us to understand what we're finding in neuroscience?
Maybe you might say I'm just being a Psi denier, but I think a comparison between evolution
and Psi research is very illustrative of the difference between a legitimate, robust, successful
scientific theory and a pseudoscience that is stuck in neutral and simply not able to
progress or to get anywhere even over 100 years of research.
Related to the strategy of pointing to gaps in our knowledge, rather than considering
how useful and predictive a theory is, deniers will often point to disagreements within a
discipline often about small details, as if they call into question basic and well-established
conclusions.
Well, there's always disagreement within an active scientific discipline.
It doesn't mean that the science is not solid.
