Are there any mainstream scientific beliefs that you do not accept?
For example, depending on exactly how you conduct the survey, about 40 to 50 percent
of Americans report that they do not accept the scientific consensus that life on Earth
arrived at its present form through a process of organic evolution.
There are communities in the world who deny that HIV causes AIDS, that vaccines are effective
in preventing infectious disease, that millions of Jews were systematically slaughtered during
World War II, that mental illness even exists, or even the germ theory of infectious disease.
And of course, there are many who believe that there is a campaign of denialism about
anthropogenic global climate change.
Just like with grand conspiracy thinking covered in the last lecture, denialism is a category
of pseudoscientific thinking worthy of separate consideration.
Now, this is not to say that the conventional wisdom on any topic is always correct or is
beyond error.
Sometimes the consensus of opinion is flawed or not correct, nor is the term denialism
an attempt to morally equate any one form of denial with all others.
But there is often a commonality among the various forms of denial, the same cognitive
and logical errors are being committed.
And just as with conspiracy thinking, examining some of the extreme examples will perhaps shed
light on the more subtle forms of denial that we are all vulnerable to.
What do we mean by denial of science or denialism as it is increasingly being called?
Like any pseudoscientific thinking, denialism begins with a desired conclusion.
Rather than supporting a controversial or rejected claim like many pseudoscientists, denialists
maintain that a generally accepted scientific or historical claim is not true, usually for
ideological reasons.
This then engage in what is called motivated reasoning, rationalizing why the undesired
claim is not true or at least not proven.
They therefore are working backwards from their desired conclusion, filling in justifications
for what they believe, rather than following logic and evidence wherever it leads.
This is the same description I gave of pseudoscience in general and why denialism is a form of
pseudoscientific thinking.
This is probably a good time to pause in this course and this lecture to note that many
of the topics I will be covering can be highly ideological and emotionally and emotional.
It is difficult to cover critical thinking, especially the topic of denialism, without
occasionally challenging cherished or emotionally held beliefs.
Let me just say I expect it's okay if you don't agree with me on one or more topics.
I'm often in fact deliberately choosing topics that I know are provocative and controversial.
