It may seem like an absurd claim today, but they actually tried that one.
They said, well, cancer makes you feel anxious and smoking is relaxing, so people who have
cancer even before it's diagnosed will turn to smoking.
Or perhaps there is a factor X, their term, for this mysterious third thing that causes
both smoking and cancer.
And that explains the correlation rather than the two being correlated.
But of course, the scientific evidence for smoking causes cancer is well established.
What they ignored is the fact that different causal hypotheses make different further predictions,
and those further predictions can be tested.
For example, if smoking causes cancer, it's not just correlated but actually causes cancer,
statistically, smokers will begin smoking before it is likely that the cancer has developed.
The duration of smoking will correlate with the increased risk, and smoking unfiltered
cigarettes will have a higher risk than smoking filtered cigarettes.
Further, quitting smoking will reduce cancer risk over time.
All of those predictions flow from the hypothesis that the correlation between smoking and cancer
is due to the fact that smoking causes certain kinds of cancer.
All of those predictions have turned out to be true.
In other words, multiple correlations can be used to triangulate onto the one specific
causal relationship that is resulting in the observed correlation.
And you cannot dismiss correlation as an entire category of scientific evidence.
But the tobacco industry did just that in a deliberate campaign to sow doubt and confusion
about the scientific evidence linking smoking to lung cancer.
Evolution denies use a similar strategy to deny that any historical science can be truly
a science.
They argue that since no one was around when life developed, we cannot know scientifically
what happened, or that since we cannot reproduce evolution in a laboratory, it is therefore
not a real science.
This however denies all historical sciences like geology, astronomy, forensics, and any
type of history.
Just because we can't reproduce a star in the laboratory does not mean that we cannot
scientifically investigate the astronomy and the physics of stars.
The core property that renders a science legitimate is that it engages in hypothesis testing.
It generates testable hypotheses that make predictions that can be practically and theoretically
falsified.
Those predictions do not have to be about an experiment in a lab.
They could be about what fossils we'll find when we look for fossils in the earth.
