They could be about what spectra of light we expect to observe when we look at different
stars of different sizes.
For example, we can observe, we can gather observatory types of evidence, we can observe
nature around us, and those observations can test the hypotheses that we have.
For example, evolution makes predictions about what we'll find when we compare the genetic
sequence for various proteins among species.
So we can scientifically infer what happened in the past, even if we cannot go there and
see it for ourselves.
If horses and people share a common ancestor, then our genes should look similar to a certain
extent.
And since people and horses are both mammals, we should share a more recent common ancestor
than our combined common ancestor with lizards.
So our genes should look similar to lizards, but not as similar as they do to each other.
We can ask this question over and over again for every different protein in the body, and
they all show a consistent pattern of dissent, consistent with evolutionary history.
The predictive power of evolution in this respect is nothing short of staggering.
Yet another strategy is to use facts out of context that gives one the ability to marshal
a lot of facts that make it seem like there is a compelling or a strong reason to call
into question a specific claim or scientific theory.
But each fact is not being put into its proper context.
If you look hard enough, you can always find facts that, taken out of context, can seem
inconsistent or puzzling and can again sow doubt and confusion about a scientific theory.
Pile enough of them together and you can make it seem like your case is strong.
For example, those who deny the Holocaust of World War II have pointed out that Zycon
B, a form of cyanide gas, was used at Auschwitz and other camps for delousing, therefore evidence
of Zycon B at those camps is not evidence of human extermination.
They also point out that the delousing chambers contained much more cyanide, a greater, much
greater concentration of cyanide residue than the alleged gassing chambers, and that
some gas chamber ruins contain no cyanide residue at all.
Taken together, these facts may seem compelling in terms of calling into question the claim
that Zycon B was used in gassing chambers to exterminate humans at Auschwitz and elsewhere.
All of these claims are, in fact, true.
The specific facts themselves are correct.
They however are cherry-picked and they are taken out of context.
Zycon B was used for delousing objects at the camps.
That doesn't mean, however, it wasn't also used to kill inmates.
