Initially it was spread simply by traditional mail.
But with the advent of the internet and the spam email, the ability to send out millions
of emails with very low cost, of course these scams have become much more popular and frequent.
In fact at this point in time this is a 5 billion dollar annual industry.
Obviously like many scams they are playing on the greed and gullibility of their victims.
With email they can scan for millions of potential targets, looking for nibbles.
If you answer then they will reel you in as far as they can.
First you will have to pay to get their certificate.
Then you may need to bribe a corrupt agent somewhere.
It will never stop as long as you keep responding, as long as you keep sending them money there
will always be one more thing you need to do before you get your $820,000.
Some scams even try to get you to fly to an airport in a third world country to collect
your big bags of cash.
But the purpose of this is to kidnap you and then ransom you back to your family.
Let's move on to another example.
Were 450 girls under 10 years old forcibly married to men in their 20s in a mass wedding
in Gaza in 2009?
That's the claim of countless emails, blogs and Facebook pages.
This type of scam is more of an urban legend than a crafted deception.
Although it must have started from someone who knew that they were making unwarranted
assumptions or maybe even inventing details out of whole cloth, it spreads mainly by those
who believe the content, however.
It spreads so-called virally.
People pass it along to their friends and acquaintances thinking that the information is genuine.
The evidence for the claim given is several photographs of young alleged brides with their
older grooms.
These emails, etc., were used to stir up anti-Muslim sentiment.
Fortunately, the internet is both a boon and a bane of information.
There are many sites on the internet that expose urban legends and hoax emails.
One site called Hoax Slayer has all the information needed to put this particular piece of spam
email into perspective.
There was indeed a mass wedding put on by Hamas in Gaza in 2009.
The picture itself is genuine.
It's not doctored in any way.
However, the young girls were not the brides.
They were young relatives of the grooms, nieces and cousins, mostly.
And this is the tradition in that region.
Western reporters who were present at the wedding were able to confirm this fact.
The youngest bride who was actually there was 16, and most of the brides at this mass
wedding were over 18 years old.
