The claim that the hamburger will not rot is sort of true, but the interpretation is
what is suspect here.
The obvious experiment to do in order to test the claim that fast food hamburgers don't
rot is to buy 100% beef from the supermarket, cook it, leave it out, and see what happens
to do a basic comparison.
A good experiment would compare the store bought hamburger to the fast food version
and control for obvious variables such as the thickness of the hamburger, the thoroughness
of the cooking, the presence of a bun or other things, and whether or not it is kept in a
sealed container or out in the open.
When such comparisons are done, it turns out that any thoroughly cooked hamburger, especially
if it's left uncovered, will not rot or mold.
The reason is the lack of water or moisture.
The dried out meat will not decay.
This process is in fact used to preserve meat for a long time.
It's the basis of beef jerky.
In human conditions, however, or when sealed in a container so that the moisture will be
trapped inside and prevent the drying out of the hamburger, the expected molding or
rotting will occur.
Also if the hamburger is thick or not thoroughly cooked so that it's still moist, it again
will rot and mold as you would expect.
There is nothing artificial or strange or scary about the fast food versions of the hamburgers
that make them not rot.
It is merely a factor of the moisture content.
Let's tackle another very common food myth, the artificial sweetener aspartame.
You may have heard that aspartame is responsible for many diseases and symptoms.
Since 1998, there has been a letter circulating claiming that aspartame is responsible for
an epidemic of multiple sclerosis, lupus, Parkinson's disease, and many other diseases.
They further claim that, and I quote, when the temperature of aspartame exceeds 86 degrees
Fahrenheit, the wood alcohol in aspartame converts to formaldehyde and then to formic
acid, which in turn causes metabolic acidosis.
The letter goes on to say that this results in methanol toxicity and that it's actually
this methanol toxicity that mimics multiple sclerosis and lupus.
They claim that many people are misdiagnosed with these diseases when in fact they just
have chronic aspartame toxicity.
It all sounds very scary.
The letter warns readers away from using aspartame and claims that if they are suffering from
almost any symptom, simply avoiding aspartame will cure them of their ailment.
Aspartame, however, has been approved for years by the FDA, the Prude and Drug Administration.
So promoters of these aspartame fears also must claim that there is a conspiracy among
manufacturers, the medical community, the people who do the research, and the FDA to
