You need to have some basic process or skills by which you can evaluate these claims for
yourself.
In order to assess such claims critically, there are a few basic steps, mostly common
sense, that you can do.
First, consider the source.
Is this source just some guy who sent you an email?
Is it a website that appears to have an ideological axe to grind?
Does it appear to be very emotional and fear-mongering?
Or is it an independent, respected academic institution?
Or is it a government agency who are bound by at least some reasonable strictures of
transparency?
You should also consider the plausibility of the claim, including all of the implications.
As with the aspartame claim, you can consider, well, if this is true, then where are the
researchers, the academic institutions, and the worldwide regulatory agencies on this
issue?
How is it possible that such a thing can be true?
Also, you could just consider the scientific plausibility of the claim.
With aspartame, it's a substance that you consume.
It's reasonably plausible that it could have a negative consequence.
But other claims are less plausible on their face.
And then try to find multiple reliable sources of information to see if there is a consensus
of opinion.
Never stop after just the first source you find on any question or any claim.
Always sample at least a few to see what the pattern is.
Now, on the internet, unfortunately, one claim or one source can be replicated hundreds
or thousands of times.
So you do have to follow sources back to their origin.
Sometimes it may seem as if there are many people or many sources repeating the same
claim, but they all lead back to one ultimate source.
And that's not very reassuring.
But if different independent sources have done research or evaluated a specific claim
and have come to the same conclusion, then you could be reassured that it's at least
a little bit more reliable.
Let's turn now to some common marketing strategies and how to defend against them with a bit
of critical thinking.
In previous lectures, I discussed the psychology of belief, various cognitive biases and enumeracy.
All of these phenomena can be exploited in order to manipulate you into buying something
that you otherwise would not buy.
In fact, there are journals dedicated to marketing research, the science of psychological manipulation
for making sales.
