hide this awful truth about aspartame's toxicity.
Apparently also the mainstream media is either in on the conspiracy or are simply incompetent
because they have not been reporting this aspartame story at all.
What about other regulatory agencies around the world?
In the United States, we tend not to look beyond our borders.
We think that, well, if the FDA is in on it, that's all that's necessary to foist a toxin
on the public.
But there are literally hundreds of regulatory agencies around the world, all independently
evaluating the scientific evidence and coming to their own conclusions.
There are also scientists and academic institutions around the world doing independent evaluation
Every regulatory agency that has looked at the data for aspartame has come to the same
conclusion as the FDA that it is safe for human consumption.
The websites that promote the aspartame fears, however, also contain unsourced or unreferenced
claims and they base many of their claims on anecdotal reports.
So there are lots of red flags for skepticism to this claim.
There are numerous observational and experimental studies looking into aspartame toxicity.
Epidemiological studies have found no association between aspartame use and any disease or symptom.
If you remember from the lecture on the different types of scientific evidence, epidemiological
studies are observational.
They simply observe what's happening out there in the world.
And people who consume aspartame are not at any higher risk of having MS loopers or any
of the diseases it is alleged to cause.
There are also experimental studies where people are exposed to measured doses of aspartame
over time.
In fact, studies exposing subjects to up to 100 times the typical daily consumption by
users of aspartame have shown absolutely no toxicity.
What about the claim that aspartame is broken down into formaldehyde?
Aspartame is a scary-sounding chemical that's the chemical they use to preserve tissue, right?
This claim is true but highly misleading because it's not being put into its proper context.
The breakdown products of aspartame are mostly excreted from the body.
And there are many different types of breakdown products from aspartame.
A small amount, however, is ultimately converted to formaldehyde.
However, what the websites and emails trying to scare you about aspartame don't tell you
is that formaldehyde is also produced by natural metabolic processes in the body.
So just by being alive, your body is producing a small amount of formaldehyde.
The small extra amount resulting from aspartame consumption is negligible and has no measurable
health effect.
Claims like this are seemingly endless on the internet and in popular culture.
I'm asked daily about one such claim or another.
So I can't cover all of them, obviously.
