I don't know about you, but I get spam email daily.
Much of it is unwanted marketing, but it also contains what used to be called chain letters.
Ask me to send somebody money or trying to change my political opinions.
In one form or another, whether it's spam, traditional mail, telemarketing, or even mainstream
ads or media, we are bombarded with motivated misinformation, trying to manipulate us in
some way.
Pursuasive speech, propaganda, and marketing have probably existed as long as human communication,
but we are also living at the dawn of the internet age.
Without question, in the last two decades, the internet and the World Wide Web have already
revolutionized how we access information.
This has led in many ways to the democratization of information access and creation.
Steadily, the barriers of editorial review and the cost of publication are being lowered.
It's amazing to think where we will be in another 10 or 20 years and beyond.
Already, it's become sort of the wild west of information where every point of view,
every bias, and every agenda can vie for equal access on the web.
More than ever, therefore, we need basic critical thinking skills to survive in this age of
misinformation.
In other words, no one is filtering information for us.
Increasingly, there are no editors or publishers between us and the information that we consume.
Anyone can publish a blog on the internet, and even books can be published one at a time
as needed, so it's a lot easier to create information.
Hopefully, we will be able then to put our own filters into place, critical thinking
filters, to assess which information out there is reliable and authoritative, and which is
biased and perhaps even malevolent.
Let's start by strolling through my spam folder to sample the kinds of misinformation that's
out there.
There are different types of scams.
Some are deliberate and malevolent.
Here is one simple example.
Many people have probably encountered this.
Reading from an email I received, my associate has helped me to send your first payment of
7,500 US dollars to you as instructed by the Malaysian government and Mr. David Cameron
of the United Kingdom Prime Minister after the last G20 meeting that was held in Malaysia,
making you one of the beneficiaries.
The email goes on to say how I can claim my 820,000 dollars.
All I need is a certificate which I can get by sending them some personal information.
This type of scam is known as the Nigerian scam because so many of them originate in
the country of Nigeria.
This is also known as a 419 scam after the relevant code.
It's not new, it dates back in fact to the 1920s, obviously far before the internet.
