Now even though stories are very compelling and some products essentially eschew the scientific
evidence, science still has a lot of marketing cachet.
If you could say that your product is supported by science, then that is a very effective
marketing strategy.
However, many of these products are not supported by science, so they have no choice but to
heavily rely on testimonials or to use what scientific evidence there is out there and
distort it and misrepresent it to make it seem as if it supports their claim.
They do this by many of the things that I discussed in the previous lecture on scientific
evidence.
They cherry-picked the data and they misapplied data, the wrong kind of data, for the wrong
purpose.
For example, they commonly will use basic science data, data about what happens in a
test tube in order to make clinical claims when there is no clinical evidence, studies
and actual people that support the specific claims that they're making.
Cults are another phenomenon that uses significant psychological manipulation.
Cults manipulate the environment to cause disorientation.
They deliberately induce sleep deprivation and even nutritional deprivation in order
to lower a prospective member's defenses.
They also do what's called love bombing.
They make a new prospective member feel unconditionally accepted.
They then build a sense of in-group acceptance and out-group rejection, the saved versus
the unsaved.
They isolate members from their family and friends, creating dependency on the group.
Cult leaders also tend to be highly charismatic individuals.
This encourages the surrendering of critical thinking capacity and free will.
All of these factors conspire together to make a new recruit very susceptible to the
message of the cult, to be enfolded in the arms of the cult and then to be cut off from
any outside information that might make them question the claims or the practices that
the cult is making.
These are just some examples of the numerous attempts to influence your beliefs and behavior
through misinformation by ideological groups, con artists, people wishing to sell you something
or to lure you into a nefarious group, and even by those who mean well but are themselves
just misinformed.
All of the critical thinking skills reviewed in this course can be applied every day to
evaluating such claims.
But you need to be skeptical not only of emails and websites but also the mainstream
media which can be a source of dubious information as we will see in the next lecture.
As we will also see, even experts can sometimes get it wrong.
