There were many red flags in these emails that should have raised your skeptical radar.
The tone is highly political and emotional.
There are no linked or authoritative resources given in the emails.
The pictures themselves do not provide any clear context.
Therefore they allow for misinterpretation.
And it seems unlikely that the mainstream media would have missed such a story.
None of these factors prove the story false, but they should just raise the level of skepticism.
It only took me a few minutes of an online investigation to uncover all of the information
necessary in order to put this story into context.
However, most of the people who receive such emails simply pass them along without first
doing that five minutes of investigation to find out if the information is reliable.
Often someone has already done a detailed investigation and can provide you at least
a reason to be cautious before accepting the claims in such emails.
Sometimes misinformation is not political or ideological, but speaks to a common fear
in our society.
We fear, for example, exposure to toxins and chemicals from our highly industrialized society.
We fear that we have to trust others to prepare our food for us whenever we eat out.
We fear invasion of our borders and the watering down of our values.
And we fear the intentions of others.
Those urban legends that spread are often ones that resonate with some fear or anxiety
that's common in our society.
As an example, there is the now classic spam email that claims that there is a kidney thief.
The story goes that a gentleman away on business gets picked up in the hotel bar by a beautiful
woman, only to wake up the next morning in a bathtub full of ice with a scar down his
back and one of his kidneys missing.
The implication here is that he was lured to that hotel room so that the woman could
surgically remove his kidney in order to sell it on the black market.
I always wonder upon hearing these stories though, why wouldn't the organ thief just
take all of the organs, that would net certainly a lot more money, and also leave behind no
witness.
In any case, such stories always happen to a friend of a friend.
When investigated, they never lead back to the original source.
Often they're even spread by reporters in newspapers and in online articles.
The reporters who haven't done the investigative journalism to find out that the story actually
never happened.
Here is a more recent example.
Have you heard that if you leave a fast food hamburger out, it will remain fresh for months
that it won't rot or mold?
The implication is that the hamburger is so full of artificial ingredients and preservatives
that it will not rot as regular food should.
