purchases of product, each salesperson has to build their downstream, develop another
layer of five, six, or seven salespeople that pay them money.
Now, I mentioned this in enumeracy because when you do the calculations, you can quickly
see that with seven, eight, or nine iterations or levels to a multi-level marketing scheme,
there would need to be more people.
You would need to recruit essentially every person on earth.
These schemes therefore just mathematically break down very quickly.
Any area will be rapidly saturated by salespeople and, of course, everyone can't be a salesperson.
But there are other aspects to multi-level marketing that represents manipulation.
For example, the MLM structure turns their customers into a sales force.
It's easier to convince someone of the value of a product if they, in turn, are trying
to convince others of those same virtues.
So by turning customers into salespeople, you make them into very loyal customers.
Most MLM salespeople, in fact, greater than 95% lose money.
They do not make money in the endeavor.
They are mostly just deluded customers buying product for their own use or just to make
the necessary quota.
Even though they have no chance of selling what they are forced to buy and they have
no chance, unless you have gotten in very early on or at the very top of the pyramid
in an MLM, chances are you will lose money.
You have no chance of making back your investment.
Some MLMs or multi-level marketing companies, many of them, in fact, sell what we would
now call snake oil, dubious medical products with unsubstantiated health claims.
Snake oil is also sold in many traditional models as well.
These dubious health care products are increasingly common, partly due, at least in the United
States, to lax regulations.
They often make claims that are too good to be true.
Here the manipulation is the appeal to wishful thinking, such as losing weight without effort.
At times they incorporate conspiracy claims to explain away reasonable skepticism.
If it's really that easy to lose weight without exercise or cutting back on calories, or if
cancer, for example, can be prevented or cured with a simple supplement, why aren't I hearing
about this from the mainstream media or my physicians?
Why isn't this something that's much more common?
Well, it must be because there is a conspiracy to suppress this new effective treatment.
The sale of so-called snake oil often relies on testimonials, on people's stories.
There's a very good reason for this, because stories are very compelling.
We have evolved to be very compelled by the things that other people tell us.
We are more compelled, in fact, by a personal story than by the abstract concept of data
being published in a graph in a journal somewhere.
They also frequently misrepresent or misuse the scientific evidence.
