Let's start with a simple example.
Why are so many products priced as $19.95?
This is something that's always bothered me.
Does that really work?
Are people really fooled into thinking significantly differently about a $19.95 price tag as opposed
to just $20?
The answer is actually yes.
We have what is called a leftmost digit bias.
The leftmost digit disproportionately affects our assessment of cost and value.
Some researchers think that it's an inherent limitation in the amount of information that
we can process.
Remember the need for oversimplifying or for simplifying a complex issue.
We tend to just focus on the first digit, process that and not process the other digits
as much.
We see this also with odometer readings and used cars.
Retail prices for used cars drop significantly at each 10,000 mile increment.
So a car with 29,950 miles on the odometer we think is more valuable than a car with 30,000
miles on the odometer.
It really does affect our marketing decisions, our purchasing decisions and what we think
about the value of things.
Marketers also frequently exploit the need for self-esteem, specifically the need to
appear consistent to others.
A salesperson may therefore ask you, do you think this is a useful feature?
Would you say that this is handy, et cetera?
They'll ask you questions about the product they're trying to sell you, getting you to
agree to say, yes, that's a useful feature, that's valuable, I would like that.
Then if you still refuse to buy the product, that would make you seem inconsistent.
You're not purchasing something you just said you thought was valuable.
And this is enough in many cases to emotionally manipulate someone into buying something that
they otherwise would not buy.
The ultimate manifestation of this is a strategy called getting down to the last objection.
Salespeople and salesmen are actually taught to do this in some cases.
If the customer raises an objection, the salesperson can ask, so if it weren't for this one thing,
you would buy my product, then if you say yes, I would buy the product, but this is
the one reason why I just simply won't do it.
What the salesperson does at that point in time is to remove the final objection and
say, okay, I'll tell you what, I will make an adjustment so that concern is no longer
an issue.
So now if you still don't buy the product, you essentially have to admit that you just
lied to that salesperson that that was really the only final objection to your purchase.
