Rather than appear inconsistent, we would rather just bite the bullet and buy something we
maybe don't want or don't need.
Many purchase decisions are made subconsciously, in fact, just like most of our decisions.
Remember from the previous lectures about our cognitive biases and the way we process
information, most of that processing is going on subconsciously and marketing research looks
at ways of affecting that subconscious processing as well.
Much of our purchases are in fact impulse buys.
According to one source, about 80% of luxury item purchases are impulse buys and about
60% of purchases made in the supermarket are impulse buys, meaning they are not the product
of a long thought out process of research, but simply a decision that we make in the
moment.
This allows for psychological factors to play a huge role in our purchasing decisions.
For example, the anchoring heuristic mentioned in a previous lecture can make a price seem
low by anchoring to a higher base price.
Another strategy is the guarantee of satisfaction.
For satisfaction is guaranteed, perhaps even with a money back guarantee.
This appears to lower the risk of the purchase, lower a barrier to the purchase, therefore
facilitating the impulse buy.
Another strategy is to make potential customers worry about a non-existent problem.
Do you suffer from X, even if X is imaginary or very, very rare?
You may not even know what it is.
They don't explain what it is.
They don't want you to know what it is.
They just want you to say, oh, there's one more thing to worry about, or I could just
buy this product and not worry about it.
There are other mechanisms of psychological manipulation, one being guilt.
Have you ever received, for example, a request for a donation with the personalized address
labels inside the envelope?
These are address labels that have your name and address on them, so they're only usable
by you.
Or you may have received a survey that contains a $1 bill enclosed, or sometimes it's a check
for $1 or $2.
These free gifts are meant to apply guilt to make you fill in the survey or send in the
donation.
Not be uncommon for a charitable institution, for example, to get up $20 donation simply
because they included 50 cents worth of labels in the envelope.
I mentioned multi-level marketing in a previous lecture on enumeracy.
Multi-level marketing is essentially a pyramid scheme where salespeople need to recruit salespeople
below them.
In order to make back their investment and in order to cover the cost of the necessary
