Some studies found a lesser degree of correlation.
Some found essentially no correlation that there was just as much venous blockage in
patients with other neurological disease or in even healthy controls.
Many patients with MS do not have venous blockage.
Inferring a causal effect between these venous blockages and multiple sclerosis seems very
tenuous.
The research so far is moving in the direction away from Zamboni's claims.
Further, the evidence continues to pile up that MS, multiple sclerosis, is an inflammatory
disease with a genetic predisposition.
In fact, there is decades of research showing that MS is an autoimmune disease.
And of course, was the cause of the initial skepticism among the neurological community
that if Zamboni were correct, we have decades of research which has been misleading or incorrect.
So Zamboni's one preliminary study was flying in the face of mountains of data leading to
a very different picture about multiple sclerosis.
Unfortunately, this particular genie is now out of the bottle, as it were.
The promise of a potential cure for multiple sclerosis has caused some in the MS community
to rally behind Zamboni despite the negative evidence coming in.
Some are calling for clinical trials, which seems premature given the negative evidence
so far.
Some even claim that there is now a conspiracy against Zamboni, a conspiracy of neurologists
or MS experts who don't want to be told by this upstart outsider, this vascular surgeon
what the true causes of MS are.
As we discussed in the conspiracy lecture when the evidence is not going your way, you
can always invoke a conspiracy to explain away the evidence.
In the end, a lot of time and resources will be wasted on what is likely to turn out to
be a dead end.
This situation was greatly exacerbated by the premature press reporting.
This is part of the double-edged sword of free access to information.
Traditionally, these scientific controversies would be worked out in the scientific literature
and at professional meetings, long before the public was made aware of them.
Now the public essentially has a ringside seat.
They get to see how the sausage is made.
They see the scientific debate as it's occurring.
You might argue that this is a good thing.
It is good for transparency and it will help the public understanding of the process of
science and I agree with that.
But at the same time, it causes a significant risk because the public may not be prepared
to understand how that process of science works.
