Every day, I read science and other news stories that make incredible claims.
Some of them turn out to be reliable, while others, not so much.
For example, have scientists discovered a treatment that can regrow the end of a finger
and therefore perhaps more extensive injuries?
Has a lone researcher unexpectedly found the cure for multiple sclerosis?
Have astronomers found an Earth-like planet around a nearby star?
The broader question is, how does one find reliable information?
It's one thing to have basic critical thinking skills, but without accurate facts and a good
understanding of specific topics, those skills have nothing to work with.
Before we get into some specific examples, here are some rules that will help.
First, no one source is definitive.
Before accepting any piece of information as probably true, make some attempt to verify
it.
Do not trust any one source as definitive.
If possible, see what multiple independent sources have to say.
That is becoming more challenging on the internet because often single sources are repeated
endlessly on many sites.
A very useful strategy is to specifically look for disconfirming information or a contrary
opinion.
Try to find out what the people on the other side are saying.
Searching for the topic of interest, for example, with the keywords scam, skeptics, skeptical
or fraud can often be very helpful in getting you to those other points of view.
But see what all sides are saying about an issue before deciding who has the strongest
case.
It's easy to make what seems like a convincing case when you are only being presented with
one side.
And of course, it's important to consider the quality of each source.
There have been many reviews, for example, of online information quality.
One 2010 survey by Starman et al. of health information found that accuracy ranged from
46 to 61 percent.
So even the best sites still had significant problems.
Also, academic and non-profit sites generally had better information than commercial or
individual sites.
In general, don't trust sites that are trying to sell you something or have an apparent
political or ideological agenda.
Also, the more controversial a topic, the greater the chance that information will be
skewed or biased in some specific way.
In such cases, it is especially important to survey a number of sources to get the
