The reporters make the mistake of confusing the authority of an individual with the authority
of the scientific community.
However, no matter how many letters someone has after their name, their opinions are still
the quirky opinions of just one individual.
Reporters however often defer to such authority.
They have an expert, somebody who should know the answer to whatever question they're reporting
on and they're reporting the opinions of that expert.
This is often how they source non-science stories so it fits in with their process.
Often it seems like simply justification for making sensational claims however, you can
find an expert to say something then that's fair game.
However, you can find an expert to say almost anything.
It doesn't mean that it represents the consensus of opinion in the scientific community.
A good journalist would put the opinions of any individual into their proper context.
Further, the press love stories about the lone maverick taking on traditional beliefs.
It's a narrative that resonates especially within our individualist culture.
Sometimes those mavericks turn out to be correct but far more often their speculations do
not hold up under further research.
That's the nature of scientific research in general.
This represents another common error, confusing speculative research with confirmatory research.
Most speculative research turns out to be wrong in the long run but the public is often
treated to an endless sequence of scientific research and then never hear the follow-up
that the preliminary findings turned out to be wrong.
A lot of science news reporting is just premature.
For example, we may hear that a certain food or nutrient is good for you and then a year
later we hear that it's bad for you.
Wine daily is prevents heart attacks, wine daily is a risk factor.
It seems to go back and forth with each story is being reported totally in isolation without
being put into the proper context of this is a preliminary report.
We can't rely upon this.
We have to look at this in the context of the other hundred studies that have already
been done which says that this is probably not true.
That's the kind of real science journalism that we need.
When it's not provided then we're simply being given little bits of information that
often seem contradictory and generally don't pan out.
In the case of Zamboni, his claims have now been replicated many times.
Most of the follow-up studies have not found what he did.
No one has found the amount of correlation that he did between the venous blockage and
MS.
