Now, of course, the best outlets, like the New York Times, for example, specifically
will not reprint press releases as news stories, but many outlets do.
They often do no independent fact checking and just accept the press release at face
value.
There are many problems with this.
Even respectable universities have a press office that may try to sensationalize a news
story to get their institution in the news.
Often the researchers have little or no input into the copy of the press release.
And worse, private companies can use the science press release, essentially, to advertise
their products or drum up interest in their company, perhaps to attract investors.
In this case, the story was generated by Spivak's brother, who was apparently trying to increase
interest in his company and in its new product.
The story itself is almost entirely bogus.
Spivak did indeed injure his finger, but not a single joint was missing.
All that happened was typical wound healing.
Sometimes the very ends of fingers can regrow with such healing, but this is very different
than the impression given by the press that Spivak had regrown a lost finger.
Essentially, the press was duped by a self-serving marketing campaign.
Or perhaps many outlets didn't really care how accurate the story was.
They had a source, they were reprinting the source.
As long as they got their sensational headlines, which they certainly did.
The next story is also about a claim that itself should immediately raise skeptical red
flags.
Dr. Paolo Zamboni, an Italian vascular surgeon, claims he has found the cause and a cure for
multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis is a serious autoimmune or inflammatory neurological disease where
the immune system attacks the brain and the spinal cord, causing any number of neurological
deficits.
He claims MS is due to a condition known as chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency,
CCSVI for short.
Essentially partial blockage in the veins that drain blood from the brain.
Further, he claims that he can cure MS by opening up this blockage with venous angioplasty
and stenting.
Essentially snaking little balloons into the veins, opening them up in order to relieve
the blockage.
This understandably has excited the MS community and the media around the world breathlessly
reporting how this lone maverick has challenged decades of MS dogma.
There are multiple problems with how this story is often being reported.
