If they are being misled by a press, a media looking for sensational headlines and not doing
the proper background work to put the story into context, then again they may be misinformed
into thinking that we have a potentially viable treatment for MS and a conspiracy of silence
and repression rather than what is much more likely to be true is this is just one more
preliminary claim.
These kinds of claims of a new dramatic treatment or cause for MS are actually nothing new.
It seems that every few years, every decade there is another such claim and they never
pan out, at least not so far.
The evidence is pointing increasingly strong in the favor of a genetically predisposed
autoimmune disease as the cause for MS.
So in the end, more harm may be caused than good by inappropriate reporting of this unfolding
controversy within the scientific community.
This I think is good in the long run but the public now has to be educated more about the
messy process of science and specifically about the nature of speculative research.
In other words, it is essential to remain skeptical of new ideas until they have had
time to go through the meek grinder of scientific research, peer review and replication.
Most new ideas in science fail.
They turn out to be incorrect in the long run.
Very few ideas stand the test of time.
So the public needs to learn patience and healthy skepticism when it comes to new ideas
in science.
Despite the frenetic pace and short attention span of the news cycle, it can often take
10, 15 or 20 years for a new idea in something like medicine, medical science, to go through
the long tedious process of research before we really know what the potential of a new
idea is.
Some ideas will die after a short time.
They simply don't pan out as soon as they try to be replicated.
But if the reporting is premature and preliminary and without this proper context, people are
simply left with the idea that, hey, wasn't there some new treatment for MS, something
about opening up the veins?
The sensational headlines get much more attention than the follow-up, which is not as interesting
and not as sensational to the public, although the scientific community certainly finds
it so because that's where the real interest is.
Reporters also may fall into a trap known as false balance.
This is another chronic problem with many science news stories, especially about controversial
topics.
The standard journalistic practice is to cover both or all sides of any controversial issue
equally.
