percent range.
Most people who aren't working scientists don't meet the criteria for scientific literacy.
Experts propose a number of possible causes and fixes to this problem of scientific illiteracy.
Basically the quality of science education needs to improve at all levels.
Science textbooks are also frequently criticized for their poor quality.
One study shows that requiring science classes for non-science majors at the college level
has a significant impact on scientific literacy.
And I think this point should be emphasized.
If high quality science education is reserved only for science majors, then we will continue
in the situation that we have now where only people who go into a science-based field have
a basic level of scientific literacy.
I would also argue that improving the overall quality of science reporting and science in
mainstream media is also highly important.
As I covered in this lecture so far, most people learn most of their science from the
mainstream media after they're outside of the classroom by reading articles, reading
magazines, and now reading entries on the Internet.
So it's important to raise the overall quality of science news reporting.
That's where most people are going to get most of their information.
We live in a world increasingly dominated by science, yet most people are without the
basic critical thinking skills and scientific knowledge to deal with the relevant science.
Both of these are required to deal with the flood of complex scientific information.
Critical thinking skills end by basic scientific knowledge.
One does not substitute for the other.
If you have critical thinking skills but no basic scientific knowledge, you have nothing
to apply those skills to.
And even a working scientist with detailed knowledge, even expertise in a field who
lacks critical thinking skills may fall prey to a lot of the foibles that I've discussed
in this course.
In the next lecture, we will explore this idea even further by discussing the nature
of expertise itself and the scientific consensus.
