broadest perspective possible.
Some topics are genuinely controversial, even among experts.
For example, are biofuels a useful strategy for achieving energy independence and limiting
greenhouse gases?
At present, for ethanol specifically, whether or not more energy comes out of the process
than is put into it depends on exactly how you make the calculations.
So experts disagree on this question.
In addition, there are many so-called manufacturers or questions that are not controversial among
scientists or experts but are made to seem controversial by ideological groups.
Examples include the safety and effectiveness of vaccines.
Experts largely agree that vaccines are both safe and effective, but there is a vocal group
of anti-vaccine activists who create a tremendous amount of information online arguing the opposite.
Is the planet warming?
And are man-made causes like CO2 emissions contributing significantly to this warming?
The scientific community largely says yes, but this balance is not reflected in the public
debate on this topic.
Many people get the majority of their science news from the mainstream media, whether online
or from more traditional venues like television or newspapers.
Therefore, it is critical to have a working understanding of the strengths and weaknesses
of how the media presents science.
The quality of information is highly variable, as is the background knowledge and skills
of journalists and editors.
Also, not all scientists know how to interface with the media, and they may unwittingly contribute
to misinformation.
I'm going to give you examples of bad science news reporting and use them to discuss the
various pitfalls of science journalism.
The first starts with this headline from the Telegraph, Pixie Dust Helps Man Grow New Finger.
Just about every major news outlet ran a version of that headline.
The story told is of Lee Spivak, who reportedly cut the end of his finger off.
However, his brother happens to own a company that is researching a tissue regeneration powder
made from pig bladders, whimsically called Pixie Dust.
Allegedly, this powder helped Spivak regrow his lost finger.
This is what we call science by press release.
With decreasing revenues going to traditional journalism, news sites have had to cut back.
Many have reduced or eliminated their science reporting divisions, and now generalist journalists
and editors are covering the science beat.
What distressingly many outlets do is reprint, sometimes with little or no alteration, science
press releases.
