with Emulsion Tracking Apparatus, situated 1400 meters underground in the Grand Sasso
National Laboratory in Italy, that they measured the speed of neutrinos.
Neutrinos are a particular type of primary particle with very little mass that interacts
only extremely weakly with matter.
That they reported that neutrinos were traveling faster than the speed of light.
This violates Einstein's theory of special relativity.
Of course, if you want to get a sensational news headline, you can't do better than proving
Einstein wrong.
And this would be legitimate, although sensational, science news if true.
However, the results are preliminary and they're almost certainly in error.
Even the researchers who came up with these results themselves acknowledged that their
results are probably an error of some type.
The neutrinos were faster than the speed of light by only 60 nanoseconds, 60 billionths
of a second.
That's an incredibly small amount of time to measure.
Already, there are several proposed causes for this error.
In the first months following this story, there was no definitive answer.
It is a genuine scientific puzzle.
But it is likely that the media will not present the prosaic answer with as much enthusiasm
or high a profile as the initial and almost certainly incorrect findings.
Another example of a story that is frequently presented preliminarily in the media is the
discovery of an Earth-like planet.
I seem to read this headline almost every couple of months.
The new exoplanets or planets around other stars are being discovered all the time.
Many of them have new and interesting properties that have not been discovered before.
But the holy grail of an exoplanet is one that is Earth-like, another Earth potentially
because it may therefore have life, complex life like us.
However, so far, all of the reports of an Earth-like planet have been premature.
They are Earth-like in some way.
They are closer to our size and mass than previous exoplanets.
They may be in the so-called Goldilocks zone where liquid water can exist on the surface.
But all of them have had significant departures from being Earth-like.
For example, they may be very close to their star or they may be tidally locked.
So one side of the planet faces the sun at all times.
Some of them have been shown to have water on the surface, an atmosphere like Earth,
similar gravity, truly Earth-like.
We will get there eventually, probably, but so far reporting on this story has been premature
and in a very sensational direction.
