Critical thinking, however, is not just about science.
In fact, the more political and emotional an issue, the more critical thinking is necessary.
This raises the important question, what is the relationship between science and politics,
ethics, and other value systems?
There is a range of opinions on this question as well.
Sam Harris, for example, has written about this issue and argues that ultimately you
can have a system of ethics that is entirely science-based.
I and others have disagreed to some degree.
This is ultimately a philosophical question, not a science question.
The position I think that has the most merit is this, that science can certainly inform
ethical and political questions and thinking, but there is always some subjective value
judgment in the mix.
So while science can inform us about how to think about these questions, how to approach
these questions, and the implications of our ethical system, it can't make these ethical
judgments for us.
Science education is also another issue that is important to any democratic society.
In democratic industrialized nations, it is important for citizens to have a working
knowledge of science.
Researcher John Miller has termed this civic scientific literacy.
This can be viewed as the ability to understand the science section of the New York Times,
for example, or to follow along with science documentaries such as NOVA.
It is also the ability to have a basic understanding of the important science-related issues of
the day.
Miller has found in his most recent survey that only 28 percent of Americans meet the
minimal criteria for civic scientific literacy.
The good news is that this figure, 28 percent, is up from 10 percent in the 1980s.
Miller has been doing the same survey now over many years, over several decades, and
this is good because it gives us the ability to make direct comparisons over time.
So the number is still low, about one in four only of Americans are scientifically literate
about basic issues, but that's up from 10 percent in the 1980s.
The numbers are also slightly higher in the United States than they are in Europe and
Japan.
This means that the vast majority of people living in industrialized nations do not have
the minimal scientific knowledge to participate in important scientific issues of the day.
And it should be noted that Miller's estimates are higher than many other surveys which ask
the same basic question, what is the level of scientific literacy in society?
Of course the number you come up with depends on where you draw the dividing line, but for
most surveys about basic scientific literacy, numbers come up that are in the five to ten
