This makes sense when it comes to politics or areas where opinion is dominant.
You're not going to cover a political story, for example, unless you equally cover both
sides of the political spectrum.
But this approach does not work well for science news.
Just because science news stories, even genuine controversies are often what we call asymmetrical.
You may have 95 percent of the scientific community coming down on one side of a controversy
and 5 percent coming down on the other side of a controversy.
A journalist, however, wishing to report balance of the story may present both sides as if
they are equal.
It even gets much worse in some instances.
For example, a reporter may report on the very unconventional claims of a lone researcher
or scientist or maybe even sometimes not a scientist, just somebody who has a very interesting
but certainly very likely to be untrue claim to make.
Then they balance that lone individual with their unconventional claims against the entire
scientific community that may hold a different view as if that's balance.
Sometimes in fact, the scientific view is given only a token approach.
You have what's called token skepticism in the reporting where the news story is almost
entirely about the lone individual making the speculative and unconventional claim.
And then the fact that the scientific community completely disagrees with that and has a mountain
of evidence to back themselves up is given just a token mention at the end for balance.
Science is about verifiable and testable factual claims.
There is often a huge asymmetry, as I said, in science controversies.
For example, let's take the notion that the earth is growing.
There is a small minority of believers on the fringe who believe that the earth is gaining
matter and growing significantly over historical time.
Further, that the reason the continents seem to fit together like a puzzle is not because
of plate tectonics, but because at one time the earth was only as big as the continents
and they broke up when the earth grew.
When subjects like this get covered, however, reporters at best will feel obliged to give
the issue balance.
So they have one expert present the growing earth theory and then a regular scientist
explains what the other 99.9% of scientific community think.
But just presenting the two views as equivalent gives a very false impression to the public.
It elevates the fringe idea and makes it seem as if it's a legitimate scientific idea.
So in the very framing or formatting of the story, the reader or the consumer of the news
is being given misinformation and a false impression about the status of the science.
One more example of this from recent science news.
It was reported that researchers from the opera experiment, the Oscillation Project
