figuring out God's master plan for building the universe, for how everything worked.
One piece of that grand design was alchemy and it was just as much a piece of the bigger
picture as was physics.
There's another phenomenon that we sometimes whimsically call the Nobel Prize effect,
but it is essentially the same thing.
A researcher who gets the ultimate iconic award, the Nobel Prize, is often looked upon
as an automatic scientific authority.
Linus Pauling, for example, is the only scientist to win the solo Nobel Prize twice.
Marie Curie also won twice but shared the first with her husband.
The Nobel Prize is, again, so iconic that it is the ultimate imprimatur of expertise,
but that did not stop Linus Pauling from adopting fringe ideas towards the end of his career.
Linus Pauling promoted the idea that high doses, so-called mega doses of vitamin C,
a thousand milligrams per day or more, could treat or prevent the common cold.
He later expanded this claim to include the flu rather and more serious illnesses and further
went on to claim that mega doses of vitamin C could help cancer and that high doses of
vitamins in general could promote health.
His claims were never based on adequate scientific research and subsequent research has shown
that his claims are essentially false, but because of his prestige he had a tremendous
influence on the public.
Many credit Pauling for the popularity of vitamin C as a supplement today.
Pauling made several of the errors that I'm talking about.
He was not a clinical scientist.
He was a very successful basic science researcher.
The expertise that he developed was in figuring out how the basic building blocks of life
worked.
However, he never did research into clinical claims, figuring out the net clinical effects
of taking an intervention like a vitamin or a supplement.
He therefore didn't really have the expertise to make the claims that he was making about
vitamin C, but armed with his two Nobel prizes he spread his beliefs, had an influence on
regulation in fact, and a profound effect on the public.
And now we know after 30 years of subsequent research that his claims were implausible and
simply not true.
Experts are also notoriously fallible, especially when asked to make predictions.
In his recent book, Future Babel, Dan Gardner presents the research showing how notoriously
inaccurate experts are when asked to make predictions about what will happen, even in
their narrow area of expertise.
More interestingly, he described the features of those experts who do a little bit better.
