to maybe even significantly to the mass extinction that occurred at that time.
So there is in a way two different consensus of opinion on this question.
There is a consensus of paleontologists which is different than the consensus of the geologists.
So it depends on which specialist you ask.
What about global warming?
The nature of the consensus has been intensely debated within the public sphere.
This is perhaps the most controversial issue today when it comes to what is the scientific
consensus.
The international panel on climate change, the IPCC, represents a consensus of opinion
among climate scientists.
But some have criticized that process as biased and highly political.
It seems that there is a robust consensus of scientific opinion that the earth is warming
and anthropogenic causes are important to this warming.
But there remains minority dissent.
Political entities with strong opinions on this issue have challenged the notion that
there is a consensus and have promoted the views of the minority of dissenters.
A 2011 study by Richard Muller, a physicist at the University of California, Berkeley,
the Berkeley Earth Surface Temperature Study, sought to replicate prior analysis by NASA
and other bodies of earth temperature data.
Muller was skeptical.
He was in the minority dissenting opinion.
He believed that the previous analyses were poorly conducted and he did not accept their
conclusions that the planet was warming.
So he set out, if anything, to disprove that conclusion.
He and his team conducted their own analysis of all the available data.
They came up with their own statistical methods to analyze the data, to make corrections for
the different sources of data, for example.
And they looked at all the data sets that were available, whereas the prior analyses
looked at only a subset of the data.
They also made their data and analysis completely bit transparent by publishing all of it online.
So anyone could access it and decide for themselves if they are trained to do so, if their analysis
is correct.
In the end, they concluded that the earth is, in fact, warming by 0.9 degrees Celsius
over the last 50 years.
Further, their temperature map closely matches that of NASA and the other previous analyses.
Not only confirming that the earth is warming, but confirming the validity and the legitimacy
of the prior analyses, which were the very analyses that were criticized by the dissenters
