in claims that he really isn't an expert to make.
But sometimes scientists believe that their scientific knowledge is enough.
This can make them easier to fool in fact because they will be overconfident in their
own ability not to be fooled.
In fact many magician friends of mine have told me that they would prefer an audience
of scientists over anyone else because they're the easiest to fool.
A famous example of this was Project Alpha.
Researchers at Washington University were given a grant to test alleged psychic abilities.
Magician James Randy offered his consultation as an expert in deception.
He specifically offered to show the experts, the researchers, how not to get fooled while
designing their experiments into the possibility of psychic abilities.
However, his offers of consultation were refused.
The scientists didn't think that they needed the advice of a magician.
They assumed that as scientists they had the relevant expertise to do proper scientific
studies and to not be fooled.
To demonstrate the need for specific expertise in deception in ESP research, James Randy
sent in two teenagers, Steve Shaw, then 18, and Mike Edwards, then 17.
They were not trained magicians at the time.
Steve Shaw did later on go on to be a famous magician with the stage name of Banachek.
But at that time they did have some skills and Randy did make sure they had the relevant
skills to do the ESP tricks.
In the end, they were able to completely fool the researchers with simple sleight of
hand tricks, most of which were just ad hoc opportunistic tricks they made up on the spot.
The researchers were overconfident in their research skills but were not prepared for
deliberate deception.
In the end, they were completely fooled because they did not have expertise as skeptics.
Individuals are biased, quirky, flawed, have incomplete knowledge and intended to overestimate
their own knowledge and expertise.
But some people have spent years mastering arcane knowledge.
It's no guarantee of legitimacy or correctness but it's at least worthy of being taken seriously.
The quirkiness of individuals is why a consensus of opinion is much more reliable.
No biases will tend to average out.
Gaps in knowledge and perspective will also tend to compensate for each other.
You end up with what is sometimes called the wisdom of the crowd, in this case the wisdom
of the crowd of experts.
Within science, differences of interpretation will tend over time to get resolved by seeking
better evidence.
