the limits of the system of knowledge itself.
So understanding for example that science only knows so much at any one time.
Therefore this is not just about incompetence that may seem like a bit of a loaded term
but everywhere along the spectrum an expert needs to have a very humble and realistic
assessment of their own level of expertise.
Expertise is not a black and white thing.
I do not want to promote the notion of a false dichotomy.
You're either an expert or not an expert.
There is the full spectrum of expertise from some knowledge to significant knowledge to
being the world expert on a specific topic.
When it comes to scientific questions I also believe that there are two related but distinct
types of expertise.
The relevant science and critical thinking as described in this course and elsewhere.
Those with critical thinking skills but who lack specific scientific knowledge will still
have difficulty thinking about scientific questions.
Specific in-depth knowledge is still important to developing opinions about scientific questions.
For example an excellent science journalist with good critical thinking skills and excellent
investigative skills as a journalist may still come to wrong or inappropriate conclusions
about a complex scientific question simply because they're not scientists, they're not
experts in that field and they don't have the relevant background knowledge to put what
they are being told into the proper context.
Also scientific knowledge itself may not be enough without critical thinking skills.
In the lecture on scientific blunders we covered the folly of many scientists who apparently
were insufficiently skeptical of their own claims.
This led them to make critical thinking errors that resulted in serious errors.
In order to avoid these kinds of errors we need science and critical thinking both.
Another example might be another Nobel laureate, Luc Montagnier, a French researcher who received
the Nobel Prize for his research into HIV, the human immunodeficiency virus.
However, later in his career he went on to promote notions of homeopathy, the idea that
water itself can contain the complex information in molecules and transfer a healing or medical
effect in this way.
Now this runs contrary to a mountain of science and these claims are not accepted by the scientific
community and clinical evidence shows that homeopathic remedies do not work.
But Montagnier has continued to promote these claims despite the fact that they are on the
fringe because he has gone beyond his expertise.
This requires knowledge of physics, not just of virology.
And his Nobel Prize has gone a long way in order to give him the patina of expertise
