One of the ironic points of this course, and specifically this lecture, is that you should
not trust even me, well, at least not absolutely.
The goal of this course is really to make you think, to think about thinking itself.
But no one person can be the definitive authority on any complex topic.
Besides, as we discussed in the previous lecture, the argument from authority is a logical
fallacy, an invalid form of argument.
On the other hand, some individuals do possess genuine expertise, and their opinions should
at least be taken more seriously than the average person.
This however, is itself a complex topic, and there are many levels of expertise.
I would also argue that true authority, if such exists, rests with the consensus of opinion
among relevant experts, not with any single individual.
Let's explore a bit more deeply what it means to be an expert, and the nature of scientific
consensus.
We rely on experts all the time.
Every time you visit a professional, a doctor, a lawyer, accountant, even a hairdresser,
to some extent you are deferring to the perceived expertise of the professional.
We could not function in our complex civilization otherwise.
Imagine if you were entirely responsible for every aspect of your life, maintaining
your car, diagnosing and treating complex illness, and reviewing contracts.
How about programming your own software, designing the electrical circuits in your
house, and countless other things we often take for granted?
Even if you can do many of those things, no one person can be an expert in everything.
Therefore, it's reasonable to defer to experts and to expertise, to people who spend their
lives mastering one small craft or one area of knowledge.
Although it's also a good idea to have enough of a basic understanding of important areas
of life that you can judge if someone is a true expert or perhaps is just faking it.
How can we know?
From one perspective, it's not easy.
It takes an expert to truly know an expert, but there are some things you can do to judge
genuine expertise for yourself.
For example, is the individual licensed in their trade or profession?
Can they document that they have had adequate training and have maintained their expertise?
Are their views representative of their profession?
Or are they out on the fringe?
And finally, does what they are saying make sense?
If it doesn't sound right, then you're probably better off getting a second opinion.
It is more difficult, however, when an entire profession is suspect.
