But first, let's talk a bit more about expertise.
One common mistake is to consider someone who is an expert in one thing to be an expert
in all things, as if they can have general expertise.
Sometimes experts make this mistake themselves and stray from their true areas of knowledge.
We've spoken in a previous lecture about Lord Kelvin, a legitimate expert in physics, specifically
thermodynamics.
By the end of his career, he was the preeminent scientist in the world.
But that did not give him the expertise to make pronouncements about other areas of science,
such as geology, nor to declare that attempts at an airplane would never be successful.
Lord Kelvin goofed yet again late in his career when he declared the initial discovery of
x-rays to be a hoax.
But he did soon change his mind when he saw the evidence and even experience an x-ray
of his own hand.
The lesson here is that by the end of his career, Lord Kelvin had accumulated all of
the accolades a scientist can hope to get.
He had the ultimate authority as a scientific expert.
And he thought that this gave him leave to pontificate, to make pronouncements about
fields of expertise that were outside of his own.
And this resulted in various instances of folly on his part.
Sir Isaac Newton, the 17th century mathematician and scientist, is another example of a famous
scientist from history who maintained ideas that are now considered pseudoscientific.
Isaac Newton was the Lord Kelvin of his time, perhaps even more so.
He was sitting on the pinnacle of scientific achievement in his society.
While there is no question that Newton was a genius and his advances in physics and specifically
mechanics transformed our understanding of science at the time, many people do not realize
that Newton was also very interested in alchemy.
In fact, he wrote more about alchemy than any other topic.
Alchemy was no passing fad for Newton.
He spent much of his time engaged in alchemical research without any tangible results.
To Newton, alchemy was central to his beliefs about how the world works as much as mathematics
and physics.
As one biographer, F.E.
Manuel wrote, the more Newton's theological and alchemical, chronological and mythological
work is examined as a whole corpus set by the side of his science, the more apparent
it becomes that in his moments of grandeur he saw himself as the last of the interpreters
of God's will in actions.
Essentially, what he is saying is that Newton believed he was uncovering the mind of God,
