Eventually, consensus is built on solid ground.
One example that is often given inappropriately, in my opinion, to represent how the consensus
of opinion can be wrong is one that shows how consensus is built.
In the early 1980s, researchers proposed the idea that a particular bacterium, H. pylori,
was a cause of gastric ulcers.
Prior to that, the consensus of opinion was that gastric ulcers were caused by stress
leading to the secretion of too much stomach acid.
Often the story is told as one of resistance to this new idea and that it took 20 years
for the scientific community to finally accept the notion that H. pylori causes ulcers.
But a review of the literature tells a very different story.
In fact, research interest into the notion of H. pylori started immediately upon the
proposal of this new idea.
The early research was encouraging and therefore more researchers got involved.
The number of papers published each year increased dramatically until a threshold of evidence
was achieved, finally resulting into a change in the consensus opinion in line with this
new evidence.
Now the consensus of scientific opinion is that H. pylori is an important cause of gastric
ulcers.
This does not mean that the consensus of scientific opinion is always correct.
It is in fact often incorrect and will then have to change over time as new evidence comes
in.
But the probability of being correct and scientists all about the probability of being
correct not absolute certainty is higher than the opinion of an individual.
If you are going to disagree with the consensus of scientific opinion therefore you should
at least have a very good and compelling reason for doing so.
It shouldn't be rejected out of hand.
Sometimes it may be difficult to determine exactly what the consensus of scientific opinion
is on a topic.
Different specialties may have different opinions.
For example, geologists are fairly convinced that a single asteroid wiped out the dinosaurs
65 and a half million years ago and this view has dominated in the public consciousness
and in the media.
However, many paleontologists are not convinced.
There was certainly an asteroid impact at that time but some paleontologists feel the
fossil evidence suggests a longer die off of the dinosaurs.
Perhaps the asteroid was just the coup de grace.
There are other factors that were going on at the time that could have also contributed
