They tend to be less certain of themselves.
They consider a wide range of factors and information.
And they consider the consensus of their fellow experts.
Those experts who do worse tend to act like gurus.
They apply their one magic system or golden rule to explain a complex system.
And they do so with utter confidence.
Or there tends to be an inverse relationship between individual confidence and accuracy.
The bottom line is when it comes to predicting the future behavior of complex systems, even
experts are all but useless.
They do only a little bit better than chance.
But that does not prevent the popularity of asking experts to make such predictions.
And the evidence of how they do reveals a lot about the nature of expertise.
Those who are more humble, who defer to the consensus of opinion, and who are likely to
be very cautious in their predictions tend to do a little bit better.
Those who make the arrogant assumption that their one method can be over-applied to a
wide range of questions tend to do much worse and often no better than chance at all.
Predicting the future in general is highly problematic.
So-called futurism is very popular and may serve a purpose in terms of preparing for
possible future technologies.
But the track record of futurists is appallingly bad.
When asked to make a prediction for 50 years from now, Harvard professor Stephen Pinker
replied, this is an invitation to look foolish.
As with the predictions of domed cities and nuclear-powered vacuum cleaners that were made
50 years ago.
And he is essentially correct.
Trying to extrapolate something as complex as the development and application of technology
beyond just 5 to 10 years is utter folly.
We may be able to make very broad brushstroke statements about what is likely to happen
in the future.
But specific predictions have a track record of being sometimes humorously inaccurate.
Going back to the overconfident experts, this relates partly to what is now known as
the Dunning-Kruger effect.
Psychologists Dunning and Kruger in 1999 described how those who are incompetent are generally
unaware of their own incompetence.
The same failings that make them incompetent also make them unable to see it.
This leads to what is more casually referred to as the arrogance of ignorance.
New expertise is comprised of an appreciation for the limits of one's own knowledge and
