Many professions become established, create the trappings of legitimacy, and even gain
licensure without ever developing true scientific legitimacy.
Psychics and astrologers, for example, often have their own organizations and institutions,
sometimes their own journals.
In some states, they are even licensed.
Licensure is often granted as a means of controlling an industry, establishing professional standards
and collecting licensure fees.
But too often, licensure is interpreted by the public as indicating that the body of
knowledge on which the profession is based is scientifically legitimate.
Unfortunately, in some cases, that is simply not the case.
The difference is between external and internal validity or legitimacy.
Licensure is usually all about internal legitimacy, following the rules of the profession, filling
out the proper paperwork, etc.
External validity, however, means that the body of knowledge has been tested against
reality, that there is a mechanism of self-correction and that there is transparency.
In other words, the processes of science.
Without the methods of science to truly evaluate a system of knowledge, there really is no
way to establish external validity.
Some professions, like chiropractic, for example, exist in a gray zone.
Some of their practices are supported by evidence, like lower back manipulation for
uncomplicated acute back strain.
That's actually much of what chiropractors do, and it is based on some clinical scientific
evidence.
Getting a back manipulation for an acute strain without any neurological involvement is effective.
But much of what they do is not validated by science and is, in fact, at odds with modern
medical science.
There is no system of external validity within the chiropractic community, however.
There is no universal science-based standard.
And so dubious practices proliferate and continue.
In fact, there are a great number of practices and even philosophies that exist under the
umbrella of chiropractic, because chiropractic is a licensed profession.
The bottom line is that there is no guarantee of legitimacy.
There is no one simple litmus test.
There are indicators, but nothing definitive.
And there is no substitute for a critical analysis.
And this brings us back to the question of consensus, because whose analysis are you
going to listen to?
