before entering surgery, for example, so that you don't forget any little thing that
you need to do, and so that everybody has a moment to pause, to get on the same page,
and to go through the process systematically.
It's systematically rigorous, an external mechanism, just like science and critical thinking, rather
than relying heavily on our own memory and experience, which even when profound is just
not enough when the tasks are complicated enough.
Also I would argue that it's this process, this Bayesian approach of updating our beliefs
as new information comes in, this constant updating approach to knowledge that should
be reflected more in the classroom and in the media.
I feel that oftentimes the media treats scientific inquiry as if it were a black box.
Nobody really knows what goes on inside that black box.
Science is treated as some kind of arcane ritual, only understood by scientists who
are treated almost as a priesthood within a given field that spit out authoritative answers,
and all we have to do is just listen to what the scientists tell us.
Rather science should be presented as an understandable and accessible process, a transparent process.
We can't all be experts, but we can all understand it to some degree, enough to at least get
a feel for how it works and when it tends to be legitimate.
The critical thinking approach to knowledge and life is also very empowering.
Its power comes from its acceptance of reality.
As Carl Sagan said, for me it is far better to grasp the universe as it really is, rather
than to persist in delusion, however satisfying and reassuring.
That I've always felt is a very good way to encapsulate the skeptical approach to knowledge
and belief.
Scientific skepticism is also a mature view of the human condition and knowledge.
It is not scandalized, for example, by the flaws in human efforts of science, nor, however,
is it naive about the existence of those flaws and the limitations of the human brain.
We accept the flaws, we accept those limitations, and we understand the messiness of science,
and yet we see it as a process that slowly grinds forward and improves the reliability
of our knowledge.
The critical thinking approach is to do the best that we can with full knowledge and appreciation
for those weaknesses and limitations.
Putting all the pieces together then, the goal of this course is to understand all of
the cognitive and other biases that rule our thinking.
This is what I call the monkey brain level of thinking.
Without understanding all of these biases, we are destined to simply be carried along
by our monkey brain inclinations.
We're along for the ride, as opposed to being in the driver's seat.
Engaging our executive function frontal lobe critical thinking puts us in the driver's seat
of our own beliefs.
With a thorough understanding of logic and cognitive biases, we have the opportunity
