Once we know something to be true, we can then rationalize reasons to justify it as
if we knew it all along or we would have known it or figured that it was true even before
we knew it.
There is also the frequency illusion.
This is a very common one.
It's also known as the Bauder-Meinhof phenomenon.
Have you ever heard a new word for the first time and then in the next day or two you hear
that new word multiple times or the first time you become aware of something, you seem
to see it everywhere?
It seems to defy statistics, to defy random chance, but it's just an illusion based upon
something entering your awareness that previously you were not aware of.
All of these factors conspire together to lead us to make and firmly hold beliefs that
potentially have little or no relationship to reality.
What we believe in fact is a narrative, it's a story that we tell ourselves, stitched together
from flawed information, modified by our cognitive biases and emotional needs and desires.
This is an essential realization, one that separates critical thinkers from those who
think less critically.
Once we accept that we cannot trust what we think we remember, we become humble in the
face of our own experiences and our own knowledge.
Then we're open to the dire need for a systematic approach to knowledge, methods to compensate
for all the many flaws in our brain's function.
In a way, science and critical thinking are our fix for all the flaws in human reasoning.
That is why it has transformed our understanding of ourselves and the universe in which we
live.
And yet, even for those who have a working knowledge of critical thinking, it's difficult
to fully appreciate the potential for self-deception.
Every day I hear people say things such as, well, how can so many people be wrong?
Or do you think everyone who thinks that they were, for example, abducted by aliens, or
saw a ghost, or felt that they were healed by some treatment, et cetera, do you feel
that they're all either lying or crazy, as if those are the only options, that if somebody
comes to an erroneous belief, there must be something wrong with them or they're deliberately
deceiving us?
No, that's just the human condition.
We all come to dramatically erroneous beliefs all the time.
Our biases and flaws will lead us to those beliefs unless we put in the filters of critical
thinking.
There is a tendency overall to grossly underestimate the human potential for self-deception, even
among critical thinkers and skeptics.
We all want to view ourselves as rational beings, but that is just the greatest self-deception
of all.
