In this last lecture, I'm going to give some final thoughts on how to apply critical thinking
to everyday life and the importance of scientific literacy and critical thinking in our modern
world.
Taking together this critical thinking and scientific approach to knowledge is known
as scientific skepticism, a term coined by Carl Sagan.
The modern use of the term skeptic does not mean cynic or naysayer or nihilist, rather
it refers to an appreciation for the limits and foibles of the human brain combined with
the power of the self-corrective approach of science.
It puts in place a rational filter through which all claims to truth must pass.
I've been talking about scientific skepticism for years and in response I've received
many letters and emails from people who have taken the basic rules of critical thinking
and applied them to their lives, saving themselves or their loved ones from being the target
of a scam or just making bad decisions about investments, healthcare or purchases, or just
not being taken in by a dubious claim.
To summarize what I've covered in this course so far, we have learned that the human brain,
although very powerful in its way, has many flaws and weaknesses.
We only perceive and attend to a small amount of the world around us.
That sensory input is highly filtered, processed and in fact ultimately constructed.
Immediately after we experience something, that highly altered sensory information becomes
a memory.
Our memories then start to alter further.
In fact every time we remember something we add change and fuse details.
We update the memory.
Further, humans are both rational and emotional creatures at the same time.
We come with a suite of emotional needs and biases.
Our default mode of operation is to make decisions for unconscious or only dimly seen emotional
reasons and then to rationalize them with motivated reasoning.
We then succumb to errors and biases in thinking, logical fallacies, insufficient information
and a poor grasp of math and statistics.
Psychologists have identified many more cognitive biases in fact almost anything they choose
to remember to study about our gut instincts tends to be at odds with reality and then
they assign a name to that error, a cognitive bias.
To give a few more examples, the forward looking bias or the forward bias, we tend to assume
that whatever is relevant or happening now will exist indefinitely into the future.
You may in fact read that if current trends continue then something horrible will happen.
We'll run out of energy for example.
Those all fall victim to the forward bias, they assume that the current variables are
going to remain forever relevant that we won't for example develop new technology that will
change the very nature of the game.
There is also the hindsight bias.
