At some point, at the same time, you don't want to appear to be accepting an illogical
or false belief.
So there could be a delicate balance.
And there may be important decisions at stake, such as whether or not to seek an unconventional
treatment for a serious illness.
So you don't just want to stand by passively while somebody makes what you understand to
be a very bad decision.
One approach that is helpful is to simply ask questions.
Engage the other person's natural tendency to be curious and to ask questions themselves.
Engage their critical thinking and their skepticism.
If, on the other hand, you take a full frontal assault at their beliefs, you will be encouraging
them to engage their defense mechanisms, their rationalization.
So turn it around.
Just ask them questions about, well, how do you think that works?
Why do we know that?
How could we know that?
Do you think that this other possibility may also be true?
Also, we recognize that this is extremely rare for someone to simply abandon a valued
or strongly held belief system when confronted with disconfirming information.
In fact, recent psychological research shows that when this happens, when people who have
a firmly held belief are confronted with facts that disconfirm that belief, people tend to
dig in their heels and hold the erroneous belief even more strongly because they are
being encouraged to defend the belief, to think of and recall reasons that their belief
is true or that the alternatives are not true.
That in the end has the result of reinforcing the belief rather than getting them to think
more critically or skeptically about the belief.
Another approach is to give analogies, to talk around the problem a little bit or examples
that would encourage them to question certain aspects of their belief.
Get a seed of critical thinking and doubt, then encourage it over time and see what develops.
For example, if someone relates a story that they were abducted out of their bed in the
early morning by aliens, instead of just telling them that your experience is incorrect or
your interpretation of the experience is incorrect that didn't happen to you, encouraging them
to get defensive and dig in, you might simply relate the fact that, well, I have read elsewhere
that there are people who have had similar experiences, experiences that seem the same
as what you're describing to me.
And some of them were found to have had a neurological event known as a waking dream.
You can then provide them with links or articles with more information.
It's interesting to view this struggle between critical thinking and our cognitive and emotional
biases as a discussion, perhaps even a conflict that happens inside of our brains, between
our various brain regions and networks.
