And in order to seem consistent and in order to meet the emotional needs of your ego, you
will focus on getting the process correct, not on being correct in any conclusion that
you have set your stakes into.
I mentioned that we cannot change human nature in that our personalities seem to be highly
resistant to change by therapy or by other means.
However, recent neuroscience is finding that the brain can actually change its wiring in
response to use.
This is called brain plasticity.
Sometimes this is simply learning.
The brain can learn and remember and with our increasingly sophisticated technologies,
we can see that process occurring in the brain.
And habits of thought can also become more ingrained.
However, you simply cannot change your basic personality profile.
Personality has proven to be remarkably resistant to change.
What you can change, however, is how you deal with your basic emotional makeup.
This begins with what some psychologists call emotional intelligence, insight into your
own emotional makeup.
And this is why knowledge of psychological needs and cognitive biases, all the things
that we covered in this course, are so important.
So we cannot change what we evolved in terms of our basic emotional needs and how we react
to things and the biases that tend to be shared or common among people.
But we can change how we respond to those emotions.
We can engage our frontal lobes, our executive function, and develop adaptive responses.
These responses can be learned and ingrained through habit and effort.
Throughout this course, I have advocated the application of rational thought, scientific
methods, and skeptical thinking.
This frequently prompts some to ask if this critical thinking approach of life denies
human emotions.
I frequently hear, well, what about love, beauty, and art?
Critical thinking, however, is not at odds with these things.
The full emotional palette is part of the human condition, and it is healthy, even rational,
to embrace it.
This is part of my point.
I'm not advocating that you deny your humanity, that you deny human emotions.
Simply that you understand them, that you understand the influence they have over your
thinking, and that you put in place systematic processes that will lead you to conclusions
that are more reliable.
When it comes to beauty and art, I would also agree with what Richard Dawkins wrote.
He was expressing the view that many scientists have had.
He wrote a book called Unweaving the Rainbow.
