In this book, he argued that understanding the science that underlies the world, such
as the beauty of a rainbow, does not diminish that beauty at all.
If anything, it enhances it.
We live in a beautiful, subtle, elegant, and complex world.
Understanding something about how it works has a profound beauty of its own.
I'd also point out that the science that results from this scientific view of the world gives
us the ability to see things such as the rings of Saturn close up.
We have more beauty that we can see because of the fruits of the scientific world view.
In line with this view is the realization that, as far as theories and facts are concerned,
there is no absolute right and wrong.
There are only degrees of confidence.
Further, all conclusions are tentative because our information is always incomplete.
In other words, what Emerson said about life applies here as well.
Empirical knowledge is a journey, not a destination.
You need to be comfortable with uncertainty.
If, however, you think you have arrived at absolute truth at the final answer, then your
journey is over.
That journey is the process of science and critical thinking.
Again, this gets back to focusing on the process rather than any specific conclusions that
you hold to be an absolute or final outcome.
It's actually a very empowering perspective on the world.
To be a critical thinker is to be comfortable with uncertainty, comfortable with the limits
of human knowledge, and aware of all the many flaws and limitations of human intelligence,
and therefore not married to any one conclusion.
To be flexible in the face of new ideas and new information, but at the same time, not
afraid to acknowledge that some ideas are objectively better than others.
We do know stuff.
Reliable scientific knowledge is possible.
Logic can be valid or not valid.
Some data is more reliable than other data.
Being flexible does not mean being gullible in the face of any claim.
It means critically analyzing all claims and judging them fairly on their own merits.
Another question I frequently receive from those trying to be better critical thinkers
is how to deal with family and friends.
What do you do when someone states a belief or claim that you believe to be wrong or invalid?
Well, there really isn't any one answer.
A lot of this will depend upon your relationship with that other person.
But there are some ideas to keep in mind which you may find helpful.
So first, you have to recognize that no one likes being told that they are wrong or having
a valued belief taken away from them.
