If you think you are not biased and that you cannot rationalize a completely erroneous
belief, then that is just the greatest bias of all.
That's the master bias, the one that can undo all of your critical thinking skills.
We spoke previously about the fallacy of experts who begin to think that their expertise makes
them infallible.
Often times scientists and great intellectuals may become more susceptible to self-deception
because they lose their intellectual humility.
And that is the ultimate lesson of our understanding from neuroscience and psychology, humility
in the face of our own knowledge and beliefs.
So yes, millions, even billions of people, can be profoundly wrong about a belief for
hundreds or even thousands of years.
For example, it was widely believed and accepted as true in Western culture for thousands
of years that bloodletting was an effective treatment.
This wasn't questioned, everyone just knew it to be true.
Entire cultures may endorse a belief system which is strongly then reinforced by confirmation
bias.
Eventually, the apparent examples of support seem overwhelming.
Confirmation bias can be that powerful and deceptive.
There is also extreme social pressure to conform.
Our in-group identity is tied to specific belief systems which are common in that group.
If you are listening to this course, then you probably want to be a better critical
thinker yourself.
First, it is important to apply the rules of critical thinking to yourself most of all.
The famous physicist Richard Feynman famously said, the first principle is that you must
not fool yourself, and you are the easiest person to fool.
But there are barriers to being more critical thinking ourselves.
Once you invest, for example, your ego into a conclusion, then motivated reasoning will
kick in and distort and bias your critical thinking into that direction.
In the end, your education, your knowledge, and your critical thinking skills will still
lead you to the wrong answer.
You will just be much more confident in your error because you have rationalized it in
a much more sophisticated way, unless of course you really apply that critical thinking to
your own beliefs.
If on the other hand, you invest your ego in the process of critical thinking and not
in any particular conclusion, then you will be more free to follow the logic and evidence
wherever it leads.
You will in fact take pride in your ability to change your opinion as new information
becomes available.
Being called on using erroneous logic or biased thinking or incomplete data, that will be
what you will fear.
