to engage in what is called metacognitive reasoning, thinking about thinking.
We can consciously put into place a metacognitive self-check or filter on our own reasoning.
We literally engage the frontal lobe part of our brain, which hierarchically can override
the more primitive parts of our brain.
It's a filter that can inhibit, literally neurologically inhibit, those primitive impulses.
We can try to transcend our biases by being aware of them and asking, does this belief
really make sense?
And even if it makes sense, is it actually true?
How do we know it's true?
How can we separate it from other ideas, other hypotheses that may also fit the data, that
may also be true, by systematically doubting knowledge and ourselves, but in a positive
constructive way that leads to more inquiry and exploration?
Along with the understanding of metacognition, when logic and evidence leads us to uncomfortable
conclusions, this creates cognitive dissonance, which I've discussed previously.
Recognizing that dissonance and how it will motivate you and powers you to engage in metacognition,
to choose an adaptive, more rational resolution, rather than following the neurological pathway
of least resistance, in other words, rationalizing a convenient answer.
This is when we will tend to use our logic and our highest cognitive ability to rationalize
rather than reason, to have our cake and eat it too by convincing ourselves that we are
both logical and can still hold our emotionally appealing beliefs.
It is not easy, and it takes practice, knowledge and dedication to stay in the metacognitive
realm to allow the facts and logic rather than our biases and emotions to rule our thinking.
The ultimate irony of this course is that in taking the metacognitive critical thinking
approach, thinking about thinking and the nature of knowledge, one comes to the unavoidable
conclusion that you should not trust me as any kind of definitive authority.
You should question everything that I've said in this course, check my sources, verify my
facts and reason things out for yourselves, because after all, I am just one person trying
to make sense of a horrifically complex topic.
And in the end, I may be wrong about some things.
By listening to this course, you have already demonstrated that you are someone who enjoys
the intellectual journey of learning and thinking, as do I.
It is, I think, an ennobling journey, engaging the better part of our nature.
Thanks for letting me take this small part of that journey with you.
Thank you.
Bye.
