we already know, all of the science that we have accumulated up to this point.
It then looks at any new information and updates that prior probability with the new information,
a Bayesian analysis that then gives us the post-probability.
What's now, what's the new probability that this claim is true, given the new data?
This is a process that we generally do in our everyday lives, as we learn new things,
we update what we think about the world around us.
We acknowledge all the limitations and uncertainties in the data and in our conclusions, and then
we constantly update our tentative conclusions as new data comes in.
All conclusions are tentative, but we also acknowledge that there is a range of confidence.
Some conclusions may be so highly confident that we treat them as approaching 100%, although
we never quite get there, we're always open to new revision.
It also needs to be pointed out that we live in a highly complex civilization, an increasingly
complicated civilization.
There has been and continues to be a geometric increase in scientific knowledge, meaning
that our scientific knowledge is not just growing, it's accelerating.
You can contrast this to what psychologists call our evolutionary milieu, the environment
in which humans evolved.
Certainly it was complex in its own way, many plants and animals to learn about, for example,
but nothing compared to the complexity of our current civilization, and again, of course,
the problem is getting much worse.
The evolved adaptive cognitive tools that may have been well suited to the plains of
Africa, but they simply are not up to the task of mastering all the complexities of
our modern world.
Science, skepticism, and critical thinking, including formal logic, you can think of as
rigorous processes that we use to handle the complexity of our world, because our flawed
brains are simply not up to the task by themselves.
There is another process to handle this complexity that has been specifically proposed.
In the book The Checklist Manifesto, author Atul Gawande makes the same points that I
just made that in our increasingly technological and complex world, we are getting to the point
where we're overwhelming our brains, we're overwhelming our cognitive ability to deal
with all of the details that are necessary.
In some professions, in some practices, there is a high degree of complexity, and there
is also a very unforgiving environment where the tiniest error can have catastrophic outcomes.
He points to examples such as flying a B-52 bomber or any modern commercial jet.
A small error may lead to a crashed airplane and many deaths, or to modern surgery, where
a small error, a small cognitive error, may lead to, for example, operating on the wrong
side of the body or the wrong limb.
Those are catastrophic outcomes resulting from tiny errors.
He recommends as one external mechanism, one fix, what he calls the checklist.
This checklist is simply a systematic list of things that you go through on takeoff or
