There are parts of your brain telling you to think or believe one thing while other
parts are filtering it through reality testing or other processes.
Critical thinking is the process of engaging your higher cortical function as a filter and
control on the more primitive parts of your brain.
Not only can we all strive to be more critically thinking ourselves, but we can also strive
to make those around us more critical thinkers.
And further, if our goal is to make society overall more scientifically literate and
critically thinking, then we can also change our educational system.
Our culture can also change, especially the way science and information is presented in
the media.
As we saw in a previous lecture, our society generally does a poor job of teaching critical
thinking skills and scientific literacy.
As a society, we can learn to approach science and education as a process, as I was recently
describing, rather than a set of answers or beliefs that never change.
Science news items, for example, should be framed as part of an ongoing process of scientific
discovery, not always as a definitive breakthrough that finally gives us the answer to this scientific
mystery.
Education can also focus on teaching children the process of science, not giving them authoritative
answers to memorize.
And we need to think of education as more than what happens in the classroom.
As evidence shows, in fact, most of your learning will take place outside of the context of
a classroom.
I find it very encouraging that scientists are increasingly engaging with the public,
trying to make their discipline, their science, more accessible, and engaging in ongoing education
themselves through blogs, podcasts, and other social media and the new media.
This is a great new tool that our civilization has to disseminate information, to close that
gap, make a connection between actual working scientists who are truly experts in the field
and who have also found the passion to teach their science to the public.
And there are those who think that this is largely responsible for a positive trend in
the public becoming more scientifically literate.
The numbers are still low, but they are getting better.
Further, it is a process, it's critical thinking, of questioning and constantly updating our
knowledge.
We're never content to just sit on a fact as if it is final, though there is the emotional
desire to do just that, to seize on an answer, and then to freeze our beliefs in place, check
that box and not worry about it anymore.
In statistical analysis, this method of constantly updating as new information comes in is called
a Bayesian approach.
A Bayesian analysis starts with what is called a prior probability, the probability that
some phenomenon is real or some claim is true, some hypothesis is true, based upon everything
