Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy. I'm Enya Shbrodsky. I'm Stephen Zuber. I'm Jay Sticky.
And today we are going to talk class, but not until after we have done our two
lesser-on posts like we always do. We're gonna talk class after we go to class.
That's right. And the first lesson into today's class is? Original seeing. Yes,
which is an interesting post because it is entirely just a quote from somewhere
else rather than being anything new or originally written, but on the other hand
like drawing people's attention to one specific interesting thing out of a book
is also valuable. And I've had people recommend this book to me from outside
circles. The what Zen and art or the art and Zen of motorcycle maintenance. Zen and
the art of motorcycle maintenance. It's a good book. Yeah. Yeah. It was recommended to me by
my AP English teacher way back in the day, but I never got around to it. My uncle who
works on motorcycles and other vehicles recommended it. So isn't it about to shake
with air? Um, no, it's maybe I was thinking about the motorcycle diaries. Yeah, that's
okay. That's the one. That's a good movie. Oh wait, is that a book? I think it was
originally a book. It was probably originally a book. Anyway, so this is a
totally different motorcycle with a different dude on it. Yes. Okay. It's also not. It's
just more about Zen. Like from, I mean, this, I think this chapter is probably
pretty indicative of what the book is like. Yeah. I don't know if there's a lot of
like, and here's how to replace your whatever on the motorcycle. Yeah, exactly.
That's what I was trying to articulate. It's like, is there not a lot of
motorcycle maintenance in it? Well, there is, but it's more about like, it's sort of
a story about a guy and, and some topics. And there are parables like the one in
this, in this post. Yeah. I was hoping like to actually be able to learn something
about motorcycle. Like apparently when you read Moby Dick, you learn a lot about
wailing. In general, there's like suddenly, you learn stuff about money pages about
wailing. You learn how insufferably boring it is and how you wish you could throw
yourself off the edge of the boat just from being forced to read it. You know, it
occurred to me just a few weeks ago how fucking bizarre it is to just go and
tether yourself to a giant whale and be like, well, I bet I can float longer than
he can keep swimming. That's fucking nuts. Yeah. The book feels about that smart.
Moby Dick, you mean? Yeah, I hated it. Oh, okay. I hated it too. Yeah. I hated
Old Man in the Sea worse. Yes. Did you also read that in one setting? Cause it's
like, oh, it's a novella. I could just crunch right through this in one set. And
like, I remember finishing it and just slowly putting the book down and then
laying down on the couch. 15 years ago. How I, if I read the whole thing or if I
finished it or not, and I might be conflating the Old Man in the Sea with
the other one that we're just at the whale one, it's really similar. The entire story
I'll summarize it is there's angry fishermen and Old Man goes out in like a little boat
and then he hooks a big fish and it's all about how his life shit. And if he could just get like
one good big fish, then he could turn his life around. But like, he does battle with this
fish and is being dragged around by it. And it's just an entire novel length story about how miserable
this guy's life is. And then in the end, he fucking loses the fish. And then he like loses
everything. And it is just, it's just a like book that wants to just punch you in the face.
Repeatedly. I guess I've read multiple stories like that. I didn't realize they were all like
Old Man in the Sea remixes. Well, I don't know if that was the first one, but... See, I'm bad at
picking up, I'm bad at picking up like lessons and subtleties and morals from stories, but the
moral of that is obvious. His life wouldn't have been any better if he caught this fish, right?
He thinks this is what he wants, but it's not what he wants. Life is just terrible. It's what I
took away from that story. Like, there was no... Don't be an old fisherman is the moral of the story.
Don't live. Life is shit. Just do it happy, right? If you, you know, being old and fishing sounds
tight. If you're into, you know, into fishing. I guess the oldest story is depression is a
hell of a drug. That sounds about right. Yeah. Okay. All right. So the thing with original
seeing is that... And this is my... So like the 32nd version will do the longer version.
Student, it's a parable of a student who's like, I need to write a 500 word, 500 word essay on the
United States. It's like, okay, great. You're going to get through, I don't know, nothing
in 500 words. Yeah. So the teacher is like, how about just like... Just this town that we're in.
Just this town. And they're like, I can't think of anything. And then, okay, how about just Main
Street? I couldn't think of anything again. Okay. How about the front of the opera house on Main
Street? And then that one is like, oh yeah, I started... And then, okay, how about the, you know,
a brick on the top left? Yeah, it starts with the left or left hand brick. Yeah. And then they're
like, they come into the 5,000 word essay and they're like, I did it. I saw it because this,
I saw it with fresh eyes because they were trying to regurgitate. It started with one brick. And
then I wrote about the next one. And then the third. And before long, I was writing about the
entire facade and then the windows and then... Yeah. So that sounds fun. And I like the parable
for what it's going for. But that, like the exact example sounds like complete dog shit.
Because A, what's the assignment if you're getting graded? Like, it can't be write the history of
something. Maybe it was. Yeah, I don't know. You might have just been writing a historical essay.
But then also the, I guess, I mean, maybe they did figure this out, but I don't know how you,
I don't know how you learn the difference of the history of one brick versus the other. And I
imagine they're very similar. Well, I don't, I don't think you actually write the history. She
was just describing what she was seeing. Oh, see, I thought it was a history assignment. I mean,
it probably was, but he said, just describe the first brick. Okay. Yeah. Then, then, all right,
I'm into that. But I'm just thinking, like, I could see, you know, if your assignment was,
all right, write me a history on this, on Main Street of downtown, like you bet. And I give you
the origin of the manufacturing of the bricks on one of these buildings. I'd probably get an F,
right? Because they're like, well, it depends on your future. That would be a really original
essay. Yeah. Yeah. All right. Well, all right. So maybe the example is less facetious than I
thought. But the takeaway is that if you're tasked with looking at something in a way that is wholly
original, you're somehow, well, not somehow, but you find yourself able to be remarkably inspired
and able to actually generate thoughts rather than just try and find new ways to put stuff
that someone else has already said. Yeah. Yeah. I think the way it ends here is the quote that
I finally pulled out. I'm not going to bother reading the rest of what I pulled out because
you summed it up very well. The end quote was, she was blocked because she was trying to repeat
in her writing things she had already heard. She couldn't think of anything to write about
Bozeman because she couldn't recall anything she had heard worth repeating. She was strangely
unaware that she could look and see freshly for herself as she wrote without primary regard
for what had been said before. The narrowing down to one brick destroyed the blockage because
it was so obvious she had to do some original and direct scene, which, yeah, good parable about
looking at things yourself rather than sticking to cash thoughts and regurgitating other things
people have said. Yeah. And what's fun is this one gives you virtually no instruction on how to
do an original scene. And I feel like it's a lot easier to think that you've done one than
actually have done one. I feel like it's kind of explicitly saying break it down into the
smallest components. Then I think that's one way for sure. I guess, I mean, you could also do an
original scene on the origin of the United States if you just look at it from a different angle,
right? And that might feel like a wholly original thing rather than saying, well, in
16 whatever Columbus found and just start from there. If you were to take it from the whatever,
five, 10, 15,000 years ago of the whatever the ice bridge and start maybe with the
the native populations, or you can even just do like the the history of the geography or something,
right? Like, I guess you can do I guess what I'm saying is you can do original, I would think you
could do an original scene on a big thing. But you're right, being as reductionist as possible
with it and breaking it down. That sounds pretty cool. And hell, if you were to do an original
scene on the bricks, you could get all the way back to the big bang, right? And you could even get
there fairly quickly. And then, you know, you could summarize from there to the actual brick
to bake an apple pie. You must first create the universe. Oh my god, I haven't heard that quote
in at least five years. I used to have this framed that's a classic Carl Sagan. Yeah, I used to have
this frame piece of artwork of Carl Sagan baking a pie with like the galaxy behind him and that
quote on it. I love it. And he was like wearing an apron. And I gotta see if I can find a print
of that again. I gotta say this this whole post is also very applicable to anyone trying to do art,
at least in my experience, because when you're like, I have a blank piece of paper and I can write
anything, or I can draw anything, it just there's where do you even fucking start. But then like
you see a story story contest or prompter, whatever it says, we want 5000 words on mermaids that
kill puppies. And like, you're right away, like, Oh, yeah, okay, I can do something with that,
you know, just putting those restrictions on you, and it can't have the color purple anywhere
in it, you know, something like that. The more restrictions it puts on you, the more you're
like, Okay, cool, I got something to chew on and go with. Yeah. Yeah. And again, force you
into making something wholly original. Yeah. There was, I think it's not active anymore,
but it's called the rattle fiction podcast or rattle fic, where the where the host would read
short rationalist stories. Okay. And it's so you can find that on iTunes or maybe on the website
and I had to find the RSS feed myself. But I listened to the last Christmas on there, and I
happened to discover it around Christmas. I'd had this feed open or had this podcast, whatever,
on my phone for years before I found that. And then I listened to, I think it's called True
Love's Kiss by Elisa Yudkowski. Okay. Classic kind of reversed in the real thing. Yeah. Okay.
But without giving away the ending. It's not like that spoiler, but it's just fun. And it's like,
Oh, okay, now I get it. The girl's fiance or something falls into a magic induced coma,
a la sleeping beauty. And only True Love's Kiss, like uninhibited by anything else,
like just pure love can can wake him. And it doesn't work for her. It doesn't work for her,
for his parents. And so she kind of like soliciting the town. It's like, please, you know, I'm not
ashamed. If anyone loves him, can you guys just try? Even if you don't, can we just line up
everybody in the town and like, they're kind of not into it? Yeah. So that that it was, all right,
how do I do a, I'm kind of guessing on the author's thought. In fact, I think it wasn't the notes of
the story. But it was like, how do I do this story told in an original way? And it's not,
you know, a breathtaking new angle on it, but it's a fun new angle. And it's a quick story.
It is. And it's explicitly rationalist, because yeah, she does start thinking of all the other,
all the various ways she could hack at this problem, which other people are like,
No, man, we're not lining up everyone to kiss him. So do you think that would actually happen
that the rest of town would just be like, no, and not do it? Yes, I think that there's no way.
I mean, we couldn't get people to wear masks during a pandemic.
People these incentives, generally. But like, if it was like a, if it was a smaller tighter
community, maybe, I mean, because, you know, how are you going to line up everyone in Denver to,
you know, kiss an unconscious person? I wouldn't do, I probably wouldn't do it, especially if I
didn't know, but that's part of the point. It has to be, you know, true love or something. Yeah.
But then, you know, given today's limits, you could find like a yogi or something who just loves
everybody, right? And like, I mean, part of the conceit there was supposed to be that like,
maybe someone secretly loved him. And that is why like her kiss didn't work, because someone loved
him even more, but in secret. And so if everyone in town has to kiss him, there's plausible deniability,
whereas if just like one person goes up and kisses him, everybody would be like,
John had a secret crush on him the whole time. Stone him. Right. So yeah, original seeing,
I like it. What I, it's interesting to think about, because I think it's easy to say, well,
I've done the work, I did an original thought on this, but I find that it's easy to encounter people,
including like myself, where it's like, yep, I did it. And then I arrive at the right, like,
the conclusion that everyone else has, or even everyone else in my subgroup. So it's, it's
having stupid epiphanies. I find that like happens a lot in therapy, where it's something that like
you say, and it was the most obvious fucking thing in the world. It's like, I just had another
stupid epiphany. I think that sounds valuable. I mean, I occasionally come to, you know,
realizations that like, oh, I could have realized that five years ago. But hey, better late than
never. So I guess I, what I meant is that it, when I said it doesn't give like instruction is I don't
quite know, other than like having had an original thought, how I would know if I've done this practice
properly. But maybe that's not really the point. Also, it's the short initial post on it, right?
So he gets a bit more into it in the next one. He does, speaking of which, how to seem and be
deep. Yes. Okay, so he starts out with this cool, not starts out, there's a cool quote at the front,
a fanatic, someone who can't change his mind and won't change the subject. He says, I endeavored
to at least be capable of changing the subject. You would think he would also never be capable
of changing his mind, because he's supposed to be a good Bayesian, right? Yeah, it was just a funny
rejoiner to that. Yeah, the fanaticism. Yeah, it's a cute quote. But yeah, he was talking about how
he was at a place where people were just talking, you know, more in deep kind of stuff. And a lot
of people were talking about death, and that death gives meaning to life. And death is really a
blessing disguise. And he was apparently like the only transhumanist there. And he tried not to
be fanatic or something, but would like push back very cautiously sometimes about how generally,
you know, death is not a great thing. And that it's just not not a thing that we should valorize.
He specifically phrased it, he says cautiously, as transhuman is generally positive on life,
but thumbs down on death, which I guess everyone, apparently several people came up to him afterwards
and said it was really deep. Yeah, I like that. Well, yes, I am. This got me thinking about what
makes people seem deep. Yeah, I like to that, you know, thumbs down on death, thumbs up on life is
like a very like soft way of putting it. And that's, you know, a great way to break the eyes
on that subject to somebody, I guess. Thumbs down on that subject, actually. What? Yeah.
But yeah, he, he, as you said, he was like trying to figure out why did people think that he was
really deep? And he was going over some of these interactions. There was one woman who said that
when I have a nice thing to say about someone, now I try to say to them right away instead
of waiting, because you never know when someone's going to die, and then you wouldn't be able to
tell them the thing you want. The last thing they heard from you to be a nice thing, right?
And he said at one point, that is a beautiful thought. And even if someday the threat of
death is lifted from you, I hope you will keep doing it. Which, you know, cool. And then someone
else was spoke about some benefit, X of death, and he doesn't remember what the benefit was.
And he replied with, you know, given human nature, if people got hit on the head with a baseball
bat every week, pretty soon they would invent reasons why getting hit on the head with a baseball
bat was a good thing. But if you took someone who wasn't being hit on the head with a baseball
bat and asked them if they wanted it, they would say no. I think if you took someone who was immortal
and asked them if they wanted to die for benefit X, they would say no. Yeah. And that sounds like
the kind of an application of the original scene, right? Where like, okay, let's take this and remove
the context and just say, is this a good thing? Everything else aside, right? And it's like,
well, and when you phrase it that way, no, how could you possibly sell somebody on an eight decade
lifespan or a, I don't know, I mean, especially when the last three, four decades of that,
your body is slowly disintegrating and getting worse. Yeah, I mean, and then I'm trying to think
of like other non easy targets, you know, like, or even ones that like don't sound deliberately
edgy, but all my thoughts are like politics, right? Is that euthanasia? Yeah, maybe. Or like,
I mean, just the the way that our democracy works in the US or something, right? Like,
oh, sure. It's like, you know, maybe it's it's the canned phrase from Franklin about like, it's
the worst system of government there is, except for all the other ones. But or whether one of the
founders was supposed to have said that. It's just like, I thought it was Churchill. I feel like it
was, oh, no, Franklin said, like, they went allegedly, you know, when they come out of the
the courthouse in Pennsylvania, like what sort of government have you given us? It was like a
democracy, if you can keep it, I think was the quote I was thinking of from Franklin. I'm amazed
that we've kept it this long. Well, I mean, and that's the thing is like, I think it sounds like
a great idea. But like, if you take it, if you look at it with with fresh eyes and just look at
what you've got, I think uses the example in the other post, or maybe even in this one about education
and lost purposes. That's a good that's a good easy example. Like, what does college look like?
Well, I'm getting an education so I can get a good job. And it's like, are you doing either of those
things where you're sitting there learning 12th century underwater basket weaving? Yeah, and you
and like, for the most part, no, trade schools are tight. That's like, we're, hey, I'm here to
learn this, so I can get a job doing this, you betcha. And there are like, actual schools that
do that sort of thing, not just like software boot camps, you can do that for like, automotive
repairing everything, right? Yeah, but those are low class. Yeah, they're low class. We'll get there.
No, no, no, I shouldn't transition yet. Now you're good. The, I guess what I'm getting at is that,
like, people, and this is explicitly why I went to college was 75%, probably more if I'm
being honest, was a sense of social inadequacy. I wasn't doing anything with my life. And it
became especially stark when I bumped into somebody from high school, and they're like,
oh, I'd be doing something more interesting. And like, fuck me, you're right. And so I'm like,
well, you know, what's a good answer to say? What are you doing? You know,
oh, people who are in school, you know, I'm, I'm going to college. That's what I'm doing. That's
the entire reason I went. That's the overall and majority of the reason. I can't think of,
I mean, I guess I sort of went there to learn stuff. But, and like, I tried to pick something
that I was actually interested in, that I felt like I was going to do something with. I got an
undergraduate degree in science of psychology. And I say science, because most schools, it's a
liberal art major. So I had to take some science classes, and realized my second semester in,
because I'd already had my undergraduate or my whatever core credits out of the way from
what do you call it? Community college. And I'm like, oh yeah, this is actually super boring.
Turns out reading psychology research is a lot of fun. Doing it is insanely boring. And this will
not be fun for me. So I realized immediately, I'm like, yeah, I'm not going to do this, but I'm
here. As long as I'm in school, I can at least tell people I'm in school. That's what I'm doing
with my life. I went because I knew from, I don't even know how long, as far back as I can remember.
So at least elementary school, that that was the life path. You do really good in school,
then you do really good in high school, so that you can get into a college, and then you do good
in college, and then you get a job. Like there was just no question ever about it. Going to college
was part of the life track. And then yeah, I dropped out after one year when I was like, this
is shit, and I don't want to do it. And I'm not doing what I wanted. You know, it's like, this
isn't actually advanced. It's once once like you're at college age, after you've been old enough to
sign the loans, that's when you start to like come online enough as a person to realize like,
wait, this isn't actually advancing my personal agenda of like, self actualization towards what
I'm trying to do. But since you get to sign those loan papers at 17, you're not, you know, at least
when you're me, you're not really a sentient person yet. And you're like, Oh, great, I'm in debt.
And I guess I'm already here. So might as well finish it. Yeah. Yep. Okay, so he upon further
reflection, figured out, at least suspected that he came across as deep, because he coherently
evaluated a cached pattern of deep wisdom in a way that made immediate sense. Because there's
this stereotype of deep wisdom that death, complete the pattern, complete the pattern.
Death gives meaning to life. Okay, I guess I'll do it. Now we're all looking at like screens and
you're looked around at us. Yeah, everyone knows this is the standard deeply wise response, but
they will not be surprised. It carries no experience or insight. One might call it belief in wisdom.
And yeah, that was his point that everyone knows it's wise, but not surprising at all. And he was
surprising. They may even say what deep wisdom, perhaps in hope of being thought deep themselves.
But he also points out that like, the the transhumanist School of Thought has its own
cash thoughts there. And this is where it's like, Yep, I've done my original seeing and I've come
to the exact same conclusion as the transhumanists. Death, complete the pattern. Death is a bummer
that we should get or as death is a pointless tragedy that we should do our best to get rid of.
And it's like, that sounds all original, because fewer people think that way.
And it doesn't mean that it's the wrong idea. That's, I think that's the tough part. You just
kind of got to like, dig around and think, like, Okay, yes, I happen to have come to the same
conclusion as my peer group. But I'm kind of wary of that fact, because, you know, is this
some social pressure me trying to make sure that I fit on the same, like, intellectual level as
them? Or is it like, is this my actual thought? There was another key component to seeming deep,
which was that if you're conveying, you know, because every, I guess there's two components.
One, you have to have all these thoughts cashed in advance, because that's where every good
thought comes from. Generating thoughts on the fly sounds like me rambling on in a sentence and
you sound like an idiot. And yeah, he said that he already had all these thought patterns as
automatically as he breathes. Exactly. And then the other thing is to be able to convey them
with minimum inferential distance. I think he specifies one step, but I think if you could do
a couple and still sound really deep. He said that was the hard part. Yeah, the part that made
him seem deep was being able to just have that one inferential step rather than be bizarre out of
nowhere. Yeah. And it's interesting because I've heard people who, you know, say long things that
are sound bizarre out of nowhere because they haven't conveyed the distance and they just sound
dumb or insane. And it's like that might be a real coherent thought, but you've not convinced,
you've not bridged that, that, that crevice for me. And he pointed out that transhumanism is like,
got its own whole coherent philosophy that many people have spent a lot of time thinking about
and making cohere. And so the fact that he was able to present a unified coherent thought was
very important because it wasn't just original. It was also original and made sense internally.
Right. Made sense to the listener too. Yeah, yeah. And it was like more than just one thought. Like,
you can have a deep sentence that you've got cashed somewhere, but then someone asks you to
expand on it, you've got nothing. You clearly review yourself to just like, you know, and this
is something that God, I mean, it doesn't have to be a smart thought, but you know, like a random
cash thought, you know, I think about this, like dinner party I went to a few years ago,
once every couple of months. And it's like, we're playing, what's that, cards against humanity.
And I mentioned this in the context of other posts with like applause lights and everything.
But it would be, you know, somebody throw in some random jab about, Oh yeah, America is the worst
and basically get a round of applause. But if you ask them to expand on that, they can't. And it's
like, well, why, you know, what specifically? Well, you know, racism. It's like, well, okay,
sure. But like, no other country has that. Yeah, we invented it. Speaking of, I saw
SNL this morning. And it was the guy from Get Out. Okay. And it was a bummer because he's
remarkably unfunny. And you know, like most SNL episodes have like, like one or two good
sketches from get out. Okay, okay. I forget the guy's name. Yeah. But like his opening sketch was
like, I know, because he's British. He's like, I know what you're thinking. He's British. Oh,
no, he's not black. Don't worry. I'm black and British. And it's like, we all know, you know,
he just always like, we're aware that this can happen. But well, there's also a thing right
now where the capital B letter black applies only to American people who are descended from slaves
or something. Like there's a whole new woke vocabulary around that. I'm lucky. I don't
buy the woke dictionary and read it then because I remember years ago, like being confused that
African American is what you're supposed to call black people. Right? I'll call anyone who,
you know, what they want to them to them. But I'm talking about a group. Because at the time,
most black people I knew weren't African, weren't African American in any guys. One, you know,
one was Jamaican, one was French Canadian. And it's like, so, you know, calling you African
American is like, Oh, you're black, you must be from Africa, right? It felt so kind of sending
to me. Yeah. And then and calling black people from other countries, African American, that was
the last straw was I saw something about, you know, African American British actor.
It's just Elba being considered for James Bond. And I'm like, African American British actor.
Okay, yeah, this isn't this is nonsense. It wasn't just me. Great. So anyway, what I brought that up
because Oh, a lot of his stuff was those sort of just like random, quick jokes about like, Oh,
don't worry. It's I can't think of any examples. Point is, it was like applause lights, but it's
it's like almost a deep thought, but it's like, there's no substance to it. And you can tell or
many people can tell I think that it's like, Oh, yeah, there's, you know, this is just a shiny
coat of paint. And there's nothing underneath it. Good comedy is actually subversive, which I guess
often means that it is an original thought. Yeah, I mean, I think, and it wasn't just the jokes,
I think, I mean, don't get wrong, it's, it's, I'm not sure if the guests write their own monologues
or what. Let's see, was there anything else I'm seeming and being deep, like having a parent
philosophy that's easy to explain and non typical seems to be the, the one sentence summary, right?
Yeah, he did also point out that an economist once remarked, the popular audiences are so
unfamiliar with standard economics, that when he was called upon to make a television appearance,
he just needed to repeat back econ 101 in order to sound like a brilliantly original thinker.
This was written about 15 years ago, this post, do you think this is still true?
That's still true. I have this experience with any,
uh, anyone to try to talk to you about economics is not like in this circle directly.
No, that sucks. Yeah, we're in our bubble so much that like it seems like the sanity
water line is up, but that's because we're just swimming in the deep end, baby.
For the shallow end, I'm not really sure. But it's not to say everyone's dumb. It's just like,
you know, in fairness, you know, most people haven't heard any kind of one on one lecture.
And so they hear stuff, and it's kind of like the joke there was one of this on like American dad,
where, uh, the daughter's like in her first week of college and she says something about something
and, oh, how's that cycle in one class teaching you? Well, it's only been a week, but I know how,
I know how the whole world, I know how the whole world works now. And it's like that, that sort of,
that, that the joke there is that like, you, these are original thoughts that you haven't had,
you know, that you haven't been exposed to yet. And it, you know, sounds deep and profound and
smart. And in a way it is because it's new to you. But it's not like this is not the, the, the edge of
humanity's grasp of the subject, right? It's just, it's just yours.
I have over the last 15 years started to see more and more of the death is a bad thing,
idea seeping into popular culture. Is that just me looking for it? Or is this actually a thing
that's happening? Um, I mean, we still get a whole bunch of death is crap in the media,
but every now and then I see something that really makes me hopeful.
Yeah, I mean, I, I'm hoping it's a positive trend. I mean, I remember we talked to Eleazar about this
a few years ago, back when, uh, Harris was hinting that they were going to write a, that he was going
to write a book on the, on AI. Um, and I'd asked him, I was like, you know, it seems like more
and more conversation about AI seemed, I don't know if we caught him on a bad day or if he actually
feels this way, but I was like, it seems like more and more conversations these days about AI
are less about like the terminator and more about like actual content. And he just said twice,
because I think I read the question, he's like, I am not optimistic or hopeful about,
you know, the public conversation on this or something. Um, and maybe again, maybe he's having
a bad day. Maybe he's, he's definitely, you know, more, he's got his, uh, ear to the floor
there more than I do, but I feel like it's more positive, more conversations coming down from
people like Bill Gates and Elon Musk and, you know, names that people listen to,
aren't talking about the threat of bipedal robots shooting us in the face, right?
Yeah. Or saying just unplug it. Right. Yeah. I mean, even Neil deGrasse Tyson,
you know, came around completely on that, right? And he's a popular science figure.
So, uh, well, that's because I don't know. Um, that's because AI exists now. Uh, we have,
we're like, we're going to have self-driving cars. We have GPT three. Uh, there's some really cool
services now using it. Like, um, I'll have to see if I can find the service and put it in show notes,
but there is a GPT three powered article writing software now where you just tell it like,
I want you to write an article for this kind of blog and on this subject and add in quotes from
this thing. And like, I don't know, just a sort of, you can make it as detailed or easy as you want,
and then just be like, generate and it'll like generate a title and then it'll start writing.
And, uh, I haven't tinkered with it yet. I think it might be for pay, but, uh, yeah, there's,
there's a few things out there like that now that I've, I've seen people tinker around with and
do reviews of and they look pretty powerful. Still not quite as good as a human article writer, but
like one human article writer can do the work of 10 just by using that and yeah, culling,
tightening up a little. He ends because so all of that was about how to seem to be deep to, yeah,
read about, um, non-standard philosophies that are, uh, that are well thought out. He said,
to actually be deep, you got to think for yourself about what's wise or important. And, uh, it's
not necessarily coming up with an unusual answer, but it does mean seeing for yourself and expect
to the previous post, uh, rather, rather than letting your brain complete the pattern. So it's
key, key points to this is don't stop at the first answer, uh, cast out replies that you see as vaguely
unsatisfactory and spend a lot of time on it because if you keep mulling over the stuff for a while,
eventually your thoughts may form a coherent whole. Yeah. And time, your thoughts will form a
coherent whole flowing from the single source of yourself rather than being fragmentary repetitions
of other people's conclusions. I just wanted to make that sentence because it's good. I like
that too. It's fun because I try, you know, I don't know if I'm getting there. I'd have to,
you know, do another deep dive on all my beliefs. So give me 10 minutes because I don't have that
many. Um, for the most part, most of what I believe is amalgamations of what like is what I try to
like synergize from other, you know, other thoughts that have come to me from other sources.
And then I try to, I try to make something fresh out of the combination thereof, right? And that's
still like original, but it's, you know, I didn't make the ingredients. I just made something new
out of it, right? Well, literally everything is a remake. I mean, yeah, but you can, you can
independently discover something, right? Yeah. And so that can be, yes, someone else already had
this thought, but you didn't know that it came to you fresh. Right. You know, no doubt. I don't
know who, but it's always, you know, sparked by or outgrowths of other things that you've already
run across or that you already know. Probably. I mean, like, I'm not sure who gets credit for
being the founder of the transhumanist school of thought, but there are no doubt the first person
to think that death is bad, right? Right. I think that this article is not saying original thoughts
have to be wholly original. Like, it has to be original from your brain. But like not, I'm the
first person who's ever thought this thing. Like that was sort of the distinction between seeming
and being deep. I do think it's really important that he, you know, he says, oftentimes you will
just get the standard answer because, you know, if you have to find a nonstandard answer in order
to feel like you've won, then that leads you down into conspiracy theory land. Yeah, you're
going to have to be completely nuts. Most things that the common accepted wisdom is probably true.
Right. Yeah. All right. For next week, we are reading the logical fallacy of generalization
from fictional evidence. I just talked to Rachel about that yesterday. Yeah, that's one of my favorites.
Or at least it's a fun one. And hold off on proposing solutions. All right. We should actually
get to the topic, though. Yes. So we are talking about the I'm on the wrong mailbox primary.
Am I not as proposal for Republicans or was it the book review? I mean, it's just the whole
how about it's class stuff in general based around that. Yeah. Astral Codex 10s essays on class.
Right. I keep forgetting it's Astral Codex 10. Just call it Codex. That works. I don't know.
ACT runs, I mean, it's already an acronym, but SSC was, you know, so ingrained for so long.
Yeah, it's going to be hard to change. There was a book review we did a few months ago on.
It's not ACT, it's ACX. Well, I look at the at the word 10. I know. But I guess I don't know
if this is supposed to be in group signaling or a marker of higher class that use Roman numerals.
But well, the website is astralcodexten.com. If you wanted to be Astral Codex X and say 10,
then you could have done that. That would have been just two Xs.
But everybody abbreviates it as ACX. Yeah. Okay. Well, they're all doing it however they want,
you know. Okay. All right. So there's a 1983 book called what class a guide through the American
status system. Right. And that was some months ago. And or was this before after his post on
February 24th? Okay, there we go. I can't which one came first. I guess I can just check. The
Trump one was after that or the Republican one was after that. Yeah. So it was Oh, it was the day
after. So I thought that it was like a while ago, you read this book, then he kind of put
together this original thing. But I guess he was doing them at the same time. The I, I recommend
reading the book review of by Fusel Fusel, I'm assuming Fusel. Yeah, I don't know how to pronounce
it. Fusel. Fusel. Yes. It was it was just fun. Like the guy. He writes great book reviews. And
even now. Yeah. So Alexander writes great book reviews. I don't know if I could recommend the
book to people just based on the review, but I can recommend recommend the review to people
based on the review itself. Apparently the guy, it's hard to tell when he's being serious or not.
But he's basically trying to decide like, All right, what does upper class and middle class
and lower class look like? And I think his definitions are probably slightly too constrained,
which he talks about a bit when he's with Alexander talks about when he's responding to it a bit.
I guess Scott talks about and I said Scott, Alexander, whatever. Yeah. Yeah. He has two first
names. That's right. ACX talks about, see, that's just terrible. That's awful. Anyway,
where do we want to start with this? Well, good question.
So I want to start actually way before this, but we'll jump into it in just a second.
Remember when we talked about when we had that episode about the four settler groups in America?
I'll be on seed. I'll be on seed. That's right. This is an excellent book review. It is. This
reminded me a lot of that because I think Alexander has been or Scott has been leading
up to this for quite a while, or maybe it's just been an evolving line of thinking. No,
I was going to bring that up in response to these subjects because I as I was reading them, I kept
being put in mind of earlier essays on politics that he had written. And I think finally now he's
like getting to the big reveal, the prestige part of the magic show, or he's like just at least
discovered another component of it. Could be. Yeah. That's true. He's probably like learning
as he's writing. But is this an original thought? I think it is. The hand with the butterfly,
which our listeners couldn't see. But yeah. So yeah, I mean, like that, I guess what it comes
down to is that culture is really important and culture matters. And class is basically
another type of culture. It's... Or there's a cultural component to class. A strong culture.
I think not just a strong cultural component, I think class is basically just culture because
he makes the argument here that you don't have to be rich to be upper class, and you can be extremely
rich and still be middle class or lower class. Yeah, there's maybe some distinction about like
class also being your beliefs and values. Yeah, yeah, which is culture. But yeah, it's just...
So he says that... Sorry, I'm just trying to think of examples of things that aren't in
struggling but gone. In the book, Fusel's book or Fusel's book, he says that upper class is old
money. The people that you think of as rich and famous, whether they're tech billionaires or
celebrities or whatever, are not upper class because to be upper class, you have to inherit
your money. If you know about the upper class, it's probably only because you know their ancestors,
like Rockefellers or... Ford. Yeah, Ford, Carnegie. The real upper class is not showy. And I think
partly that's just a defense mechanism. It's much harder to loot the wealthy when you don't
know who the wealthy are. There's this whole other... I think this wasn't... Alexander, although it might
have been essay about fashion in fashion and class where you're sort of, if you divide class into
four categories, it was previously the upper class, like the aristocrats sort of setting the
fashion standards that would trickle down. But when we got the fast fashion industry, the elites
started... Mark Zucker started just wearing hoodies. It was too easy for the lower classes
to copy the rich. Back when you had an expensive well-boned corset and somebody would have to
save up for a very long time to get that, or painstakingly craft one themselves. And by the
time they had one, the aristocrats had already moved on. But now, as soon as you see a celebrity
wearing a particular t-shirt, China will crank out thousands of them. He could wear one the next
day. So I guess they tried to win there. Currently, the strategy is win the game by not playing.
Right. I don't know if... I don't remember if it was this post, but he put pictures side by side
of Trump's residence with everything it looks like. It came out of fucking 14th century Florence,
Gilded, and crazy shit. And God, who's the... Oh God, the name is sleeping me right now,
but he's the hedge fund manager. Really rich dude. There's a few of those. That's true. Okay.
I don't remember.
Coke brothers or...?
No, it wasn't the Coke brothers.
We got it. Richie McRitch guy.
Yeah, extremely rich upper-class dude and showed a picture of his house.
I have a really minimalist house.
Yeah, yeah. You wouldn't have guessed that it was his house.
Yeah, I thought it was actually kind of...
Oh, Sam Walton maybe, because he lives modestly.
No.
Fair enough. It's not in the post, so...
But yeah, the point is that to be upper-class, you have to have already been born into a lot of
money and be raised in that culture from birth, basically.
Yeah, and I like... There's some pushback in the... So we're talking about the book review.
That's Fusil's definition. I like how there's some pushback on that from Alexander later on,
because I don't know if that is a distinction really worth keeping.
I mean, if I'm old money, but I've got $10 million and you're new money, but you've got $40
billion. At that point, it's not about the money so much as it is just like the signaling aspect,
right? Like, what do I do with my time and money? I guess I can kind of see that, but I don't know...
There's definitely gatekeeping where old money considers itself to be basically the aristocratic
class. People with new money don't fit into that culture because they just haven't grown up in it,
so they didn't learn all the nuances.
Which is what one of America's worst classic books is about.
Oh, is that Gatsby?
Yes. He's like, I'm rich, but I can't buy my way into the upper-class. What was me?
Yeah, it sucks to be you, man.
Yeah.
There's also a good book that illustrates this well that I thought was a lot of fun
just because I was like, oh, it's these people from a ton of French is the likeness,
the people who all live in that house, especially like the guy who inherited it.
They're all doing the full upper-class lifestyle, right?
In fact, they're doing it even though they're not that they don't have that much money, right?
You don't have to have money to be upper-class. You just have to have come from that culture
and have those values.
And the other one defining characteristic is they're never trying to prove anything because
they have nothing to prove.
Yes.
And so they're like, they don't give a shit.
And they're not throwing nice parties because nice parties that show that I have to prove
that I have money to throw nice parties and I have nothing to prove.
So they'll throw boring parties, much like Gatsby, I'm sure, right?
I'm sure that they had nice champagne or something, but no price tags on it or something,
whatever.
Yeah, he says also that Jeff Bezos for all his billions is only upper-middle-class at best
because he still had to work to get that money.
Yeah, I think at the point, I guess, working.
And I think the reason I'm like, I just don't like necessarily that hard line is because
I don't I don't know what the useful distinction is then saying.
All right.
Yeah.
So we've got old money.
It doesn't matter how much money you have.
That's this own separate group, but is Bezos out there trying to demonstrate his wealth to
people and like doing any of the things that upper-middle-class people do?
No, I don't think he does.
Not really.
So then all of his behaviors also indicate old, you know, or also indicate upper-class.
I do not think his behaviors indicate upper-class.
Well, if he's doing, if he's not, if he's doing the one thing, which is not trying to
prove anything to anybody.
Well, no, he's working.
He's not performatively not trying to prove anything.
Right.
If that makes sense.
His business is successful and that he, you know, keeps it growing.
Oh, right.
Because I guess if you're the real upper-class, you're not even maintaining a business anymore.
You're just riding on the coattails of your ancestors to get you money.
Yeah, living off interest or something.
Okay.
All right.
Well, that's fine.
I guess I just, I find that an almost arbitrarily niche group, but that's fine for
the purpose of, like, I don't think they are.
I think those are large groups.
And I think you don't necessarily need to even not care about anything.
The, oh, what was the guy I just heard about on the Doofcast?
The guy who did the Coraline movie or funded it anyway.
He's a, the son of the Kellogg fortune.
Tim Burton.
No, no, no, no, not Tim Burton.
The guy who financed it.
He's son of the Kellogg's fortune and he like spends all his time and a lot of his money,
just making stop-motion movies that are beautiful and usually almost nobody sees.
And that's just all he cares about.
And, you know, that's interesting.
It's in each interest.
He's doing something.
He's making the world richer, but it's like he's not doing it for the money.
He, he, like the money doesn't even come into a consideration.
He's just kind of living his life.
He's just patronizing the arts.
But the fact that he's working hard doesn't seem to indicate upper class, right?
He should be sitting around doing nothing, but, you know, sniffing expensive wine all day.
That's, that's where I still get like squinty-eyed at it, where I'm like,
people, that was another thing that I guess aristocratic classes are known to do, patronize the arts.
Yeah. And, and he's a hobbyist.
It's like, I, well, I support patronizing the arts.
Like I actually think it'd be awesome if there were, like, if we could shift culture to be a lot more,
like, you know how you can display that you have lots of money,
like make a charitable foundation, like the against malaria foundation or,
or even patronize the arts.
Like, no, I mean, I agree with you.
That would be great.
But also, I think that is like, that is a sign of the middle class because you're trying to
because you're showing your care about something.
Yeah, exactly.
Like I have no idea that this guy even existed.
He just like makes these movies and stuff because he enjoys it.
But that's, that's where I found that distinction kind of arbitrary.
Like he's, he works hard because he cares about stuff.
Well, yeah, but he enjoys it.
That, yeah, but this seems to indicate that he's, he's doing stuff, right?
And he cares about doing a good job.
Yeah.
Like, I think you're allowed to be like a hobbyist.
All right, fair enough.
I mean, I guess the, the book review, the Fusil was not crazy clear on,
like, to me what it actually entailed.
It seems to be explicitly, I have money, I don't have to do anything.
I think it is really hard to define.
That's probably why the book seems so vague.
Can we like read the, can I read the paragraph about flowers?
Yes.
Yeah, that this is actually the one right after he says, Fusil, a lot of things really.
Sometimes it's hard to know whether to take him seriously.
What is one to make of paragraphs like anyone imagining that just any sort of flowers can
be presented in front of a house without status jeopardy would be wrong.
Upper middle class flowers are rhododendrons, tiger lilies, amaryllis, columbine,
clematis, and roses, except for bright red ones.
And I'm, that freaked me out because I was like, that was my grandmother's garden.
Like the, yeah, the rhododendrons and the tiger lilies.
One way to learn which flowers are vulgar is to notice the varieties
favored on Sunday morning TV religious programs like Rex Humberts or Robert Schollers.
There you'll see primarily geraniums, red are lower than pink.
Poinsettias and chrysanthemums.
And you know, instantly without even attending to the quality of the discourse
that you're looking at a high prole setup.
Sure, dude.
You know, instantly.
Other prole flowers include anything to vividly read like red tulips,
D-class, also are flocks, zinnias, salvia, gladioli, begonias, dahlias, fuges, and petunias.
Members of the middle class will sometimes hope to mitigate the vulgarity of bright red flowers
by planting them in a rotting wheelbarrow or a rowboat displayed on the front lawn,
but seldom with success.
And then there's another whole paragraph about desks.
And then another one about when, what time you eat dinner.
And I think this is definitely pointing at something because I've,
like I have family members that fall into these different classes and I like,
as a kid was always super confused by it until like I finally learned about signalling.
And then I was like, oh.
Yeah, see, I have dinner at 9 30.
So I'm upper class.
Does it matter that I'm eating freezer waffles off a paper plate in bed?
Like that doesn't sound very high class, but the time sure does.
I mean, I think it has to be a confluence of various indicators.
It seems like what's going on is that we have these stereotypes about what things
belong to which class, some of which are true and some of which aren't.
And maybe they were true at one time, but just it's all shifted.
And we're still kind of stuck in the 1950s stereotypes because we started portraying
them that way during that time period on TV and whatnot.
And Fusil gets to signal his class by being able to list off at a glance,
30 different kinds of flowers, where I'm like, I think that's a rose.
And like that's about it as far as my plant skills go.
Oh, wait, I know what a spider mum looks like.
I don't know if knowing flowers is upper class.
I think having in this...
Yeah, I mean, old Gardner could know flowers.
But yeah, maybe flowers, but I think there's something about knowing a lot
about something that doesn't matter, that signals upper class.
Or at least signals upper middle.
That's why I don't like...
It seems like the middle encompasses basically everything.
Well, I think the middle and the lower encompass basically everything,
but that's also kind of the point.
But the middle covers everything from Jeff Bezos to basically not a factory worker.
And so I don't so much like Fusil's hard lines,
but I like the general points that come across from this.
But anyway, if you're the kind of person who knows a lot about fonts,
which you might bump into if you do.
I do.
Right.
But you have a professional graphics designer.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And so I mean, professional interests, I think gets rid of the class from it or something,
but fonts or whatever, different hues of paint or like...
I'm feeling really called out here.
I know lots of shit about useless stuff.
Sub varieties of wine.
I'm not calling out.
I'm just saying that I feel like this is a way, if I knew a lot about wine,
if I could write a book on it, all that does is signal to people,
well, one thing that does is signal to people that I have so much free time
that I can spend it accruing all of this useless knowledge.
And that suggests to you that, oh, this person doesn't need to spend all the time working.
If they can know this much about wine,
it's because they don't work so many hours that they can't read books on wine or something.
Right?
Right.
Well, I think also a lot of it is also the attitude.
Like I don't think Jeff Bezos could ever be in that sort of aristocratic elite area,
but like his kids probably could.
If they spent their lives immersed in that culture with their, you know,
they bought their way into those neighborhoods,
and they had those peers, and they went to those schools,
and they didn't have to do work.
Or, you know, if they did, like you can be an inheritor to a large company
and keep running it and still be super upper class
if you don't really get your hands dirty.
Like his kids could be there.
I just don't think he ever would.
Fair enough.
Yeah.
I'm just willing to just leave all that aside because I don't...
I get the distinction that it's making,
but I don't know if it...
Again, I like to hydrase, but it makes me squint.
But not enough to hold the conversation on it anymore.
So I'll just take it for granted for the sake of the discussion.
Yeah.
He does say that the middle class is marked by status and anxiety.
Upper middle class, like people like Jeff Bezos,
have already made it, so they're fine.
They aren't anxious.
But the middle class actually is pretty anxious about their situation.
I like that a lot because that's where it's like,
at some point throughout the book review, it's like after the flowers bit.
And he's like, so that all sounds...
I'm paraphrasing kind of crazy, right?
Why does he get to decide which flowers mean what?
But this is where it starts to get scary.
And he lists off another passage about...
It might have been how he separates...
Super Bowl parties.
Super Bowl parties and a couple of other things.
And it's like, those are all spot on.
And this is a 40-year-old book.
Contempt for clothing with obvious brand names.
Lists of grammatical pet peeves.
I feel called out by the brand names thing.
Because I've always hated brand names on clothes.
I've been like, if I'm going to advertise your product, you should pay me.
Same.
Yeah.
But now I'm like, oh, I guess I'm middle class.
I don't know.
That's what I thought.
Maybe it's just because this is what I've been taught by my class.
I mean, it kind of goes back to our original thoughts and seeming deep where I think it's...
You do kind of have to deconstruct your own preferences.
And that's just where I don't get like, this guy just decided this.
Right?
Well, I think he observed it.
Yeah.
But I mean, I think that there might be good or bad reasons to like,
not want to wear a Nike t-shirt.
Right?
Well, I mean, it could be like, if we're being a little more introspective about it,
we see people that we consider of a lower class and they proudly wear these brands.
You know, they're always flashing their brands.
Yeah.
So your only exposure to it is tackiness.
Yeah.
You're like, I don't want to be like that.
Stout as anxiety.
Yeah.
So I won't wear those symbols.
And, you know, then you're like, oh, shit, I'm a classist piece of shit too.
I think that there's, because I mean, if you read both of the book,
if you read the book review, and I'm sorry if you read the entire book,
you're going to fall into these groups, right?
So I don't feel like feeling called out and like, oh, no, I fit in this pattern.
I don't think you should feel bad about it because he's describing at least at some,
he's at least brushing on like every aspect of human life.
Yeah.
Right?
Yeah.
So you're going to fall into these groups.
Yeah.
And I don't think, I guess I don't know what, if it does mean that, you know,
having a preference about whether or not you wear Adidas brand clothing
with the word Adidas on it, if that makes you classist or not,
but like then just don't care about that, right?
Yeah.
This reminds me of the conversations that people always inevitably have
after learning about signaling and economics for the first time,
where you start seeing it everywhere, and then you see yourself doing it,
and then you go, oh, no, everything's signaling.
Even counter signaling is a type of signaling.
I had a fantastic.
Yeah, just, but that's what humans do.
It's not good or bad.
Like move on.
I had the conversation with a friend a few years ago.
He was talking about, is there any way for me to like tell my friends that I gave
to charity that isn't signaling?
And I'm like, there's no way to do anything that isn't signaling.
Right.
And that's sort of the point.
Like you can't even be healthy without signaling something.
So like signaling isn't bad.
It's just the explanation for a lot of human behavior, right?
I think similar to this.
This is in fact, all of this classism basically is signaling, right?
Yeah.
And so if you think of signaling as just a form of communication.
Yeah.
Then like, maybe you can try to, I don't know, I feel like people try to put moral
judgments on the stuff when they first learned about class signaling and signaling in general.
And it's kind of, it's, that can be, I don't know, that can be an interesting topic for a bit, but.
So everyone belongs in some kind of class.
You just shouldn't be classist to people who aren't in yours.
Yeah.
Kind of like race.
Everyone belongs to some kind of race.
Just don't be a racist.
I think that in general, you can get, you can get right on, you can be correct on basically
all of these by just saying, don't be a dick to people who don't like what you like.
Right?
Right.
Yeah.
If someone likes.
Maybe like the things you like for genuine reasons or like try to analyze that.
I mean, if someone likes something that you don't like, you know,
but they enjoy it, like just let them do it.
You know, if someone likes driving a Lamborghini, even though it's a complete waste of money
and it costs $5,000 to get the brakes changed and all that nonsense.
It's like, if you like it, go nuts.
Sure, you're sitting in traffic at the rest of us and your bottom of your car is scraping
potholes because it's so low to the ground.
But like, that's you, you know, if you're having a good time, go for it.
If you like watching Desperate Housewives, have a great time.
Right?
Yeah.
If you like watching reruns of Marvel movies, don't shit on that person.
Right?
Yeah.
And at the, at the last class, last class, I don't know, the third class is prolies.
It's short for proletariat.
They do wage labor.
High prolies are skilled craft people like plumbers, medium and low are more typically
factory, factory workers.
All right, I'm going to be that person.
Is it pro or proly?
Oh, shit.
I don't know, man.
I was saying prols and I was reading it in my head.
I've heard people pronouncing it prols.
Yeah.
Okay.
I'll go with prols then.
I'm sorry.
Well, you can say it however you want.
I'm not sorry then, but I'll say it the right way.
So there, prols.
Like, is it plebs or plebs?
Yeah, I don't know.
I believe it's plebs, but I've heard it said both ways.
I think they're both, what's like the contractions of a full word.
Yeah.
I don't know if there is an official pronunciation.
Okay.
Well, no, prols is short for proletariat.
Yeah.
I've never heard proletariat.
So, okay.
Anyways, yeah.
They really like mass culture and they watch like transformers and shit.
And he points out that there's these classes, like there's,
there's three different ladders on which you can rise or fall.
Like you can become really rich as a proly and still, you know,
you can be Michael Bay, I guess.
But you're still proly class and you can be a super upper class person
and just be destitute because you decided to go into, I don't know,
17th century art history and you know, everything there's to know about that.
And you live off that little bit of interest that you get every month from your parents,
but it's barely enough to buy your cigarettes.
The dictionary only has the little line over the O on parole.
So, I think that's how you say it.
Yeah.
Okay.
Anyway, what I really liked about this was that it demarcates income from class.
Like social worker makes $40,000 a year, teacher makes $40,000 a year,
but they're upper class because of their interests and like how they,
how they conduct themselves and their attitudes towards things.
How they vote, yeah, what they're, what they're signaling with their purchases.
And likewise, if you're a lumber baron and you make $400,000 a year,
you're still low class, right?
Or like a famous NASCAR driver.
Right.
They could be like, yeah, I think sports stars generally, like you're kind of...
You're in the, usually you're coming from the low class.
That's a weird, that's a weird thing, actually.
But this is where like, I get confused to like, he talks about cruises as like vacations and...
And the people that would respond with like, I would never take such a cookie cutter vacation.
Like, I'm going to go to Bali and ride a...
Raph made out of sea turtles, yeah.
Sure.
Like, I, for me, it's just like, I don't get how, who decided, was it just Russell?
Did he observe that people felt this way about cruises?
I think he observed it.
Because like...
I have observed everything.
I've known...
Upper class go backpacking through Europe.
But I've known upper middle class people who do cruises.
And I don't know any lower, I guess poor people have done cruises.
Not necessarily poor, because that's not the point.
But I know people who fit in these low class, what he calls low class labor work.
And they do more of the upper class vacations.
And so, and I guess it's not supposed to be where like, everyone fits in.
It might be your aspirational class.
Maybe.
I mean...
Can I tell the story real quick?
Yeah.
This is actually kind of illustrative or something.
So my parents both, I don't know if either of them even have GEDs,
but neither of them went to college, but they're both business owners.
And then me and my two sisters all went to college.
And my sister, my, I'm the oldest of the middle sister, for Christmas, she got a teacher,
she got like a job teaching and had like decent money and bought my parents a ticket
for a cruise.
And they refused the gift and made her return it.
Wow.
Because it seemed very much just that like, no, this is like, we're not the kind of people that
go on cruises.
But this is too expensive.
This is too flashy.
We can't accept this.
You're like, they felt super uncomfortable with being given a nicer gift like from their kid,
because that was that like just violated the order of things.
Okay.
I also like how their, their refusal was based on the seams to upper class.
Yeah, they're like, oh, I'd be so out of place.
Like it just, it was complete status anxiety.
Like I can't accept this nice gift because it's going to like, I know my mom would just
be really upset about all the rich people or like the being surrounded by people she
perceives as being higher class.
It was always this like weird thing with both of my parents and especially my mom,
where there's this like genuine hatred of the upper classes and anything associated with them.
Or even like it was weird where they'd make fun of like people with college degrees,
but then also like strongly encouraged me and my sister to go to college.
It seems like they fit neatly into that upper middle class or into that middle class group of
like status anxiety.
Oh yeah.
Where like like the upper class and the lower class don't have that,
but the middle class has like a lot of anxiety about how they're being perceived by people,
right?
Yeah.
So yeah, that makes sense.
I don't know, like as far as I wouldn't buy a cruise just because I don't know if I'd
enjoy being on a boat that long, but if someone got me a ticket for a cruise, I wouldn't turn it down.
Yeah, it sounds fun.
Yeah.
And I always enjoy the opportunity to like interact with different people.
I just figure I could lay by the pool and eat as many shrimp as I could just to see what it does,
right?
That might not be the best idea on a boat.
It's like Jay Feralta when they go on the cruise.
All right.
Yeah.
Okay.
That went over in my head, but now that you've pointed out.
Living in the full on slug life.
We had the best lower middle class boat.
It was like a small Cobia boat that my dad liked.
Was just Cobia?
It's like a brand of boat.
It's a small like kind of shitty boat.
I don't know.
But he stuck a gigantic engine on it.
So it had like a speedboat engine.
It was like a total like Franken boat.
Like we, my dad loved tinkering with stuff.
So we grew up with like Franken bikes and we had Franken cars and then that was our Franken boat.
See, I'm confused because owning a boat seems like upper middle class to me.
But the power boat is like a lower class, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
If you're upper class, you sailboat.
Yeah.
No engine.
And if you're really upper class, you've just, you've got yachts or wood yachts.
Yeah.
Anyway.
And the upper upper upper class just buy a bunch of yachts to crash into each other to see what sound it makes.
I have another story about that.
I should stop telling stories though.
I feel like I can't not tell that because just there was someone I was doing graphics design for
who's this like wealthy guy from Florida who came into Atlantic City and was trying to buy one of the
casino or did buy one of the casinos.
It didn't work out.
But like this dude was just wild.
He brought his yacht because he didn't want to stay in any of the hotels in Atlantic City.
So he like brought his yacht and they're not meant to overwinter, but he didn't know or care.
So it was actually like a guy who hired me for different graphics design jobs.
I remember he was telling me, he told me this story and it's much better because he saw it happen.
It started snowing and this guy, Bill, he was like really anxious whenever it snowed because
he like was scared of being snowed in.
So he'd always like go out to a diner.
And as he said, he went to Atlantic City.
He's sitting there watching the water, I guess, and then starts to see this yacht.
Coming towards land.
This yacht unmoored itself and crashed into the Atlantic City Harbor because yeah,
this guy just had to have his yacht to live in.
But like I'm just imagining sitting there in a diner eating some soup and you see it coming
closer and closer and you're just like, it's not supposed to be there.
It's going to crash into me.
So shall we move on?
Yeah.
Okay, I think the reason this is particularly interesting recently is because of the follow-up
post he made where he said that that classism is kind of a big deal but no one is talking about
it right now and the Republicans could seize on this to actually make something of the party
again rather than the flaming pile of vomit and wreckage that it is currently.
This one is exactly it, but yeah.
Yes, and not far off.
Yeah.
I like it's like, look, I hate you and you hate me.
Yes.
But I would rather you guys develop yourself into like a coherent message that like you can
actually articulate yourselves behind just to make it to that my side has to like actually
level up to compete with it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
If you guys weren't a bunch of bumbling morons, it would like because you guys are a bunch of
bumbling morons and I'm paraphrasing his stuff, it means that my side doesn't have to shape up
whatsoever because all they have to do is not totally suck to do better.
But if you guys didn't-
What are you going to do?
Vote for the yacht guy?
Yeah.
If you guys didn't suck so hard then my side would have to shape up and that looks great.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So he does this by pointing out that Trump did not win on a platform of capitalism or
liberty or anything else.
He won on a platform of being anti-establishment and the establishment that he stood against
was the upper class, people who live in nice apartments in Manhattan or San Francisco or
DC and laugh under their breath at anyone that comes from Acron or Tampa.
Is it Acron?
Akron or Tampa?
And yeah, that is absolutely the impression that I got that Trump was the president of the
lower class, even though he never said anything like that, like everything about him screamed
that the way the media portrayed him was they are pissed off that someone this low class and
crude got into the presidency, right?
Well, what's fun just a picture about how, because then you wonder like, all right,
what about class and money?
Trump's no doubt lying about his exact figures, but let's assume he's got some.
He's the guy who would drink a six pack of Coca-Cola a day and have his limousine driver
take him through McDonald's drive through and then presumably have explosive diarrhea on his
literally gold gilded toilet, right?
And so the money aspect isn't really playing a role there.
Neither is all this flashy shit.
Like he's as low class as it comes, right?
It's not that he has the money.
It's that he still feels the need to signal that he has the money.
And you can't signal louder than a golden toilet.
And when you're shitting up McDonald's and Coca-Cola, it's just, it emphasizes that point,
right?
Or a well done steak with ketchup on it.
Like the guy, and I only know a couple of like his eating habits.
Well, I know the McDonald's one because when the basketball team came during the furlough.
We've got the best eaters and say, oh my God, I forgot how that guy talked.
I love I haven't heard a fucking thing.
You know, having that guy off Twitter has made the world a better place.
But anyway, yeah, the class aspect of it isn't like how many Big Macs can I buy?
It's the fact that he's eating Big Macs.
And so it's the establishment and the the classism that he was winning that he won his campaign on
his platform wasn't like against the rich because he had a bunch of rich friends.
His cabinet was largely wealthy people.
He's technically rich, if you believe all the signaling he does, yeah.
And if you're looking at his properties, he's probably have enough.
He'd probably have more money than all of us put together.
Right, right.
So, you know, there's all that.
But it was the so, so the class that he's articulating against and I might be jumping
ahead here is the elites.
Yes, those who think they're better than you.
Yes, exactly.
Now granted, those who call all the other states the flyover states.
Yeah.
And like I, you know, I eat Thai food and I think they'd gain 200 pounds if they stepped in a
McDonald's and won't even speak the name Chick-fil-A and go to Ivy League College.
There's a long list.
I love being in the middle on this.
You know, like my wife went to an Ivy League college.
She doesn't brag about it, but I do.
And yet we had Chick-fil-A like last weekend, right?
So I, you know, we're just fuck all the norms.
We'll just zigzag as much as we want, right?
Again, I'll eat dinner late like a rich person, but I'll have, I have waffles for dinner on
Thursday night, right?
So.
So I don't know if this is worth bringing up, but having met your wife, she very much
gives off an upper class vibe.
Because she's sophisticated.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
Well, that's cool.
I mean, yeah, I guess that makes sense.
But again, she's a social worker, right?
So it's not about the money.
Right, right.
It's just the.
It's the culture attitude.
Yeah, the attitude and the culture, I guess.
Yeah.
And I don't know exactly how she does it, but like you can just tell.
You're like, huh, okay, that, that person's classy.
It's because normal plebs like us aren't that beautiful.
That must be it.
It's at least part of it.
Yeah.
Your wife is very conventionally attractive, but she also is, there's like mannerisms that
clearly are just part of like how she grew up.
And like, I would feel weird breaking it down since she's not here to like defend herself.
And you know, there's, there's very attractive lower class.
Class people too.
So like.
Oh yeah.
I'm being somewhat tongue in cheek.
Like you said, there's certainly a mix.
Like you still eat at Chick-fil-A.
You guys went to the same school together.
So I think that's.
Nothing else.
She wasn't in a European boarding school.
Yeah.
I mean, she went to, she went to public school.
It was just like Colorado State University didn't accept her for her master's program.
And for some reason, Columbia did.
So well, honestly, the real reason is probably because CSU wanted to have out of state people
because they get to charge them three X, right?
So anyway.
Yeah. What do, what do we think about this, uh, modest proposal?
Well, I think that he's right about Trump ran on classism.
Like the people who love him.
But he never used the word.
No, he never used the word, but you could tell just you don't need to use the word to tell,
to your actions speak much louder than any words do.
Whatever he said was immaterial as was proven by him many, many times.
And like the people who support him, even though lots of times they're hurt by any
and any of his policies, individual policies that you care to mention,
it doesn't matter because he's from their class and he's the only person from their
class that that's in the political game of, of at least at any really important level.
Everyone else for the most part is upper class people.
Maybe there's a few upper middle that have made it in like, uh, AOC, but there's no,
of no one in the lower class, the proly class or pro class representing them.
And he does.
And that's fucking nice to see.
And you're willing to vote for like one douchebag who's kind of an idiot,
as long as like he's the one person representing your entire class out there,
finally sticking it to those rich snobby assholes that think that you're a bunch of hicks with,
you know, missing teeth that aren't good for anything except working in the coal mines.
Yeah, it definitely helps resolve the, like what was a confusion five years ago about like,
you know, the NASCAR enjoying drive through, um, you know, again, you just check the box
down the list of what you call low class and it's like, I thought you guys hated rich people
and yet you guys are big fan of Donald Trump.
And it's like, well, it's not about the rich part.
It's that wealth seems to correlate with upper class, but this guy's, you know,
he does all the same, you know, the same shit I like, right?
You were about to say degrading, weren't you?
Yeah, but I don't want to, like, again, I was mainly thinking of the, um, uh,
like the McDonald's diarrhea, right?
So, um, that sort of stuff.
Can you stop putting that mental image in my head, please?
All right, last time.
Okay, that was it.
Okay, um, do either of you remember the title of or some way like some Google keywords for
another essay that I think was Scott Alexander where he suggested that we have two different
elections, one where you vote on the policies and one where you're voting on the status stuff,
because I feel like that kind of correlates to this where.
Yeah, that rings a bell.
Okay, here it is.
It's the 21st century having principles is out of style.
Politics is motivated by tribal hatred.
You tell your people that the other side hates them and wants to kill them,
they need to fight back.
The Democrats are great at this.
Cis white men hate you.
They deny your right to exist.
Their cruelty is the point.
Resist or be destroyed.
Your Republicans have been caught flat footed.
You can't openly defend cis white men.
That would be transphobic, racist, sexist.
And you can't openly attack trans black women.
That would be super transphobic, racist, sexist.
Plus it wouldn't work.
And the sort of bitterness in the leg having principles is out of style.
Politics is motivated by tribal hatred.
It just really echoes that essay that I wish I could remember the name of.
I'm probably going to remember it as I'm driving away.
Happens every time we record this podcast.
I'm like, ah, it was that big.
No, you could always, um, always text us about it later.
People who listen to the show will know it immediately.
Correct, everybody.
I do like that about our community.
Yeah, yeah.
So yeah, I think that is, you know, absolutely why Trump won
and why, um, the media hated him
and couldn't understand how he could possibly get in.
And I mean, I, I do think it's a problem that there's an entire class
of the American populace that is just ignored by the political apparatus.
Not even ignored, but outright like shamed and mocked.
Yeah.
And.
Or at least pitied.
Like at best, maybe pity.
I feel like there's not very much pity.
Well, it's like, oh, those poor, you know, factory workers, you know,
or those, those people have to work in fast food restaurants.
They, you know, oh, must, must suck to be them.
I feel so bad.
And like, I do think that there's some, some level of pity, right?
Probably.
I've definitely run into people, I guess like now we're starting to divide Democrats
or Republicans like, or liberals rather, that just cannot spare a shred of sympathy
for someone who they know belongs to the, you know, the group of racist, transphobic,
warmongering, whatever, whatever, like education, Hayton, gun, Toten.
There was a really fun, like eight minute episode of Sam Harris's podcast,
I think the day before the 2020 election.
And it was like his final, like, you know, you talked about stupid epiphanies earlier or something.
It was kind of his on that with Trump, where it's like, he's like, I finally get it.
And it was, like I said, less than 10 minutes long, but he's just listing off.
And he's like, you know, consider the message that you get from your friends on the left
about like how you suck.
Every problem for minorities is your problem, is your fault personally.
You know, you're not good enough because you're not woke enough.
Your, your, your failure to master all the pronouns proves that you're a piece of
shit and, or your failure to, you know, master them immediately proves that you're a piece of
shit. It's like all of this, whatever, not merely like kicking, kicking yourself,
but like the rest of your group kicking you down for not being good enough.
And everyone gets points forever.
Every kick they get in, maybe kick yourself, you get extra points.
And I'm paraphrasing.
Watch me checking my privilege.
Exactly.
Because you compare that to Donald Trump, who's like the McDonald Jesus, right?
You know, you're, there's no comparison.
You know, you're never told you're not good enough.
Like every fault that, every quote fault that you have is just fully accepted and that's okay.
And it's like, I think that's partly part of the message that makes this divide, right?
That's definitely like a left, right thing and not so much of a class thing.
But the class thing correlates strongly with that, right?
Scott Alexander says whenever an upper class institution tried to make him admit that they
were the experts and he should bow to them, he spat in their faces instead,
which feels really gratifying after being subjected to what you were just talking about.
Yeah, it's really concerning though, I think, because basically it was like he won on a platform
of hate or disdain for dismissal of like wanting to overthrow like these elites.
But as, you know, Scott also pointed out, he was like,
like spitting in the faces of pandemic, I was extradistoring a pandemic.
That wasn't a costless signaling thing.
Well, that brings us to Scott's modest proposal.
I was going to say really quick though, I don't know if it was fully a platform of hate,
it was just a platform of you don't suck.
But that wasn't what the, or like the things that people were like cheering for
and voting for him for were his like making the other side really mad.
Yeah, there was definitely that too.
And talking shit about them.
That's a Democrats one too, right?
Yeah, no, I'm not saying this is literally anyone but Trump, right?
Well, the thing is, when you've been feeling that way for a decade or more, like,
it was a powerful message of people that felt totally disenfranchised,
somebody could like make it to the highest office in the US and then talk shit about,
I don't know, gays in the military.
What was it that the riot is the language of the disenfranchised or whatever?
It fortunately, they didn't have to write, they just had it to vote for Trump and he would have
the... They did riot eventually.
Yeah, well, yeah.
And then, you know, his election would be basically a four-year riot that fucks the rest of the country.
Yeah, it was a little...
It was pretty fucked up.
Don't get wrong, there's plenty of hate there, but I'm just thinking like,
you know, the couple of Trump voters I know, they're not particularly hateful people.
I think that, and they're always just gonna vote,
they're gonna check the red box no matter what, apparently.
But I think that it's, for many, it wasn't just like,
oh, finally, someone else who hates black people as much as I do.
Go ahead and quote mine that.
Like, it was, oh good, here's a guy who's not telling me that I suck.
You know, if it's, I don't know, because the professional politicians like Biden and Bernie,
they do a pretty good job of not shitting on you personally.
Yeah.
But, you know, like, I don't know, maybe AOC, but even she's more just like fueling hatred.
It's not so much about how you suck and you're not woke enough.
But that's like the message you get from your friends if you hang out in left circles like I do, right?
I think it was just finally somebody who's like,
no, actually, you're good and I got your back, even though I don't represent
anything that you care about personally, but I'm not going to put you down.
Right.
I'm trying to, that's like, I'm like charitable.
It's probably both of those things going on.
Totally.
I'm sure that there's probably two different camps also of like,
people that voted for Trump because he represented them in some way and people that
voted for him because they had the same enemies.
100%.
Yeah.
I'm really trying to cut my most positive spin on how, because I mean, again, this is just the
thing that is important to keep in mind that like, it's not true that 40% of Americans are just
savage, bigoted monsters, right?
No doubt every savage, bigoted monster voted for Trump, but not every Trump voter could have,
it was that because frankly, the country is way too well like, our society is too strong for it
to be the case that literally four in 10 of us are raving psychopaths.
I'm willing to bet a lot of savage, bigoted monsters voted against Trump too.
Probably.
Yeah.
Now I know a lot of people that voted for Trump.
When I think of the other angle.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
Man, I think this might have been on Radiolab or something, but where they were looking at
trends about who voted for Trump and one of the confusing ones was first or like second generation
immigrant business owners and talking to them, it was clear that they first of all thought that
Trump was going to help business and then secondly had this like, yeah, I guess it was the
like sort of class familiarity thing.
And I think the really fucked up thing is that the only person that these people could turn
to was fucking Trump, right?
Like there was no one else, this was what they were stuck with.
That's because we're voting on policies.
I guess that's the thing that I'm like bitter about with this, but anyway, like.
So yeah, so his modest proposal is that we can actually, the Republicans can pivot to actually
represent these people and instead of being, you know, the flaming wreckage of a party they
currently are, they can start focusing on that and becoming the party of the working class
and put all their messaging on fighting classism.
Whenever anyone talks about the white working class, you can always say the white working class.
And yeah, and focus, focus on that instead and that he's talks, you know, this could obviously
it would appeal to the people who are factory workers and working class already, it would appeal
to blacks and Hispanics because they're mostly working class and they hate the elites as much
as anyone else.
He was talking about a bunch of people who could it could appeal to it could appeal to
Republicans weren't it for capitalism, because you'd argue that capitalism is a system that
lets people succeed regardless of their class could be appeal to poor people who just want
jobs, passing out how DC Democrats passed a law saying all child care workers must have
college degrees and how this is just a blatant attempt to take away jobs from working class
people and give them the upper class people instead.
And you can even position yourself as the power of meritocracy.
And because meritocracy is the opposite of class favoritism.
But I like about this whole like when you're reading this, I don't know about anyone else,
but like I'm getting this sense of apprehension because like this is like a damn compelling
message and I don't want the enemy to be that powerful.
And yet that's the point.
Yes.
And it's like if we if we get an articulate powerful enemy, then the then the other side,
our side has to up the level of their game.
Right.
There's a lot of shit I don't like about Democrats that like, I think that I mean, I'm like,
kind of excited about this.
I don't know if it's going to, you know, here's a really good strategy.
Have it for free.
Please take it.
But it's coming from a like San Francisco Jewish intellectual doctors.
Like I'm I'm worried about it because like you said, it's a compelling strategy and it could
get them winning a lot.
And I hate Republican social issues.
I I'm on, you know, I think abortion is the most important right that the modern society
can have.
And they're rabidly against that.
Plus, you know, a lot of other things that I clash with them on.
But on the other hand, maybe if they were to adopt this working class thing,
they would have to modify some of their positions in order to go down to the platform that he
proposes.
Yeah, the platform is really interesting.
Yeah, I had a comment just before platform that I wonder if platform even matters.
Right.
Like nobody voted for Joe Biden because they liked his take on whatever issue, right?
Right.
They voted on him because he wasn't Trump.
Right.
And I think the people who voted for Trump didn't they're like, oh, he he's
pro this or anti that.
They're just like, oh, he's he's he's on our side.
Right.
So I think it's less about like what individual candidates like policy proposals are or
stances.
It's more just like how well are they communicating their allegiance to me?
Well, that's the distinction between like signaling voting and policies voting.
Right.
I really liked Scott's other.
I think it's the other proposal that we just have two separate elections.
Oh, and the thing is you get one vote, but you only get to vote in one or the other.
Yeah.
And one or the other.
So you have to pick whether do you remember this?
It's vaguely ringing a bell, but I remember thinking it would be really great because
one of the things he proposed was that like so the policy, whoever wins the policy election
would get to like do the boring stuff, like worry about budgets and laws.
And then the status side would get to decide what national anthem we get to play and what
the official dress of inauguration day was like, like everyone has to wear a uniform
and like sing a song and they get to pick which one it is.
Yeah, I can I can see where that I like that.
I think that is fun.
But I I guess my last thought was about the what was it?
What was I just saying about classism and signaling and policies?
Oh, right.
So that I guess that's what I was going to say was that like, you know, there are there are
Democrat policies that I'm not like the biggest champion of.
But the most important ones are like to me, things like environmental sustainability,
global warming, abortions on the list, like those.
And it doesn't make me a single issue voter necessarily, but it makes me a plural issue
voter really like one sides pro science and education and reason the other one's not.
And like that's a somewhat harsh distinction, but it's basically comes down to that.
Right.
Like if you're if you're going to be a global warming nihilist, you have to be an anti science
person. Right.
And that means that means that means that seeps into everything else.
Yeah.
But germs aren't real.
Covid's you know, Covid's fake.
And you know, I'm being untratable there.
But Covid's not real.
It's fake and also China made it.
Yeah.
I mean, I think the left has its share of things that it exaggerates scientifically as
well or denies or whatever.
Organic foods.
Yeah.
GMOs are a fun, fun example.
Chemicals.
Vaccines are kind of the one, at least as of like 15 years ago.
I'm not sure where now vaccines are definitely a political issue where the left is all for
them.
But five years ago, it was one of those things that kind of split evenly among the parties.
You got like, oh, the purest non chemical liberal people and then the anti science.
Yeah, it causes autism.
Well, I mean, even on the climate change side, like what's her name?
Greta from Norway.
Bloomberg.
Okay.
Yeah.
The 16 year old girl who was literally like, she was very impassioned and everyone loved
her and cheered her, but she literally thought the world was going to end in her lifetime,
which I don't, I don't know how you can, in good conscience, raise a child to think that.
That's what I was taught.
And I started college as an environmental science major and I dropped the major because
the, yeah.
And no one corrected her.
They cheered her on.
Yeah.
At least everyone that I saw.
And like no one said, look, the world won't literally end.
It'll make things hard for a lot of people and it'll especially fuck the poor countries,
but the human race is going to keep going.
And, and I mean, sometimes you see some of the, the estimations on how much it's going
to cost to change things.
And like the left doesn't even want to talk about that.
Like here we can change some of these things and talk about how we're going to change other
things and maybe we can look at geoengineering or something.
And instead they're just like, no, cut carbon, cut carbon, cut carbon.
And it doesn't matter who it emissarates and how badly the world's poor are going to be
affected by this because they're the ones that are needing to boost their carbon output
in order to have better lives.
And it's just, just this whole idea that all you have to do, that all you should do
is cut carbon no matter how much it hurts people or the human race will go extinct
is a thing that I see pushed sometimes.
And yeah, it's definitely.
And it's wrong.
And that drives people away.
It's a reduction to the absurd for sure.
And it's like, because the, the non bumper sticker version of it, or because the truth
of the, of the issue is too long to put on a bumper sticker.
Yeah.
It, it becomes like, well, the, the simple succinct message is what gets pushed out there.
I think.
I think especially like the sort of anti corporate message to like pig oil and,
you know, the big agriculture are generating all the carbon.
It's their fault.
We need to performatively say that we don't agree with them while eating our fast food
sandwich, like driving our car.
While eating our organic food that takes three times the amount of energy and puts the grill.
I think it's like, you know, yes, the, the messaging and often the, the practice of solving
it is misguided, but they're at least acknowledging a real problem that they're trying to address.
Right. You can't just ignore it.
And so that's going to be fucking even worse.
Right. So that, that's where I'm at.
Almost certainly will be.
Yeah.
I mean, granted, there, there would be possible to try and fuck it up worse than it just happens
to work out.
But I don't think that's, I don't think that the push to cut carbon is going, is that way.
Right.
Right.
Um, at least the lift acknowledges that it exists.
Yeah.
I don't know.
The ride is starting to.
Yeah.
They're probably not buying beachfront property in Florida.
Yeah.
All right.
I didn't mean to derail us too hard there.
I guess all I'm trying to do is like, is it's probably that it's possible to be
on either side and not be an insane evil person.
Yeah.
Right.
And I do think ultimately it probably will be good to have a strong opposition party
because otherwise you can just do whatever and shit the bed and it doesn't matter.
Yeah.
I've, I've heard, I don't know.
I don't remember where I heard this.
It was probably on some HBO series or something where some politician was pushing something
and someone said, but this is going to negatively affect black neighborhoods.
And he said, what are they going to do vote for the Republicans?
Where was this?
I don't remember.
I think it could have been the wire or something.
Oh, okay.
So not real.
Well, that's the kind of thing that this would prevent.
Exactly.
Because if people have an alternative option, then you actually have to take care to address
your constituent's issue.
Or if somebody is pointing at things that you're doing badly, then you have to do better.
Yeah.
I could even see, I mean, like I might vote for a Republican if they like advocated some
of the things on this platform.
Yeah.
So this is an interesting platform.
And I have comments about it afterwards, but shall we go into some of it?
I don't know if both sides could have like stuff that I agree with.
And there's one politician who's like, they're running on the platform of I'm going to do
this thing, even if they brought a bunch of other Republican shit that I don't like in.
I just think it'd be fun if there was, if it was hard to pick between two candidates,
imagine sitting there actually thinking and like, I got to do some more homework.
Yeah.
You'd have to weigh the pros and cons of this policy package versus this one.
And I could see some cases where it might outweigh, where the benefits might outweigh
the non-benefits.
God damn it.
It's like about the platform.
Okay.
But I think to almost every listener and every American, you're like, you're pretty sure,
you know, which side you're going to vote for, because you basically know what you're getting
or you've accepted that package, right?
If it was a hard choice, I think that's what makes this modest proposal so interesting,
is like, I could see myself deliberating if one side was particularly arguing the platform
we're about to get into, right?
Yeah, people would actually, it would make people more like politically active.
If it was like, oh, both sides have good points.
Now I actually have to think about it.
Yeah.
Most people don't even like, I don't know, they don't even research their candidates
or what their platforms are.
They kind of just like go to the poll and be like, blue, blue, blue, blue, blue, blue, blue.
So first point in the general rebrand yourself as against classism is declare a war on college,
because college is basically there to serve the upper class.
Make it illegal to require bullshit degrees for any sort of promotion, which happens a lot of
places where they don't even care what degree you have, you just have to have some kind of college
degree.
Or how long you've been doing the job.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Did you read this one, this bullet point here that said, just use the words class and classism,
say, hey, we Republicans want to be the party of the working class.
We're concerned about the rising power of the upper class and we are dedicated to stamping
out classism.
Yeah.
I don't know if you said that yet or not.
Oh, I don't think I said it.
But that's the, that's like the setup for this.
The rebrand.
Yeah.
And this is how they're going to do it.
Yeah.
How to stamp out classism, which is as bad as racism, if not worse.
And anyone who isn't a Republican is, you know, trying to oppress your class or something.
Yeah.
It gives, it lets you have that same actual like superiority looked on your nose that the right,
or that the right has, or the left has towards the right right now.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That I'm a racist.
Yeah.
Not really.
You're a classist.
Exactly.
Those would be fun bickering wars to watch on Reddit, right?
Right.
Yeah.
Sorry, you're still talking.
Well, no, I was just going to talk more about the war on college and why.
Yeah, that's what I was going to mention that specifically says ban degree discrimination.
Or if you can't make it illegal, just make all government offices and companies
that do business with the government ban degree discrimination.
Can't require someone have a degree if they've shown that they can do the work,
which, God, I don't even remember who this was that I was talking to.
But there was someone I was talking to not too long ago who had,
Jace, it was you, in fact, wasn't it?
I don't know.
You haven't said what the thing is.
It was a library position.
And when you wanted to get hired on, the guy, your boss said, you already do everything,
probably better than someone we brought in new would do it.
But you don't have a degree, so we can't hire you.
Yeah, I would need a library masters to be a librarian with a capital L.
Even though you were already doing all the work.
And well, actually, my boss was like, well, if you want to get a promotion,
you could, I don't know, I was considering it.
And she's like, it would be really easy for you because you already know everything in the degree.
So you could just breeze right through it.
And I was like, but I'd be out 20K.
I just have to bribe someone $20,000 to continue doing what I'm already doing.
And do a lot of writing essays about and working on stuff that I already know, which like...
Waste your life.
Not to mention staying in that same job without prospect of promotion for like the two years
it takes to get a master's degree.
Yeah.
I mean, I think you could do like an advanced standing program that get you through in a year.
But it's like, so what you're basically telling me, just hang out,
keep getting paid on paid at this job title,
just like get the piece of paper that says you're allowed to give me a better job.
See, this is compelling.
Yes, it is.
Yeah.
There's and trade schools are often frowned upon for whatever reason,
even though they teach you how to do the fucking job as, you know...
I went to a trade school instead.
Yeah.
Two thirds of us are in bootcamps right now, right?
Or have been through bootcamps anyway.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And because you finished one, you're in one right now.
And yet there's still places that are like, oh, a programming bootcamp.
I need to see a degree.
Yeah.
I think those places are here with you.
But they do exist.
Yes, they do.
Clinical research was interesting, though, because they did the...
I did that bootcamp for clinical research.
And nobody, like none of the companies who hire researchers are familiar with it.
My resume and like interviews had to include a lot of explaining what the course is and
like showing that they are actually accredited and that I do actually like know all the like
federal, you know, codes and stuff.
But you were able to demonstrate that.
I knew them at one point.
That was a struggle getting like coding bootcamps off the ground too.
Yeah.
But it's easier to walk in and demonstrate that you can, you know, talk the talk and walk the
walk in an interview than maybe for clinical research.
You might not...
I'm not sure how you demonstrate your knowledge in that industry.
Like an...
No, you can.
There was like tests where you had to memorize like 500 acronyms and...
Yeah.
No, like I had to be able to like explain the, you know, declaration of Helsinki and...
But you didn't have to, I don't know, give an explanation of how old was...
I forget the guy who discovered penicillin.
Well, whoever it was, the idea that you didn't have to recite the pointless trivia you would
have learned in school.
Yeah.
No, it was like stuff that you need to know in order to do the job.
Exactly.
I do remember Scott Alexander specifically complaining that he needed any kind of undergraduate
degree before he could go in for a medical degree.
And so he got one in philosophy and his, the medical teacher when they saw that were like,
oh good, we're going to have someone to class this place up.
It's like, I spent four years and $60,000 so I could class a place up before I learned
how to actually be a doctor.
Motherfuckers.
Yeah, that's fun.
See, this seems to indicate that class aspect that I was talking about though, where...
He literally used the word class.
Oh yeah.
Well, that too, that's perfect.
But I was thinking like, if you know pointless trivia, it shows that you have time to learn
pointless trivia, right?
So if I can tell you how old Charles Darwin was when he, whatever, had his first kid or
something, does that make me a better biologist?
No, but if you want to be a evolutionary biologist and you go through the school program,
I don't know if you'll learn that particular piece of random trivia, but my point's illustrated,
right?
Yeah.
So yeah, I think being as this community is already kind of down on college as a wasteful
signaling game that steals years of people's lives for not much benefit.
I think we're kind of already on this boat.
That's part of what made this so like, this delightfully dangerous idea here of the proposal.
It's like, oh yeah, check, I'm already on board with that.
Oh shit, check all of these boxes, man, what are you doing?
Yeah.
So the second box is the war on experts, which first of all, I'm not sure I like the sound
of that because I kind of like the experts when they tell me that, you know, things about
coronavirus.
But then I remember that the experts also told me that masks don't work because I guess
they wanted to preserve the masks for the emergency workers and decided lying to the
public is the best way to do that.
And for the first three months after vaccines came out, they're like, nope, keep social distancing,
keep quarantining, keep wearing masks.
No, you still can't see your family.
Like basically the vaccine doesn't do anything, right?
That was the message for the first three or four months, right?
And it's just like, in fact, I think it was in the last couple of weeks where it was like,
nope, you don't have to quarantine if you travel anymore if you're vaccineed.
And it's like, thank you, I fucking knew that.
But you know, why do I need your, so it's annoying.
And that's part of what makes this fun is like, these are the same noises that people on the
wrong set of arguments make, right?
It's like, I already know better than you on this.
And it's like, most of the time you don't for any given expert on anything that they're
talking about, right?
Yeah.
So like this generic anti-expert rhetoric is terrible for the most part.
Right.
But it's, but there are so many times where you can say,
What about this situation with the expert literally fucked the public for their own
gain?
And you're like, well,
even like just taking COVID again, like if you, if you mention that it's, you know,
the average survival rate for people in our demographics is like 99.995% or something.
Like that sounds like a anti-corona believer person would say, right?
Right, right.
Like I'll almost certainly not die if I get COVID.
And that's just, that's a fact.
I'm a basically healthy 30 something year old, right?
So like my odds are pretty good.
But, but to acknowledge that out loud makes it sound like I'm shouting from the red tribe,
right?
And like, I just looked this up yesterday.
I think Colorado had 6128 deaths recorded for COVID.
And so granted how many of those were, I don't know, you know, Cuomoed away into like,
not actually COVID, but where COVID deaths, right?
Let's say if you double it, right?
There were still half a million cases ballpark in Colorado.
So, you know, we got something like 10,000 deaths for half a million cases.
So the survival rate was pretty good.
Granted, way scarier than a flu.
But like the, and also part of the good survival rate was the fact that we didn't overwhelm the
hospitals.
Right.
Colorado did a good job.
And like that's the thing is Colorado had 6,100 something deaths.
The United States had a half a million, right?
So we just, our state happened to do a pretty good job.
And that's however you, however the numbers were, where came to be 6128 exactly.
Again, double, triple it, it's still pretty good.
Doesn't, it's not a drop in the water really for the half million dead, right?
So the solution that he proposes is prediction markets.
Yes.
This is the thing where like, I wasn't on board with this until he said,
the solution is prediction markets.
And then you're like, oh, what's that prediction markets?
Oh, that's not the thing that our group has been pushing for the last decade.
So yes, about the prediction markets.
Yeah, repeal all bans on them, give tax breaks for participating in them.
Then you'll get a decentralized populist, credential free market based alternative to
expertise.
When the prediction markets outperform, 75% of experts fire them and say,
this proves you're right all along that government sponsored entities were just
a jobs program for the upper class.
The remaining 25% of experts are cool.
And you'll definitely listen to them very closely for whatever they have to say.
So yeah, kind of acknowledging that this one's a bit of a stretch, but you can sell it.
I don't think it would be bought, but I mean, I think it's a damn good idea.
And if you're dealing with a Republican party, which for the past five years
has been saying experts are awful and telling everybody that, you know,
you can't trust experts.
And this is part of their branding now.
They can't just drop it.
This is Scott's way of like saving that.
Like you don't have to lose face and turn, you know, turn around on this.
You can continue to say you can't trust experts and still be that party.
But look, we can fucking do prediction markets.
It kind of feels to me like Scott saw a way to hijack the Republican party
into supporting something we all actually want and think would make the world much better.
And I admired that of him.
He's that's one of the things that makes him a genius.
He's a very like creative thinker, able to like articulate these.
This is an original idea that, right?
I wish he was in politics, but I wouldn't want to like impose politics on him.
So when we said I'm a worst enemy, but he saw that Republicans have this problem
that they are now anti-expert and he has a solution, which happens to really,
you know, dovetail very well with his own goals.
And part of the solution is like, you guys can be the experts, you know,
we'll deregulate prediction markets and we'll tax incentivize them.
So you guys now are incentivized to learn what you can and, you know, make money on this.
And so yes, we still have experts, but it's you, the public, right?
The working class, you guys can be the experts on this when you make the right predictions.
Like it's a very like empowering message.
And the idea, you know, what is it?
Predict it.io or whatever or predict.it.
It's like a $500 maximum that you're allowed to put any in the prediction market.
If it was $500 million that you're allowed to put in there,
people could be making some serious fucking money on this.
And even if you're only, you know, over an average year making 1%,
like 1% of 500 to use staff debt, 1% on 500,000 won't be a comfortable living,
but it's a pretty good living.
Yeah.
Yeah, it's 5,000 a year.
That's not a lot.
I thought it was 50,000.
Oh yeah.
I think it's more of the sort of branding than like, it's not necessarily that everybody who's
going to vote for this wants to be the expert themselves, but like the fact that I think
Republicans, whether they're super rich or super poor, do just like all tend to be pro-money though,
or you know, pro-capitalism.
So the association with money and the idea that the common folk could contribute.
Yeah, or rather than like, yeah, the experts aren't these people who are coming from these
like Ivy League colleges.
And like he says, sneaking in democratic ideas that are pro-democrat bias into their judgments.
Yeah.
I don't know if a real Republican would actually like buy this though.
I doubt they would, but it's an elegant solution to this We Hate Experts problem.
Well, the point is that there's no other solution to where it's sort of like, well,
what's the alternative?
So like, maybe this doesn't exactly dovetail with the Republican ethos, but it's at least
something that they could like, pretend to support.
Yeah, the alternative is like, there's two.
There's what they're doing now, which is say expertise is a myth and those guys don't know
what they're talking about.
Or it's flip-flop and say, you know what, never mind, let's start touching the experts.
This way it's like, no, you guys get to keep the experts in check.
And just the fact that it's a like, it empowers the populace in a way.
I think that's the the attractive part of it.
Speaking of empowering the populace and you guys are the experts.
Number three is the war on upper class media.
Why am I the expert on that?
Well, I'm not saying you are the expert.
You were saying that the you guys, as in the general populace are the experts.
Oh, yeah, you can take over for the upper class who are trying to
lead you around by the nose.
He points out that 67% of US families watch the Super Bowl.
What percent of New York Times editors and reporters do?
How come 96% of political donations from journalists go to Democrats?
Insist, there is no reason any of this could be true except systemic classism.
And any other explanation is offensive.
And it's upper class is upper class media's moral duty to do something about this immediately,
which I think is fucking beautiful because it's basically a mirror of the thing where,
you know, they say, why is it that 14% of the population is black, but only 4% of CEOs are black,
you know, this is could only be due to systemic racism.
And you must do everything you can to fix this right now,
which I'm not saying that's a wrong argument or anything.
But the fact that he can just completely flip it around like that
and say like, well, 90 per six of political donations from media go to the Democrats,
that could only be due to systemic classism, which is just as bad as systemic racism.
And you got to fix that now.
They're paying the government to reinforce their narrative for their ends.
You guys need to stop them.
Yeah.
Yeah, I mean, I guess that one's less clear what it would look like.
Does it just mean like buy a subscription to Breitbart's sub-stack page?
Yeah, it's basically things like, you know, read blogs, go on sub-stack,
watch YouTube, don't don't watch the mainstream media channels anymore.
But there already is like Fox News.
There is Fox News.
That's the problem.
This one, I don't, I haven't, I read this in February when it came out.
I didn't get a chance to rereading the last part here.
Does he or does he expand on this point that much?
Anti-censorship is a big part of it.
Okay, yeah, I guess I can see that too.
Insist that working class people have the right to communicate with each other
without interference from upper class gatekeepers.
It's a really nice way of saying you should be allowed to say the N word on TV.
Oh, shit.
I mean, or let's put it in a more defensible position,
because this ties into bullet point four about wokeness.
But it's like, this says that you should be allowed to read Huck Finn in college, right?
You should be allowed to read it out loud in front of a class if you're pulling out an important
passage and you shouldn't lose your job for reading Huck Finn or To Kill a Mockingbird
or these other important books, right?
Yeah.
So the, I guess, yeah, I do, like you said, you pulled out that bit where it's like,
yep, let's just flip this whole thing on its head.
So I'm not sure how I feel about that one in general, because again,
I'm not sure about the splintering of the media.
But I mean, then he points to Substack and, you know, podcasts and blogs and I'm like,
I'm down with all those things and participate in some of them.
But I feel like everybody already does that, right?
Anyone who wants to listen to podcasts can.
I guess, yeah, I don't know how you are.
As far as right wing news.
Yeah, but this isn't actually solving that problem.
It sounds like it's trying to get anti censorship.
Yes, yeah.
There would be like a thing where you cannot be kicked off Patreon if Patreon has issues
with what you were saying, which I know has happened to few well-known people.
I don't remember who at this point, but it was one really famous case that cost Sam Harris to
leave Patreon because he was like, well, I guess if I say the wrong thing, I'll get kicked off too.
So let me take care of that right now.
It might have been Jordan Peterson or maybe it was Milo Yiannopoulos or one of those
professional trolls.
I'm not really sure.
But yeah, it's funny because that's my inner status, I guess.
I like the idea that if I get on Patreon and I've got a podcast and I'm whatever,
not merely throwing around the n-word, but advocating for violence against these communities
or something, it's like, yeah, you know what?
Patreon is totally justified in kicking me off their platform.
It's their house.
Again, that's me and that's how I feel.
And I realize that there are problems with, I think you gave it to me in the most articulate way,
which in the most succinct way that drove the point home.
It's like, imagine if the other side controlled the platforms instead of our side.
Right.
That would actually be illegal.
Well, so then it's like, oh yeah, if it was Fox News and tried to do everything and not
the New York Times just to make it super simple, then what all my opinions on Patreon have to
subscribe to Fox News narrative?
No, we should just protect every narrative.
All right, fine.
I get where that's coming from and yet I still find, I need to settle this.
Internally?
Internally, not word vomiting through the whole thing, but it is an interesting way to drive
that point home.
It's like, Steven, I'm saying this to myself, you're probably only okay with this because
your side controls the right side of the narrative, right?
Right.
Like, if it happens to be that the dark side controlled the internet, then you might feel
a little differently and I probably would.
If it was Joe McCarthy and this was the 1950s, you would be like, you know, I shouldn't get
kicked off of the only way I can make a living because you think that I'm a communist because
I said certain things about how workers should have rights.
Yeah.
Or like me being trans means that I would be censored just for that fact.
Because you're an unwholesome influence on our poor young Christian children, right?
Some bullshit like that.
That's what I was saying.
We'd be illegal.
I mean, we're like atheist free thought, like pro science podcast.
We'd probably be censored.
Yeah, I could think of all kinds of nonsense reasons that if the wrong side was in charge,
they could find reasons to kick all of us off.
And you're right, you're in it.
Jason, you're indicating but you can't, audience can't see.
Isn't a uniquely tough position there because you're basically at that cusp, right?
In the trans community, I mean, right?
Like, if things were just a little worse, you wouldn't be allowed to podcast whatsoever, right?
Things would have to get substantially worse before atheists were allowed to podcast.
Yeah.
But, you know, if Trump had 10 years in office instead of four, there's a good chance that
we wouldn't be allowed to hear your voice on the radio, which is funny and horrifying.
Like the favorite minority or the, I don't even know what to call it.
Like the minority that people are the most like angry about on both sides,
where like, you know, I'm actually curious who's going to come after.
Like once trans people are considered like, you know, like gay men are pretty much like
nobody cares anymore, except for some like extreme sort of fundamentalists about whether
or not they're, they should have equal rights and public acknowledgement and whatever.
It's like, who's going to be next?
I feel like some people on the right would probably say that they're already next.
I feel like it's like kind of, they're kind of happening at the same time though.
Conservatives, we have it so much worse than the trans people.
I mean, some people can think that thought without laughing.
I've met so many Christians that think that Christians are a persecuted minority.
Oh my God, I know, right.
That deserve protection.
Well, that's, it's literally part of their religion.
Yeah.
It's like, you know that you're on the right side of history when you're being persecuted by the,
you know, the government in charge, because it was Rome at the time.
And oh, it just happens that 2000 years later, they control all the government and everything,
but it's still part of the religion.
You're being persecuted.
If you aren't being persecuted, you aren't a true Christian.
So very important to keep that complex.
Yeah, they're still trying to earn their gold medals in the oppression Olympics.
That's, yeah.
Dude, now that you put it that way, they started the oppression Olympics way back then.
Oh my God, is that where, where the current oppression Olympics are going to take us?
To Rome.
Well, no, 20 years from now, there'll be, you know, in charge of the government and
everything or 200 years from now.
But still be like, oh, we're so oppressed.
Probably.
Could be.
I don't know.
It just depends.
And if they, whether they get the emperor to convert or not.
Yeah, we'll have to see.
I actually worry as a sort of secularism gains more power, whether that is going to,
I mean, I think we already see it a little bit in flame.
Like those messages of we're being oppressed are like, people can use them right now to just
like, yeah, win the gold medal for the oppression Olympics.
But you like, no one really takes it seriously.
But they're oppressed.
Like it's not, I don't know.
I feel like if we got like an atheist president or just the demographic started shifting,
it would cause people to like fight more, be more like anxious about.
I mean, I think Trump was basically an atheist president.
But people got to pretend that he wasn't.
Right.
If someone was like, yeah, no, I don't, I don't believe in God.
I don't go to church and they became president.
Then yeah, I think that would definitely galvanize the, oh my God, wearing danger,
you know, not merely from being eaten by these atheists, but our mortal souls
and those of our children, I think would totally galvanize all that nonsense.
Yeah, I think that's going to be like inevitable, but still something I worry about.
But anyway, the fourth thing on this platform was the war on wokeness.
I didn't even have to read any further.
I was like, yep, I'm on board.
But what does he say about the war on wokeness?
Trying to find a sentence or two that captures.
Well, it's hard to, yeah, the first paragraph is a bit confusing.
I'm not sure what this translates to as like, and therefore we will do X.
But it says, why are there, okay.
So first of all, it says that wokeness is a made up mystery religion
that college educated people invented to feel superior to you.
And this is a great way to like to pitch the narrative to somebody.
Yeah.
Why are they so sure that some of my best friends are black doesn't make you any less racist?
Because the whole point is the only way to not be racist is to master an inscrutable
and constantly changing collection of fashionable shibboleths and opinions,
which are secretly class norms.
Which I believe is true on the face of it.
Yep.
There's definitely the like, wokeness is a form of signaling like superiority.
There's a reason the vocabulary has to keep changing every few months
because other people catch on and then they got to change.
Yeah, that's probably part of it.
And then like, just the more terms you can invent,
like the more it shows that you're thinking about it consciously,
the more the more lying to can draw between people.
Like if you don't have the time as a rich person who doesn't have to do anything else
with their time, if you don't have the time to constantly keep up with
what the correct words of the week are and how the opinion on the ground is changing,
then that that that is proof that you are not woke.
It is sort of a class thing because who what person that's working for a living
and has to care about like their kids and their yard and their mortgage and everything
has time to keep up with how all this shit is changing every every few weeks.
Yeah, it's interesting because like I'm trying to I just think about this recently,
like if it wasn't for the mind killers, I would have like not heard of the J.K. Rowling thing,
right? Now, that does that mean that I don't care about trans oppressive issues?
I am trans and my first response to hearing about the J.K. Rowling thing was,
who fucking cares? Oh my god.
She says, well, you're one of the brain ross rationalist ones,
you're not one of the fully woke ones, right?
Yeah, I say that lovingly brainwashed into the right
way of thinking. Yeah, but but like there are people, I mean, I've had conversations with people,
it's like, yeah, sure, that person's trans, but they, you know, they're still against
trans people because they're associated with rationalists, right? Yeah.
There's there's this, you know, mentality that somehow the rationalist community is anti-trans
despite having really overrepresenting trans people in the community, right? Well, they're
they're all just they're drinking the Kool-Aid or they're they're those poor subjugated,
you know, it's like actual trans people that are anti-trans according to the woke people.
Yeah, there's gay people that are anti-gay. I mean, but the thing that this is actually
punching against is like a thing that I feel like I should be able to articulate more quickly,
but you have you caught onto the thing where like woke people tend to like it tends to be white
people saying you can't say that about black people or like straight people saying like you
can't say that about the gate. Like, you know, it's actually like the people who do have the
like sort of the funny like the most privileged people that like I think there's like a
element of guilt there as well as the sort of trying to signal superiority, but they just
like it's a lot of like white cis people fighting amongst themselves about what the like
correct thing to do is like to just keep being reminded of this Japanese woman who sells kimono
to tourists and who heard about cultural appropriation like people on Twitter or whatever,
like telling people you can't buy kimonos if you go to Japan and it's cultural appropriation and
this woman had no kind of like reference for this. I feel like you're reading your mind because
that's exactly the one I was going to bring up in this. Like so she's just like I think that
there's like these woke people on Twitter. I don't know what woke means. I guess they're like
racist or something. Like why wouldn't you want to buy my kimono? Like I make them for tourists to
wear and when I see people representing my culture and like being interested in it, that makes me happy.
I never had a black person tell me that the movie Black Panther wasn't for white people.
I've only had white people tell me that. I've never known a black person who used the word African
American to describe themselves. Maybe Barack Obama but like he's a politician. Yeah. Yeah.
He had to do the woke speak in order to like be taken seriously by his own side while also belonging
to like I don't know it's just it's really funny. But like my thing was I remember the first time
someone told me that like that oh no I don't think Black Panther was for white people and I'm like
even if every black person in the country saw it, it wouldn't have made as much money as it did.
Like are you saying that they don't want this movie to be successful? Because like I think they did.
And the I mean it's just on the face of it. That sounds insane. And so you're going to tell
you're going to tell your white friends don't spend money to see this movie. That's insane.
Who are you helping? Nobody. Yeah. I mean the vast majority of the upper class is white people
because it's old money. It's mostly inherited. It's just the demographics of the era. They're
still mostly white. And that is why the vast majority of the woke people are white people
getting you know upset on behalf of minorities because it's actually recent. Like in a lot of
cases I remember I mean some of my white friends and a few of them were black too but we were like
doing a day of the dead party just because like I don't know there's any excuse to have like a party
themed around a holiday especially if it involved dressing up because this was also my like anime
group. So like we were all doing like sugar skull makeup and the next year when Shingo
de Mayo came around to this the same like or not Shingo de Mayo god damn it the day of the dead.
But it was like the same group of people were like oh we definitely can't do that
because it's cultural appropriation. Like last year it was it was it was like painting on skull
makeup and having fun and like making traditional drinks and like the next year suddenly it wasn't
okay and it was like there was this double speak going on where it was like that that's cultural
appropriation we don't do that and we never did that. Like who dares like like I don't know it was
a party where people are talking shit about the kind of people that do the same thing we had
done last year. Okay I find it interesting that lots of times you have to before you can appreciate
a certain piece of art you have to figure out what the race or gender of the artist is because if
yeah. You're not allowed to like things made by racists. Well no not just that like if I don't
know if like Ray and the Last Dragon was done by a primarily white crew it would have been not okay
to watch it. I didn't see it I think I saw the pitch meeting for it. I have not seen it but that
is what I have. It's like the one thing on Disney Plus that you have to pay extra to watch it now.
Huh yeah I I like the kimono example too because it's like the person selling this is like yeah I
would love tourists to come give me their money and enhance my business right and what this this
15 year old girl on Twitter in America is gonna say no no that they're taking advantage of you
you don't get it but I do right it's so kind of sending. Yeah and then like it's the same thing with
like I've asked about like a bunch of Mexican people that I was friends with her that I just knew
like what what do you think about like you know people white people celebrating like Day of the
Dead or Cinco de Mayo and they're just like I think it's great like it's cool that I can go to the
supermarket and like find you know stuff for this holiday like that we're getting more recognition
as a culture and I see like the white people being like well you know they're just wearing it
as a costume they're just using it as an excuse to drink and like and and I don't know every holiday
is an excuse to drink and I was kind of like yeah that's what the like people who celebrate this
holiday do too yeah this is a this is a it's like St. Patrick's Day yeah even if you're a devoutly
Catholic uh Irish person you know it's still just like this is a this is a party holiday right um
maybe if you're not that devoutly Catholic but you know what I mean if you're if you're the kind of
Catholic who goes to church twice a year on Christmas and Easter you know even the bad Catholic I
think the only holiday that isn't a drinking holiday is Easter I'm not even planning to drink the blood
of Christ yeah you can't get wasted on the blood of Christ that's that's a that's a sin but you know
getting a buzz on Christ is totally okay all right buzzed on Christ so it'd be a great wine label
that would you'd probably get enough controversy that people would hear about it and then buy it
I bet I can if I were to go through trouble like I bet I can get it sold on the uh St.
Patrick Temple's website kickstart it get some card funding all right if anyone does that I want
five percent so that's a weakness yeah so and that was the last one that was it yeah so overall I
I think he has a very strong point and maybe I think this because I've been reading him for years
and this is something he's been kind of building towards for years but I think that
classism is a very big deal and I kind of get the feeling more because my parents came from Europe
and over there it is just acknowledged as a thing that the different classes are in a struggle
and maybe this is like due to the old influences of Marxism but like it's weird how no one in America
talks about classism at all and uh I it's boiling over it's a specific thing though where like in
India you can talk about castes because they literally had like a governmental caste system
yeah but our whole like identity as Americans originally was that we're gonna be a democracy
and everybody will be equal and we really don't want to acknowledge that we failed miserably
I don't know like but it was alive even from the very beginning you could only vote in the original
democracy if you were a rich white landowner that there was like aspirational ideas of this
is the kind of like you know we want to be the country of freedom okay and I think we still are
very attached to the idea that we're the country of freedom and acknowledging that we have class
that we have like a you know unofficial class system makes people uncomfortable well and like
definitely get I think younger people talking about it especially online right like oh the you
know anyone who says eat the rich is talking about class right yeah um I think that this is probably
like an unpopular thing amongst like voting adults because they either were alive or they
knew people who were around during the anti-communist campaign of the whatever 50s through 80s and so
like that that was just so that was such a part of the culture for an entire generation
that like oh no we're not we're not part of that class stuff America's transcended that that's like
you know I'm assuming this is part of like the implicit message right we've transcended all that
stuff everyone can be anything you know you if you work hard you can be the next Elon Musk right
in fact Elon Musk worked hard and became Elon Musk so like you could do it too so like I think
people conflate um classism with that sort of like uh in the sense that Alexander's putting it
they're conflating uh they kind of like Marxism class class uh warfare compared to like what
Scott's proposing here just happens to be the same word I think class is sort of a scary thing to
consider and like admit exist on both sides uh where it would mean that like people on the right
who consider themselves like I don't know I think there's the whole idea of the elites and like
left leaning behaviors signaling elitism although they wouldn't call it that but the
probably can certainly would uh acknowledging that they're actually like upper class and
performing upper class behaviors would make them feel bad because of the whole like oh no
privilege is like they'd have to actually admit that this is like that the media is run by the
left and there is a because of class and uh on the left I think that there's or on the sorry right
it's probably going to be scary to acknowledge that or like that they're mainly representing the
working class yeah well there's there would definitely be an aversion towards admitting that
there are classes in America and I'm in the lowest one yeah because yeah I mean like in
order to I think that would be actually the biggest like barrier to this proposal which means
that in order to talk about class they'd have to admit that they're not the best one yeah yeah
I think you're right because in Europe people really didn't give much of a fuck that they were
in the lowest class they're like because they knew they were yeah it was explicit I like to drink
I'm a peasant and someday I will kill the king because fuck the upper class but you hear people
on the left like supporting marxist ideas and like people on the right are the people that are
mainly the ones saying this is America America is great it's like you could be anything you want
to be when you grow up we're the country we love freedom and liberty like well that's that's also
the you know the admitting that we have class yeah that he was Scott was saying you know like
you can say anyone can be anything um so the not acknowledging that there's class puts in hidden
barriers because saying anyone can be anything means that anyone can move out of their class
into a different class it feels like a lot like someone denying that there's any race you couldn't
have you couldn't address issues of racism you couldn't talk about like how there's some people
who hate people of a different race and that's a bad thing if you couldn't talk about race at all
and I think that's the same thing with classism like you can't talk about classism and how you
should be accepting of all classes regardless of where you are and where they are because
classism is bad and if you can't talk about classes at all then that's a problem well I think also
there's like the you can be anything you want to be ethos is generally supported by like the
old money people or you know like uh I think they're the ones who believe at least though I think
well it's a justification for being able to say that always be crude the poor people are poor
because they just didn't work hard enough and I have all this money because I worked hard for it
I don't think they have any delusions that they worked hard for this money I think they think
they deserve it because they're of the upper class and the lowers will always waste their money and
squander it and it's probably a distinction between the old and new rich but like so like
rich republicans definitely would want like they I think a lot of times like outright say
things like you know uh they're anti welfare because they think poor people just are too lazy
to go get a job and that like women make less money than men because they don't really want
to make as much money as men or like men do work harder and earn the money like I don't know
they want there to be like sort of a you know if class existed then they'd have to admit that
actually there are these barriers like and you you didn't like work for your money or like you
did but like this person is just as deserving as this money as you sorry what are you gonna say
soon I was gonna say that I liked the the way that you put it that in order to sell this message
you'd have to say you know y'all are the lowest class or like we are where I am and I'm there
with you yeah but in order in order to sell the message you'd have to say we're the working class
and that's the best class that's what I was gonna say is I think Scott addressed that but he maybe
maybe could have spent a paragraph on it rather than a sentence he worked on rebranding low class
to working class and that you guys should be proud of it you guys are the backbone of America you
guys you guys build the roads you guys build all of our stuff the j6 packs or whatever yeah sure
but you know you know I mean you know plumbing is seen as low status unless like you're the plumber
sorry I'm just trying to remember uh it's low status until you're drowning in your own shit yeah
because the pipes aren't working what the hell was um do you it was Joe the plumber the thing that
like the republican platform was running on for a while oh that was a thing when was that that was
when Obama was running yeah wasn't Sarah Palin that coined it I don't remember uh I was just gonna
say that like it you know the the important infrastructure jobs are all seen as like low
class but if you rebrand it I think more you know more or less correctly as like working class slash
essential for the continuation of society um like I mean no if you're if you're a construction worker
right that's that's oh that's a low-brow working job whatever yeah yeah but you guys like having
places to live and roads to get there right um there's a term for that I'm trying to think of it
like someone who provides essentials like or I guess you could say essential workers uh that might be
an interesting way to kind of co-op that phrase from COVID because we basically think essential
workers are like what we thought firefighters were during 9-11 like amazing angels slash heroes
putting their lives on the line ooh they could call them the essential class yeah I think working
class probably sounds better though maybe uh something in between there I think the connotation
could be even better than working class because that still already has kind of a low-brow connotation
but during your speeches you could say the working class the essentials yeah the real American heroes
the ones putting their lives out on you know putting out fires and I'm definitely not farming
services yeah I'm definitely in favor of not shitting on people for having vocations that are seen as
low status right um especially because like I said so many of them are are essential for society to
function um I it's kind of surprising how things shook out that way you know maybe I need to just
up my history level right my skills and history but uh I don't know I guess I'm I'm just now
mulling over the idea that like why is somebody who built houses seen as low status like because
if you're rich you have people build houses for you but like yeah I guess but it's still like uh you
know I think knowledge work is higher status than labor work but I think it's because it requires a
it requires a degree you know anything that requires a degree or or a master's or like a doctor it
is more complicated than learning to build a house sure or you could even just take the degrees out
of it and say that like some things are just harder than others at like the not the physicals uh
stuff but like the cognitive stuff well I'm doing physical labor just where is your body out faster
right you you're in pain for more of your life you die younger it's I can see why it would be
viewed as more high status to not have that yeah peasants build stuff and they they get you know
hurt and die young where the nobles have their stuff built for them by peasants and eat caviar
right I think it's just that it happened that knowledge work was the most profitable in the
last few generations because so many things are run by computers now so much money goes into tech
and yeah knowledge work skills it just grabbed the fact that like intellectual work had them has
the most money means it has the most power so it's like I'm sorry I'm being like no no articulate
today but it's like there's a thing I want to encapsulate where it's sort of tied to the whole
like idea of upper class people having their like a whole bunch of degrees whereas if you join the
military you don't need a degree you just need to be need to be able to make it through boot camp
and there's like yeah this kind of I actually I also dislike that though where it's like building
a house is actually very complicated and like but there aren't house building there's architecture
degrees but it's not like if you were like to become my dad's apprentice you'd go get a degree
if you give you a roller and a hammer you like follow me up on this roof I think building a whole
house is probably really complicated but the person who like the project planner for a house
probably needs to be the the quote intellectual party member of that but like the drywall person
the flooring person those are all things you can pick up pretty quick maybe for many people right
so it's like it's for some things yeah but not certainly not things like I mean like what about
whole mining not the plumbing and electricity part that's you know okay there's jobs that are
physically hard yeah maybe that's also sort of the shift away from like uh yeah like valuing
jobs that that could only be done by certain people or certain badasses who are willing to
risk getting electrocuted you know like again electrical engineering pays a bunch because
it's kind of dangerous and really complicated yeah you know like I think I mentioned a few weeks ago
like I fixed my bathroom light or something but the most comfort I'm level I'm the most level of
comfort I'm my highest level of comfort is turning off the circuit breaker for that entire part of
the house and basically poking it with a screwdriver right like that that's as far as I can get if it
involved me having to pull wires whatsoever on the wall I'd be paying somebody a nice chunk of
change to do it because I'm not going to die poking at my own house right yeah what about like IT
like I'm trying to find examples that aren't and I'm realizing that like a lot of things that we
consider low class are physically dangerous well IT is I but like that's like weirdly in the middle
right yeah it's like the high level of low class because they're still basically wage workers
they're doing what other people tell them and it's not like that the most technical
job to learn a lot of engineers are more of the working class level than uh yeah okay that's another
example yeah like mechanical engineers but like most of the examples I think of are like jobs
that are physically demanding or in some way dangerous like uh working on an oil rig uh driving
a truck uh you know being in the military being a coal miner even just like being a bus driver
it's just like it's more physical and also you're like more physical more taxing and you're putting
yourself in potential danger more than most of the like elite careers there's some exceptions but
this would have been fun to think about in advance but having just had the idea I don't
have time to articulate a good like answer to it but it'd be fun to try and think of okay cool we've
leveled up the right now how do we level up the left um maybe Scott will do a post like that or we
can think of something ourselves or the community I think the rationality community is like like
talk about that a lot like I mean basically actually a lot of these ideas are rationalist
ideas like you know anti-censorship uh prediction markets um but then that but that's the conservative
platform now what do we do to level up the the liberal platform oh like which uh which issue
should we pick that like we can sell to the democrats yeah I mean I can think of a couple ideas right
off but I don't have the time or the brain juice now to say like make us the party of science that's
what I was gonna say is my first thought was like specifically attack like organic foods and anti-vaxxer
stuff and yeah and like dumb you know global warming advocates that just say reduced like
carbon and or like you know the you're you're a good you're a good environmentally conscious liberal
if you don't use disposable straws right like that it the the straw thing is a good example of a
complete waste of effort yeah um you can buy a steel straw and wash it and use it yourself and then
try good luck washing a fucking straw but if you manage to keep it clean using plenty of bleach uh
you have a straw brush exactly but I mean all that stuff costs a lot to manufacture and ship
and all the chemicals needed to keep that thing clean are going to be pretty hard in the environment
too right but hey at least not throwing away straws so like sound environmental activism
might be a platform of the left science-based environmental activism it's shuttered to think
that you have to call it science-based and you know uh science-based science activism but yes
science-based science we should probably wrap this up yeah all right well not before we think
of patron yes is it my turn I think I haven't done this in a while go for it okay thank a person do
it this person we would like to thank is soon Jacobson Jacobson soon Jacobson thank you for
supporting all the classes but especially the class you're part of is the best one and we're
glad that you could help us talk about this and and bring this to the people the real hero this
week soon yeah bring this to the real working class americans who are the true people behind
everything that's right think for the most part I think of rationalist as working class to middle
class I think we tend to be every middle class we have a lot of programmers yeah I still think
programmers more of working class especially the ones who've gone through boot camps rather than
colleges because we're just weird we don't really like slot into the political norms I think also
not really the classes and they're not they're not wage workers they're salaried for the most part
too yeah which basically means you get paid I know that like I'm not sure how the distinction fits but
yeah in any case whatever class you are listener especially you soon are the is the best one so
however you define class unless you're the upper class in which case take your patron of the arts
they are a patron of the arts ah good point okay we like the upper class that patronize us
if you would like to also patronize us you can do so at patreon and you can be as cool as soon
Jacobson all right thanks everyone and we will see you oh oh oh oh oh we should announce this right
now next is going to be our live episode which we have it's been like a year and a half since we
did the last one so we will be doing that through the discord we will post a link and we will uh you
know be unmuting people in the discord and just chatting with them and having a live episode
awesome do it do we have a date and time separate that yet uh is it going to be sunday at noon
mountain time yeah it's going to be sunday at noon mountain time okay and that day will be
sunday the 18th noon mountain time uh which i should check what that is in utc uh mdt plus six so
six p.m utc okay or six or 1800 utc okay so 1800 utc uh do we join us on the discord you can chat
with us we will be taking questions we'll just be chatting with people you know having a grand
old time like we did last time yay cool all right thanks everybody and see you then loot
what are the rules
