These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled, Biological Anthropology and Evolutionary Perspective, Part 1.
The lecturer is Dr. Barbara J. King. Dr. King is a biological anthropologist and a professor of anthropology at the College of William & Mary, where she has taught since 1988.
Professor King received her BA in anthropology from Douglas College and earned her MA and PhD from the University of Oklahoma.
Professor King was selected as one of William & Mary's University Professors for Teaching Excellence from 1999 through 2002 and has won three other teaching awards, including William & Mary's Thomas Jefferson Teaching Award and the Virginia State Council of Higher Education's Outstanding Faculty Award.
Professor King has studied ape and monkey behavior in Gabon, Kenya and at the Language Research Center at Georgia State University and is currently conducting research on gorillas at the Smithsonian's National Zoological Park in Washington, D.C.
She is the author or co-author of three books on anthropology, including The Information Continuum, Social Information Transfer in Monkeys, Apes and Hominets.
Professor King prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures. The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, species sketches, and an annotated bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Hello. I'd like to welcome you to this introductory course on biological anthropology, which is comprised of 24 lectures about humans in evolutionary perspective.
As I share with you knowledge from biological anthropology, I will be speaking with you as both a teacher of biological anthropology and a student of the field as well.
For the last 20 years, I've been engaged in research in this area and in learning about it.
And one of the most exciting things about this work is that biological anthropology has something new to teach me every year. The field is dynamic and ever-changing.
And what I'm learning and would like to share with you is not only new information and new knowledge about our evolutionary past as a species,
but also about how that knowledge can help us understand ourselves, our species, in the present.
I'd like to start by situating for you the discipline of anthropology as a whole against the other social sciences.
And from there, I will then get more specific about what biological anthropology is about.
So our field of comparison here will be other social sciences, such as history, psychology, or sociology.
Now, compared to these fields, anthropology has two particularly distinguishing characteristics.
First is its breadth, and secondly, the evolutionary perspective.
Now, anthropologists are interested in literally every aspect of what it means to be human.
Rituals, language, behavior, religion, anything at all, including the archaeological past, material remains of the past, and so forth.
Perhaps anthropologists are best known for traveling to relatively exotic places around the globe
and trying to enter into the worldview or perspective of the people who live there.
So this is not studying another place from the point of view of North America, but rather trying to take into account how the people there may feel or may think.
My colleagues at William & Mary are either now or have recently been in the field, as we call it, in Malaysia, Tanzania, Brazil, all parts of Virginia and the United States.
Turkey, Taiwan, and I could go on with a very long list.
This endeavor of understanding different perspectives in the world has, I think, become increasingly more appreciated,
as people understand more and more how interconnected the world's cultures really are.
And certainly in this country, in the United States, this has come home to us in a particularly clear way since September of 2001.
There is a subset of anthropologists who add something to this basic anthropological view, and these are the biological anthropologists.
What they add is what we can simply sum up as time depth.
Biological anthropologists are interested in the long evolutionary history of the human species, well before the time period of written records.
They want to understand not only how we came to be what we are, but also the modern outcome of that history.
Now, the best way for me to give you an introductory flavor to biological anthropology is to tell you about six different perspectives
from which scholars can come in being researchers and teachers in biological anthropology.
And we'll start, number one, with people who study anthropological genetics and anthropological theory.
These anthropologists help clarify how the processes of evolution happened in the past and how they affect how we live in the world today.
Now, the absolute single most key concept in this course is, in fact, evolution.
We'll be talking a lot about it in the initial lectures.
And this first group of scientists will give you a clue that evolution is not just a concept that is assumed in anthropology.
Rather, it is studied directly.
And it might be considered the micro level of anthropology.
Getting down to the genes, the chromosomes, how DNA has changed over time, the real stuff of evolution at the micro level.
To give you a concrete example, let's consider work on the Y chromosome and how that can inform history and evolutionary history.
Now, you know that the Y chromosome is the marker of maleness.
An organism that has an X and a Y chromosome is a male, an organism that has a double dose of X chromosomes is a female.
So the Y can be used to trace lineages over time through the paternal line, and it is exclusively a male marker.
Those of you who follow history, American history and the study of it, may be well acquainted with the fact that the Y chromosome has made headlines in recent years in connection with Thomas Jefferson.
Historians and many people are interested in Thomas Jefferson, not only as our third president and as an architect of the Declaration of Independence, but also as a man.
How did he live his life? What kind of behavior did he have? What was his social life like?
There had long been a suspicion that Thomas Jefferson had fathered offspring through an enslaved individual that he had on his farm or plantation named Sally Hemmings.
The Y chromosome research that anthropologists have done have nearly confirmed this.
What it is possible to do is to take the modern day descendants of Thomas Jefferson, the males, compare their Y chromosomes to the modern day descendants of Sally Hemmings.
Again, of course, the males. And you can check for the match in these two lineages.
And the intricacies of this process reveal that it is highly likely that Thomas Jefferson was in fact the father in this case.
Now, this can be used to talk about evolutionary history far back before the present or our written records of history.
For example, the Y chromosome can be used to trace lineages way back in time to suggest that the first human males that are modern, like us, originated in Africa.
This is an interesting finding to anthropologists because it fits very well with the fossil record, with fossils that have been found in Africa.
And it can also give us a time period of when the origins of modern genetic variation may have arisen.
And this time period comes out to be about 60,000 years ago, which is a pretty close fit, not exact, but relatively close to what we know of in the fossil record.
The second subgroup within biological anthropology is primatology.
Primatologists study the evolution, the anatomy, and the behavior of the primates.
We humans are primates, as are our human ancestors, and the other non-human primates are a vast array of species.
Monkeys and apes, and you'll be hearing a lot more about these creatures in subsequent lectures.
There are, in fact, hundreds of species of non-human primates.
And I'll assume that you will have heard of some of them, that many of you will know the work of Jane Goodall in Africa over a four-decade span studying chimpanzees.
Other great apes are relatively well-known also.
There's a small monkey called the golden white tassel-eared marmoset that lives in Brazil, and I would wager that fewer of you probably are familiar with that monkey.
But there are all kinds of creatures in between the two in terms of size and our knowledge of them.
Quite recently, in the summer of 2002, two entirely new monkey species were discovered in Brazil, in South America.
And this gives us a clue that we have not, by any means, exhausted our knowledge of even the existence of non-human primate species, much less their detailed anatomy and behavior.
Now, I myself fall into this sub-area of biological anthropology.
I am a primatologist, and you will hear a bit more about my research in subsequent lectures.
I started out by researching learning and cognition in apes, in some zoos in the United States, and then I was sent on to West Africa.
And rather ironically, I ended up studying captive chimpanzees surrounded by the lush rainforest of Africa.
That's the work that I was paid to do.
From there, I was able to have a true anthropological field experience.
I went and lived in Kenya for over a year, in the shadow of Mount Kilimanjaro, but in Ambicelli National Park in Kenya, where I studied baboons.
Now, I am back working in the United States again in captive environments with apes.
My work at present is centered at the National Zoo in Washington, D.C., which is part of the Smithsonian.
Now, I will be giving you other examples as well of primatological research.
The third sub-area of biological anthropology is paleoanthropology.
And here, as the name indicates paleo meaning old, we are talking about the time period before the present,
the time period of human ancestors that are called hominids.
These are now extinct fossil forms that existed in the broadly speaking evolutionary line that gave rise to humans.
The best illustration I can give here is of one particular family that is quite famous in the paleoanthropological world.
And these are the Leakeys, the patriarch of the family, Louis Leakey, the matriarch, Mary Leakey.
And they since have gone on to have extended family that has together collectively found an astonishing number of really exciting fossil finds in Africa.
Now, Louis Leakey was born of missionary parents in 1903. He was living in Kenya.
He was raised there and he spent most of his life there.
He did spend some time in England and it was there that he met his future wife, Mary, who had been born in 1913.
Together they returned to Kenya. They went to some of the most fossil rich areas in Kenya and Tanzania and nearby countries.
And again, made discoveries that pushed back our understanding of the origins of humanity.
When their son, Richard Leakey, was only six years old, he made his first find.
He uncovered the bones of a pig, a fossil extinct pig.
And that must have really hooked him because he went on from there to make a tremendous career in paleoanthropology.
Richard Leakey also, by the way, served as a member of parliament in Kenya and has been, continues to be, highly influential in the Kenyan wildlife service,
in the service of conservation of endangered species.
Now, in the 70s, Richard Leakey married a woman, a scientist called Meave Leakey.
And she, in recent years, I'd say the last five years, has become very prominent, featured by National Geographic,
for finds of her own that pushed back the human line even further than her husband and her in-laws had.
Richard and Meave have had a daughter called Louise and she too is a fossil hunter.
So the legacy continues and they seem to have just amazing, not just good fortune, but skill in uncovering these finds.
The fourth area of biological anthropology has to do with modern human variation.
Biological anthropologists are interested in understanding how groups located across the globe today are similar and different to each other.
And they go out and study these things.
So this might be genetic differences, anatomical differences, or behavioral differences.
For a very long time, biological anthropologists, like everyone else, assumed that the best way to study this human variation
was to look at modern human races, groups of people that differ according to visible characteristics,
such as, let's say, facial features or skin color.
And somewhat to the surprise of even the scientists, we have found out in recent decades that race is really not a good way to study human variation.
In fact, the variation that we see, if you compare, let's say, nylotic peoples living in Africa to Inuit Eskimo peoples living in North America,
this variation is real, but it is not explained because of genetic racial markers.
We can explain it in other ways. For example, as response, bioculturally, to environmental variables, to differences in the environment in these two places.
So biological anthropologists have been engaged in ways of uncovering methodologies and processes to really root out what explains modern human variation
in the rejection of race as a biologically valid category.
Of course, race is sociologically valid and historically valid in helping us understand our country and processes in the world,
but it is not so for modern human variation, and we will devote a lecture to this topic later.
Now, group number five, forensic anthropologists.
These scholars work to identify human remains in various contexts, and they often use their knowledge to help out in legal matters,
in court cases, to help solve crimes, certainly to identify victims from their bone remains.
And there's an interesting debate that's set up within the field generally of biological anthropologists,
because unlike the fourth group that I just described to you, forensic anthropologists continue to use race as a category for modern human variation.
So there's a debate. The forensic anthropologists say, look, if you're trying to identify an individual, you want to know its sex, its age,
and race really works. You can identify a person as African American, Hispanic, Caucasian American,
and this is a practical thing that we need to be able to use, and we'll get more into the terms of this debate later.
Most likely, the person you may have heard of as a forensic anthropologist is Clyde Snow.
He's probably the most famous person in the world. Who does this type of work?
I had the good fortune of meeting Clyde Snow in Oklahoma. I was at the University of Oklahoma as a graduate student, and he is based there.
Now, he does the type of work I just described to you. He uses a very interesting term to describe what he does.
He says he reads the bones as a kind of osteo-biography, osteo-referring to bones, so that he can look at a collection of bones
and reconstruct something about the individual that used to be living.
When Clyde Snow was born in 1928, he was born into a family where the father was a physician, and he, Clyde, went around with his father on medical rounds
and became comfortable with the body and the medical realm. Early on in his life, he also accompanied his father on a hunting trip,
and this, I believe, was a turning point for him. His father discovered, quite unexpectedly on this hunting trip,
a pile of bones that he, the father, was able to identify as a mix of mule deer bones and the bones of a man who had been a local person
who had gone missing some years before, and Clyde Snow was there for this event.
So Clyde Snow went on to get his education, continued to learn a great deal in forensic anthropology,
and he now flies literally all over the world in the service of this work.
He was instrumental in helping identify individuals who were victims of the Oklahoma City bombing.
He has gone to Argentina, and he has helped identify many citizens, innocent civilians, who were put into mass graves killed by government death squads.
So this was politically very inflammatory work, very important humanitarian work.
He also is called in to be the absolute sort of final arbiter of identifying individuals who are famous, who have died.
He did this even with the remains of King Tut. He did this with the remains of John F. Kennedy, and he also works on plane crashes.
I could go on and on, but he's a very good example of a forensic anthropologist who's making a difference in the world.
Now our final group, our sixth group of biological anthropologists, works to understand the degree to which modern human groups are adapted to the past.
That is, how are we living today in the 21st century, affected directly by the conditions under which we evolved?
I have to say that this sixth group is a very new subfield of biological anthropology.
We can consider it an emerging subfield. An example might be, let's take human mate choice.
We know if we look at cultures around the world, it is far more common to see older men choosing to be with younger women than it is to see the opposite, older women choosing to be with younger men.
A parallel example would be that it is far more typical to have one man and many wives than the reverse, one woman with multiple husbands.
And the anthropologists in the sixth group ask, could there be a reason for this beyond simply learning, tradition, and culture?
Could there, in other words, be a bio-cultural reason, something that's partially rooted in our past, in our biology, to account for these human mate choices?
And they tie these choices to reproductive success. That is, what particular arrangements of social organization and choosing partners leads to better offspring production?
They think biologically about this and suggest that there are conditions of our ancestral past that would have led to these choices being rewarded evolutionarily.
So they suggest that it is not enough just to look at culture, but we must look also at our past and the very specific conditions under which we evolved.
There you have the six subgroups, and I'd like to sum up this part of the lecture by saying that even though I've divided up biological anthropology for you in this way,
it wouldn't be a good idea to think of these as totally separate autonomous units within biological anthropology.
In other words, these scholars often consult with each other. Paleoanthropologists talk to evolutionary theorists who talk to primatologists all the time.
Also, the way that science works nowadays, it's a very collective interdisciplinary effort.
The issues and questions we are interested in are big ones, and the discipline boundaries don't really reflect what we want to know and how we want to approach our questions.
So here, psychologists and zoologists, botanists, all of these scholars and more would be working together with anthropologists.
A biological anthropologist might be one member of a large interdisciplinary team trying to study some particular question.
Now, biological anthropologists make a very strong point that they believe, I believe too, that this discipline has genuine practical significance in the world.
These six sub-areas are useful for gaining knowledge, pure knowledge, but they are also useful in practical ways that can make a difference.
If you learn about biological anthropology, I believe it can really teach you something about today.
Now, this course that I'm embarking upon with you is based on one that I teach every fall at the College of William & Mary.
And in this course, there are 125 students, our typical load for an introductory course.
And for those of you who are teachers, you will recognize what I'm about to say.
It's a front row of students with bright eyes and excitement, and they go on to study biological anthropology and they graduate with a PhD in the field.
And this is so gratifying when this happens.
A recent student of mine, not so recent really, it was years ago now, but his name is Peter Fasching.
He recently got his PhD after work at Columbia University and doctoral research in Kenya on monkey behavior, really fascinating work.
So I'm now coming of an age where I'm turning out students who are also professionals in the field.
But let's face it, of the 125 students in that class, there are rows and rows of students who are there because they have to be, because it's required for their major, because it's required to get credits.
And what I want to tell them is, yes, you do have to memorize some dates and some sites and some long-hominated names with Latin binomials.
But what we're really after in this class is a dual type of goal.
What I want people to take away is an understanding of new concepts and an understanding that those concepts can be used in practical thinking and understanding about the world.
When I start my class now, I've gotten into the habit of handing out a page-long advertisement from a telephone company that appears in many newspapers.
It starts out with what's clearly an ape on the left side of the page.
It ends up with a shaven man in a business suit carrying a briefcase and a phone book.
Remember, it's a phone company ad.
And in between, there are various organisms that are progressively less stooped, progressively more modern, in a line, one after the other, all male by the way.
And I give this to my students and I ask them, what's wrong with this picture?
I tell them, don't count the phone book. That's not what I'm worried about.
But what is wrong in terms of the picture that this tells evolutionarily?
Many times, and this is fine, students cannot answer this.
They haven't had anthropology in high school.
By the end of my course, they can.
And we will be able to talk more about what's wrong with that type of linear picture of evolution.
And that kind of knowledge has implications for how we see ourselves.
So, the evolutionary perspective primarily asks its students, novices and old hands alike, to accept or at least be willing to entertain a shift in perspective.
I suggest that it is very useful to start out thinking of ourselves not as wholly unique creatures, but to think of ourselves as one of a well-adapted array of species living on the earth.
In other words, to be open to the idea of continuity with other creatures, particularly the other primates living on the earth.
Now, I want to qualify this statement almost immediately.
Biological anthropology in no way denies human uniqueness.
In fact, in many ways, the discipline is a search for how we are human and how we are unique.
But not in a simplistic way and not as an assumption that we are unique.
To give you my perspective, for example, I don't think that humans are unique because of any one simple thing or feature.
We are not unique because of language or technology or culture.
It goes deeper than that.
The best way I can think of to express it is that we are unique in the degree of elaboration of a flexible relationship between biology and culture and how that shapes us.
And I think that this is a theme that we'll want to elaborate upon as we go along.
So, in sum, I want to give you some examples of how we can gain insight into down-to-earth issues by talking about biological anthropology.
It's fine to hear me say this, but it might help you to hear some specific ways in which this perspective can be applied.
I'll give you three relatively quick examples.
First, let's consider some health problems or medical issues that modern humans may face.
As you know, humans are prone to choking.
There are people every year who die from choking and it's something that we worry about with our children and so forth.
But why should this be the case?
As you may know, other mammals, cats, dogs, monkeys, even human babies, by the way, are perfectly capable of swallowing and breathing at the same time.
Cats can lap up milk, babies can suckle, they can do this while they're breathing.
However, in adult humans, the vocal tract has been completely redesigned in the interest of speech.
And the cost of having the vocal tract set up by evolution for speech is choking.
And we'll get into the specifics of this later.
But it helps us to understand that there's a reason why.
We get a benefit in one way, a cost in the other.
Sometimes people will complain of low back pain.
This is one of those things that happens as people age, not to everyone, but many people will complain about aching backs.
This again is a trade-off.
We are upright walkers.
We are bipeds.
Our muscles and bones have been redesigned towards bipedalism.
But there has been a cost compared to other creatures that don't bear all their weight through hips and knees, lower backs.
And lower back pain is such a cost.
Shifting our examples a little bit, let's consider social learning and the issue of our children and how our children learn languages.
Little kids learn complex languages.
English, Finnish, Mayan, any number of languages relatively effortlessly.
After all, we don't sit them down with vocabulary flashcards and teach them verb endings.
They absorb language.
How do they do this?
Some years ago, I wrote a book suggesting that all primate infants, monkeys, apes and humans, are selected to be, that is evolutionarily primed to be, information gatherers.
Infants are tuned in to adults to pay attention to their social partners.
Their brains are specifically adapted to absorb information.
And yes, the speech and language part is new with humans, but that is built upon a foundation of information gathering that is millions of years old and characterizes primate infancy.
Third, I'll return briefly to an example that I already mentioned, the idea of race and racial variation.
Using common sense, one might look around the world and say, look, this is clearly the best way to understand variation.
People look different. They're different races.
And what anthropology teaches us is that logic isn't always accurate scientifically.
For the reasons that I discussed earlier, we have to go deeper to understand modern human variation and it's not enough to stop at race.
We'll talk about all of these examples at greater length.
In some then, the evolutionary perspective is a way of thinking about the world more than anything else.
I've given you six particular approaches to how this may happen.
It shows that biological anthropology is an academic exercise, but it is also a practical one.
And what I am inviting you to do as we embark on the next 23 lectures is to be willing to enter into a shift in perspective and to be willing to think in a different way.
Biological anthropology is provocative. I think it's fun.
As you go through these lectures, you can accept what you agree with and reject what you don't, but it will give you a new view of the understanding of the evolution of human species.
Thank you.
