Welcome back. In this lecture, we're going to plunge right into an understanding of evolution.
Our goal in this lecture is going to be first to master the vocabulary and the ideas behind
the vocabulary of basic concepts related to evolution. And our second goal will be to
try to disentangle good scientific understanding of evolution from many popular myths that have
formed around the concept. Our starting point will be three key concepts, species, populations,
and genes. And we will move on from there in order to begin to fill in the foundations of the
concept of evolution. You already know that evolution is a single most critical concept for
the whole course. A good definition that we can use for evolution is change in the genetic
structure of a population. Now, you can see how we need to back up immediately and get a vocabulary
under our belts. Let's start with species. All humans belong to a single species. We are all
homo sapiens all around the world. There are, however, multiple human populations,
groups of humans in which most mating takes place. A population we can define more specifically in
just a minute. For the moment, what I want to get across is the idea that the species level is the
umbrella concept, the single species. And underneath this, then, there are multiple pockets, if you
will, of humans living around the globe. Another way to put this is that there is no meaningful
category of humans in between the population level, which are myriad populations existing,
and the single species level. All right, so then, what is a population? A population can be defined
as the group in which people or organisms, whatever animal species we're talking about,
tends to choose a mating partner. Most mating takes place within rather than between populations.
Now, this is so, even though we know now that populations of animals and humans, too,
are open rather than closed. The fact that populations are open simply means that some
individuals may, at some time in their lives, leave the population into which they were born and go
elsewhere and live elsewhere. We used to think, quite the contrary, we used to think that
populations were closed. There used to be a model of populations that we can call the BD model.
The B stands for birth, the D stands for death. In other words, the only way to get into a
population is to be born into it. The only way to get out of it was to die, so that your whole life
would be spent in the same population, and you'd get a series then of closed units,
population after population after population. This model has been revised. We now call the
model that we accept the BID model, B-I-D-E. This is essentially a model of demography,
how population changes over time. While the B and the D are the same, birth and death,
the I stands for immigration, the E stands for emigration, and this just refers to that
process that I mentioned. Some individuals leave emigrate out of a population and enter
another, become immigrants into a population. Now, because of this, we know that genes also
flow between populations. As a rule, members of a population share a common gene pool,
but sometimes genes will move between population units. So having figured out what a species is
and what a population is, we need to tackle a definition of what a gene is, what a gene pool is.
I first want to say a very key point to define evolution for you again, to repeat a definition
again in slightly different terms. When a gene pool in a population undergoes systematic change
over time, this is when evolution is said to have occurred. So we know automatically
that we're making a statement here, evolution occurs at the population level and then we want
to work more with the concept of gene pool and gene. So what's a gene? A gene is simply a chunk
of genetic material. It's a sequence, if you will, of DNA in the body that gets passed on
from generation to generation, so that when you have organisms, whether they are frogs or monkeys
or humans living together in a population, all of the genes that are available in that population
together are referred to as the gene pool. So we can think of the gene as being passed along
through sexual reproduction, a way of getting the genetic material, the DNA, passed down across
the generations. So the key changes that occur evolutionarily are at the level of the gene pool.
Now I want to take just a minute and introduce an idea to you about genes. I'm convinced that genes
are fairly well misunderstood. In other words, it is often assumed that genes are extremely
powerful units, that genes have the ability to determine an organism's anatomy or even its
behavior. And biological anthropologists as well as many other scientists are working to make clear
that this is not the case. You would never know that it's not the case by reading the headline.
Think back to a popular magazine or even a newspaper that you might have read within the
last couple of years. I would wager it likely that you would have seen a headline, something along
the lines of gene discovered for shyness or gene explains disease or gene therapy will eradicate
this disease or that disease. They give the sense that genes are isolated units that themselves
are capable of determining outcomes. In fact, genes are part of a larger system.
Genes interact with the environment and the environment directly affects what genes are
able to accomplish. Now we know, having just said that genes are composed of DNA, they are strings
of DNA. And as such, of course it is correct to say that genes do influence anatomy, physiology.
But influence is a much different word than determined and it is the word that we need to use
in this course. The fact that genes are part of a bigger system and what genes can do and what they
cannot do is the subject of lecture 23. So we will be returning to this point at some length.
But for now, I'd like to just give you some examples of the difference between the determinative
function of a gene and the influential function. And I'm going to use myself as an example of an
organism that contains genes and DNA. First of all, I have blue eyes. Now here is an example,
a rare kind of example, where genes really are quite determinative. I inherited genes for blue
eye color from my father in his paternal lineage. I have blue eyes because of this. But let's consider
another characteristic that you might think of as equally biological or physical. In other words,
it's not behavioral. I'm tall. Is that not completely genetic? No, it isn't. Genes certainly
influence the fact that I am tall. My father was quite tall, my mother is tall, my height tends to
actually comes out in between the two of them. And obviously the genes for tallness, for height,
I inherited and they had an influence on the outcome of my height. But the environment also
directly interacted with those genes. In other words, for the gene for tallness to be expressed,
what I needed in my life were things that I were fortunate enough to have, good nutrition,
good medical care, all the things that lots and lots of people, unfortunately, in the world don't
have. In other words, if I had grown up in a different part of the world, or if I had grown up
during a severe famine or drought in a certain part of the world, or simply happened to live in a
family that was unfortunately living in poverty and didn't have access to good food, then the genes
for tallness would not have been expressed in the same way as they are. That is why the word
influence is better. A third example using myself in a behavioral one, let's take the fact that
I'm not shy about public speaking. Can this be considered genetic in any way? I would say no,
not because my parents are shy in some way, but rather because this is outside the realm of genes
or really any kind of very strong genetic influence. There might be some small role, but this is really
a way of being in the world that is learned, that comes through experience and comes through life.
All right, so we know that evolution happens because of what's going on in gene pools. We know
that it happens at the level of the population, but how does evolution happen? So far we have been
talking about definitions, but we've not been talking about mechanisms, and it's to these
mechanisms now that I want to turn. Four mechanisms of change can affect the genetic structure of
gene pools and thus contribute to evolution. The primary most important mechanism is the one
called natural selection, and here we encounter another one of those cornerstone concepts of the
course. It is an idea closely related to another differential reproductive success, so let us
start there. Differential reproductive success simply means that again in any population of animals,
frogs, warthogs, monkeys, humans, some parents will be better at producing many healthy offspring
than our other parents. That's where the differential comes in. Not everybody in the
population will have the same reproductive output. Some parents will contribute more
to the next generation, and this is because some offspring will simply be better adapted
to the local conditions under which they live than others. Because of differential reproductive
success, you can see then that the relative frequencies of traits within gene pools will
shift over time. If you've got some parents reproducing and contributing more of certain
types of genes than others, and that's continuously changing and dynamic, you can then see that the
gene pool itself will not remain static. There will be change over time. Let me try a more
concrete example. Picture a population of monkeys living in a forest. They're active during the day.
One year, there's an invasion of the forest by a new predator, a big cat, that is, for other reasons,
shifting its territory. It's a nocturnal, big cat, and it eats monkeys, eats these kinds of monkeys.
Well, these monkeys have not had this kind of predator pressure before. They sleep in the trees
at night. They're relatively vulnerable, and they start getting picked off and eaten for dinner by
these big cats. Well, there's natural variation in this monkey population. Some individuals just
automatically, by virtue of variation, will be more alert at night, may have better hearing,
to hear the predators coming, may have better night vision, to be able to see the predator.
These individuals will survive and reproduce differentially. They will contribute their
genetic traits differentially to the gene pool, and as a result, what do we get? Systematic change
in the gene pool over time or evolution. Now, Charles Darwin is the one who came to understand
this mechanism of natural selection. You, I am sure, are familiar with Charles Darwin,
famous 19th century British naturalist. In the early 1800s, he took a famous five-year voyage
on a ship called the HMS Beagle that left from England and sailed partly around the world and
made many stops. He did collecting and observation work as a naturalist, and during this time,
he began to have ideas that eventually later caused him to establish this idea, the mechanism of
natural selection as a way for evolution to happen. Darwin's major contribution to science then
is for the first time he offered a plausible mechanism of evolutionary change. Now, to understand
this better, it's helpful to know that when he boarded this ship, the HMS Beagle, he boarded it
with the concept firmly in his mind called fixity of species. Fixity of species simply means that
all the animal species in the world are created at one time and they never change. They're put on
the earth and that's the way they are and the way they always will be. This was a popular idea in
especially Christian thinking straight through from the Middle Ages through the 19th century. Darwin
went on ship with this idea, came off the ship five years later, questioning this idea, and as he
worked through his analysis of what he saw, rejected fixity of species and began to develop
natural selection. In a future lecture, we'll talk a lot more about what specifically led him
on the trip to come to this conclusion, but for now it's just important to know that he did reject
fixity of species. He and others, by the way, working together. I said there were four mechanisms
of evolution. We have just talked about the first. The second is mutation. And mutation can be defined
as a change in the structure of DNA, the actual sequence of how DNA is put together in a string.
This mutation may happen for spontaneous reasons, some error in the copying process as genes reproduce.
It may happen due to environmental causes. For example, radioactivity can cause breakage
and change in mutation. In some cases we don't know why mutation happens, but it does happen.
And the important fact to know about mutation is that it produces raw material upon which
natural selection may act. In the example that I used before about monkeys in the forest, I talked
about natural variation existing in any population, just naturally. Well, mutation is a way to produce
variation. If there's a genetic change, it produces a different kind of a gene
that can influence then different anatomy or behavior. So natural selection acts on variation,
but mutation is a way to produce it in the first place. All right, mechanism number three
is gene flow. Gene flow I've actually already referred to before. It's simply the exchange of
genes between populations. We talked about how populations are open and individuals may move
between them. Of course, as the individuals move, so do their genes. So their genes are flowing,
and the gene pool can change as new individuals and their genes come in or leave a population.
These three mechanisms, natural selection, mutation, and gene flow, are key for this course.
The fourth one will be less important for our purposes, but in the interests of completeness,
I feel I should define it for you, genetic drift is the fourth mechanism. This is a change in the
gene pool structure due to some kind of random event. And I'll give you an example. Let's consider a
group of hominids, human ancestors living, let's say, a million years ago. And they fall prey,
a subgroup of the group, falls prey to a natural disaster. A rock fall, a volcano,
an earthquake, pick one. We just need a disaster for the example. There is some small part of the
group that is out, say, foraging, collecting food out on its own, possibly members of a family
sharing certain genes. And they're killed due to some random event. The reason they're killed has
nothing to do with their genes. They just happen to be together and in the wrong place at the wrong
time. That means that the gene pool changes quickly and drastically and abruptly. A genetic
event happens, genetic drift. Genetic drift is more important in small populations than in larger
ones. Let's say you have 10% of a population that's removed from the gene pool, where you can see
that that 10% shift would be more important in a smaller population than a larger one.
All right, we've considered our four mechanisms then. What I want to do now is broaden our lens
again and step back a little bit to the process of evolution as a whole. I think that in many cases
so many myths have sprung up around what evolution really is about, that they can cloud our understanding
of the process. I am going to run through with you three such myths posed as questions and give you
the answer that biological anthropologists give. Why these are myths and not scientific truth?
Okay, we'll start with the first. Is an evolution just a theory? You hear that all the time after
all, the theory of evolution. Doesn't that just mean then that scientists are making good educated
guesses? That doesn't sound very convincing to have a theory in all of this knowledge built on a theory.
There is a good clear answer to this from science. Theory is a word with a particular meaning in
science. It means that a set of principles have been built up over time through testing and
observation. In other words, there's lots and lots of evidence that has been obtained via the
scientific method. By the time you get to call something a theory, there has been an enormous
process of evidence gathering and testing. So that word really packs a punch, if you will.
Theory really means something. It does not mean what we might mean if we come home at the end of
a day and we say to our partner or our spouse, well, my boss was really grumpy today and I have a
theory about why. Or we might say, oh my gosh, the stock market went down again and I have a theory
about what's wrong with this. And we mean, hey, we have a good idea. This really makes sense to me.
But there's not maybe a lot of evidence for that. We use it in a casual sense. Science does not mean
theory in that way at all. For biological anthropologists and other scientists, there is no
doubt that evolution happened. We may not know in every case the details of how these four mechanisms
interact to produce specific outcomes. Some cases we do. In some cases we don't. But we do know
that evolution has happened and the process itself is not in doubt. I mentioned before that I teach a
course like this at William and Mary. And I would say that this is one of the really key concepts
that I like students to take away from the course. This does not mean that I require my students to
make some kind of a pledge of allegiance to the evolution concept. What they believe is of course
up to them. But rather the understanding that evolution is the bedrock accepted concept of
biological anthropology because of evidence and testing, not because it's somebody's casual theory.
Myth number two posed also as a question. Doesn't evolution really boil down to survival of the
fittest? Isn't that phrase a good summary? You're going on about all of these mechanisms, but can't
we just boil it down to survival of the fittest? No, science has a good answer for this question
as well. The key to evolution is not survival. The key is reproduction. We've talked already about
differential reproductive success. In fact, reproductive success is such a key concept that
we biological anthropologists use all the time that when we talk to each other, we just call it
RS. We know immediately what we mean by RS, and we can't talk about evolution without it.
So just as with the term theory, the term fittest has a specific meaning in science. To be fit in
scientific terms means to be able to out-compete reproductively the other members of one's
population, the other members contributing to the gene pool. Now here's an example I give my
first year students. It's a hypothetical example, and it's put into cold, stark terms of science.
There are two women. One woman has lived to 98. She is Hale and Hardy, and she's going strong
towards her hundredth birthday. She is surrounded by family and friends. However, she did not
reproduce children. She has no offspring. In the strict terms we're talking about here,
she is considered to be pretty much of an evolutionary failure. Zero reproductive success.
Consider another woman. At 35, she has four children. They are healthy. They are young,
but on their way to reproducing themselves. And unfortunately, remember this is hypothetical.
She's sick by a bus, and that's the end of it. However, she is successful in terms of evolution.
She has reproductive success. So surviving doesn't matter if you don't reproduce.
Okay, the next time you're watching a nature documentary, whether on PBS or Discovery Channel
or somewhere, and you hear the narrator then in Tony, survival of the fittest. As two large moose
come at each other with their big antlers, you can think, okay, that may be a good description
of the actual fight that's unfolding on the screen, but if the narrator is using this to talk
about evolution, survival of the fittest is not going to work. It's not enough.
Third, hasn't biological evolution been far outstripped, at least by humans in our species,
by cultural evolution? That is, hasn't our human culture, our human technology, let us to be able
to have so many advances that natural selection of the other mechanisms really don't matter much
anymore. They're really not forces anymore in our lives. Biological anthropology rejects this view.
Biological anthropology says that biological evolution and cultural evolution interact,
and each process affects the other. To give you just a very quick example, it was announced in
the summer of 2002 that over the next 20 years, 65 million people in this world will die of AIDS.
AIDS, as you know, is caused by an underlying virus. In this country, we have new good effective
medicines so that the HIV virus does not necessarily progress to AIDS and to death,
but around the world, globally, there is not necessarily access to medicine. Medicine
is effective. It's not always 100% effective, but worldwide, think of this as what we would call
an environmental pressure on humans. This is a virus, a living organism. It, too, has undergone
natural selection. What is it selected to do? It's selected to live in hosts, but it may also kill
them, and in big numbers, 65 million people. So my claim then is that humans are still subject
to natural selection in today's world, and I'd like to give you a slightly more extended example.
I am choosing for you the absolutely classic biological anthropology example. Don't expect
to get through an introductory course without this example. It's in the textbook that I recommend
for you, and it's just a very important one. This has to do also with the disease. The disease,
in this case, is sickle cell anemia, and unfortunately, some humans are born with a genetic mutation
in a substance in the body called hemoglobin that causes them illness and, quite often,
death and death before reproductive years. This is a very tragic situation. The mutation causes a
sickling shape, half moon kind of shape, of the molecules that transport oxygen in the body.
So the result of the disease, in terms of symptoms, is oxygen deprivation, poor circulation,
and very serious symptoms. So a question that arises naturally is, if this is genetic and
genetically controlled, why over the many, many years hasn't natural selection weeded this out?
Why hasn't selection taken care of this? Or why hasn't medicine and culture taken care of this in
some way? Well, in fact, in order to get the disease of sickle cell anemia, you need a double dose
of a particular gene, one from the mother, one from the father. However, and here's the key point,
in a single dose, that very same gene is not only important but highly beneficial to the
individuals that have it. The single dose of the same gene is protection, affords protection,
from malaria. Malaria is a killer in such enormous proportions across the world.
Millions die all the time from malaria yearly. And this gene affords at least partial resistance.
So what you have, again, not in human terms but in evolutionary terms, a kind of cost-benefit
ratio, if you will. You get a double dose of this gene. It can undergo a mutation. You have a real
problem with sickle cell anemia. But in evolutionary terms, the gene pool maintains the gene in its
pool because for so many more people that get the single dose, there's the ability to survive
and to live in geographic areas where malaria is a real problem. So what I'm suggesting here
is that the AIDS example, the sickle cell anemia example, are really just tips of the iceberg.
There are many other ways in which we can see evolution at work. I'll be talking to you soon
about how we can see evolution at work today in animal populations. And the whole course,
in a certain sense, is about saying that the forces of evolution have not stopped.
It is possible that the relationship between biology and culture that we now see in today's
world has shifted how evolution can happen in certain parts of the world, but in no way is it
correct to say that evolution has stopped. Alright, then we've laid to rest some myths
about evolution, three in particular. Before that, we went over the mechanisms of evolution so that
we have a good fundamental understanding of what it means to say that there's a systematic change
in the gene pool. What we want to do next is to take on a certain controversy that also
impacts understanding of evolution. As we will see in the next lecture, the United States is
particularly prone among western nations to have what I call evolution skeptics,
people who are not willing to accept evolution for various reasons. What I want to do in the next
lecture is take on the thought that it is necessary to choose between belief in evolution
and religious faith, because I think just as much as the myths that we have just
exploded, this feeling that it is necessary to choose can cloud one's understanding of evolution.
So we will talk about challenges to evolutionary theory and the relationship between evolutionary
science and religion when we return in lecture three.
