Alright, in lecture three we will continue our exploration of evolution.
Let's start with a statistic.
A recent poll has shown that almost one half of Americans do not accept evolution.
In other words, they do not accept the fact that humans have evolved from earlier organisms.
Now, I have taught for most of my career in Virginia, before that I taught in Oklahoma,
and I have encountered in both states this view, this resistance to evolution.
But I also know that is by no means just a southern phenomenon.
I grew up in New Jersey and my parents, for example, were and my mother continues to this day to be skeptical of evolution.
It is a peculiarly American phenomenon, quite widespread in our country, but quite unusual in other nations.
In, for example, England and Western Europe, if you do a similar poll, the numbers of the skeptics about evolution are much lower.
And we're going to explore that phenomenon a little bit in this lecture.
So our starting point is the fact that a substantial number of people believe not in evolution, but in an alternative.
That humans were specially created by a supernatural force within the last 10,000 years.
So in other words, humans were put on a young earth.
The earth is not actually ancient in this view, and we are all, all the creatures that you can see ourselves and others around us are young as well.
Now, this view as held by a certain number of people is not necessarily confined to just a private perspective.
Rather, people who hold this view have repeatedly mounted legal challenges to teaching of evolution in public schools.
Many of you will be familiar with the famous Scopes trial, the most famous such challenge.
In 1925, a young biology teacher named John Scopes was teaching evolution in the state of Tennessee.
Many people did not like this and mounted a legal challenge attempting to prevent him from doing this.
He was defended by the famous lawyer Clarence Darrow.
However, Scopes and Darrow lost to the opposing team headed by William Jennings Bryan.
This bit of history is recounted in the movie Inherit the Wind, some of you may have seen.
So Scopes was convicted.
He was fined $100 and he could no longer teach evolution.
Many of us know this.
Something that I learned just recently is that this law preventing the teaching of evolution in public schools was only overturned in 1968.
That surprised me.
Even though it was in fact overturned, there are still frequent challenges to the idea that it is not only permissible but a good idea to teach evolution in public schools.
Most recently, the state of Kansas has been in the headlines in the late 1990s for such challenges and other states as well.
One reason why the skepticism may exist in the United States is that there seems to be a feeling that it is necessary to somehow choose
between believing in evolution and believing in God, between evolution and having a religious faith.
I think it is important to explore this viewpoint.
Quite often, if we read books or articles or tune into talk shows or even look at the internet, the situation is presented in this polarized, dichotomized way.
You can believe in God or you can believe in evolution but you've got to choose.
Well, biological anthropologists and other scientists make a different type of statement and have a different type of understanding.
What we suggest is that it is quite possible for religious faith and belief in evolution to co-occur, to co-exist.
Of course, one may choose between them and certain religions may force a choice but in many cases religious faith is compatible with belief in evolution.
In other words, I, myself, know of many individuals who believe in God and believe in evolution at one and the same time.
And it is the nature of why it should be possible for this coexistence to occur that I would like to explore.
Now, I want to preface my remarks by saying I can understand that it sounds kind of strange.
It sounds almost as if it's worth being skeptical of how can you believe in both.
But I do want to underline the idea that we tend to hear of these things as polarized when, in fact, in regular everyday life, lots and lots of people walk around holding both beliefs.
There's even a foundation in the United States called the Templeton Foundation that is wholly devoted to reconciling different approaches in science with religion.
In other words, there are people whose jobs it is to be able to think and talk about these different realms in a co-existing type of way.
As Stephen J. Gould has eloquently written, science and religion simply represent different systems of knowledge.
Gould wrote that it is the differences between them that allow them to co-exist and I will be relying on Stephen J. Gould's wisdom in this lecture.
I suspect that a lot of you will have read works by Stephen J. Gould or know of him.
He was a professor of science at Harvard University, a prolific and elegant author who popularized science with a great deal of technical proficiency.
For many years he wrote a column for the magazine Natural History and he has published a large number of books.
Sadly, and quite suddenly he died in the summer of 2002 at the age of 60, which was a great loss for the field of science.
What Gould wrote is that science is fundamentally predicated on observation and experimentation and testing.
In other words, the scientific method.
We have talked about this already in previous lectures.
Without this process, there can be no science.
It is absolutely critical to have the evidence phase, the observation phase, the testing phase.
And if you'll remember, we only get to call something a theory when it has undergone all of that important stuff of science.
So another way to say this is that in science, belief has no meaning.
It is not the realm of belief.
Now admittedly, one may as a scientist derive an idea initially from one's own belief, but that is not enough.
Then the process of the scientific method must take over.
So if belief plays a role, it's only minimally and initially.
Religion, of course, is based on faith and belief.
And here in this realm, it is the other things that have no meaning.
There is not a process of evidence gathering, observation, and testing when we're talking about the actions of God.
Now, I was recently engaged in a conversation on this very topic with a taxi driver in Washington, D.C.
And it was an interesting conversation.
I had asked him to take me to the National Zoo, which is my research site where I am studying gorillas right now.
And often when I do ask a taxi driver to take me there, I'll get asked in turn,
well, what are you doing at the zoo?
And there launched a conversation about apes and anthropology, and we got down to the question of evolution.
And I was telling him this view that I hold that comes from Stephen J. Gould and others about the compatibility of science and religion
and how evidence testing and gathering and knowledge through evidence is not important in religion.
And he was a very open and intelligent person, but he immediately said, wait a minute, evidence is very important in religion.
I believe that I have evidence for religion.
Well, at that moment, the taxi got to the National Zoo, so I got out, and I don't know what he was going to say next.
But he might have been willing to talk about biblical archaeology, the Stroud of Turin.
There are people who do go out and test historical occurrences that relate to religion.
But what I'm talking about is a little bit different.
The existence of God and the action of God creating humans is simply not something that we can subject to science.
It's not something that we can test.
It's something that has to be believed.
So I very much endorse what Gould has written about this and want to explore it a little further.
A good way to do this is to talk about a contrast that's very different than the one we've just talked about.
We have just contrasted evolutionary science and religion.
Now I want to move to a different pairing, and I want to contrast evolutionary science
and what is called scientific creationism.
Now here, to give you the punchline before we start, one must make a choice.
It is a very different type of comparison.
One cannot believe in evolution and scientific creationism at the same time.
And I'm going to explain for you why that should be the case.
In the strictest and in fact most popular form of scientific creationism, there are four key characteristics.
First, the earth is quite young.
It is not ancient.
It is some tens of thousands of years old or perhaps only 10,000 years old.
So the geological data that evolutionary scientists accept are rejected by scientific creationists.
Once some hundreds of years ago there was a man, a bishop in fact, who calculated using the Bible quite literally the date of creation of the earth.
And he came up with a specific date in October, 4004 B.C.
Scientific creationists no longer hold with that particular date, but they are quite literal and they do talk in terms of tens of thousands of years,
which is very, very different than what evolutionary scientists talk about.
Point number two, scientific creationists say that humans were specially created by a supernatural being.
That is, by God.
Now the important thing to think about here is that according to this, humans were created simultaneously with all the other animals.
All the organisms and everything on earth were created in a relatively rapid time period and put together on earth all at the same time.
And of course this is recent given what we had just talked about for point number one.
Okay, the third characteristic follows from the second.
The claims of evolutionary scientists, for example, claims for let's say a three million year old hominid fossil, an ancestor of humans that can be dated to three million years ago, must be false.
Scientific creationists say these fossils are wrong, they're wrongly dated, they're wrongly analyzed.
Of course they're a collection of bones, but they must be recent, they cannot be old, the dates are wrong, there's something wrong.
They often point to the fact that certain fossil finds from the period of human evolutionary history are fragmentary.
And they will say, this proves our point that they don't add up to too much.
And we'll talk about that a little bit more later.
Of course we understand how this would have to be the case for internal consistency in scientific creationism.
If the earth is young, you can't very well have a three million year old skeleton.
The last, the fourth point about scientific creationism.
It is a science according to its adherence.
It deserves to be taught equal time with evolution in public schools.
This is a pretty important point.
It is not a group of people who are saying, we have certain beliefs and we want to teach them to our children.
This is a group of people saying, we have fashioned a science.
And as such, we do a disservice to our children if we fail to teach this science right alongside evolution in the public schools.
So it is a legal matter, not a personal matter for scientific creationists.
Here is where Stephen J. Gould comes in, in helping us respond intelligently to scientific creationists.
So I will use him in this part of the lecture.
He has written a lot on this topic, but I'm going to refer specifically to an essay that he wrote in 1982.
It is called Genesis versus Geology.
Evolutionary scientists then, led by Gould and others, reject all of these four tenets, point by point.
They emphasize specifically that scientific creationism, that two word phrase, is a misnomer, even an oxymoron.
The reason why they say this is that the core ideas of scientific creationism cannot be tested according to the scientific method.
Science is about being testable, period.
There's nowhere to go from that conclusion, and scientific creationism is not testable.
Now, the book that's widely considered the founding textbook for this brand of scientific creationism came out in 1961.
And it very clearly states a role for supernatural intervention in the world.
It talks, for example, about the great flood of Genesis.
And it says explicitly, we cannot talk about the great flood of Genesis without admitting supernatural intervention.
When Gould writes about this passage, he says, look, they're talking about a miracle, and in fact, that's really what it does seem to be.
So there is an explicit admitting, if you will, on the part of scientific creationists, that there is a role for God that is supernatural in the way that it works that we couldn't possibly test.
Let me also tell you a little bit about why the Genesis flood is important in the first place, the question of flood geology.
You'll remember that scientific creationists feel that humans were created at the same time as all the other animals.
Well, they still have to explain how it is that worldwide, all across the globe, you get sequences of fossils.
Whether this be in Africa or Asia or South America, when you get sequences of fossils, they're always in the same order.
How did that happen if, in fact, evolution didn't occur?
If there wasn't evolution of one species from another, why is it that these organisms would all sort in the same way?
Here's where the flood comes in.
According to scientific creationists, the supernaturally engendered flood caused all of these organisms to be mixed up together, but they settled in a particular order.
Scientific creationists say, well, the creatures in the ocean were most affected by the flood.
They're in the ocean already, and they will settle out on the bottom.
Creatures on the mountains will settle out on the top, and we would expect to find this order everywhere,
because that's the way the flood basically sorted them.
Well, first of all, we're back to the supernatural, but secondly, here you can actually look at the order of the fossils, and this turns out not to be true.
In other words, all the oceanic creatures are not at the bottom.
All the mountain living creatures are not at the top, so there's problems from the geology of this as well.
Scientific creationism in some is not a science.
It distorts very well-established information from evolutionary science, and what biological anthropologists say is that it must not be taught as a science in public schools.
This is nothing about what people believe.
Biological anthropologists are not engaged in the business of telling people what to believe, but they are engaged in talking about what is science.
And put bluntly, scientific creationism has no leg to stand on as a science.
All right, I've been talking to you about this particular form of a challenge to evolution, and a challenge to Darwinian thinking.
I mentioned a textbook from 1961, a response by Gould, written in 1982.
What about more recent decades?
Well, first of all, I want to tell you that scientific creationism is by no means outdated, it continues in this form.
But there is also a new twist, if you will, that has been emerging much more recently.
It is a perspective called intelligent design.
Intelligent design differs from scientific creationism, but it is equally incompatible with evolutionary theory.
It is equally rejected by biological anthropologists, and almost all evolutionary scientists.
I can't say all, but almost all, and we're going to explore intelligent design, what it's saying, and why it is rejected by scientists.
Okay, first, to compare it with scientific creationism.
Unlike scientific creationists, intelligent design advocates say, yes, we must accept that the earth is ancient, very old,
millions and billions of years older than tens of thousands of years.
The geological evidence is completely convincing on this point.
Secondly, animal species may in fact change somewhat over time.
It is not just that they are put on the earth in a certain form, and they're totally fixed for the rest of time.
So as you can see, these ideas are superficially more like evolutionary science, certainly more so than scientific creationism.
But, superficial is the key. The similarity is only skin deep, and I'll be explaining for you why that should be so.
Intelligent design adherents directly challenge Darwinian theory via the concept of irreducible complexity.
According to this idea, some systems, whether that be an organ or an organism, are so complex with so many interrelated,
interfunctioning parts that they must have emerged by design, by some force that has the ability to plan and design as opposed to evolution.
In other words, these systems could not have come about via evolutionary change, and most especially not through the small successive modifications over time
that we have been talking about. We have been talking about four forces of evolution, the natural selection, mutation and gene flow particularly.
It is these mechanisms that are rejected by intelligent design advocates as being able to produce complex systems.
So the idea of irreducibly complex means that there had to have been planning at the end of a certain scale of certain phenomena,
a complex end of a certain scale. The complex mammalian eye, according to intelligent design, is a good example of a phenomenon that is irreducibly complex.
The intelligent design people say, eyes are made up of so many parts. You have lenses and retinas and corneas. You take out a part of that, the whole thing falls apart.
It doesn't work. How could that ever have arisen through natural selection and mutation? It is too intricate and too elegant, and it couldn't have worked.
Evolutionary scientists, as you might well imagine, have an answer to this. They include biological anthropologists who say that in fact we can use evolutionary theory to explain the evolution of the complex mammalian eye.
We can approach this with two different points. The first is that it is possible to chart the evolution of the eye from relatively primitive organisms through the first mammals through the complex mammalian eye across evolutionary time.
So that, in fact, the first eye-like type of organ was really a patch of light-sensitive tissue. It wasn't a fully formed organ. It started out as something simple but something that worked in being able to sense light and was enough for the organism under its particular conditions.
We can then see over time more complexity being added so that you end up at the other end of the scale with the lens, the retina, the cornea, and so forth.
To be more specific, at 500 million years ago it is possible to identify the first vertebrate eye. This happens to be in a fish.
There are people who devote their lives to studying the evolution of the eye and it can be done. It can be done in an evolutionary sequence.
So it is not the case that the eye is fully formed quickly or rapidly, but there are different variants of the eye that work under different environmental circumstances and that gets essentially tinkered with by evolution through time.
Just last week I was hiking with my family in Shenandoah National Park in Virginia and we stopped on the way home at Loray Caverns in Loray, Virginia.
We took the tour of this enormous subterranean cavern. My daughter was particularly excited to go there because we went down 16 stories into the earth.
The equivalent of going into a building and pressing 16 on the elevator, we went down and were able to see cave formations, stalactites, stalagmites, and all the other wonderful things this cave has to show us.
One of the questions asked of our guide was what wildlife, if any, exists in this cave? And the answer was shrimp, only one species of shrimp.
And my question, which may have struck others as slightly strange, was are they eyeless shrimp? And the answer was yes, because evolution would lead to the prediction that this small population of shrimp had somehow gotten into the cave from a regular population with eyes.
But in a dark subterranean cave there would simply be no need for eyes. Natural selection did not maintain the pressure for eyes and in fact in this population they disappeared.
Now that led me to wonder all kinds of things with humans coming in with strobe lights and guides who knows what's going to happen, but my life is not devoted to shrimp eyes so I'll have to leave that question for now.
I mentioned that there were two points to bring to bear on this question of the eye. And the other one is a little bit more theoretical. Evolutionary change in fact need not always proceed via small successive modifications, the gradual incremental changes that are rejected by the intelligent design advocates.
Something called punctuated equilibrium may also occur. And here we have again to thank Stephen J. Gould and his colleague Niles Eldridge for formulating this concept. As devised by these two scholars punctuated equilibrium can be defined as a period of evolutionary stasis, period of no change that is broken up by rapid evolutionary change every now and then.
So instead of a regular sort of clock like small modifications building up over time, there can be a time in the fossil record where nothing much is happening and then there's a quick change.
Now Gould and Eldridge were able to look at the history of life on earth and come up with very specific examples of the evolution of organisms where organisms in a particular lineage will look very similar to each other for a long period of time and then there will be a rapid change.
So they were able to take this theoretical concept and tie it down to something very specific. And this is important to say to the intelligent design advocates often whether a person believes in intelligent design or scientific creationism.
They may point to so called gaps in the fossil record in our sequence of fossil forms and say if there's nothing in that gap or if there was a big change ahead but you can't account for it directly beforehand, well then that implies that evolution didn't happen at all.
And what punctuated equilibrium tells us is that there's an alternative to the incremental change. And so that is important to keep in mind.
So they actually are refined Arwenian thinking in an important way.
Alright in some then to this point we can say that evolutionary science and intelligent design ideas are fundamentally opposed to how they view the origins of human life.
But as you might suspect intelligent design theorists are not wholly occupied with things like the eye. They are interested as well in the origin of human life.
And here they make a very parallel argument to the one that we have heard about the eye. In other words humans are complex. They are irreducibly complex and therefore must have arisen by design.
And here they mean by God. And here we get to the real crux of the matter. Humans were designed intelligently by a supernatural force.
And we're right back to our starting point. A non testable claim that cannot be dealt with by science.
And of course evolutionary scientists counter again as they have all along with every claim to this point.
They say that the evidence from the fossil record the evolutionary record coupled with our understanding of the mechanisms of evolution can indeed account for human evolution.
I'll give you one quick example here. Let's take bipedalism the ability to walk erect. As we will learn later this is a fundamental characteristic that marks the start of the lineage of human ancestors.
So human ancestors were able to walk upright whereas previous organisms could not. However the organisms from which human ancestors evolved could walk upright for short periods in a kind of awkward way.
Bent knees shuffling gate not for a long time period. What happened evolutionarily was a redesign of the muscles in the bones that permitted bipedalism.
But it didn't happen out of nowhere. It came from variation that key concept again of the previous organism that could do a sort of kind of bipedalism.
What's interesting about this is that the human ancestors that were bipedal also retained some clear anatomical adaptations for getting around in the trees just like the organisms from which they evolved.
So the point here is that we can look at the progression and the sequence of evolution over time and we can account for how things came about.
Bipedalism is a complex system because all the bones and muscles and movement have to work together dynamically. It's a good example of something that is complex but it is not irreducibly complex.
Alright so where are we as we near the end of this lecture? It is very important I believe to take head on, confront head on this issue of the relationship between science and religion on the one hand and the relationship between these other challenges to Darwinian thinking and science on the other.
It is very important that everyone who comes to biological anthropology to learn about evolution feel comfortable with what they believe. Again as I said earlier biological anthropologists have no interest in invading anyone's private views.
What we are interested in is stressing what is science, what makes a science. The fact that the theory of evolution is scientific that it can be taught in the schools as science in a way that scientific creationism and intelligent design simply cannot because they are not scientific.
We therefore conclude this lecture by affirming that biological anthropologists accept the theory of evolution as an absolutely fundamental part of our toolkit and we wish very much to explain the basis for this acceptance so that this rate of skepticism in the American public might change with understanding that it is not necessary to choose one or the other religion or evolution.
We are now going to turn to a somewhat less theoretical view of evolution, a more concrete underpinning of evolution by asking how primates evolved, how did new species get on the earth in the first place and particularly how did primate species ever come about.
We are primates and so we will start getting into the real heart of the matter of the human evolutionary history when we return.
