Welcome back. In lecture five we will concentrate on the non-human primates and will meet different
species in more depth. Now the non-human primates, united by the five characteristics that we
just talked about at the end of the previous lecture, are found in tropical and subtropical
regions of the world. They're found throughout the old world and the new world. Now for our
purposes we define the old world in terms of primate distribution as Africa and Asia.
And we define the new world as from southern Mexico south, so in other words including
Central America and South America. There are no primates in North America, accepting
of course humans and monkeys and apes that are kept in zoos or perhaps laboratories.
Now this means that we humans have a tropical and subtropical heritage. Just as we have
talked about the grasping hand or depth perception as being traits that go back far in our evolutionary
heritage, so does our geographic location in the tropics. Now as we're training ourselves
to do, we can think of exceptions to the pattern for the primate species. Many of you will
have heard of the Japanese snow monkeys. You'll see documentaries on TV frequently about
snow monkeys in hot springs coming out and sitting on snowy banks, but again this is
the exception rather than the rule. We are going to start talking about three divisions
of non-human primates, three taxonomic groupings if you will. The first grouping is referred
to as the prosimians. Now the prosimians are found only in the old world throughout Asia
and Africa and they were the very first primates to evolve. You'll recall that we talked about
the speciation and adaptive radiation events starting at about 60, 65 million years ago.
By about 55 million years ago we start getting creatures that look like prosimians. Now prosimians
have anatomical specializations to this day that are atypical for primates as a whole
and that is likely because they did in fact evolve first. They are what we call in science
primitive creatures and here we have another of those terms just like theory that has a
very specific meaning. In other words primitive is not to be contrasted with complex or complicated
rather primitive simply means that the creature was the first to evolve in a particular lineage.
So what are the specializations of prosimians? We'll start anatomically. They have extremely
large eyes and this is likely due to the fact that almost all prosimians are nocturnal or
active at night. Prosimians have an unusually well developed for a primate sense of smell.
They have a wet nose but a really elongated snout so that we know smell is important to
them. Many prosimians have what is called a dental comb that is some of the teeth in
the bottom jaw protrude forward in the shape of a comb and this is used in grooming and
hygienic types of functions. We also can point to the fact that prosimians many of them retain
some claws on their hands. Now they are primates so they do have nails for the most part but
occasionally on a single finger or a digit there will be retention of claws and these
claws are used together with the dental comb in grooming picking through the fur of the
social partner. Now by definition we know that prosimians do have the five characteristics
of primates but some of them are not as highly developed as what we find among the anthropoids.
We'll use the grasping hand as an example. Yes, prosimians can grasp branches. They can
move their fingers together in a good reach and a grasp but let's say you were to give
a banana to a prosimian and indicate to the prosimian that it might peel the banana.
They would not be able to do this very well. Independent movement of the fingers is not
highly elaborated compared to what a monkey or an ape could do. You give a chimpanzee
a banana and the first thing it does is peel it. Now I fear that some researcher will tell
me that their prosimian can peel a banana and that may be but again we are talking in
terms of patterns to distinguish these three levels of primates so we will work with generalizations.
Now quite often partly because of the anatomical specializations, prosimians tend to be portrayed
as the least intelligent primates and even as the least social primates. Now in a sense
there's some truth to this. There are some solitary prosimians. I mentioned for you earlier
the mouse lemur, the smallest nonhuman primate as being a solitary forager and this is an
example but really it is not a good idea to contrast a whole array of animals as simple
because this is just not borne out by the facts. In fact, prosimians are as well adapted
as any other animal to their local environments. They are the product of many millions of years
of evolution so for what they need to be they are extremely successful species. Furthermore
recent detailed research by primatologists is telling us that this least complex generalization
about prosimians is too hasty and superficial. I'll give you two examples of animals that
are prosimians that are defying this generalization. First we'll take the ring-tailed lemurs of
Africa. They live on the island of Madagascar which is a large island off the eastern coast
of Africa. This place is prosimian paradise. For ecological reasons no other primates ever
evolved there. There are no monkeys and apes on this island. Humans of course colonized
Madagascar later in its history but because the prosimians never had to compete with monkeys
and apes they flourished in major adaptive radiations across the island. One particular
species called the ring-tailed lemur is of interest to us here as the name suggests these
animals have large colorful striped tails that are used in communication and signaling.
Now the important points for our purpose include that the ring-tailed lemurs are day-living
they are not typical nocturnal prosimians and they're extremely socially adapted. They
live in groups of about 10 to 25 and there's interesting interactions between the individuals.
The females for example tend to be dominant over the males. This is fairly unusual for
primates. We have a phenomenon that's called female feeding priority and that is if resources
become scarce a female is able to take the best food for herself. If a male lemur should
come up and challenge her for that food item she simply bops him on the nose or cuffs him
on the ear. The dominance is quite strong and females take advantage of it. A second
example we will take from Asia and we will look at the laurus another type of prosimian.
Lauruses are nocturnal and until quite recently were thought to be relatively solitary. Now
because they're nocturnal primatologists knew they knew to look at dusk for them that they
sleep in a communal sleeping site during the day then they wake up and they start to be
active. Primatologists knew that there was some social behavior at the communal sleeping
site some grooming a little bit of play but then the assumption was that when night fell
the animals would spread apart and be fairly individual during the night. Recent data from
a primatologist called K. Nicaris working in both India and Sri Lanka overturns this
assumption as it turns out. She found up to nine lauruses together in the forest associating
at places and times other than the communal sleeping nest. In other words during the active
part of the night for these lauruses there would be male care of infants, play wrestling
and grooming. In other words, sociality that would go on for a prolonged time period some
time for hours. So we're finding out that prosimians hold a lot of secrets and a lot
of interest for primatologists and they will surely be the subject of more research in the
future. Now the second and third groupings of nonhuman primates are together referred
to as the anthropoids. As the name implies, anthro from anthropology, these two groups
are more closely related to humans. We already know that they evolved later. So we will start
in on anthropoids. They are the monkeys and the apes and they are day living group adapted
primates with the fully elaborated primate characteristics. First the monkeys. Monkeys
may be found in the new world or the old world. They vary in size, social organization and
behavior. It's impossible to easily sum up what a monkey is. Let's look at the country
of Brazil and South America. So we're concentrating on new world monkeys for the moment. And compare
a little bit two different types of monkeys. Marmosets and murrakes. Marmosets are very
small monkeys that live in trees. They have two unusual characteristics. They have instead
of nails claws. This is really atypical for nonhuman primates. They have claws because
claws allow them to cling on to actual branches and bark of trees by sticking their claws
in and hanging there and eating the sap in the gum from trees. This is a rare ability
to tap into a specific resource like that. The second unusual characteristic is that
marmosets routinely twin. That is they almost never have single births but mothers produce
two babies at once. Marmosets live in extended family groups. This also is relatively unusual.
There is a lot of male care. There's even older sibling care. So the family stay together
and everybody pitches in to take care of the twins. And this is probably a response to
the fact that having two twins is quite a burden on the mother. So this is an adaptive
social system. By contrast in Brazil there's a larger monkey called the murrake. This monkey
lives not in families but in larger groups, bisexual groups. So lots of males, lots of
females and dependent offspring. Karen Stryer has studied the murrake for many years now
and has shown us that there's intense sociality and there tends to be a relaxation of dominance
hierarchies. In other words a relaxation of relative ranking in these groups. Murrake
monkeys are relatively egalitarian, relatively cooperative and not very aggressive. So there's
a lot of variety even within one country in the new world. Let's switch now to monkeys
of the old world. In the old world monkeys may be either tree living or ground dwelling
or they may use both substrates. They also vary in their body size, their social organization
and their behavior. We can use baboons of Africa to illustrate this. For my doctoral research
I studied savannah baboons in Kenya. These animals live in groups of say between 50 and
60. Lots of males, females and dependent offspring. They have dominance hierarchies. The males
tend to be fairly dominant and they are very cohesive. They wake up together in the morning
and groom and socialize and travel and feed together, climb up trees for safety at night.
They're always together. In other parts of the continent of Africa there are very different
types of baboons. We have for example gelata and hamadryas baboons that may live in Ethiopia
and other places that are organized quite differently. Not many males, many females,
but a single male in charge of multiple females. What we used to call a harem, we don't so
much use that term anymore, the one male units then congregate together collectively into
larger clans. The clans break up and come together and different one male units are
very fluid in how they interact with each other. So the lesson that we can take away
from talking about just a few monkey species is that there is first of all no baboon type
single type and secondly more generally no monkey type. One really has to know the species
in question to understand about it. This brings us to the third taxonomic grouping
of nonhuman primates. We're still in the anthropoid category now and these are the
apes. Apes are found only in the old world. Typically they are larger bodied than monkeys.
They have longer arms than legs. Now here is an interesting contrast. Go back for just
a minute. You can picture a typical monkey. It looks more or less like a dog like body
plan. Equal length arms and legs, they walk on the ground or on the tops of branches.
We get a critical difference with apes. The upper body is powerful. The arms are long,
the shoulders are strongly muscled. They apes are break-eaters and most monkeys, almost
all monkeys are not. Break-eation is a way of moving through the trees by hanging and
swinging underneath the branches. So the whole upper body is developed for strength
and agility in the trees. Now we have also the fact that apes have no tails that sets
them apart from monkeys. Lesser apes are given that name because they are very small. They
are atypical apes. So right away we have a break in the pattern for apes. Lesser apes
include species such as gibbons. These are arboreal apes. They live in Asia and typically
they live in mated pairs. So you have a male and a female that set up a small territory
in the forest and raise infants together. Gibbons are interesting because the males
and the females will vocally duet with each other. In other words, they will sing back
and forth in the forest to each other. The male takes a turn, the female takes a turn.
This appears to be an advertisement of their territory and of the fact that they are mated
and they're going to hold that patch of forest for their family.
Now we come to the great apes. And as their name implies, this is where we get into the
large body size. Great apes are the typical kind of ape that we tend to think of. They're
big. They may reside in either Africa or Asia, depending on the type. And they are, without
a doubt, humans' closest living relatives. Great apes are therefore particularly important
for biological anthropology. And I'd like to stop here for just a second and to tell
you that we have gone through relatively quickly some prosimians and some monkeys. And my reason
with giving you examples of prosimians and monkeys has been to show you that there's
a lot of diversity. To talk about adaptive radiations and primate characteristics in a
vivid and living way by examples. But when I talk about the great apes, I want to do
so for a slightly different reason. And again, that gets back to their close relationship
with humans. There are four types of great apes. And I recommend that you really learn
the difference between them because they're so critical. And I'm definitely showing my
bias, my preference as an anthropologist here, if a primatology course, for example, is being
taught by a psychologist, a zoologist or a biologist, which happens frequently, those
scholars might not put so much emphasis on the great apes. But they might distribute
their attention across prosimians, monkeys and apes. But anthropologists do tend to take
this particular emphasis. Let's start with the single great ape that lives in Asia. This
is the orangutan. And they are arboreal. And they do tend to be somewhat less social than
the other great apes. But as I have mentioned in a previous lecture, it would be wrong to
think of them as solitary in the way that a mouse lemur, a prosimian, may be solitary.
Orangutans in certain places definitely group together for prolonged times. Mothers and
infants have long associations and so forth. The orangutans live on the islands of Borneo
and Sumatra. Next, we have gorillas. Gorillas are found in Africa. And they live in either
one male unit or two male units. Until quite recently, the typical rule was to describe
gorillas as living entirely in one male unit, a big silverback male in control of multiple
females and dependent offspring. The silverback refers to as males age, they get silver hair
on their backs. It's a sign of status and age. Now we find out it comes to be that there
are lots of groups of gorillas that have two males. We didn't expect this. Two males
that cooperate maybe in an uneasy type of alliance, but they cooperate to control the
females. So we must refer to both types of social organizations. There does tend to be
a lot of male-male rivalry still in the gorilla world. If only one or possibly two males controls
a group, then you can imagine there will be males left out and they are trying to take
over existing groups, there tends to be a fair amount of male-male fighting. Now we
come to chimpanzees and bonobos, two types of great apes that we will consider for the
moment together because they are both found in Africa, they are quite closely related
to each other, and they both live in what we can call bisexual communities. Community
is a particular term that's applied to these two types of great apes. So you have multiple
males, multiple females, and dependent offspring. Yet there is a contrast between a community
of these great apes and the type of cohesive social groups that I described for you with
baboons. I mentioned that baboons get up in the morning and they spend their day moving,
eating, grooming together. Not so for a chimpanzee or a bonobo community. Rather what you get
in that case are small parties, very small subgroups of chimps or bonobos that stay together
for a while, but then the membership will change, others will come in, and there is
a constantly fluid and dynamic nature of the party membership and therefore of who is together
at any one time in the community. So in some the apes are united, the great apes are united
in their big body size, their sociality, and their brachiation. They are also, I'm sorry
to say, united in the fact that they are severely endangered. Conservationists are particularly
worried about the great apes. They're under a lot of threat, they are poached, they are
eaten, they are shipped around the world as trade items. And I hope we can talk about
this more later.
Now, with this background of the three different taxonomic divisions of non-human primates,
we can begin to consider a little bit more about non-human primate behavior. The study
of non-human primates, and particularly the great apes, took on added focus and significance
in the year 1951, over 50 years ago now. This is when an American anthropologist named
Sherwood Washburn developed his idea for what he called the new physical anthropology. Now
physical anthropology is simply another term for biological anthropology. Historically,
the field tended to be called physical. Now we tend to use the word biological, but it's
very much the same thing. Washburn felt, speaking in the early 1950s, that physical
anthropology was far too focused on static measurement and classification of human populations.
What he asked were physical anthropologists doing. They have access to many groups living
in the world today, and what are they doing? They're going and measuring head circumference,
finger length, they're classifying groups according to skin color. They are concentrating
entirely too much on coming up with types. This type of person has this characteristic.
Washburn even said, as best he could estimate, that 80 percent of physical anthropology was
about this static measurement and classification. He said, we're turning out to be just a technique.
Our whole field is turning out to be a technique. Now I don't know, this may sound innocuous
to you, but it isn't. This isn't what an academic wants his or her discipline described
as. One likes to think that there's a theory and concepts and real engagement with material.
Well, this is exactly what Washburn was calling for and wanted to work for. He wanted to focus
instead of static measurement on the dynamic processes of evolutionary change and how these
have affected and continue to affect primates, both non-human and human. He envisioned then
a real interdisciplinary synthesis that would center on questions of evolutionary change.
So what he was proposing was not just a patch on a disciplinary change in language and vocabulary,
but a change at the real heart of what physical anthropology was about. To go out and start
to do new things. Now this being over half a century ago, we need to remember, was coinciding
with more and more advances in our understanding of evolution, particularly our understanding
of the relationship between genetics and evolution. So it came at a good time to be talking about
a synthesis in this way. So what did Washburn specifically advocate doing? A major method
of the new physical anthropology involved what we can call the comparative method. In
other words, comparing and contrasting the evolutionary adaptations of different primates.
Washburn, as we know, began talking in the early 1950s. He then trained students, graduate
students, in the types of methods he was thinking about. This was largely at the University
of California, Berkeley. And by the early 60s, there was what I could only call a wave
of students going out to study non-human primates around the world with this idea of the comparative
approach in mind. In other words, these students had a goal to compare and contrast non-human
primate adaptations with those of humans and those that we can infer from the fossil record
about human ancestors. And this was quite impressive how many students went out from
Washburn's center in California. In fact, even today, very many North American primatologists
trace their professional family tree or ancestry back to Washburn. His students became so successful
that they in turn now have trained a whole other generation of students. And I'm fortunate
to count myself in Washburn's family tree. When I went to graduate school, I studied
with an anthropologist called Jane Lancaster, who had been one of this initial wave of Washburn's
students. So I get to say in the parlance of academia that Washburn is my academic grandfather.
Now Lancaster went in the 1960s to the country of Zambia in Africa. She studied how small
green monkeys living there behaved. She focused on mother-infant behavior, but when she came
back and wrote up her data, she proceeded to write a book about the evolution of human
behavior. Now that was typically Washburn-like type of approach. Other students went to Africa
and focused on baboons. Baboons were quite popular. As we will see later, baboons were
the initial primate of choice as models for early human ancestors because baboons lived
on the savanna. And we thought at that time that early humans evolved on the savanna.
So there was this fit between the two that led students to particularly want to focus
on baboons. Now, it is without a doubt true that Washburn's reformulation of biological
anthropology was a turning point in the field. Even today, a key element of the discipline
continues to be comparative research. The idea is that we want to study monkeys and apes
not only because they're so interesting to spend time with and to learn about, but because
they can illuminate the study of human evolution and behavior. So the conclusion that we can
reach is that primate studies are a key and integral part of biological anthropology and
thus a part of anthropology as a whole. And we really owe this in a very large way to
Washburn. Now, what we will see as we continue to talk about non-human primates is that the
way we go about this comparative method has changed over the 50 years. Of course, this
is only what we would expect. The very typical approach in Washburn's day was what we might
consider a kind of one-to-one approach. You go out and study a monkey and you use what
you can find there to learn about a hominid, a human ancestor. And that is an interesting
approach, but many feel it's relatively simplistic. A one-to-one relationship is really not what
we want to aim for. So the models that are now derived using primate studies as a base
to illuminate biological anthropology are quite different. And I do think that Washburn
would approve of them. He died just a few years ago, but the models that we use now are
even more dynamic and even more active. In other words, they take into account variation
much more change the whole array of possibilities of behavioral adaptations. And I can only
think that Sherry Washburn would appreciate this. Now, we have reviewed the three types
of primates and come to understand that for about 50 years, the study of their behavior
has been a very tightly focused sub-discipline of biological anthropology. This leads us
to the next logical step, which is to delve more deeply into primate sociality, which
is after all at the heart of primate behavior. So when we return in lecture six, we will
talk specifically about social behavior in the anthropoids, in monkeys and apes.
