Welcome back. In this lecture we will expand on one of the five major characteristics of primates,
their sociality, concentrating on the anthropoids, the monkeys and apes. Our starting fact of
central importance is this. Within their social groups, individual monkeys and apes form strong
social bonds with selected companions. What this means is that monkey and ape groups are not
formed because of something like a herd instinct. These animals don't just stay together to have
warm bodies around. They're not together just to have extra eyes to find predators, extra brains
to detect food. There's more to it than that. They are together at least in part because they form
individual connections, emotional ties and even build up social histories over time with each other.
And this sets them apart from at least some other mammals and many other mammals in the
quality of their social relationships. Some of the strongest social bonds that primatologists
have observed are between kin. In other words, many non-human primates recognize and act
preferentially towards their relatives. Kinship is an axis of social behavior that's very important.
As I have hinted to you earlier, because we've talked about populations being open, there is a
rule in mammalian biology. Typically in mammals, including primates, one sex stays in the group
into which it is born, their natal group. The other sex transfers out of that group and breeds in a
second group or population. So it is sometimes the case that both sexes will leave their natal group,
but more often it is the case that one stays and the other goes. What this means then is that one
sex will tend to be surrounded by its relatives as it lives in its natal group and the other sex
will transfer and go elsewhere and not be surrounded by relatives. Now other social bonds exist besides
those that are mediated by kinship. These tend to be predicated on close associations or what some
primatologists might even want to call friendships. Now we don't want to just import the term
friendship from human societies and use it uncritically. Rather primatologists to talk about
friendships, measure them and set apart that type of social relationship from others. They may
measure, for example, proximity, staying close together. A lot of grooming. This grooming that
I've mentioned several times is not just hygienic for picking out bugs from the fur, but it's very
soothing and very bonding. Another indice of friendship might be, for example, helping somebody
else in a tense situation coming to someone's aid. Some of the best studied monkey species live
socially in groups organized around groups of female relatives. These groups take the term
matrilines. Now a particular old world monkey species, the rhesus monkey, has taught anthropologists
a great deal about living in natural lines, particularly at one site, the island of Cayo
Santiago off Puerto Rico. Now I hope you've already stopped yourself and said, wait, she said it's
an old world monkey. What are they doing living on an island off Puerto Rico in the new world? Well
this is an interesting story in itself. Back in 1938, researchers went to India and imported
slightly over 400 monkeys across the sea to this island and ever since they have been studied. In
fact, since 1956 they have been studied on a daily basis with detailed records. What this means is
that we have more detailed long-term data on the Cayo Santiago rhesus than we have on Jane
Goodall's chimpanzees, which relatively few people recognize. This is a treasure trove of
information. Cayo Santiago is very vital and active as a scientific site today. It is 38 acres,
and it's possible to get there on a relatively short boat ride across from the big island of
Puerto Rico. There are no fewer than 900 monkeys on Cayo Santiago. Currently these are organized
into seven social groups plus an extra eighth group that's made up of entirely males. I'm going
to use Cayo Santiago as a case study for you, and it's appropriate that I should do so. I have a
student from William & Mary who is interning there at the moment. My student Kristi Hoffman is
studying female-female mating and competition. She's an intern to the scientist in charge on the
island. It's a great deal of work, long days, lots of observation. I've had two students who
did similar work on Cayo Santiago before, but it is also a beautiful area. You're on an island
surrounded by the beautiful sea, and of course it is also extremely important and rewarding work.
Now, one of the organizing principles of rhesus monkey life on Cayo Santiago is dominance.
Dominance is the relative ranking of monkeys according to their access to resources, food,
shelter, mates, something like that. We know a great deal about dominance from a certain time
period at Cayo Santiago, a certain number of years that were studied in depth by the primatologist
John Burrard, who used to be the primatologist in charge on Cayo Santiago. Now first, before I get
into his data, I want to make a remark about dominance. Dominance is too often thought of
as some kind of a lifetime achievement award. In other words, that monkey becomes dominant
at some point in his or her life and just is dominant. That's it. He or she is always dominant
from then on. And in fact, it is much more of a fluid and changing situation than that. Dominance
for at least some animals tends to be relatively short term, a life cycle phenomenon. This is
true of the males on Cayo Santiago. Males may rise in the dominance hierarchy and stay high up in
the dominance hierarchy, but they stay there for relatively short periods. They are deposed by
rivals relatively soon, say maybe a year and a half, two years, two and a half years, something
like that. For females, it's a little bit different. And the position in the hierarchy is a little
more solidified and a little more stable. And we'll explore that in a minute. There are three
basic facts that have emerged from Berards and other scientists to data on dominance
among the Rhesus monkeys of Cayo. First, these various groups on the island are ranked in relation
to each other. The rule seems to be that the bigger groups are dominant to the smaller ones.
And there isn't a lot of fighting here. The bigger groups simply can push the little ones
off a path or away from resources. If two groups are relatively similar in size, there may be more
actual aggression and fighting to determine who gets rights to a certain area. Secondly,
within a group, matrilines are ranked in relation to one another. And remember that a matriline
is a group of related females. So a matriline would have grandmothers, mothers, aunts, sisters,
all kinds of related females. So in this sense, defining a family as females, you get a kind of
ladder or strata, if you will, of females in families that are ranked one against the other.
And there's yet a third layer of dominance. Within a matriline, there's a particular rule that seems
to obtain. Primatologists call this youngest sister ascendancy. And what this means is that
each mother favors her newest daughter. And this may at first seem a little counterintuitive.
You might think that the daughter who's older, who's been around longer, would be supported
by her mother over a new one, but this is not the case. Now, an example may help here. Let's make up
a hypothetical rhesus monkey living on Cairo named Zelda. She has four children in her life,
four infants. Her first infant is a female. And let's make for fun Zelda be the alpha female
of the alpha matriline, that is, the top ranking female in the top ranking matriline
of this group. So she's in charge. And her daughter is born and her daughter comes to rest
right beneath her mother in the dominance hierarchy. Even as an infant, this little kid,
this little infant, can boss around other adults that are lower ranking. This is not, of course,
because she herself is powerful or strong, but because she's doing this with a backup of her
mother, who will come to support her. Zelda, the mom, goes on to have infant number two,
also a female. And the second female then comes to rest above the first infant below the mother.
So the first infant goes lower in the dominance hierarchy. Now Zelda has a third infant and it's
a male. The male will enjoy being relatively high ranking while he's around, but he's not around
all that many years because males on Cairo Santiago are the sex that transfer. So at a certain age,
he leaves the group and he goes and he mates and stays elsewhere. So he loses really the rank
of his mother and he has to start all over again in another group. Then infant four is born and
it's a female and you already know what happens. And this continues on and on. Right around their
first birthdays as yearlings, male and female recess monkeys begin to act differently and
socialize differently. Female infants begin to really cement their ties within the match line.
They spend a lot of time with their relatives, grooming, consolidating power. The males on the
other hand start to hang around the periphery of their groups. They start to play with their male
peers. This is play, but it's also testing strength. They're beginning to look at other groups that
may come near them. They are beginning to scope out where they may transfer in the future.
So the daughters, of course, are the ones who will have the important kin relationships in the
future. So Cairo Santiago recess life is something we know a lot about. The key components have
emerged quite clearly. Let's compare that case study with another. We'll look now at a great ape
and we'll return to the chimpanzee as a good example. Chimpanzees are great apes rather than
monkeys and they live social lives that are of interesting contrast to the social lives of
Cairo Santiago recess. Now we're going to rely on data from two different populations of chimpanzees.
East African chimps studied by Jane Goodall living in Tanzania. West African chimps studied by
Christoph Bosch living in Thai National Park in the Ivory Coast. Now I want to give you one fact
about chimps, first of all, and that is that unlike the racist monkeys we talked about,
in this case the males stay put in their communities and the females transfer. And what I'd like to
ask you to do is a mental exercise. You may even want to put the tape on pause. Think for a minute
what implications the fact that the males stay and the females transfer might have
for sociality of chimpanzees. And I'll bet that you were able to predict this because it turns out
that chimpanzees are organized into patcher lines, groups of related males. The patcher lines form
the core of the communities and the females will go and mate elsewhere and they turn out to be
relatively not solitary but they're not highly social in their new social groups. They will stay
around other chimps. They'll stay with their dependent offspring but they're not surrounded by
kin and they're not particularly friendly with other female chimpanzees. Now dominance is important
too in chimpanzee lives. The focus of attention within a community tends to be the male dominance
hierarchy and there does tend to be a single alpha male at the top so that even a low ranking male
will tend to outrank a high ranking female. The males are just the dominant ones in chimpanzees.
What you find though is that the dominance hierarchy is neither linear nor simply based on physical
strength. For example two middle ranking chimps may gang up together and be able to either overthrow
or at least severely hassle the alpha male. It is also known from Goodall's work that being
smart and having allies can put you on the path to being an alpha just as much as being big and
strong can. A famous example is Mike the chimpanzee that Goodall knew who put together kerosene cans
he found in the forest, banged them together, rolled them ahead of him down the path and
intimidated his rivals and rose straight to the rank of alpha even though he was not particularly
big or strong. Other alphas Goodall has known got to their position through support of their siblings
or other male relatives. Now male male bonds are very much the focus of the community very
significant whether they occur within the patriline or in some kind of friendship that I described
for you before and I'll give you a couple of ways in which these male male bonds play out
behaviorally for chimpanzees. First of all male chimps work together to hunt. Male chimpanzees
like to eat meat and they don't just accept it when they stumble upon it rather they go out
and search for it and bring down prey. The favored prey of chimpanzees are colibus monkeys,
old world monkeys that live in the trees and the interesting part is that the males use their
bonds to not hunt singly but work together so they go out in particular groups. At tie in the
ivory coast there's a male named Brutus who was just an incredibly good hunter. He seemed more so
than other chimpanzees to be able to anticipate actions of his fellow chimp hunters and actions
of the monkey prey and he had a very high success rate but he always did this in concert
with other male chimps. Then at the end of the hunt if there's a kill the meat is shared usually
between the hunters and sometimes distributed to females so it's a process not just of hunting but
of food sharing afterwards that is a male type of activity. Secondly males cooperate to go on
patrol that is males will actually walk along the borders of their territories together and they
will look for possible neighboring groups or strangers. They often will do this walking single
file and silently. Now when I say silently I mean they don't vocalize they don't scream.
Sometimes when they're setting out they will gather together at the base of a big tree and they'll
drum on that tree so they can make noise in that way and scientists speculate that this may be a
way to announce their strength in numbers by drumming they can get a lot of animals making a
lot of noise. Sometimes by the way if the patrollers find strangers near their borders very aggressive
and violent encounters may result. We know of this mostly from Jane Goodall's work so this brings up
an important point the male male bonds that we're talking about exist within the community. They do
not go across community lines so if males meet other males or other females the relationship
that results is a hostile one and there may even be lethal violence in some cases. So chimpanzee
communities are very male oriented. They are much more so than our rhesus monkey groups.
Now male rhesus certainly care a lot about dominance they jockey for position and they fight each other
for this but in the rhesus monkeys remember there's a locus of power in the natural lines
because the females are surrounded by their relatives and this is simply not the case
with the chimpanzees. So the real socio-emotional focus if you will tends to be around the males
in chimpanzees. Okay another contrast that we can make is that ape youngsters develop much more
slowly than do monkey youngsters. So if we compare the chimps to the rhesus we see a different
developmental trajectory. We know that at one year of age the rhesus monkeys begin to diverge
behaviorally by sex. This is not so much the case with chimps because a one-year-old
chimp is still a very young dependent infant. The one-year-old infant is being carried and held
close to the mother still suckling on the mother quite a bit. So there's a longer period we know
that the infancy period lasts at least four years in great apes. The entire lifespan lasts longer
in great apes. It is not unusual for great apes to live into their 40s and that would be quite
unusual for a monkey. Now at some point of course you do get behavioral divergence by sex
in chimpanzees. When females reach their puberty they start to get what's called a sexual swelling
an area on their rump of reddened tightened skin that indicates to males that they're capable
of being impregnated. In other words it's a signal of fertility. When these swellings first occur
the females begin to move to the periphery of their natal communities and soon after they then
transfer. We know that there are some exceptions not every single chimpanzee in the world transfers
at puberty. There are some famous examples that Jane Goodall has told us about. The old female
Flo and her daughter Fifi live together in the same community but this is by far a minority
pattern. Almost all female chimpanzees do transfer and therefore end up in groups without kin.
All right so we have noted some differences in social organization between chimps and
resus monkeys. These two species and their differences attest to the balance between
cooperation and competition that characterizes group living in anthropoids. What I mean here
is that group living is about access to resources in one way. There are usually limited resources
available there's not just you know totally abundant food or shelter so that there has to be
some kind of competition that results for these resources and dominance hierarchy seem to be
one way of organizing that competition. But yet competition is only one half of the story
as we have seen there's also a lot of cooperation. Cooperation evolves develops between individuals
and can be based on the social ties that I have talked about. So we don't see individual monkeys
and apes coming together just to solve some kind of task. We don't see them coming together finding
a bunch of ripe fruit eating and then going apart. We don't see them coming together just to hunt and
then finishing the task and then going apart. We see that after the particular task is accomplished
they stay together in different ways depending on the species but the sociality is continuous
so that you have what we might consider to be a real emotional matrix for the behavior that unfolds.
So when animals finish feeding or finish hunting let's take chimps as an example and they're
dividing up the kill. There can be a lot of excitement embracing and kissing and vocalizing.
Let's say that there was a squabble that broke out over some prized meat if it's in rare supply
between two chimpanzees and there was fighting. At the end of the fight more often than not there's
a process of what we call reconciliation where the two animals both seem very interested in
quote-unquote making up if you will. They will seek each other out, they will hug,
they will groom each other and essentially repair the break in the social bond. Many things like
this happen so that we understand that there's an emotional underlay here to the social bonds.
I believe that that socio-emotional nature of the social ties is more pronounced in apes
than it is in monkeys and we'll return to that question a little bit later.
But it is true that it is still essentially there just elaborated differently in different primates.
So just as Sherwood Washburn envisioned when he talked about the new physical anthropology
what we see is comparative research that really yields useful conclusions about primate evolution.
What I have done so far in this lecture is to tell you essentially two case studies. I've picked
out two primate species that are extremely well known and well studied. The rhesus monkey of Asia
or Cayo Santiago and the chimpanzee of Africa probably have more scientist hours logged on them
than any other in other words many many more hours put into studying these types of primates than
some others. But yet what I want to do is to be able to talk about some things more generally
and again step back a little bit and talk about patterns. We can conclude by saying first a deep
layer of primate social grouping and social bonding is present despite variation in form.
This goes right back to our initial statement that sociality is almost ever present in primates.
Now just as we have said that we're tropical in origin as humans just as anatomically we have
all of the characteristics of being primate. It's important for me to get across to you that
the sociality is an adaptation that is ancient in primates. The variation that we do see across
species in social grouping and social bonding can be understood as well. This is a whole subarea
of study within primatology. Why is it that in rhesus monkeys the males transfer in the female
stay but it is the reverse in chimps? That is an interesting question. We can begin to understand
the variation in primate social organization by looking at a combination of factors. We would
know from our knowledge of evolutionary theory that we want to be thinking about natural selection
and adaptation to local conditions. Food is a big part of that, a big part of what we mean when
we say local conditions are nutrition and food resources. These factors are combined of course
with the individual species biology, their brains, what kind of learning do their brains permit,
what does their anatomy allow in terms of feeding and foraging? Having talked so much about variation
between rhesus and chimpanzees in how they're organized, I do want to say just a little bit
about the prevailing hypothesis for why there is so much variation and it has to do with food.
And I'm going to say this relatively briefly. It will give you just a hint of how we can explain
this variation. Females are absolutely dependent in any mammal on getting enough calories and
nutrition to underwrite reproduction. Now we know that reproductive success is key for any mammal,
that is a given for understanding evolution. But if you think about it females are really
under a special burden when it comes to reproduction if you're a mammal because if you're a female
you are carrying a fetus, you're going to give birth to a live offspring and then there's a period
of protracted suckling or nursing where the mother has to get enough caloric energy to be able to
feed the baby as well. So the basic rule seems to be that if females can afford to stay together
with their kin, by that I mean if they can get enough food by staying together as kin they
should prefer to do so. Certainly there are advantages to having your relatives around.
You do have a built-in supply of allies, of grooming, of help and a variety of situations.
However there will be situations and chimpanzees seem to be one of them where the type of food
that is the species typical diet does not occur in plentiful enough numbers or wide enough
distribution to allow females to stay together. In other words we think, primatologists think,
that if female primates, I'm sorry female chimpanzees did live together they would
be unable to support calorically their reproduction. The last thing that female mammals want to do is
compete with their kin, don't want to take resources from their kin. So what happens is females
transfer they go and breed in another community they do end up competing but they're competing
with their non-kin and we know that they don't form terribly close friendships in these other
communities. Now admittedly this is somewhat of a simplified explanation of a very complicated
series of hypotheses that have been abundant in the primate literature but it gives you a hint
that we must understand not only how the species biology differs but how environments differ
in quite specifically how food supplies differ. A very typical exercise for a primatologist
going into the field, this was true of me and Kenya, is to spend a great amount of time not
just taking data on the behavior that is visible but on the distribution and amount of food available
seasonally because that will determine a great deal of the behavior. Now let's close the lecture
by bringing the question back to the human species and we can make a strong prediction based just
on what we've learned in this lecture. Human evolution too should proceed according to adaptation
to local conditions and selection pressures. So we can say that there's a very ancient base
for sociality and for the emotional nature of sociality that was in place before the time period
of human evolution. I think this is an interesting point to reflect upon. So often in courses
and in textbooks we tend to reduce human ancestors, hominids, to creatures that made a series of
accomplishments that reached a series of milestones, timelines, first bipedalism, first stone tools.
When was the first art? So we tend to think of hominids as achieving a certain number of things
over time. We rarely, I believe, think of hominids as living socio-emotional creatures that have
sociality, that care about living in their social groups. Yet everything we know about monkeys and
apes indicates to us that this would have been so also of hominids. With this background on
sociality in mind, we want to turn to a slightly different aspect of primate behavior in the next
lecture. We will be talking about cognition and learning and we will focus in that lecture
specifically on the great apes.
