Welcome back. Given the importance of great apes to biological anthropology, it is natural
to devote a lecture entirely to them, and we will do so here. We will zero in on the
great ape mind, which I have to admit is one of my very favorite topics in all of biological
anthropology. Our task in this lecture will be to evaluate a particular statement. Apes,
especially the great apes, outshine monkeys and prosimians in terms of their cognitive
abilities. This is what we want to consider, and when we're talking about cognitive abilities,
of course, we're referring to things that involve thinking and social learning. Now,
for some scientists, this statement is a conclusion, a firm conclusion that emerges
from the data. And I fit myself in here. I do believe that all indications are that
there is a type of watershed, if you will, in cognition, with apes exceeding the abilities
of what the other non-human primates say. Scholars who fall into this camp point, for
example, two differences in using technology, by monkeys versus apes. Good examples are chimpanzees
and orangutans. Chimpanzees are the consummate tool users and tool makers of the entire animal
kingdom. Chimpanzees will make wands to stick down termite mounds to fish out the termites
and eat. Chimps will also take very hard nuts, lay them on anvils that are flat rocks, and
take either hammers of stone or hammers of wood and crack them down on the nut, opening
it. Every single population that we know of chimpanzees include tool using and tool making
behaviors. Being a tool maker or a tool user is as fundamental to a chimpanzee as the male
dominance hierarchy is. Some populations of orangutans also use tools. This was discovered
more recently. Some orangutans use tools to probe for insects or to open fruits. Every
type of great ape uses tools in captivity, although only chimps and orangs do so in the
wild. Now, other scientists take issue with accepting this conclusion of the great ape
cognitive watershed quite so readily. They consider the statement that we started with
as more of a hypothesis for testing rather than a firm conclusion. Sticking to our example
of technology, scientists in this camp note that there are new discoveries all the time
of tool use and tool making among monkey populations. For example, just about a year ago there was
a publication about a group of capuchin monkeys, small new world monkeys living in South America
that were using anvils and hammers to open hard nuts. This was very surprising and as
I've mentioned is very new. Typically, monkey tool use is much more limited than that. Monkeys
who want to open hard nuts or hard fruits routinely will take that food item and bang
it against a tree. Now, that may be smart, but it's not tool use since it's taking the
hand and banging rather than applying something like a hammer to the nut. Also, monkeys will
do what's called aimed throwing. They'll be up on a high branch, they'll break off a branch
and throw it down as a missile on top of a predator, maybe a human or maybe another monkey,
maybe a big cat. So here I have introduced for you the terms of the debate using technology
as a way into it about the great ape cognitive watershed. We are going to consider other
examples but not talk more about technology in this lecture. We will start by looking
at an area that can be called theory of mind. And here is an area in which it seems to me
clear that great apes are capable of higher cognition than our other nonhuman primates.
So what is having a theory of mind mean? It means that you as an individual can take into
account another organism's mental state, how another individual thinks or feels or behaves
in the world. So to give some examples to start with from our basic human life, we can
think of, let's say you're in the car with your spouse or your partner and you encounter
unexpectedly a traffic jam and it's a really bad one and you are hoping to make a movie
and you know that the person you are with gets very unnerved by traffic jams and grouchy
and grumpy and so you might think to yourself, oh I can just guess how this person is feeling,
I better sort of take it easy and just be quiet for a while. Or let's say you have a
child and the child is happy and popular and things are going well but in one particular
instance the child does not get an invitation to a party that he or she really wanted to
attend and you might come home and learn this information and think to yourself, wow that
really must hurt, my child is feeling rejected, I have you know feelings for my child, I'm
sorry about that and you might act differently based on that. Those are simple examples of
having a theory of mind. We take it for granted in our lives that this is the way we act in
the world. We also look for development of theory of mind in children. This is obviously
not something that comes automatically to infants but rather develops as children mature
socially. You might have experienced being with a child who wants to play hide and seek
and the child may cover her eyes like this. She can't see you and therefore you she thinks
can't see her. It's an expectation the child has that if the child isn't able to see you
then there's nothing different about what you should be able to see of her. This of course
is false and they realize that later. Another example might be an older child let's say
six or seven coming up to you and saying John and I went to a movie and you know at the
ending of that movie and you've never seen the movie nor do you know who John is but
they just assume what they know you know. They're not able to disaggregate if you will
different states of knowledge versus states of ignorance. And an interesting question
for biological anthropology is do any of our closest living relatives share an ability
with theory of mind. So let's consider what we know about chimpanzees in this particular
realm. First of all chimpanzees will warn companions who lack knowledge of impending
danger but fail to warn those associates who already have that knowledge. So in other words
they make a distinction based on inferred knowledge state. As a concrete illustration
I can tell you about the work of Sally Boyson who's a primatologist at Ohio State. She runs
a cognition laboratory there. Primarily she investigates cognition of chimpanzees although
she does have some other species including pigs there as well. She's done a series of
very formal and controlled very good experiments on language and learning. There's also an
experiment that she has done that relates to theory of mind. In this case there are
two chimpanzees in caging. One chimpanzee has visual access to an approaching veterinarian
somebody in a white coat with something akin to a tranquilizer gun. Chimps as you might
imagine don't like to see vets coming even though vets are there for their own good.
It's not a pleasant experience often to have a vet come. So let's consider that we have
chimpe and chimpe. Chimpe can see the vet coming. Chimpe can also see his friend chimpe. Chimpe
can't see the vet coming. In this case chimpe warns chimpe. Will who shriek, get bees attention
focused on the vet? All these other things. The interesting thing though is if you change
the caging arrangements slightly or the approach path of the vet and now both A and B can see
the approach of the vet. A will not warn B. And I should mention that this has been done
scientifically so it doesn't always happen in that sequence. Sometimes chimpe A and B
both have visual access first so the order is reversed. So we know from this that chimpe
is taking into account what his friend might or might not know. In similar situations not
exactly the same but similar monkeys fail to distinguish the state of knowledge versus
ignorance of their social companions. Let's say you take a monkey mother. It can be a
rhesus mother and you cage her with her offspring but there's a glass panel between the mother
and the offspring and some sort of simulated artificial predator approaches the children.
This may again be an adult human dressed up as a vet or some other thing. If the mother
is able to see that her children see what's coming, she doesn't warn her children. If she's
able to intuit that her offspring don't have visual access because they have some kind
of a really dark barrier before they could see the vet coming, they also don't warn
their children. In other words, there doesn't seem to be any distinction here based on what
the infants actually know. The monkeys don't seem to take into account the state of ignorance
of their offspring. We also have interesting data from wild chimpanzees that appears to
support or back up the conclusion that we're reaching, that chimps have some degree anyway
of a theory of mind. It's a lot harder in the wild. We don't have controlled situations,
can't manipulate animals, but we just need to see what unfolds spontaneously. So a few
examples from the wild will be helpful here. Chimpanzee mothers teach their offspring more
than do monkey mothers. And this of course gives evidence of recognizing a state of ignorance.
After all, teaching is all about figuring out what your pupils or your audience know
and do not know. I am up here right now in the teaching mode. I'm telling you about theory
of mind because my assumption is that you are unlikely to know a huge amount about chimpanzee
theory of mind. It would be very odd if I were to stand up here and introduce a lecture
and tell you, I am now going to tell you the ABCs. This is not something that would make
sense. This would be a failure of theory of mind. So teaching is bound up with theory
of mind and chimps show that they appreciate what their offspring can and cannot do. They
may, for example, leave out certain tools that facilitate infants learning how to use
those tools. Hammers at nutcracking sites would be one example here. Mothers also intervene
in infant food choice. If infants pick up a food that is not something that chimps normally
eat or should be eating, sometimes mothers will discard that type of food. And again,
these behaviors that I am describing for you by chimpanzees are contrasted to what
we see with monkeys. That monkey mothers tend not to be doing these types of things. Similarly
in the wild, in some situations chimpanzees show what appears to be empathy. The idea
that they can put themselves in somebody else's shoes, if you will, mentally speaking. It's
very hard to know this for sure. But multiple examples, lots of data do point us in that
direction. Let's look at Thai national forest in the Ivory Coast for a moment and that chimpanzee
population. There was a death of a chimpanzee there and this chimpe had been killed by leopards.
The body was lying around on the ground and the primatologists observed the community members
coming up to the body. The adult chimps kept away all of the juvenile chimps, means the
younger ones, the infants and the young kids, except for one. The one that was allowed to
approach and spend time at the body was the younger sibling of the dead animal. Now that's
very interesting. We can't know exactly why that was the case. It certainly indicates
to me that there's recognition of a social bond based on kinship. It approaches questions
having to do with empathy. We know also that chimpanzees that are wounded and have big major
wounds on their bodies will receive care from their social companions. The wound will be
licked and tended to. However, chimpanzees who have recently died but also show wounds
do not get the same response. Nobody licks or cares for their wounds. This indicates then
that it's not an automatic sort of stimulus response. See a wound react, but rather the
condition of the animal with the wound is taken into account. So certainly empathy is
a fruitful area for future study with great apes. We should also look at monkeys as well.
Let's move away from theory of mind to another behavioral area that involves cognition. Let's
look at complex communication. This is another context in which great apes amaze scientists
and reach heights that have not been reached in my evaluation by monkeys. Now I need to
qualify that statement right away. Vocal communication is not a particularly good area to use to
support the idea of the great apes watershed. That is, it appears to us that great apes vocalizations
may differ relatively little from the way that other mammals, including monkeys, vocalize.
This may be because we don't know enough yet about great apes vocal communication. It really
hasn't been studied all that much in the wild. But interestingly enough, monkey vocal communication
has been studied more. And what we know is that when monkeys vocalize, either with a
bark or an alarm call or a scream, sometimes, not always, but more than rarely, they are
encoding specific information in their calls. We know from specific experiments that those
vocalizations are not just about an emotional response or a high arousal state, but they
encode information. And we can tell this because these calls have been played back in certain
situations and the responses of social companions have been assessed. This complex vocal communication
of monkeys is very interesting and it actually happens more with monkeys than it does with
great apes. However, if we look at gestural communication, non-vocal communication, there
does seem to be a way to see that apes are more complex communicators than monkeys. This
is an interesting channel of communication for biological anthropology. The fact that
great apes are very tied into the use of gesture has spawned recently a lot of theories
of gestural origins for human language. And we'll talk more about this later in the course.
Now we know that great apes are anatomically different than monkeys. We know that they
have powerful upper bodies, that they're break-eaters, that they can walk bipedally for short distance,
with bended knees. We also can infer from this that they're able to make gestures more readily
because their shoulder, their elbow, their wrist has been made for rotation for break-eation
purposes, but this can also serve with making gestures. Great ape gesture is in some cases
both intentionally communicative and what we call iconic. Now an iconic gesture is simply
a subtype of gesture, and it means that you're indicating to somebody else an action that
should be taken. If you can imagine making a kind of circular or twirling motion with
your hand in a quick and tight circle, you made this in front of somebody else, they
would understand that they're meant to turn around. That's an example of an iconic gesture
because you're telling someone what you want them to do. And we know that great apes use
gesture both socially to make a request or to get some point across and use gesture iconically.
Now as always I will use examples and I'm going to use some of my own work here. Since
1999 I have been studying the development of gesture in a group of western lowland gorillas
at the National Zoo in Washington. One infant male gorilla was born in November of 1999
and a second was born in November of 2001. My focus is on the development of infant gestures
in the context of the family in which these infants live. And definitely these infants
use gesture intentionally to communicate to their social partners. To take an example
the older of the two infants Kwame means born on a Saturday which he was, lifted his arms
as a very young infant straight up in the air as an indicator to his mother he wanted
to be picked up. He would extend his arm palm up towards a social companion if he wanted
to interact with that social companion. His mother would use light brushing touch more
of a gesture than any kind of force on his back for example to get him to move in a certain
way. This gorilla family like others is an interesting one, there's a silver back in
it, his name is Kuya, he's large. When Kuya gets up, stands up and begins to move across
the cage there is a whole choreography of response and interaction. Everybody monitors
him with their gaze, their posture reflects his movement. You can get an enormous amount
of information from the body posture, the way these animals hold each other, how they
lean. All of this non-vocal communication in addition to discrete gesture is very important.
Occasionally the gorillas that I study may use something like iconic gesture, it's not
very frequent and it's not entirely very very clear sometimes but not always. A colleague
of mine however has shown unequivocally that other populations of captive great apes do
use iconic gesture. Joanne Tanner has studied for many years the western lowland gorillas
at the San Francisco Zoo. She shows examples of iconic gestures and more than that she
shows that gorillas will converse if you will with each other using gestural strings.
Now she's about to publish this work so I'm going to take the sense of what she's saying
and give a hypothetical example. One adult male may make a head nod then move his arm
in a kind of swing like motion and shake his wrist. Three separate gestures in a string
and the female will respond with gestures and actions of her own so that there's an exchange
back and forth. This is interesting because it shows us first of all that different captive
groups communicate differently but all of the examples that I've given you for complex
gesture appear to be things that monkeys don't do at least basically as a rule. Now staying
within the area of complex communication I want to switch our focus to a different type
of great ape, the inculturated great ape. Now this can be a chimp, bonobo, gorilla or
orang but what we refer to with inculturated is the way the ape is raised. Inculturated
apes are raised in very enriched captive environments and some of these apes have surprised scientists
by what they can do in mastering human symbol systems, human ways of communicating. So first
let me tell you about the inculturated setting. This is not a typical zoo or research lab.
These are places that are devoted to giving lots of caregiving and social attention to
great apes. They are surrounded by objects, they may go for hikes in the wood, they may
drive in a car, they may make milkshakes for lunch, just a very human saturated world if
you will. Now I'm going to choose one particular inculturated great ape to give you an example
of complex communication. The chimpanzee I spelled A-I has lived in Japan as part of
a research project since 1978. She is at Kyoto University, specifically the primate
research institute there and her main caregiver and companion and the scientist in charge
of her project is Dr. Matsuzawa. He's worked with her for many years. Now one task that
I has been trained to do is called a token task. She's in front of a computer and she
needs to solve specific problems. I won't go into great detail here, but she's asked
to do sorts of matching problems using symbols on a computer screen. When she gets the answer
correct, which she's capable of doing, she gets a token from the back of the computer,
it rolls out down a slot and she's able to collect tokens and when she gets enough she
goes across the room and uses them in a vending machine and she gets snacks. This is an interesting
example of cognitive skills that are indicating that she can use symbols in an interesting
way and that she can also come to understand how to save up tokens to get fun food. They're
given fairly healthy snacks by the way. They're not loading the chips up on Snickers bars,
so it's a fine system all around. Now what I really want to tell you about is what happened
when I had her first offspring. In April of the year 2000, I gave birth to a son, the
infant Ayumu. After 10 months, only 10 months of Ayumu's life, scientists were very surprised
at something that they observed Ayumu do and this will tell us something about learning
and cognition in the chimpanzee mind. Now this whole time I had continued to work with
human symbols and token tests and other things and in the same room with her, of course,
was Ayumu. They were not separated, but Ayumu was never worked with directly. This is a
key point. No one had been training him. One day, however, he sat in front of the computer
screen and he touched the particular part of it, a circle that started a trial, a scientific
trial that his mother normally would have participated in. Can she solve a problem?
When the trial started, the Japanese character, the Kanji character for brown came up on the
screen and Ayumu reached up and touched that. What that did was cause the computer to present
him with a choice, a brown square and a pink square on the computer screen. And the next
part is the key part. Ayumu reached up and touched the brown square, in other words,
what the Kanji character had indicated. And the reason why this is interesting, well there
are several reasons. First of all, the brown square and the pink square were both in front
of him, but the brown square was at a much harder to reach section of the screen. So
it's not as if he either hit the brown square randomly or went for the easiest choice. He
had to work to reach it. I have seen this unfold on videotape and the ape really has
to reach in an awkward manner to hit the brown square. So it's apparent, at least quite,
likely that he knew what he was doing. A second interesting factor is that he was never trained.
So what's going on here? Now, most people, scientists involved with this, think that
this reflects, again, another example of what we have called the primate infant brain. Totally
primed to absorb information going on around it, particularly because the infant's mother
was so intently involved with problem solving at the computer. And Ayumu was scampering
around her and clearly taking in and observing and learning a lot in the absence of direct
tutoring. So we have learned from the adult eye how it is possible for apes to master
human symbols, but we have also learned that it is not necessary for the ape to be trained
to do so. Now, clearly we need more data on Ayumu and the Japanese scientists are working
on this. I have recommended in the written material accompanying this course that you
go on to a very good search engine on the internet if you have internet access and look
up the chimpanzee eyes homepage. It's a lot of fun to do that and you'll get updates on
what Ayumu has been doing since the 10 month period. Now, results from the eye and Ayumu
project dovetail very nicely with results from other inculturated ape research that's
been going on in this country. I'm thinking here particularly of the project at Georgia
State University involving bonobos. There are two bonobos, Kanzi and Panbenisha, that
have been raised at the language research center by Sue Savage-Rumbau and her associates.
And we know that a very similar process unfolded with Kanzi specifically. Kanzi was born in
1980. He was with his mother when his mother was being trained on human symbols that were
in a computer, a similar type of situation, although not directly comparable. The mother
was not making a whole lot of progress in her learning. She was essentially failing
in her task, but scientists were very persistent. They kept trying and trying to train her.
And again, Kanzi was at her side, not directly being tutored. At the age of two and a half,
on a day when Kanzi was separated from his mother, he showed scientists very clearly
that he could use the human symbols to make requests of the scientists, to ask the scientists
to play and chase. He could request certain foods. Just amazingly, on the first day, he
could do all these things. Well, we now know that it is possible for these things to emerge
from the primate brain without direct training. We know that he was watching his mother and
paying attention. We can also look back at other videotape and other data from this project
as a whole and see that Kanzi was very interested in communicating with human caregivers. He
would use his own gestures and be very socially attentive to caregivers. So he was primed
to use these symbols in a communicative way. So we have reviewed communication. We reviewed
theory of mind, and we spent a bit of time on technology. All of these results together
have profound implications for the study of human behavior. They, from my perspective,
the contention that there's a great ape watershed. I do believe that there's something different
qualitatively about the great ape mind from other non-human primates. And as I've mentioned,
not everybody agrees with this, but we will see in the future what comes of this particular
idea. So we can sum up by saying that part of the great ape adaptation is the ability
to use social learning and higher cognition and sophisticated communicational abilities
in everyday life. Again, different species living in different settings will use these
abilities in different ways, but they are fundamentally there. Great apes represent
a baseline from which to model the action, if you want to call it that, the evolutionary
action that occurred during human evolution. We ended last time thinking about hominids
in a slightly new way as social and emotional creatures, not just creatures who march along
a timeline inventing things, but as creatures who live in social groups and have an important
social ties. Here we can think of hominids as cognitively sophisticated creatures that
have been selected by natural selection in their evolutionary lineage for millions of
years to use their minds in sophisticated ways. We will turn in the next lecture to a
more specific modeling type of question. That is, how can these data from the great apes
be used to model or infer behavior of the early hominids? And we will see there are
three different kinds of models that can do this. We will go through these in lecture
number eight.
