Here in lecture 8, we will explore how data from great ape sociality and the great ape
mind can be used to model the evolution of early human behavior.
So we will have a lecture number 8 before we get into meeting the hominids directly.
So the next lecture gets us into a slightly different part of the course.
The question we have before us here relates back to Sherwood Washburn's call for new comparative
research 50 years ago.
After all, we have now 50 years of comparative results, really good data on great ape populations.
So what do we do with it, bioanthropologically speaking?
If we want in fact to use these data to illuminate human evolution, how do we go about that?
And as I will explain to you, the modeling processes that biological anthropologists
have engaged in in recent years have become much more complex than the way that modeling
occurred in earlier decades.
Now our starting point is to remind ourselves, and to use slightly different vocabulary in
doing so, that of all the animals, it is the great apes that have the closest relationship
with humans.
We want to talk now about this relationship in terms of what are called homologies.
Homologies are characteristics that arise in two organisms, two lineages of organisms,
because of closely shared descent.
And that's the really important part.
A homology exists because of a close relationship evolutionarily.
So if we compare chimpanzees and humans, let's say.
We know that both have theory of mind in some way, and the ability to have theory of mind
can be considered homologous in these animals because they share such a closely related
relative back in evolutionary time.
If an ape was ever found to have what scientists felt comfortable calling language, it would
be likely then that we would say human language and ape language is homologous because of
a close relationship.
By contrast, let's think of some things that are not homologous.
The typical textbook example is to mention wings of bats versus wings of birds.
These are both aerodynamically interesting organs, if you want to call them that, to
get these animals up into the air, to get them flying, but they're not because they're
closely related.
Bats belong to one kind of lineage, birds to another kind.
So let's say one day scientists discover dolphin language.
We would not make the same conclusion about the relationship between dolphin language
and human language.
We would not call those two things homologous.
This is because there's no recent ancestral relationship between dolphins and humans.
Of course, if you go way back in the fossil record, you might find such a relationship,
but that's not what homology means.
Homology is talking about recent, closely shared relationships.
So in the process of modeling early human behavior, we want to take into account homologies.
We want to try to produce balanced models.
That is, we don't want to just look at how great apes are similar to humans, but we
also want to keep in mind how they're different.
I don't really think it's a good idea to think of humans as the ape that stood up,
the bipedal ape, or ape except that we have one extra character, or the ape that has culture,
or the ape that has language.
And there's many reasons I don't like that kind of shorthand phrase, because after all,
we have precursors to language and culture and all these things in other species.
But also, humans are not just a collection of homologies plus factor X or factor Y. The
relationship is more complicated than that between humans and other species, and the
modeling process tries to reflect that in some way.
What we want to do is say there's a long time period of human evolution, and in the early
time period, there are not a lot of cultural indicators in the fossil record of how human
ancestors lived.
So let's take the closest living relatives and see what we might learn by looking at
them.
I will be describing for you three different types of such models, referential, phylogenetic,
and conceptual models.
But first, a qualifying statement before I do that.
We must admit right at the start that there is a potential flaw with the entire modeling
process.
Think about what we're really doing.
We're looking at modern day great apes that we have studied for, say, four going on five
decades.
No one really knew much about great apes before 1960, for example.
So all of the behaviors that we know about from tool using to theory of mind are things
that we know about in the modern day.
But yet we're using those as the behavioral underpinnings of models that are supposed
to illuminate ancient creatures.
So what's to say that chimpanzees in Tanzania didn't start to losing in 1950, in 1900, and
thousands of years ago?
We don't know that for a scientific certainty.
We really can't.
There are many reasons why this is an unlikely scenario.
The widespread nature of these behaviors across populations, some archeological indicators
even of the antiquity of some of the technology.
But we must admit that this is a potential problem.
Biological anthropologists continue, in spite of this, believing that modeling does have
benefits as well as that one risk.
Let's start with the historically most popular type of model, the referential model.
Now in referential models out of the entire array of 200 plus non-human primate species,
one is chosen and it is deemed the best non-human primate to use to model early human ancestors.
We already alluded to the fact before that for many decades the baboon was considered
to be the best choice and the baboon is not an ape at all.
It's a monkey.
So why was it chosen?
Well, it was chosen because of its ecological habitat.
It lived on the savanna and we thought for sure that how many evolution has also occurred
on the savanna.
We'll see it's a little more complicated than that later.
There was even in the 1960s a very simple equation devised that baboons plus hunting
equal early human ancestors.
That is, baboon social groups are multi-male, multi-female for the most part on the savanna
and the males group themselves as defenders and play defense roles.
That particular social organization was seen as the most likely social organization that
hominids adapted to survive on the savanna, but we knew or we assumed we knew that early
hominids hunted also and we assumed we knew that baboons did not.
Hence the equation, you take the basic baboon lifestyle, you add hunting to it and you get
hominids.
Well, clearly we've moved on from there.
We don't make simplistic equations like that anymore.
Furthermore, the focus has shifted away from ecological looking at the savanna for a reason
to choose the baboon.
In fact, we have known for 20 or 30 years that great apes are much more closely related
to humans and I have talked about that at some length.
We know that genetically and physiologically and anatomically chimpanzees, for example,
are very good fits as a best choice model.
But also we might choose the chimpanzee for behavioral or social reasons.
After all, if you've got a great ape that's already closely related to us in all the biological
ways, why not choose the chimp, the consummate tool user, theory of mind seems present, they
hunt, all these other things that we have talked about.
So the chimpanzee, I would say in the last 20 or 30 years, has replaced the baboon as
the popular choice for referential modeling.
Now the evolution of human hunting has been modeled referentially with provocative results.
As we know already, chimpanzees hunt in groups.
The male-male cooperation we have already described, that is the basis of chimpanzee hunting.
So the premise is that chimpanzee male-male behavior may shed some light on what hominids
began to do as well.
The key modeler here has been an anthropologist named Craig Stanford.
We will talk about his ideas quite specifically in lecture 14.
For now, it is enough to know that he studied chimpanzees in Tanzania.
He saw the male cooperation, the hunting of red colobus monkeys.
He noted that the impact on the colobus monkey populations of the hunting was quite severe.
In other words, this wasn't just a very occasional process, but seasonally at least, chimpanzee
hunting was a real selection pressure, and he began to think that both the hunting part
and even more importantly, the food sharing part after the kill could be used as a referent
to say, hmm, maybe early hominids did things like this with some differences, then the
key part is to model those differences based on different selection pressures of hominids
or different hominid biology, but it gives you a good starting point.
Other biological anthropologists have preferred broader based models.
They think it is not so sensible to acknowledge that 200 primate species exist, but then to
look at only one.
Some of these anthropologists embrace what can be called phylogenetic models, and phylogenetic
just refers to evolution through a family tree, a branching kind of evolution of ancestry.
These anthropologists say that it is quite misleading to rely heavily on only one type
of great ape to say, look, the chimpanzee is better than the bonobo or the gorilla or
the orangutan.
They're uncomfortable with that, claiming that such referential models can force the
data to reflect too much similarity where it may not exist.
If we already have in our mind, here's the way that chimpanzees hunt, and we might import
too much of that and assume similarity as a starting point to model hominid hunting.
In a phylogenetic model, the claim is made that there should be a broader look at great
apes across the board.
For example, a key point made is that humans are equally as related to bonobos as we are
to chimps.
And in fact, this is quite true, there's a triangular relationship among the three
species in a sense in that you can't say we're closer to chimps or we're closer to bonobos.
So why privilege, in other words, the chimpanzee and choose it for a referential model?
So what happens when we bring in the bonobo to a hunting model?
Well, there's a problem immediately because bonobos don't hunt.
They are not interested in acquiring meat in the wild.
And so in fact, if you look at it from this perspective, you have to ask the question,
is chimpanzee hunting and hominid hunting really a good example of a homologous relationship?
Does it really come from a period of shared evolutionary descent or might it just be something
that each lineage evolved completely separately?
Bonobos don't do it, so what makes you think that hominids would do it in that particular
way is an even more fundamental question that emerges here.
In fact, none of the great apes besides the chimpanzee hunts with any regularity and certainly
not on the scale of what chimps do.
Gorillas are largely herbivores.
They tend to eat grass types of foods and some fruits in some cases.
They will eat insects, they will eat protein, but they do not seek out meat.
On extremely rare occasions we have some instances of bonobos eating meat, but again it is not
on a big scale and the same can be said for orangutans.
So in conclusion, the phylogenetic modelers say there is no phylogenetic family tree basis
for modeling a specific pathway for human hunting.
What I tell my students to do when they think about phylogenetic models for any trait, and
we'll stick with our example of hunting, is to make a little chart with C, G, B, and
O written as letters on a piece of paper or on the blackboard.
Chimpanzee gorilla bonobo and orangutan, and you ask yourself, okay, how many of these
four types of great apes exhibits this trait in question?
And if we're going to stick with the hunting example, you only get one yes and three noes.
There's a yes next to the chimp and a no in all the other places.
And this allows you to see what the phylogenetic modelers are saying, that in fact we can't
use the great apes in a very clear cut manner to tell us much about whether or how the earliest
hominids hunted.
So they're much more content with leaving it as an open issue.
Some results of modeling can be what we might consider negative or neutral, in other words
the suggestion that we're not going to get a good answer from the great apes.
So you'll see that the referential model comes out with all kinds of results predicated on
chimpanzees where for hunting the phylogenetic model does not at all, and it says we must
leave this as an open question.
Now although there are differences between the referential and the phylogenetic model,
there's also a certain type of broad similarity.
They are after all basing their conclusions in certain specific types of primates.
The referential model chooses one, yes, but the phylogenetic model is also basing it on
great apes, types of animals that you can read the literature about, observe, really
learn the data about.
The conceptual model, the third type, is somewhat different.
So we have biological anthropologists who prefer a different approach.
A conceptual model focuses not on certain types of primates, but rather on processes
of change over time, on concepts and processes, and these of course relate to evolution.
So the question that is basically at the heart of conceptual models is to ask how would primates,
breeding hominids, have reacted to certain selection pressures?
We don't really care what type of primate is looked at.
In this case, any primate that hunts is a good candidate to be included in the conceptual
model.
There is no constraint due to either ecological similarity or closeness of ancestral relationship.
In other words, a baboon here is as good as a great ape if the baboon is hunting.
A new world monkey, if it hunted, would be fine, so would a prosimion.
What we want to understand is what selection pressures and conditions would likely have
led these non-human primates to hunt and then begin to apply those pressures and processes
to early humans.
So we can ask the question coming out of this point, well, do any baboons hunt after all?
We certainly didn't think so in the 1960s, or the equation never would have been devised.
Baboons plus hunting equals hominids, but there were things happening with baboons that
we didn't know about in the 1960s that we only learned later.
In predicting aspects of the evolution of hunting then, a population of baboons is as
revealing as any other, and we do have evidence of such a population.
In fact, a population of baboons living in Kenya did hunt for a time they no longer do.
I want to explain this to you and explain how it affects the making of a conceptual
model.
An anthropologist from California, Shirley Strum, she divides her time between California
and Kenya, showed us in great detail that it is perfectly possible to have sophisticated
hunting in monkeys as well as in chimpanzees.
Now the baboons that she has studied now for 30 years, she has a great deal of detail on.
This work that I'm going to describe for you, she did mostly back in the 1970s, although
her work continues today.
At that time, the savanna baboons that she was studying lived on a cattle ranch in Kenya.
They were therefore relatively protected from predators, because the people running the
cattle ranch made sure that the predators in the area wouldn't be getting to the cattle
and the baboons took advantage of this relative safety.
Now at one point during the study, male baboons began to start a new behavior.
They began to hunt meat, gazelles for example, small antelopes.
By chasing them down in relays, different males would go out and chase down meat.
This is highly unusual compared to most baboon populations.
At ambicelli, where I worked, for example, if a male stumbled across an infant gazelle
in the grass waiting for its mother to come back from feeding, the monkey would become
very excited and would definitely tear into that gazelle.
It was somewhat difficult to watch because they would really just eat it alive.
And other baboons would be interested and there was excitement about this, but what
you did not see was a planned hunt.
Well Shirley Strom did see this and the question was why?
And there are two ways to consider an answer.
First of all there is the safety from predators.
These male baboons could run for long distances after the gazelle without being as concerned
apparently about predators attacking and eating them.
They could separate themselves from the cohesive social group with relative impunity.
Secondly there was a particular male in the group at that time named Rad, R-A-D, who had
an absolute love of hunting.
There's no other way to put it.
He was very interested in these relay chases and his, if you will, temperament, personality
or proclivity, whatever you want to call it, really had an effect on the social behavior
of the group.
Other males joined in, but he was essentially a leader in this way.
Now what can this tell us?
Here the importance is not the fact that these are baboons doing this, but rather the conditions
that apply.
The relative freedom from predators and a social personality factor, which really anthropologists
hadn't considered a whole lot until then, in the, I can't say in the person of Rad,
in the monkey of Rad, who was there as this individual.
So here was a new way to begin to think conceptually about factors that might have impacted how
many populations as well.
I just want to mention that at a certain point this cattle ranch was sold and the baboons
no longer had the same protection that they had before.
In fact, the people who took over the cattle ranch ran a kind of agricultural cooperative
where crops were grown.
Baboons, being good social learners and quite adaptive creatures, learned quite quickly
to crop raid.
That is, they discovered that these crops were a cheap and easy source of calories and
nutrition.
So they began to steal the food, which was quite distressing, understandably, to the
farmers in this area.
This is not a rich area.
These crops were needed for the people, and yet the monkeys were stealing the crops.
Well, Shirley Strom and her associates tried very hard to scare the baboons away from the
crops with non-dangerous methods of getting them to move, and this really didn't work.
Shirley Strom, after some years of trying other methods and searching around Kenya, actually
translocated over 100 baboons away from this area across the country to another site.
This is really a very unusual process.
She felt very responsible for them.
They were being shot by farmers because they were cooperating, and she wanted to save them.
So I wanted to explain this to you for a couple of reasons.
First, it's a very interesting thing that she did, and it's possible to read about this
in her books.
Also, this is one reason why we can't continue to study this population of hunting baboons
because they don't do that anymore.
Okay.
We now have reviewed the three types of models, and they differ very much.
For a time after these models were well discussed in the literature and laid out and compared
and contrasted, there was a kind of feeding frenzy of people jumping forward to say,
I prefer the referential, I prefer the phylogenetic, I prefer the conceptual, and going back and
forth about which one was better.
What I'm hoping is coming now is a different stage of analysis in which anthropologists
realize that one type of model may be more appropriate for certain types of evolutionary
questions, and another type of model might be more appropriate for the other.
Furthermore, they need not be mutually exclusive.
We don't necessarily need to choose, but might try modeling in very different ways.
Now, referential phylogenetic and conceptual models are critically important, and I want
to spend a little time talking about why they're so important.
After all, I started out admitting that there might be a flaw with them.
I've gone through and I've told you that there's disagreement among anthropologists
about how best to even do this.
So why spend so much energy on this type of modeling?
Well, simply put, the fossils in the archaeological sites that are connected with early human
evolution yield very few clues about behavior.
Fossil hunters who find a 40% complete skeleton consider this to be a really excellent thing.
The 3 million-year-old Lucy ancestor that we will hear more about soon was found in
Ethiopia, 40% complete, and it's very, very important.
There have been just a few fossils that have been more complete than that.
We will hear about a hominid called Homo erectus later, and at about 1.6 million years
ago an individual died, and the skeleton was dug up in 1985 and was 80% complete at that
time.
Now, that's just astonishing, and that's extremely rare.
So if you've got a 40% or an 80% complete skeleton, it's possible to learn to fill
in a lot about the anatomy of the individual.
But what do you do when you want to find out something about behavior?
You have to look at the material record that goes along with the fossils.
Is there some way to look for tools or remains of houses or some indicator of what types
of social groupings these hominids lived in?
And until about 2.5 million years ago, we get almost none of these clues.
And as we will hear in the very next lecture, we start the period of human evolution at
about 6 or 7 million years ago, and what that means is that for over half the time period
that we're talking about for hominids, we don't have these material remains.
Now, how do we reconcile that with the picture that we've been building up of hominids?
I've taken great care to talk about hominids as having emotional histories and social
ties, complex problems, solving skills, and to think of them as cognitive creatures.
So what I'm telling you is that there's an essential misfit, if you will, between what
we can derive from the archaeological anthropological fossil record and what we can infer based
on our understanding of living primates.
And it is here, sort of right up the middle, that the models come.
The best models will yield predictions that can be tested by the fossil record.
Here I return to a fundamental premise of science, that we want to come up with things
that can be tested against evidence.
This can be tricky because of the fact that there's so little material that we can go
to in the fossil record.
But this is something that we really should attempt to do with our models.
Now, to conclude, I think it would be helpful to step back for a minute and to pick a year
in the not too distant past and to ask what we would have thought about hominids in that
year and then ask, how has this modeling process caused us to think differently in the intervening
time periods?
And for the sake of argument, I'll pick the year 1956, totally random year except for
two things I was born in that year.
And also, that is a year right before the onset of primate field studies, before we
started to really know about great apes and other non-human primates in the field.
What would we have thought about our hominid ancestors at that time?
Well, we would have predicted that, for example, the early hominids would have invented tools
and invented tool making, that nothing like it would have come before in the primate lineage.
Similarly, that they would have invented the whole idea of hunting.
We knew nothing about what great apes were doing along these lines at the time.
Furthermore, hominids would have been conceived of as the first primates to use vocalizations
or gestures in very specific communicative ways, more than shrieking or hooting or alarming
or something like that.
We certainly didn't have any notion that theory of mind would have been present in any other
creature.
So we might have been thinking about hominids in this light as sort of inventing perspective
taking, if you will.
In other words, I could go on with my examples, but what we can say through the database that
is built up from primatology is that the models get us to a very different starting
point.
And what we know in the early years of the 21st century represents a really great advance.
So the modeling gets us to the point of saying, OK, here's what we think we might have with
hominids, but we have to tailor what we know from the other species to the hominid species
biology and the specific selection pressures, and that's the real key, is to think of where
the hominids were found to reconstruct the paleo climate, the paleo environment, the
ancient climate, the ancient environment, and to begin to understand how the processes
of evolution would have worked there in that particular location.
And by no means is this an easy task, but again, if we don't do this modeling, we're
left with many, many more unanswered questions.
At this point, then, it is time to consider the hominids themselves directly, to start
with this early time period of human evolution about six or seven million years ago and find
out what types of creatures do we have in the fossil record.
Lecture number nine will begin that part of our journey through biological anthropology.
