When we reach the end of this lecture, we will also reach the halfway point of this course.
So it is perhaps fitting that in this lecture we'll discuss a true shift point in human
evolution with the hominid Homo erectus.
We've already covered quite a lot of ground in human evolutionary history, and we have
seen that the situation in early human studies of human evolution is a little bit confusing.
Now I don't say this in a negative way.
We expect science to be in flux and dynamic and new finds to emerge and overturn old ones.
We equally expect debates to rage in the field.
But it does lead to some intricacies in dealing with the material, and as a result it might
be worthwhile to take just a short time now and review some of the more major conclusions
that we have reached.
We have dealt with the time period from about 7 million years ago to about 2 million years
ago.
I will give you four conclusions that can serve as a kind of summary to date.
If we're going to talk about the time period of early hominids, let's define that for the
moment as through the period of Homo habilis.
These early hominids were bipedal, and they lived in Africa.
They were concentrated as far as we know to date in eastern and southern Africa, but the
very latest indications push us to look in central Africa as well.
Second, designation of the oldest hominid on record is continuously shifting.
We know for a certainty that a multiplicity of hominid forms existed, and in some cases
co-existed in this early time period.
Our best bet right now is the 7 million-year-old hominid for the base of the family tree.
We will see what comes in years ahead.
Third, it is debatable which of several early forms gave rise to the first hominid in our
genus Homo habilis.
It is much more likely that a grassal form, something like Australopithecus afarensis or
Australopithecus africanus, would have given rise to early Homo.
We're quite sure that the robust Australopithecines didn't.
The robust Australopithecines look quite different.
They are quite specialized, and we know that they were headed for extinction.
Fourth, we start to get behaviorally quite significant advances at about two and a half
million years ago with the advent of Aldewan tools in the archaeological record.
We know that Homo habilis, whether inventor of these tools or not, certainly used them
in efficient foraging.
Animal carcasses were very likely processed by Homo habilis using these modified stone
tools.
We have concentrated on talking about the flakes as important stone tools that laid
the foundation for all technology that was to come later.
We are now set up and ready for the so-called shift point.
At about 1.9 million years ago, Homo erectus enters the fossil record, quite probably descended
from Homo habilis.
We have known about Homo erectus since the 1800s.
More and more details of its behavior have been emerging in recent decades, but we do
have a long history with the species to fall back on.
You might have heard of Homo erectus being called Java man or peaking man.
These were all early terms that were applied to this species.
Now, Homo erectus was discovered by a man called Eugene Dubois, and he did so on the
island of Java, which is in Asia.
This leads to our first interesting point about Homo erectus, the very fact that we're
talking about a place that is not Africa.
Dubois was an interesting person.
He was born in 1858 in the Netherlands.
He is correctly characterized as the first person to intentionally search for hominid
fossils.
Of course, hominid fossils had been found before Dubois, but they were stumbled upon.
They were found by chance.
He was a person who was determined to set out and find himself a hominid fossil.
He was born in the Netherlands and was trained as a doctor.
He took up a post as an anatomy lecture, but decided to leave it and go to the Dutch East
Indies, an area of the world we now call Indonesia, and do this search for hominid fossils.
Now, why did he pick such an area?
This coincided with the idea of the day that the earliest human ancestors would be found
in Asia, not Africa.
In a certain circle of scientific people, this was considered the most likely thing.
And of course, also the Dutch East Indies was a colony of the Netherlands, so it was
relatively easy for Dubois to travel there.
Unfortunately, he didn't have a lot of luck in the Dutch East Indies, so he moved over
a little bit and tried the island of Java.
And in fact, he encountered great success in the year 1891, when he found the form he
called Java Man.
He found a partial skull, and his career was essentially vindicated by this.
Of course, it doesn't surprise us to hear that just like Raymond Dart, his claims were
met with skepticism.
This seems to be true throughout much of the history of paleoanthropology, the skepticism
being that this form was really a million years old, as Dubois claimed, that it was really
a human ancestor, and so forth.
Just like with Dart, Dubois was right, and this eventually emerged.
Now we can't make too much of the fact that Dubois worked in Asia, by which I mean to
say it's impossible to overemphasize the importance of that fact.
Homo erectus migrated out of Africa.
The recent surprise that has come out of studies in the 1990s, let's say, is that this migration
happened even before one million years ago.
The so-called Java Man that Dubois found had gotten to Java by a million years ago.
We now know that Homo erectus actually reached Asia as early as 1.8 million years ago.
This is a much earlier migration than realized at first, and we know this now due to improvements
in dating techniques.
So scientific technology has advanced, and so has our knowledge of the movement of Homo
erectus.
Ironically, these dates of 1.8 million years ago are in Java as well.
So what we are developing is a picture of Homo erectus speciating in Africa.
Homo erectus has been found at sites that we already have encountered, Aldevaigorge,
Lake Turkana, and then rapidly migrating to Asia.
Now of course, not all Homo erectus individuals left Africa.
That's not the picture that I want to paint here, rather some populations stayed in Africa
and other examples, other individuals, moved up into Asia relatively quickly.
Putting together information from Asia and Africa, we can point to major innovations
in the behavior of Homo erectus compared to Homo habilis and Australopithecines and other
early hominids.
Let's start with technology.
The Homo erectus toolkit is more advanced than the older one, toolkit prepared by Homo habilis.
In fact, really it's only appropriate to talk about a tool kit when we get to the time period
of Homo erectus.
In other words, there's more variety in the types of tools.
The staple tool used by Homo erectus is what we can call a biphase.
This is a very different type of tool than a flaker or core.
A biphase, as its name indicates, has two faces, two sides, and it is worked all around.
In other words, flakes are taken off on the front and on the back and on all sides.
The quintessential Homo erectus tool is called a hand axe.
It is a tear drop shaped stone tool, very standardized in shape and also in size, that
is found across Africa.
There are also other types of tools, picks and cleavers, hence my claim that we can reasonably
speak of a tool kit, and again it is likely that these tools are used mostly in some kind
of foraging endeavor involving carcasses, possibly digging, maybe for other things as
well.
Almost certainly Homo erectus ate more meat than did previous hominids.
We will emphasize later, lecture 14 to be specific, that the evolution of human hunting
probably occurred later on than the early Homo erectus time periods.
Homo erectus most likely survived by efficient scavenging, that is making use of meat, yes,
but not necessarily and not regularly hunting large game.
Several lines of evidence about Homo erectus point to an increased reliance on meat in
the diet.
Homo erectus teeth, their larger body size overall, the fact that they were able to migrate
over such long distances, all together point to the fact that a high energy food was likely
consumed.
So that together with marks on the bones indicate to us the carcass processing, but as I had
said before for Homo habilis, I don't want you to assume that this means hunting.
A somewhat less clear issue involves the control of fire.
Some scholars believe that Homo erectus was able to control fire and others are not so
sure.
There is evidence at sites in Asia, for example the cave site of Zucudian, that indicates
perhaps they did control fire.
And if we can just for a minute think about what this would have meant to Homo erectus,
we can see it would have been another one of those major milestones.
Control of fire would have meant that Homo erectus could cook food.
In fact, there are quite a few paleo-anthropological scenarios that simply assume cooking was
possible in Homo erectus.
In other words, people who have been convinced by what evidence there is for control of fire.
But let's think beyond cooking.
Fire could have been used for defensive purposes, for example, driving away predators.
Also would have extended the length of the available day, if you will, daylight would
have been sort of substituted for by light, making night discussions at the campfire possible.
Who knows, we can speculate in that way.
Temperature control could have been enhanced by the use of fire.
Now at Zucudian cave, we have Homo erectus bones inside the cave and we also have a layer
in which there are burned bones and stone tools found together.
This is enough for some people to say that Homo erectus controlled fire.
The bones being burned and the very clear Homo erectus tool kit pointing to some use
of fire that was not just spontaneous in a cave or, you know, lit by lightning but controlled
by a human ancestor.
The skeptics reply by saying that along with these bones and tools, there never was found
any ash or charcoal.
There are not hearths in this cave or others.
So again, the debate goes back and forth.
There are other sites as well to be sure where there are hints of fire control.
I would not be surprised to find out more definitively later that Homo erectus in some
places was able to control fire because there are so many sites in different places that
have hints of this, but it is probably better to leave it as more of an open question than
meat eating or the tool kit advances that we've talked about.
There's also a new wrinkle appearing in paleoanthropology about this question of hominid migration
out of Africa.
It doesn't have to do with questioning Homo erectus leaving Africa.
We know that for sure.
The 1.8 million year ago migration is quite firm now.
The wrinkle has to do with something a little different.
Just quite recently in 2002, a new find was found at the Republic of Georgia.
It was dated to 1.75 million years ago.
Now this would have been quite interesting under any circumstances.
Finding something in the Republic of Georgia at that time period would have added to our
knowledge of Homo erectus migration out of Africa.
However, the bones don't look like Homo erectus.
They look much smaller brained and different in other ways as well.
In fact, there are some people suggesting that the new find might be Homo habilis.
It is really too early to say this with any confidence.
An issue of National Geographic coming out in the near future will have as its cover
story this new find.
I'm quite eager to read this and to do what all scientists want to do to be able to evaluate
this evidence.
I am not prepared at the moment to say Homo habilis migrated out of Africa.
As you'll notice before, I did not say that.
It's really too early to know.
But this new find may complicate matters in talking about Homo erectus migration.
But nonetheless, we know that Homo erectus did migrate.
Now I have a side note that I want to add about Zucudian Cave, the place where there
may be fire evidence.
When we're talking about migration to Asia, the bones that were found there were dubbed
Peking Man, just like when Dubois found his find on Java.
He called the bones Java man.
Peking Man is an interesting case.
The bones that were found there were very important to science and were thought to be
under threat during the years of World War II.
In 1941, they were in China and they were boxed up very carefully.
The box was labeled with the American Museum of Natural History on it.
The bones were to be sent to New York for safe keeping out of harm's way with the war.
They were even escorted by U.S. military because they were considered to be so important.
However, they never got to New York.
Somewhere between central China and who knows where, they disappeared.
This is a big mystery to this day.
Sixty years later, we've never found them.
Some people suggest that the Japanese may have seized them and never gave them back.
Who knows if that's true or not.
We do know that plaster casts had been made of the skulls and the bones because they were
so important.
So we have the plaster casts, but the originals are missing.
Okay, let's talk now about Homo erectus anatomy.
We know something about Homo erectus behavior and we want to see how anatomy fits in with
the behavior that we have discussed.
Homo erectus has a big brain, bigger than Homo habilis.
For the first time, some Homo erectus individuals had brain sizes that fall within the range
of modern human brains.
Now modern human brains have quite a big array of sizes.
There doesn't seem to be any simplistic correlation with intelligence either.
It's not like you have a bigger brain, you're smarter.
It's just that there's a large amount of variation.
Not all, but some Homo erectus brains come into that lower range for Homo sapiens brains.
So that really does represent a change.
Intestinely enough, however, the skull itself is primitive looking still, is ancient looking.
It's perched on top of a post cranial skeleton that is really quite modern, but in some very
visible ways the Homo erectus skull doesn't look anything like a modern skull.
For example, there are heavy brow ridges over the eyes and the forehead is low and sloping.
We Homo sapiens have what we might call a high or domed forehead.
There's a high area there.
This is absent in Homo erectus and the bones are thicker and heavier as well.
We have a very complete Homo erectus skeleton.
I have referred to it before because it is 80% complete and therefore is famous just simply
for that fact.
It yields a wealth of information about the anatomy of at least some Homo erectus individuals.
So the 80% completeness, think of it this way, it's double the completeness of Lucy.
It's almost the whole skeleton, in this case the hands and feet were missing but everything
else was present.
This skeleton was found in Kenya at a site we have encountered before, Lake Turkana.
You will remember that site was very important to Glenn Isaac in devising his scenario about
Homo habilis social behavior.
A person who had worked for a long time for Richard Leakey, his name is Kamoya Kamu, found
this very complete skeleton.
This fossil hunter is very important to paleoanthropology.
This is not the only famous fossil find that Kamu has made.
It is probably the most famous, however.
The skeleton itself has been called the Naryokitomi boy because this is a person who died at about
the age of 12, something we can tell again from the teeth sequence, the teeth development.
At the time of his death, this boy stood about 5 feet 3 inches.
Scientists estimate that he would have been over 6 feet tall had he lived to adulthood
because we know that young boys are not fully grown and that seems to be the case for Homo
erectus as well as for modern humans.
Richard Leakey has talked a lot about the Naryokitomi boy not only in terms of its anatomical
details but also about its importance to evolution.
He has said specifically, speaking to scientific creationists and others who doubt evolution,
here is a find that you can't dismiss.
If you're a fence sitter or if you're skeptic, pay attention to the Naryokitomi boy because
you can't say that it's scattered bits of bone.
You can't say that the dating is not secure.
We've got everything in one package here.
You cannot get around it.
This is an old human ancestor 1.6 million years ago.
Like other Homo erectus individuals, this one had an enlarged brain compared to previous
hominids.
And the best way overall to describe the Naryokitomi boy's adaptation is to use the word hypertropical.
He lived in Africa and he was well adapted to life in Africa.
We can just invoke for ourselves the thought of natural selection here.
We have a body type that is very much selected to heat, to the tropics, part of our primate
heritage.
For example, the body itself is slender and tall.
The limbs specifically are slender and elongated.
And all of this is an adaptation for heat dissipation.
This is the best type of body form to have for living in hot areas.
And we will follow up this kind of analysis with discussion later of modern human variation.
We know that Nylotic peoples in Africa have body types of this sort.
Again, we can contrast that as I did in an introductory lecture with thinking of, say,
the Inuit or Eskimo people, squatter and shorter and more robust.
So the Naryokitomi boy we've known about for over 15 years and can tell us so much about
evolution that it has become very famous.
Now some scientists look at Homo erectus in Africa and say, yes, you have a certain body
type and a certain brain structure, but in Asia you get differences in anatomy.
And this is not wrong.
There are differences, differences that I believe we would expect on the basis of typical
species variation, in other words, variation within one species, adapting to different
climates, different selection pressures in different environments.
So as I have said to you before with Homo habilis and with some other examples, I reject
any push to say that there are really two different species reflected.
There are some scientists who insist that Homo erectus should be split into two forms.
As before, we are not going to do this.
In this case, however, it's worth my mentioning to you the other taxonomic name because it
has been relatively widely used in the literature.
I would not say that there's a consensus towards using it, but it pops up a lot.
If you hear the term Homo ergaster, that is very much subsumed under what we are calling
Homo erectus.
Because again, I feel that the single species is the best designation and the most accurate
one.
There is no reason to suggest that what some scientists split up into Homo erectus and
Homo ergaster would have been prevented from interbreeding had they met.
OK, Homo erectus overlapped with other fossil forms.
By now this is a conclusion that we would expect from the early hominid fossil record.
Homo erectus overlapped in space and in time with the robust australopithecines, for example.
But they're very different types of creatures and it might be useful to take just a minute
and draw out that contrast a little bit to emphasize the shift point that we've been
talking about with Homo erectus.
Robust australopithecines were what we might think of as relatively localized hominids.
That is, they lived in a part of Africa where they stayed put.
They had a specialized diet that seems to be quite vegetarian.
We have talked before about the crushing and grinding, how they focused on seeds and berries.
There's no indication that they ate any meat.
We certainly have no good evidence for regular tool use of any kind, possibly organic tool
use.
Nothing really good to indicate stone tool manufacture or use.
We do not think that they migrated or moved around appreciably.
So on the one hand we have species that are clearly well adapted.
We want to return to our definition of what is fit.
These creatures had reproductive success for over a million years.
But something stopped them from continuing to evolve.
They went extinct, likely due to their over specialization.
By contrast then we have Homo erectus and we can think of how different Homo erectus
individuals are.
They're not localized, populations move around.
The toolkit becomes very important.
They have all kinds of other adaptations that robust australopithecines don't have in terms
of a bigger brain and their social and cultural behavior.
And so Homo erectus seems to be a very critical ancestor to again things that come later.
We talked about Homo erectus as emerging in the fossil record at 1.9 million years ago.
I have avoided up until now giving you an end date for Homo erectus.
And that's because it becomes very fuzzy or unclear.
The end stage of the Homo erectus time period is not in clear focus for paleoanthropology.
For example, some scholars think that some of the earliest fossils ever found in Europe
are usefully classified as Homo erectus.
But this is highly controversial and I have chosen to state that Homo erectus is well
located in Africa and Asia and is not clearly found in Europe.
Similarly then, the time period at which Homo erectus disappears from the fossil record
is very tricky.
We know at a half million years ago we have good evidence from China, the cave of Zucudian
being a good example.
We get layers of Homo erectus fossils in that cave from 500,000 years ago through perhaps
300,000 years ago.
We have good evidence till maybe 250,000, 200,000 years ago in different parts of the
world for Homo erectus.
And after that it becomes unclear.
Some groups of scientists say that Homo erectus is more recent.
Others want to take those more recent hominids and classify them in a different way.
So we're going to have to return to this question of what happened later.
For now we want to conclude this lecture by looking back at a statement that I made
earlier that this is where the cultural record of human achievement really begins to take
off.
And what I would have us do is again try to get beyond just the toolkit or the migration
itself, even beyond the possible fire control, these sort of milestones that get put on timelines
and chronologies and think beyond that a little bit.
Let's think about social learning and cultural change and how they might lurk for us behind
these accomplishments.
Consider the handaxe.
We know that this tool, so important to Homo erectus in Asia, was around for a very long
time period and it was standardized over this time period.
It is not necessarily that there are quick advances in technology throughout this time
period, but does this not indicate to us or at least suggest to us that there was social
learning and possibly teaching involved?
It is possible that individuals could have learned to standardize a handaxe by just observing.
It is possible that some elders, adults would have taught youngsters.
You really can't know the exact mechanism, but there is some kind of cultural transfer
of information going on here.
Now once again we're in a situation where we have both continuity and discontinuity.
It would be quite correct for me to remind you about chimpanzees at this time period.
We know that tool use in sophisticated ways exists in chimps and some of this ability
is passed down over the generations.
So this is not something that is totally new, but I would certainly submit that in
keeping with our theme of a shift point, Homo erectus is doing things on a different scale.
The handaxe is very precisely worked and shaped and standardized in a way that you simply
will not see with any other primate.
If there is fire control, as I suspect is likely and will be confirmed in the future,
then there are all kinds of rituals and social learning that may have sprung up around this
fire control.
Consider the process of moving up out of Africa to Asia, traveling over very long distances
and probably acquiring meat as they went.
Not through hunting probably, but through scavenging.
All of these are complicated problem solving tasks and they probably indicate a lot of
culture that goes beyond just material remains now.
There are many more exciting such developments to consider as we go further in the story
of human evolution.
One of the most interesting categories of hominids we will consider next when we embark
upon an exploration of the Neanderthals in lecture 13.
