Welcome to a lecture that I expect will be fun because in it we are going to confront
the Neanderthals, a hominid that I think is behaviorally quite compelling and I might
even say enigmatic.
I should say right at the outset that there is an alternative pronunciation or spelling
of Neanderthal with a th, but Neanderthal is more accurate so that is the term we are
going to use.
In this lecture also we will widen our focus geographically and we'll begin to consider
hominid occupation of a third continent because we find Neanderthals in Europe.
They are therefore in Europe and Asia.
We've been talking about Africa but we won't in this lecture because Neanderthals are not
found in Africa.
Neanderthals have been known to science since 1856.
That's quite a long time.
That's almost 75 years longer than we've known about the Australopithecines since Darts
Discovery and about 35 years longer than we've known about Homo erectus since the time period
of Dubois Discovery.
In that time Neanderthals have become something of a cultural icon.
To say the term Neanderthal, something usually comes to mind, a particular image usually
comes to mind and it's an interesting fact that this long period during which science
has known about Neanderthals has not really translated to accuracy of the images that
tend to come to mind.
Most people think about an ancient, stooped cave dweller, possibly somebody wearing animal
hides and grunting and hunting mammoths.
If you assert that someone else thinks like a Neanderthal, this is most assuredly not
a compliment.
I tell my students, especially in election years when they're reading the newspaper,
to read letters to the editor and every now and then you'll be sure to come across one
that accuses a politician or someone else of thinking like a Neanderthal and that is
a code for thinking in a primitive and backwards type of way.
None of this image, the physical or the mental, is particularly accurate.
Why did it arise then?
Historically we can't explain the origins of the shambling not so smart Neanderthal.
It goes back to 1911, which is the year in which a French anatomist decided to reconstruct
a Neanderthal from bones that had been dug up in his home country.
These bones were found at the site of La Chapelle in France.
They were from a male who had died at about the age of 40.
The anatomist, Marceline Boulle, constructed a human being, or almost human being, who
looked very primitive, a shambling kind of bent knee gate was assigned to this creature
and a kind of unintelligent look.
Most important perhaps is the lack of full bipedalism that was put forth in this reconstruction.
The textbook that I have recommended for this course describes the reconstruction as looking
bent knee and brutish and that is a very good description of it, but we know from all the
work that's gone on since that this is really quite inaccurate.
So let's push the question back one step further.
If Boulle was such an expert in anatomy, why did he make these mistakes?
We will soon see that Neanderthals were, of course, bipedal in the normal modern way and
that they were not at all stupid.
Well, Boulle, like others of his day, had certain preconceived notions of what an ancient
man, so to speak, should look like.
They should not look modern at all.
They should be quite primitive.
In fact, by choosing to reconstruct the bones from La Chapelle, Boulle had chosen a particularly
robust specimen, not a very modern specimen in the array of Neanderthal bones, but even
more than that, no matter what bones he had chosen, he would have assumed that they should
look non-modern.
Furthermore, there was an additional factor.
He selected a skeleton whose individual had suffered in life from osteoarthritis.
We know now that quite a few Neanderthal skeletons show signs of arthritis, and this, of course,
can distort and twist the bones.
When he reconstructed this individual then and did not realize that he was looking at
arthritic bones, well, this factor only strengthened his conclusion of a brutish look.
So clearly his preconceptions overrode his anatomical expertise in this particular instance,
and his reconstruction affected science and scientific models for many years and continues,
as I've hinted, to affect popular images of Neanderthals.
Biological anthropologists very much reject the stooped caveman image of Neanderthals.
Like all the other hominids that we've been talking about, Neanderthals did not have bent
knees, they were bipedal, but they, of course, show a mix of more human-like and less human-like
traits.
And within Neanderthals there's also a range of variation.
Those that are found in Western Europe, for example, in France, do tend to look more primitive
and less modern.
But let's look, as we usually do, at the pattern of Neanderthal anatomy and not worry so much
about all the exceptions.
Neanderthals were large-brained hominids.
It's kind of ironic that, in fact, we have discovered that their brains were, on average,
larger than modern human brains, not by a lot, but by some.
However, this does not mean that they really looked like us.
They didn't.
They were particularly robust, strong, short, and squat.
So their whole body plan and body shape was quite different.
The strength that this implies in their body deserves particular emphasis.
We know from the enlarged joints and the muscles that would have attached at those joints that
Neanderthals, both men and women, would have been quite spectacularly strong compared to
modern humans.
So they had a body plan that was short and relatively squat.
You can think of this as the opposite of what we had talked about in the Homo erectus lecture.
Back then we talked about the Nereocatome boy being hypertropically adapted, long, body,
long, slender limbs for heat dissipation.
And it's quite the opposite for Neanderthals.
They tend to live in cold areas and were cold adapted.
So the strength in the body plan seems to be a kind of response, an adaptive response,
to a harsh life and also a fairly cold life.
Well, what about from the neck up?
We've already talked about the large brain.
But Neanderthals skulls look entirely different than modern human skulls.
For one thing, their forehead shows a very low brow.
There's no high domed forehead that we have.
Brow ridges are quite prominent, these ridges of bone over the eye.
Also the mid-facial region, particularly around the nose, is kind of pulled forward and elongated
or enlarged.
So there's a very particular Neanderthal look with this enlarged nasal area.
The front teeth tend to be quite big as well, the incisors, the teeth that are in the front.
So they are more modern post-cranially below the neck than they are cranially, although
we have to factor in the strength differential that we had talked about already.
The best way to think of the Neanderthals is as an ancient species that is not part
of our species.
In other words, the decision that I have made, and I'll talk about this again in a minute,
is to go along with those biological anthropologists who classify Neanderthals into their own species,
Homo Neanderthalensis.
This is very much staking a position because it is part of a controversy and not everybody
agrees with this.
What we want to do is kind of set a foundation for how we're thinking of Neanderthals when
and where they live.
So we will call them Homo Neanderthalensis.
We know that there are what we might call precursors of these Neanderthal features that
I've described for you, visible in the archaeological record, back to about 300,000 years ago.
So there is a long lineage of individuals leading up to Neanderthals.
But by convention, we tend to refer to Neanderthals proper as those individuals, like the ones
I've described, living between 130,000 years ago and right around 32,000 or 30,000 years
ago.
We know the most about Neanderthals that lived from between about 75,000 years ago and about
32,000 years ago.
That happens to coincide with the time period of the last glaciation of the Ice Age.
We have more information about that time period than about any other.
But the key date to remember is the starting point at 130,000 years ago.
I've already mentioned the two continents on which Neanderthals lived, Europe and Asia.
We've also made mention of France and Germany as particular countries in which they were
found.
We could also mention some other examples of countries in which they've been found, Croatia,
Israel and Iraq.
Now we want to focus a lot on their behavior because this is where things get particularly
interesting.
There's a very hot debate about how much like modern humans were Neanderthals in their behavior
and in their cultural adaptations.
We have intriguing hints that Neanderthals were complex thinkers.
The question is just how complex were they thinking?
Were they thinking symbolically?
How do we know?
And here is where the disagreement lies.
So let's begin to assess some of what we do know about Neanderthal behavior in both Europe
and in Asia.
The best place to start is probably the most concrete type of evidence, which is the technological
material, the stone tools.
We see that there has been technological advance within Neanderthals compared to all earlier
hominids.
So the trend that we have already noted towards improved stone tool technology over time just
continues here with this hominid.
Neanderthal tools are based on flake manufacture.
Now you might say immediately, well wait a minute, didn't you earlier say that the old
iguan tools of Homo habilis really seemed to be focused on those small flakes that were
struck off?
And didn't we think that Homo erectus tools also involved a lot of flaking?
Yes, but the Neanderthal tools are different and here's how.
The core, the piece of rock, the chert of a quartz, was taken and flakes were sliced off
incrementally until the core was essentially used up.
There might be a little bit left at the end if there was that would be discarded.
In other words, we can think of this almost as an assembly line type of manufacture of
tools slicing off lots of flakes and this is a very efficient pound for pound use of
stone compared to what we had been talking about before.
When the flakes were then cut off of the core, they were what we call retouched or trimmed
into different tools.
So the flakes were made into different shaped, different sized tools to form a proper toolkit.
So there were knives and all kinds of other tools that would be fashioned after the initial
process of trimming.
So biological anthropologists have been impressed not only with the range of tools that exist
but with the efficiency in the tool making process that we can see from the actual remains.
Of course there is some truth sometime to popular images and there is at least a bit
of genuine information reflected in the image that we have of Neanderthals as cave dwellers
because often they did live in caves.
Sometimes they also lived in open areas though and we have some intriguing evidence from the
country of Moldova to show that this was so.
There is a ring of mammoth bones that are set up on an open plane and in the middle
of this ring there is a hearth and Neanderthal tools and animal bones and the hearth is a
very good indicator of Neanderthal control of fire.
This is pretty unambiguous and what we imagine is that the ring of mammoth bones had skins
stretched over them, animal hides stretched over them so that this was a shelter.
So we know that caves weren't the only places that Neanderthals occupied and there is a
real search for finding other shelters as well and some others have been found.
It's interesting that also Neanderthals were good hunters.
This is another part of the stereotype that holds true.
This is not to say that they were necessarily as efficient as modern humans as homo sapiens.
For example as far as we know Neanderthals did not have projectiles, weapons that would
have allowed them to hunt from a distance.
There's no example of a spear thrower, there's no example of a bow and arrow, these enter
the archaeological record only with modern humans but yet they were successful at hunting
and we know this from various sites across Europe and Asia.
We also know this from a different source of information as well.
The biological anthropologist whom I consider to be the foremost Neanderthal expert Eric
Trinkhaus has studied the diet of Neanderthals in various ways including chemical analysis
of bone.
What he has been able to do is to take Neanderthal bone and study it for the so called isotope
chemical signature of the foods that Neanderthals have eaten.
This is a very promising fairly new technology in biological anthropology and what it suggests
is that at least in Europe and at least close to the 30,000 year old time period there is
a lot of meat in Neanderthal diet.
So that in combination with the tools that we see, the marks on the tools, the bones
that are found and how they're processed tell us that Neanderthals were able to hunt successfully.
It may well have been a type of close quarter real confrontation type of hunting but however
they did it, they did it.
Now the most contentious area of interpretation of that Neanderthal behavior involves their
cultural and symbolic behavior even more directly and one of the most fascinating topics has
to do with burial of the dead.
This has not come up before because we've never had any hint at all that Homo habilis, Homo
erectus or any of the earlier hominids ever intentionally buried dead companions but we
do start to get that with Neanderthals.
The fact that Neanderthals in at least some places buried their dead is accepted by almost
all biological anthropologists.
There is debate about for example a particular site here or a particular site here, how do
you read this evidence in this case versus that case but the fact of deliberate burial
happening at least some places is accepted.
A good example is the site of Shanadar in the country of Iraq.
Shanadar is a cave site in a very mountainous area of Iraq and what we find are multiple
skeletons of Neanderthal individuals in this cave and at least four of them are quite clearly
known to have been deliberate burials on the part of Neanderthals.
The more evidence that you can amass in any given case to suggest deliberate burial the
better of course.
What archeologists and biological anthropologists look for are things like dug graves, some
very clear indentation in the soil that could have been made only by hominids, also for
a very careful positioning of the body in the grave.
Oftentimes buried individuals were placed in a flexed position.
This isn't always the case but it is possible to tell when the body was strategically and
perhaps even tenderly we don't know placed in a grave.
Most useful are what we call grave goods.
When some type of object was included along with the individual upon burial, examples
here might be animal bones.
There's one Neanderthal burial where the person was buried with the jaw of a boar.
There are sometimes stone slabs that are buried either with or on top of the individuals
and in Shanadar we have enough of the right mix of information to know that we're dealing
with this type of burial.
Finally when this site was first excavated by an American anthropologist in the 1970s
he could see that this was the case, that he was dealing with deliberate burials but
he also went a bit further and he claims that there had been flowers put on the graves of
the deceased individuals.
He had found pollen in the cave and was able to say, he thought, that it was ancient pollen
and that it reflected a variety of very colorful flower species.
So when he reconstructed life of Neanderthals in this cave it got a little bit out of control.
People were talking about the flower children and flower burials and how emotional this
must have been.
Well Shanadar we know had deliberate burials that isn't in question but what has turned
out to be the case is that this pollen was not as ancient as first thought.
The analysis in the dating of the pollen initially done in the 70s turned out to be inaccurate.
It turns out that the pollen was much more recent.
In fact was as likely to have been tracked in by rodents or even people, modern people
as it was to have been old.
So we have to let go of the flower burial part but the rest of it stands up.
This leads to another issue though, how do we really know what to make of the fact that
Neanderthals wanted to and when about and did bury individuals with whom they lived?
What does it mean?
Is this symbolic thinking or what is it?
I have recommended for you the video series that has been created by Don Johansson.
You'll remember that he was the discoverer of Lucy in 1974.
When in his video series he gets to the point of Neanderthals he is standing in a cave and
he talks about deliberate burial as a quote powerfully spiritual act unquote on the part
of Neanderthals.
Very intriguing but I think perhaps a claim that we need to approach with caution.
Consider the various levels of interpretation that we might make about Neanderthal burial
or more precisely about the meaning behind it.
First of all, perhaps Neanderthals realized through experience that it was simply more
hygienic, healthier to bury the dead rather than to leave the dead out in the open.
Perhaps burial was an expression of respect or love or tender feelings or some type of
emotional tie that shouldn't surprise us given what we talked about, you know, about
even the apes having emotional ties.
Perhaps it did indicate some type of ritual or initial religion but there is no way to
know and that's the point that I want to make here.
That one explanation sounds as reasonable as another and there's nothing in the bones
or the graves or the grave goods that gives us an indicator of how we can interpret this
Neanderthal behavior.
So I prefer to leave it as an open question which I think is the best way to approach
this.
What about art with Neanderthals?
Can we find symbolic thinking in representation of images or engraving or some type of art?
Here the answer for one seems to be fairly clear and the answer seems to be no, that
art appears in human evolutionary history only with Homo sapiens.
There are just the slightest hints in some places of an engraving or a stone with lines
on it, something like this, but there's nothing like the splendid, really artistic renderings
that we will talk about coming into the picture with Homo sapiens.
So how do we sum up the major question about Neanderthal symbolic or cultural behavior
that we've been talking about in this section of the lecture?
It doesn't seem as if the evidence for symbolic thinking is very strong.
This does not mean that Neanderthals lacked symbolic thinking, it's just hard to know
from the evidence that we have.
Surely we can see behavioral advances from let's say Homo erectus.
The burial of the dead particularly is unprecedented in the fossil record at any other place and
the fact that there's such success at hunting even in the absence of projectile weapons is
quite telling as well.
So we want to be able to talk about both things simultaneously that there are new behaviors
emerging with Neanderthals without necessarily showing us that they are capable of a great
deal of symbolism.
That part will have to go unanswered at least for now.
The precise relationship of the Neanderthals to modern humans and even to other hominids
of this general time period is another area that remains unclear.
In these lectures as we know we will consider Neanderthals as a separate species, we have
explained that already.
I should make a side note here and refer again to that textbook, the Jermaine et al textbook
that I have recommended as a companion for these lectures.
Because even there we see that those biological anthropologists came to the opposite conclusion.
They are comfortable suggesting that Neanderthals are part of our species but just a variant
type.
In that case what biological anthropologists do is use different terminology.
In that case Neanderthals become Homo sapiens Neanderthalensis, in other words a subspecies
and we modern humans become Homo sapiens sapiens.
This is the same type of taxonomic decision as was made for gorillas.
There are gorillas that live in the lowlands of Africa and gorillas that live in the highlands
in the mountains.
Most people are familiar with the highlands because of Diane Fossey's work.
In any case they are subspecies of the same species.
And when biological anthropologists say Homo sapiens Neanderthalensis, Homo sapiens sapiens,
what they're saying is exactly the same thing that those two sets of creatures could have
interbred with each other.
That is something that I am not accepting and do reject.
Analysis of ancient DNA may someday resolve this question about same species or not same
species as modern humans.
At present I believe that the DNA analysis does support the fact that Neanderthals should
be considered a separate species.
But there are admittedly uncertainties still surrounding this technique.
In the 1990s a very exciting breakthrough was made and DNA was extracted from Neanderthal
bones and nicely enough the skeleton that was used was the one discovered in 1856 in
Germany, the very first Neanderthal known to any of us.
And what happened was that the DNA was extracted and in the laboratory compared to DNA of modern
humans.
And this seemed to indicate, at least from what I can read of the technical literature,
that in fact Neanderthals and modern humans could not interbred and should be considered
a separate species.
There is argument over this point.
Let's broaden our view just a bit and look at this time period surrounding the Neanderthals.
What was going on between about 400,000 and 130,000 years ago?
This is an area that we have kept somewhat fuzzy until now.
We talked about Homo erectus as disappearing from the fossil record somewhere around 400,
300, 200,000 depending on how you define things.
There are in fact a group of hominids that are best just referred to as the transitional
hominids that lived between about 400,000 and 130,000 years ago.
They can be thought of as having a mix of Homo sapiens traits and Homo erectus traits.
So when you hear the term transitional hominid, you should translate that as erectus sapiens
mix.
So there were a lot of different hominids in the world at this time and they're considered
in a group to be the archaics.
In other words, just simply meaning that they're not modern humans.
Neanderthals can be also called archaic if you accept that they're Homo neanderthalensis
as we are.
But there are a lot of very shadowy relationships here that aren't entirely clear.
Scientists are at work attempting to clarify the relationship of these species to each
other and particularly of Neanderthals to Homo sapiens and we will have to wait and see
how that work goes and we'll talk a little bit more about it later.
But there's not any big startling conclusion that's coming here because we simply don't
know yet.
Neanderthals unsurprisingly I think have been the most compelling of all of the hominids
alive at this time period that approaches the appearance of modern humans.
And I think that's because they are in some ways so close to us.
They can so easily imagine a creature that hunted, dwelled in caves and for whatever
reason buried their dead.
But yet when we look at them or we look at depictions and representations of them more
precisely they look very different from us.
We know that they didn't have the symbolic capabilities that we did.
So it's just a kind of mystery shadowy sort of almost cousin type of creature.
Let's sum up this lecture then.
In the last century and a half Neanderthal anatomy has come quite clearly into focus.
We see these creatures as being robust in body enormously strong with big brains but
fairly primitive faces, cold adapted creatures.
We are learning more about Neanderthal behavior by the year.
Some biological anthropologists feel comfortable assigning them fairly complex symbolic capabilities.
Others less so but we can definitely see advances from Homo erectus in hunting in their flake
efficient manufacture of tools and in deliberate burial.
What remains most unclear is this whole area of ancestral relationship among Neanderthals,
some humans and other hominids as well.
We want to return to the question of the origin of Homo sapiens but we will not do so until
lecture 16.
The two intervening lectures are ones that I want to devote to behavioral issues that
we have touched upon but that I believe deserve further scrutiny.
We will be talking about the role of hunting in human evolution and the reconstruction
of gendered behavior in human evolution in lectures 14 and 15.
So we will start talking about hunting in the next lecture.
