We are now up to the point of origins of homo sapiens, of modern humans.
What we are going to do is take a step back for two lectures and talk about certain behavioral
aspects of human evolutionary history.
And we will start in this lecture with the evolution of hunting.
We have already said that we know quite for certain that homo habilis did process animal
carcasses using aldewan tools and then ate the meat.
We know that homo erectus ate even more meat than did homo habilis.
Furthermore, we have credited the Neanderthals with successful hunting behavior.
But until the time period of the Neanderthals, until our discussion of Neanderthals, we have
remained agnostic about the role of hunting in all of this meat acquisition.
Several classic anthropological models, however, imputed hunting success to very early hominids
and went further and suggested that hunting was a real prime mover of human evolution.
And by a prime mover, it was meant that hunting actually accounted for brain size increases
and increases in intelligence in the hominid lineage.
We want to review some of these models and look at them with a more modern eye with new
evidence that has accumulated since they were first published.
In the 1960s, two authors collaborated on what has become a classic model of the evolution
of hunting.
The two authors were Sherwood Washburn and Chet Lancaster.
Now we have already met Sherwood Washburn.
Well how influential he was when in 1951 he made his call for the new physical anthropology.
One of his students, also an anthropologist, is Chet Lancaster.
They published this seminal article suggesting in no uncertain terms that it was hunting
that made us human.
Their argument went like this, males are naturally drawn to hunting.
Hunting was a way of life from almost the start of the hominid time period.
They went even further than to talk about the natural affinity of males for hunting.
They talked also about the pleasurable basis of killing and warfare in general for males,
whether in the past or in the present.
They talked about a biological basis for pleasurable killing that is seen in the psychology of boys
even today and how easily they can be interested in things like hunting and fishing and sports
and games of war.
They very specifically touched on one factor in hunting that made us human.
This was the need for a lot of communication and cooperation during the hunt.
So here's what we have, hunting as the human adaptation going back in hominid times and
it being a collective activity.
We're talking here about big game hunting.
We're not talking about walking through the bush and grabbing a rabbit.
We're talking about hunting giraffe, elephant, big game.
This is not something that men or anyone could do individually.
So it required put a premium, put a pressure on communication and cooperation.
And that's what did it for us according to Washburn and Lancaster.
Now in this scenario published in 1968, females were painted as relatively passive creatures.
Sure, they evolved.
Obviously humans evolved as both males and females, but they evolved essentially on the
coattails of the males.
The males were doing all the work and the females kind of coasted along, if you will.
More to the point, they were pretty invisible.
Now it's easy enough to look at this as scans.
Now I am quite sympathetic to feminist anthropology.
I read a lot of the feminist literature and I know that this doesn't sound right.
This absence of females doesn't sound right.
But we have to be careful here and not too easily mock a past scenario because at the
time some of this made more sense than it sounds like it should today.
Modern hunter-gatherers were the referent for this model.
Washburn and Lancaster looked at the data from modern forager peoples who were living
off the land before agriculture, before domestication.
We've encountered this type of model before.
This is the same type of thing that Glen Isaac did when he wanted to model homo habilis
food sharing and homo habilis base camp living.
So Washburn and Lancaster went to the anthropological source data, but they did so selectively.
There was information, as we'll hear in a minute, about females, but there was more
information about male hunting and the importance of this.
This is what they chose to focus on.
This scenario, as it was published, made a very big splash in the anthropological world.
In fact, it is still reprinted today in classic collections of important anthropological models.
Partly I believe this is because of who Washburn was, after all, a major figure in the field.
But this is not to say that there was no response.
There was a backlash to this model, starting probably in the 1970s, and two of the prominent
counter-modellers, if you will, were Tanner and Zillman.
Nancy Tanner was the first anthropologist who was instrumental in leading the charge
against the male hunting model.
She unfortunately died fairly early in her life and in her career.
Her co-author was Adrian Zillman, who is still an influential biological anthropologist today.
She's at the University of California, Santa Cruz.
Together, what they wanted to do was reinsert women back into this role of the evolution
of hominids and the evolution of human intelligence.
What they suggested is that, in fact, the gathering activity of females would be the
most important factor rather than male hunting.
Gathering is walking long distances if necessary to collect plant material, highly caloric
and nutritious nuts, possibly even eggs of birds and small mammals if they're very small.
But whatever can be done while walking and gathering food, putting it in some kind of
a basket or a sling, and coming back to wherever people are about to eat.
Tanner and Zillman said that it was critical to see the role of women not only to balance
out what males were doing, but to see the role of women as primary in understanding
human evolution.
They had two sources for their own support, for their own model.
The first support that they used was data from chimpanzees.
We know that in chimpanzees, there's a differential pathway by sex to acquisition of protein.
Male chimpanzees do the vast majority of hunting, and the female chimpanzees really
concentrate on acquiring protein through tool use.
They sit for possibly hours at a time, getting termites out of mounds, cracking open hard
shelled nuts.
This type of work is much more compatible with raising infants, with having young dependent
infants with them.
So Tanner and Zillman said we need to look back at chimpanzees as a referent, possibly
for the common ancestor, to see that females were using tools very heavily might have been
inventing those tools.
Their second source of data was at the other end of the continuum, if you will, and they
too wanted to look at contemporary foraging people, just as Washburn and Lancaster had.
But here they said a careful look at the data suggests that women are the ones really holding
things together.
And in fact, the literature did reflect this at the time, so it's not entirely clear why
Washburn and Lancaster didn't take this into account.
Among certain forager groups, for example, yes, there's a lot of hunting, but hunting
is quite risky.
You go out and you look for game, but of course the game is moving, defending itself.
You may or may not succeed in bringing down big game and getting that big payoff.
So hunting was conceived of as both a high risk strategy and high payoff when it succeeds.
By contrast, gathering is not so risky.
After all, the plants are not moving around and nor are the nuts, and they don't attempt
to defend themselves.
One might have to walk a long way to find the appropriate resources, but there they are.
So every few days, you could go and simply get a good source of nutrition.
So it was somewhat ironic because Washburn and Lancaster's model appeared really about
the same time as the initial push in the anthropological literature, suggesting the importance of the
female gathering role.
And that data really supported Tanner and Zillman.
So there was essentially a polite, in some cases not so polite, fight breaking out in
the literature, and others too joined in to say, wait a minute, this focus on hunting
may not be as accurate as it first seemed to some.
Well, the decades went on, and in the 1980s and the 1990s, paleoanthropologists wanted
to get some hard evidence to really look at hunting and what role hunting might have played
in human evolution.
It is possible, for example, to look at tools as we have already hinted, and to ask what
clues they revealed to us about hunting, and to keep in mind an alternative hypothesis
that meat might have been acquired by scavenging, something we have talked about.
Now hominid scavenging simply means going up and disarticulating a carcass of an animal
that's already dead, possibly killed by big cats or other predators, possibly animals
that drop dead of natural causes.
Sometimes the tool marks on the bone can allow paleoanthropologists to distinguish scavenging
from hunting.
If you think about it, if you come across a bone and there are overlaid on top of carnivore
teeth marks, hominid tool marks, this is a good clue that the animal in question was
killed by the carnivore, the big cat, say a leopard, and then secondarily the hominids
would have scavenged from that situation.
If the reverse should be true and there are hominid tool marks right down at the level
of the bone, either with carnivore marks overlaying them or with no marks at all overlaying them,
hunting would be more likely.
Using this method, which again works on some bones but not all, we can say that there's
no hard evidence of hunting from this or really any other source of information for
Australopithecines or for Homo habilis.
It's a little bit more questionable in Homo erectus but still nothing particularly clear
with the Homo erectus time point.
We already know that Neanderthals did hunt.
But in fact, if we look at this transitional time period, what we've been admitting is
a kind of fuzzy time period of the transitional hominids, we can find a site that is typically
considered to be the earliest clear cut evidence for real good hunting in hominids.
This site is dated to approximately 250,000 years ago, again associated with the transitional
hominid.
The name of the site is La Cotte de Sembrelade.
It's on the Channel Island of Jersey, which is off the coast of France.
What you find here are mammoth bones and rhino bones at the bottom of a cliff mixed
in with hominid tools, with clear marks from the tools on the bones.
Another thing that's very important to mention is that the animals that are in this assemblage,
the rhino and the mammoth, are in many cases prime age.
And here's something that separates this bone assemblage out from what we've been talking
about before.
By prime age, I mean that adults in the prime of life were killed.
It is not just that older animals who might be tired and sick or the very young vulnerable
animals were killed, which might indicate more of a scavenging idea, because those are
the types of animals that big cats can kill, rather really strong animals were killed.
Now, clearly, you've got a big cliff and a bunch of animals at the bottom of it.
This indicates that there was likely a driving sort of hunting strategy, by which I mean
driving the animals off the cliff and then butchering them at the bottom.
That's hunting that is fully counting as hunting.
So we have then transitional hominid hunting, later on we have Neanderthal hunting.
If you take these data, these data that suggest a relatively late appearance of organized
big game hunting, you can put them together with the data from chimpanzees.
We know after all that chimpanzees hunt, not big game, but small game in organized ways
without tools.
Both of these things together have tended to push biological anthropologists away from
thinking of hunting as a real push factor in human evolution.
And remember, what we're trying to explain is fairly early hominid brain size increase,
as with early homo, and early pushes for intelligence.
But as with most things in this field, the debate is not over.
In fact, there's a biological anthropologist who has quite recently reinvigorated the debate
about the evolution of human hunting.
And this is Craig Stanford.
He suggests once again that hunting was an important prime mover early on.
And he does so with an interesting twist that pushes us to examine his idea quite closely.
Now, Craig Stanford, I should add, knows very well that when he resurrects the evolution
of hunting as a prime mover, he is going to be put automatically in the camp with Washburn
and Lancaster, or people will try to do that.
So when he writes, he explicitly says in his writing, OK, here's how Washburn and Lancaster
were right, and here's how they were wrong.
He bases his scenario upon some of their work, but is quite careful to distance himself
in other ways.
Well, let's start at the beginning.
For many years, Stanford was doing primatology research at the site of Gombe, Tanzania,
which as we know, was where Jane Goodall has conducted her decades-long study of chimpanzees.
Stanford's specialty was to study the hunting behavior of these chimpanzees.
He was quite impressed with the efficiency of this hunting, which we have already talked
about in earlier lectures.
You might remember that the males are the ones who do hunt, that 90% of the hunts at
Gombe specifically are conducted by adult and adolescent males working together.
Stanford suggests against the popular tide now that chimpanzees do make a good referential
model for understanding the role of human hunting in evolution.
So he is going against the grain in two ways, in that he wants to look at hunting, and that
he wants to do so with a referential model.
And you'll recall from earlier on, I had said that a lot of people are moving away from
that one-to-one type of comparison, but he does a very good job of suggesting that a
referential model works in this case because of how sophisticated chimpanzees are in their
hunting.
Stanford also says that it is a false dichotomy to set up a kind of scavenging versus hunting
situation.
He sees no reason to do this.
The question that he would prefer, we ask, would be, to what degree did early hominids
scavenge and to what degree did they hunt?
He says that it doesn't have to be one or the other.
I find it intriguing that he says this because chimpanzees actually just hunt and don't
scavenge at all.
We have never known any chimpanzees to scavenge, but beyond that, his point probably stands.
What Stanford stresses, though, is not the same thing that Washburn and Lancaster stressed.
He's not so interested in the cooperation and communication that takes place during
the hunt, when there's actual pursuit of prey.
Rather, he's interested in what happens after when the meat is acquired and it's about
to be shared.
To be specific, the strategic use of meat as currency when males interact with females
is his single most key factor.
What Stanford says is that meat is a kind of political tool and that's figuring out
what to do with the meat when you've got it is what leads us to be able to appreciate
hunting as a prime mover.
Meat now is currency and what males do with it is based on what he has seen chimpanzee
males do with their meat.
Two important things can happen primarily with the meat.
First, the meat can be shared with estrus females.
In chimpanzees now, we're talking about females with sexual swellings, those females that
are visibly marked as being ready to be impregnated and capable of conception.
In chimpanzees again, males will also distribute meat to political supporters.
The chimps who have helped them rise in the hierarchy or they might want to help them
in the future.
So there's a consolidation of power in the male hierarchy going on and there is basically
trading of meat for sexual favors.
Stanford says we can apply this to hominids.
Now we don't know that there were hominid females with sexual swellings but adapting
to the physiology of hominids, what we would get then are males who are thinking strategically
about how to use their food that they've gotten, their meat that they've gotten to make gains
for themselves.
Now the response to Stanford's model has varied.
It hasn't been out all that many years.
The book on which it was based came out in the very late 1990s so it's still taking
some time to be fully responded to by other anthropologists.
But there is one issue that's been tending to get a fair amount of attention.
It insists that he has avoided with his model passive female stereotyping.
In other words, we know that Washburn and Lancaster were rather roundly assailed for
leaving women out, for focusing only on the males and for essentially constructing a coattails
theory where females only evolved because males evolved.
Some anthropologists have said, doesn't this seem like what Stanford is doing too?
He very quickly says no because he knows that he cannot be tarred with that brush.
That would be very bad.
He says in fact that there is a role for being tactical and strategic for females in
his model because after all the females want to get meat.
So they want to maneuver themselves with the individual males who have the meat to give.
So it is a reciprocal process he stresses.
Now I could point out in his book that he stresses this in right about three pages out
of several hundred pages.
So there is this question, is he saying this part about the females because he really had
better or does he truly balance the roles of males and females?
And this is an open question.
He does mention by the way, a very intriguing fact about chimpanzees, he's always working
back and forth between chimps and the purported behavioral aspects of hominids.
He says that another researcher at Gombe found that female reproductive success of chimps
goes up when they do acquire a lot of meat from males.
And of course that immediately should ring bells for you, reproductive success, that's
important to this course.
So if there is a real benefit to females to getting this meat that also translates to
reproductive success in hominid females, then maybe there really was maneuvering on the
part of females and then it is possible to come out with a balanced model.
But as I said anthropologists aren't so sure if that's really what Stanford intended or
not.
So it is important to note that there's a difference in the factor that we're focusing
on.
We don't want to leap from Washburn and Lancaster to Stanford and say that it's all continuous
and all talking about human hunting.
This would be unfair to Stanford because of the fact that he's really talking about intelligence
and cognition and strategizing in a very, very different way than the earlier model
ever did.
Still, if we take a look back over the decade since 1968, what we can see is some continuity
and some shift over time in the importance that has been accorded to hunting.
It has tended to wax and wane over the various decades.
Now one thing that I have wondered about a lot is the fact that we have Washburn and
Lancaster really touting the role of hunting.
We have Stanford bringing back the role of hunting and we have Tanner and Zillman talking
about female gathering.
Well, what strikes you about this dichotomy if we can make two basic groups of theories?
Well, Washburn, Lancaster and Stanford are male, Tanner and Zillman are female.
The males are emphasizing the male role in human evolution.
The females are emphasizing the female role in human evolution.
Now Adrian Zillman, in fact, I've mentioned that she's still an active and important anthropologist.
She has made quite a name for herself in pushing back, if you will, against male-centered
models of human evolution.
She has even asked how come we're all so sure that Lucy, the 3 million-year-old hominid
dubbed Lucy by Don Johansson, is really a female.
If you think about it, she says, Lucy was the very first creature of Australopithecus
aphorensis ever to be discovered by definition.
This is the discovery point.
So how did Johansson know?
There's no array of skeletons for comparison.
How did he look at this single initial pelvis for a new species and decide that she's female?
Zillman at one point became quite notorious because she was hosting a conference in which
she wanted to talk about some of these exciting issues in human evolution.
And she issued invitations only to women, and she barred men from attending.
So we might ask whether that's a fair strategy or not.
She said she wanted reasoned discourse, and she would invite only women.
So I'll leave it to you to decide if that is fair.
But we want to wonder, perhaps, about the role of the actual authors of these models,
the role of their gender, and whether that plays in here.
Now, certainly, I don't want to go too far with this.
It is absolutely true that some of this waxing and waning that I've talked about has been
brought about by paleoanthropological and primatological advances.
We couldn't have gotten Stanford's model without years of careful study of chimpanzee
hunting.
We couldn't be talking, as we are now, about the possible alternative of scavenging unless
we have the new technology that allowed us to really analyze hominid tools and the so-called
cut marks on those tools to see which was primary, the carnivore teeth marks or the
hominid tool marks.
So all of that is very important.
And I would add, as an aside here, that this is a particularly good lecture to bring back
in a statement I made earlier that relates to the importance of primate studies to biological
anthropology.
Because think what Stanford did here.
He was lucky enough to go to Gombe as a student and study chimpanzees.
But he didn't just study them for chimp hunting and stop there.
He wanted to take that data and apply it to something that would illuminate human prehistory.
So he published his data on chimpanzee hunting.
He involved other primatologists who worked at other chimp sites or possibly at baboon
sites.
We remember that baboons have in the past hunted to get a conversation going about hunting
at the primate level.
Then he began to use a referential model to extend that conversation to paleoanthropologists
and to talk about whether or not chimps can really tell us something about how humans
might have hunted.
And then also the sociocultural anthropologists were brought in because we know that the data
on modern human foragers is so important.
So I find it particularly satisfying that Washburn is at one and the same time the author
of this initial model that kicked off all of this discussion about the role of hunting
and also was the one who really wanted primate studies to play this role in anthropology.
For the comparative research to turn out to really mean something and to lead us to
conclusions about human behavior.
So it is quite fascinating to consider a host of reasons for what turns out to be a kind
of pendulum swing about the role of hunting.
First the certain statement that it was important, then the backlash, and now a reconsideration
in a different format.
The issue of gender is so important that I think it deserves a lecture of its own.
Not so much the importance of the author's gender in making models, but on a wider sort
of perspective the question of whether there might be societal factors that help shape
how gender gets incorporated into models of human evolution.
And we're going to talk about this when we come back and we start lecture 15.
We will revisit different models of human evolutionary history and we will see how gender fits in
as a factor.
