In lecture 15, we will confront a layer of interpretation that is underneath the layer
that we talked about before with hunting models.
And I'm referring here to gender, or to put it informally, in human evolution, which sex
is doing what anyway?
We really would like to know what males and females were doing in the human evolutionary
past.
By now in this course, it is all a hat to refer to the fact that paleo-anthropological
interpretations are necessary to understand human evolution.
We have some bones and we have some artifacts, but what we really need to do is to flesh
out those bones, if you will, excuse the pun.
Now in turn, the scientists that are doing the interpretation are shaped by the time,
and place, and culture in which they live.
We tend to think of science as objective.
If you ask children, for example, what is their view of a scientist?
They always draw for you a picture of somebody in a white coat looking very serious and describe
the idea that scientists are out to get at the truth and they can uncover the truth.
Well, of course, there's truth to that statement as well.
We know that the scientific method exists because science values objectivity, testability,
the whole process of evidence gathering that we have talked about.
But the types of things that we are interested in, in this part of the course, absolutely
require modeling, and we've been through this before, so we know that is the fact.
What we want to talk about is what other factors societally might impinge upon models, and I
would make the claim that it is at least a defensible hypothesis that models about gender
might fall into this arena more so than others.
In other words, might more so be prone to being affected by societal trends and preconceptions
about gender.
We start at the easiest starting place, and that would be looking for anatomical differences
divided by sex in the human fossil record.
Here you have something concrete and material.
What you want to do is look at male skeletons, compare them to female skeletons, and chart
the differences between them and see if they might have any significance behaviorally.
So what we're asking about is sexual dimorphism, asking about whether there were two forms
anatomically, one for each sex.
And we know already that there were sexually dimorphic hominids.
In the time period of Australopithecines and Homo habilis, the consensus is that males
were quite a bit bigger and heavier than females, more so than we see today with modern Homo
sapiens.
It seems to have been a shift point at the very same place that we've been calling a
shift point all along, Homo erectus, with a reduction in sexual dimorphism at that period.
That is an interesting fact to start with.
We can also look at skeletons, sort them by male versus female, using the pelvis usually,
and ask about whether there's a difference in strength indicated in one versus the other,
possibly differences in diet.
We had talked earlier about the robust Australopithecines as being specialized hominids, having
this crushing and grinding complex of the jaws and the skull that allowed them to eat
hard foods, nuts and fruit that were very, very hard to open, as opposed to the grassal
hominids.
It seems clear that the crushing and grinding complex was more exacerbated in the male hominids
than in the female hominids.
And we know that again by this process of anatomical sorting by sex.
So this goes on all the time.
It's when we get to questions of behavioral sorting that we run into problems, because
the sort of information that we need simply does not fossilize.
We have a few clues as to, for example, which sex would have made tools, Aldewan tools,
indexes, flake tools.
How do we know which sex might have hunted?
This is still an open question.
We know from modern ethnographic data that there are some few, but some populations in
which females do play an active role in hunting in the Philippines, for example.
Artwork, any number of things we could ask about, and we don't have a way to trace back
a difference by sex.
So in the absence of this evidence, we turn to modeling as you know.
If we think creatively, we'd like to be able to fall back on evidence.
We'd like to say, well, maybe grave goods of Neanderthals, for example, could give us
a clue.
But if you really analyze what these data tell us, it is still hard to get concretely
at gender.
Let's say you look at a deliberate burial, what we have quite recently talked about in
this course at Shenandar Cave, let's say.
And you find that a Neanderthal was deliberately buried with a tool.
Well, does that necessarily mean that that individual made the tool?
I would submit that there are alternative ideas.
For example, that the tool might have been a gift to the individual, might have been
buried with that skeleton as a sign of respect or affection.
So again, we can't even look later on in the time period of human evolution for easy
clues to gender, much less at the beginning time periods.
In selecting the data to use and in combining different sources of data, then we do know
that subjectivity plays a role.
And again, I want to be very clear that I'm not suggesting that scientists would ever
consciously manipulate data, but rather we're talking at the level of preconception or of
assumption.
And the basic guiding theme of this lecture will be that gender falls prey to this.
To start off with a quick example, before we get into more detailed ones, I'd like to
describe for you a diorama that can be seen at the American Museum of Natural History
in New York.
This is a wonderful museum, as anyone who has been there can attest.
There have been very spectacular exhibits related to human evolution.
At one point, the exhibit was mounted called Ancestors, in which all the original dug-up
skeletons of hominids were brought in one place, from East Africa, from Europe, from
Asia, not castes, not replicas, but almost all of the original bones.
And being in that room was really quite a moving thing, a moving event and experience
for many of us.
But there is also there, as a permanent fixture, a diorama.
And what it shows us are two hominids, a male and a female, in a particular pose.
In order to describe this, I need to give you some background.
The hominids in question are Australopithecus afarensis, in other words, those hominids
that Lucy is part of.
And they're depicting bipedal walking across the African savanna with a volcano in the background.
We know that in 1977, there was a very great discovery that backed up what we had already
learned by that point about afarensis bipedalism.
This was at the site of Mary Leakey in Laitoli, Tanzania, East Africa.
And what was found was trails of footprints of hominids, of birds, of elephants, of creatures
great and small.
In other words, what had happened was that there was a volcanic explosion with ash laid
down.
And then all these creatures walked across this area.
And then after their footprints were laid down, a second volcano exploded, sealing
the footprints.
First of all, clearly and easily datable.
And second, clearly and easily analyzable.
The date for the footprints is 3.6 million years ago, found in association also with
afarensis bones, so we know what we're talking about.
And we are, of course, going to focus on the hominid footprints, not the birds and the
elephants.
What we see in the structure of the foot in this footprint trail is a clearly bipedal
foot.
With the toes all in line, one with the other, a clear heel of a biped, no question about
that.
However, what was a little bit more ambiguous was the fact that there were two trails of
hominid footprints next to each other.
One trail with a slightly bigger foot, one with a slightly smaller.
And it was the job of the museum to depict what might have happened as hominids strolled
across the savanna 3.6 million years ago.
What the diorama shows is that the reconstructor decided to put a male and a female walking
side by side, a couple, a pair bond apparently.
The male had his arm around the female's shoulders in the diorama and presumably in prehistory.
And also the female had her head turned, her face turned, and her mouth opened a little
bit, gazing a little bit out into the distance.
Well think about this.
A male and a female with a male protectively draping an arm around the female.
Not for example, two women walking across the savanna, one slightly taller.
Not two men walking, one slightly taller.
Not a man or a woman and a juvenile or a teenager or an adolescent.
But a male and a female with this protective embrace.
And by the way, you can judge for yourself if you go to see it.
But the expression on the female's face cannot easily be interpreted as an entirely clever
one.
She looks like just a little bit vacant-eyed.
Now there is, I would think, some kind of preconception here.
Out of all the possible scenarios to choose, what was chosen?
A pair bonded male and female.
I suppose you could argue that they could be brother and sister as well.
But there certainly is something to be said for the pair bond idea.
And the questions that this raises, I hope, are obvious.
Why pick that for the diorama versus all the others?
Well let's go into some more detail now.
And let's analyze three prominent paleoanthropological models that turn on this question of gender.
One model we have already encountered, two new ones I will discuss we have not yet talked
about.
And our focus in each one is going to be on the role of the male and the role of the
so-called nuclear family.
So we're not going to be talking a lot about hunting, but rather gender roles, and specifically
the evolution of the family.
To start with, I should clarify what I mean by the nuclear family, and I'm talking here
about the so-called, in quotes, typical American family.
Two parents and children living in one household together.
Not an extended family, in other words.
The first model we'll discuss is the one we have already talked about, the Washburn
and Lancaster 1968.
Primarily, yes, this model was about hunting for males, the primary significance for driving
human evolution, but it also, and significantly, projected far back into the past, the nuclear
family.
In fact, Washburn and Lancaster say that hunting and the providing of meat to females by males
created the human family.
And he means, they both mean, they clearly say, nuclear family here.
So there is an extra bit to the scenario that we didn't get to talk about.
That because the male is able to take this role, because he is then able to provide the
family forms around this activity.
And this is another aspect to the model.
13 years later, 1981 rolls around, another important model gets published.
This by the anthropologist, anatomist, both, Owen Lovejoy.
It was published in the journal, Science.
Now Owen Lovejoy, I have mentioned before, but not by name.
When I was talking about Don Johansson bringing back his very first discovery made in Ethiopia,
that bipedal meat, back to the United States, and laying it out on the carpet of an American
anatomist at home to ask, is it really bipedal?
That was Owen Lovejoy.
He published a suggestion that, in fact, we need to stop focusing so much on hunting.
In other words, he was part of the backlash to Washburn and Lancaster.
He talked instead about what's called the male provisioning model.
He said that, yes, males did need to provide females with resources, but that it wasn't
through hunting.
It was through other means, through ranging widely over the landscape and bringing food
back to a relatively stationary female and dependent offspring.
By the way, this really is a model that's about the evolution of bipedalism.
The fact that the male is provisioning the female was interpreted as a selection pressure
on male mobility that would increase the efficiency of bipedalism.
We can count this as one of a number of push factors that have been modeled for bipedalism.
For our particular purposes, what we want to focus on is the idea that a family resulted,
the nuclear family.
Because the male is in charge and is actively provisioning the family, the family was able
to spring up.
And in this particular way, there is continuity from Washburn and Lancaster, although there's
not continuity in other ways.
Let's jump ahead to the year 2001 and the third model.
Here Richard Rangham and his colleagues published a model that has gotten huge attention.
Science Times, that section every Tuesday of the New York Times, has featured it.
Many science sites on the web and science magazines have discussed this and it has been
published more formally as well.
They suggested that the prime mover factor in human evolution is, again, not hunting,
but is cooking.
Controlled fire would lead to the ability to cook foods and they tie this development
to the time period of Homo erectus.
They believe that Homo erectus have the ability to control fire, an issue we touched on earlier.
They say that cooking would have really opened up diet for hominids and would have made tough
foods more easy to process and digest, would have allowed high quality foods to be put
into the diet in new ways and calories and nutrition released into the hominid diet in
new ways.
They suggest that this also might explain why, in fact, the levels of sexual dimorphism
do reduce at the time period of Homo erectus.
It appears that female body size gets bigger at this time to close that gap in height and
weight between male and female hominids and what they suggest is that this extra quality
and nutrition particularly impacted hominid females and allowed them to get bigger.
In the Rangham et al. model, we see that hominid females are pretty active.
In fact, they're the ones who get to do the cooking.
You can decide whether this is a good thing to do to assign the cooking to hominid females.
By that I mean, do we have enough evidence to suggest that that's really true?
But again, for our purposes, we want to focus on a particular segment of the model.
That is the part of the model called the theft hypothesis.
What these researchers say is that this cooking, this new development in human evolution would
have forced females to bond with males specifically to get protection from scrounging.
That there would be some labor exploiters, essentially.
Some individuals, whether male or female, who would have attempted to steal cooked food
rather than getting it and cooking it on their own, they would be attempting to steal
this from the females and as a result then, the females need protection of males.
And here once again, the nuclear family begins to appear.
Of course, Rangham and his colleagues have not pushed the nuclear family back quite so
far in time as the other two models that we've discussed have, but it is still there in a
central part.
So there is some robust continuity across the three models.
They all imply that hominid females were forced to pair bond with males because they required
something from males, protection or resources for their own, the females' own, survival
and reproductive success.
Well how valid is this perspective?
Again, as we have said in relation to other debates, certainly this is a possible scenario.
Any of them are possible.
But is it likely, let's bring to bear some sources of information to assess this continuity
in the models about the need for males.
We can look at three sources of information that may help us.
First, primate studies.
We learn from primatology when we look at monkeys and apes that females are quite capable of
simultaneous production and reproduction.
And what I mean by this is that females forage for themselves and nurse their infants and
reproduce all without aid from males.
Now there are some cases in which paternal care does exist.
They're rare for monkeys and apes.
There are some cases in which males take care of infants and may even feed infants, but
there is no suggestion that there is male provisioning of females at any point from primatology.
However, the second source of data tells us that we had better not stop just by looking
at monkeys and apes.
We know from paleoanthropological study, of course, that life spans lengthened during
hominid evolution.
We know, of course, that life stages got longer too.
At some point, infancy became longer than what we see in great apes, and a juvenile
stage became important.
The anthropologist Lancaster and Lancaster, names you've heard before, Jane Lancaster
and Chet Lancaster, have been quite influential in pointing out that hominid females at some
point would have had multiple dependent offspring.
Not what we see in apes.
When you have one infant take care of it for a long time, suckle it for a long time, wean
it when you're about to have another, but rather having a juvenile to feed while you're
nursing a small infant.
That in other words, there may have been a shift during human evolution that required
some kind of resource provisioning of the female over and above the situation that you
would see with an ape female.
The question now becomes, is there any necessary need that this would have resulted in a male
pair bond or a nuclear family?
Maybe yes, maybe no.
We will find out in a minute that there are alternative scenarios.
We can certainly think of kin groups of females, for example, helping out a female who might
need aid in order to continue her life and have reproductive success.
So the suggestion made here is that the need for male protection specifically might be
unnecessarily constraining in the models that we have talked about.
The third source of data we can bring to bear is from sociocultural anthropology and from
demographic data that is more recent.
Anthropologists have known for a long time that the nuclear family is not the dominant
family pattern around the globe.
We know that extended families are quite common.
In some cases, there may be multiple wives, in other words, a polygynous family situation.
In other cases, it may be the grand parental generation living with the family so that
there's a big extended family.
So nuclear families do not seem to be what is found across the world.
We also have learned much more recently that the nuclear family, however, sort of mythical
in our understanding of America, is actually the minority pattern in American society now.
If you look at data from the 2000 census in the United States, it is now being fairly
analyzed.
It's fascinating to look at this relatively new data.
And what we can learn is that 24% of American households are now the typical configuration
the nuclear family.
And the typical is in quotes because we assume that it's typical, but in fact, it's less
than a quarter of American households.
That is down fairly appreciably from the percentage in 1970, 40% of American households
in 1970 were nuclear family households.
By the way, right now, or in 2000, more specifically, 25% of American households were constituted
by a single person, single person households.
Now it is always tricky to work with statistics, and I should be careful to clarify.
It is also true, we know this from the same census data, that now in the United States,
fully 70% of children alive today, dependent children, live with two parents.
So there's another way to look at this, but at the very same time, those two parent households
are likely to be composed of two parents who work and a lot of step parents involved.
So it is not the biological nuclear family in quite a few cases of two biological parents
with two biological children.
In any case, what we begin to see is that the nuclear family was pushed back in time
with reasons that don't always dovetail with just science.
In other words, the question that I think is worth raising is whether gender patterns
within American society might have influenced models such as Washburn and Lancaster or Love
Joy or Rangham even more recently.
Certainly when Washburn and Lancaster wrote, well it was 1968, you can't find a better
emblematic year for a time of social change and social upheaval in this country.
This was a time when the women's movement was underway as well as all other sorts of
social protest.
There was still to some degree an expectation of the woman as nurturer and the man as provider.
Not wholly, not in every segment of society certainly.
I don't want to go too far with this, but it is worth thinking that this may be a partial
explanation.
Another reason why we shouldn't go too far with this is of course there were other
alternatives offered to the nuclear family.
Not everybody was suggesting about the antiquity of the nuclear family or the importance of
the male providing.
We can return here to Tanner and Zillman for this type of model.
Here we already know that these anthropologists have turned the tables around from a significance
of male resource acquisition to significance of female resource acquisition.
I would suggest that when the tables are simply flipped and females are made primary
that no scientific validity is gained.
In other words, it's not simply that Tanner and Zillman wish to redress an imbalance.
They don't simply say, look these models have been missing the boat because they leave
females out.
What they do is they empower females to the extent of making males nearly invisible.
Tanner and Zillman talk about females as inventors of tools, females as the stable, reliable
food providers, networks of females, female relatives surrounding reproductive female,
perhaps in place of the nuclear family.
What you get here is a substitution of what you had before.
You had before the primacy of the male, now you have the primacy of the female and clearly
in neither of these situations is their balance.
Little support exists for this type of behavioral sorting by gender.
We know that ethnographic data should teach us this lesson.
If we look again cross-culturally as anthropologists are so good at doing, we know that a variety
of roles even just looking at foraging may be played by men and women.
In other words, there's no essential male role or essential female role as in we can
reduce what males do to this or females do to that.
If you look at modern foragers, you will find some in which there is real egalitarian cooperation
between the sexes in foraging.
For example, there are groups that hunt the males and females together.
Not necessarily big game hunting with projectile weapons, you might envision something like
net hunting in a forest where people get into a circle and even some of the older children
can participate and nets are used.
Some people will flush out game from the bushes, others will catch the game and the males and
females work together.
They may also gather nuts together.
In some societies, clearly the males are doing a great deal of hunting and are the ones providing
the most calories.
In other societies, the females are responsible for the vast majority of the nutrition that
is brought back through gathering.
So we have all sorts of situations.
Now this is a lesson that we should have been prepared for from primate studies.
The very same point has been made through studying our closest living relatives, the
great apes.
We know that chimpanzees and bonobos live in some ways very similar lives.
We know that they live in bisexual communities.
Males and females live together with dependent offspring.
A further commonality is that females transfer at puberty so that the males are left living
in so-called patrolines.
This should all be familiar to you.
However, we cannot then say that there is a male nature.
Bonobos and chimpanzees are sometimes lumped together and just called chimps because bonobos
are chimp-like and they're so similar to chimpanzees.
But there is no chimp-like male nature.
In chimpanzees, males are aggressive.
Males are entirely taken up with the dominant hierarchy, with aggressing against females.
There's very little male-female cooperation.
By contrast, in bonobos, the males are much less aggressive, much less caught up in dominance.
There's a great deal of co-dominance between the sexes with females bonding together with
each other to allow that co-dominance to be expressed.
We find the very same thing ethnographically around the world.
The question is, why is there such a tendency to do this behavioral sorting to make it a
simple picture in human evolution, to come out with statements such as, males did this
and females did that?
And here is where I think we do need to appeal to the questions relating to scientific subjectivity
and the larger societal patterns.
The best solution may be to offer a variety of alternative behavioral scenarios that work
together to try to recognize the inherent variation within a gender, within males or
within females.
Here we bring back a concept that is so central to the course, variation.
This of course is what natural selection works on, and we know that natural selection shapes
behavior just as much as it does anatomy or physiology.
We would expect natural selection to work on existing behavioral variation, and to shape
that adaptation in line with local circumstances, and that's what our models should be reflecting.
We may then try to model gender by using referential, phylogenetic and conceptual models of non-human
primates.
We may go to paleoanthropological sites and model what we find out from skeletal analysis
and artifactual analysis as much as we can, and then we can bring in the ethnographic
analogies, but always keeping an eye on the variation that is present at every stage without
making preconceptive sorts of dioramas, models or conclusions about gender.
Now in the next lecture we want to return to the hominid chronological timeline that
we have been building up.
We want to ask about the origin of our own species, and we will devote two lectures to
that.
We will start by asking when and where did modern humans first evolve.
