Let's continue now with our hominid chronology, because of course we still must account for
the emergence of our own species, Homo sapiens.
And in this lecture we will talk about both the anatomy and the behavior of Homo sapiens
as it first evolved.
If you line up a Neanderthal skull or skeleton, put it next to a Homo sapiens skull and skeleton,
there are quite striking differences.
We'll start with the skull.
There are four traits of the Homo sapiens skull that set it apart immediately from what
we would see looking at a Neanderthal skull.
First of all, the high forehead.
We have this vertical domed, if you will, forehead that looks immediately different
from the low sloping nature of the Neanderthal forehead.
Secondly, we have either greatly reduced or non-existent brow ridges that bar of bone
over the eyes.
Third, we also have smaller teeth.
And fourth, related to number three, a definite chin.
Now I'm referring to weed because we're Homo sapiens, but I'm talking about traits that
extend through the entire time period, the first Homo sapiens, and continuing now through
the present day.
People often ask, why a chin?
Why would a chin appear in the hominid line with Homo sapiens at this particular time?
It seems as if there's a reconfiguration of the lower jaw that may well reflect relaxed
selection pressures on the teeth.
The teeth we know are getting smaller, and apparently they were being used now for things
like chewing and eating rather than for things that they might have been used for before
as an aid to technology.
The Neanderthals big incisors, for example, have led anthropologists to speculate that
they use their teeth as tools.
And as the tool kit improved with Homo sapiens, it seems likely that the teeth were used less
and less often as tools and more and more often for just feeding, leading to this reconfiguration
of the lower jaw.
It is true, nonetheless, that despite the pattern of these four characteristics, we
still see a lot of variation within modern human populations.
To give you just one example, there are populations today that do show more pronounced brow ridges
than are typical.
The Australian Aborigines would be a good illustration of this.
Of course, Australian Aborigines are fully modern, fully sapient, just like any other
population, but they have retained a slightly pronounced brow ridge.
That is just a typical example of what we call intra-specific variation within one species.
What about below the neck than making this comparison between hominids and modern humans?
Post-cranially, modern humans have a lighter, slender skeleton.
That is less robust, less heavy, not the kind of adaptation for cold that we see in Neanderthals,
not the strength that we see in the Neanderthals.
So we have a move away from a robust adaptation.
Modern human anatomy, as far as we know now, appeared in the fossil record at about 125,000
years ago, and the place that this first appeared seems to be Africa.
This is going to be our working hypothesis for this lecture.
There are three sites in Africa that provide the best evidence in support of this claim.
Two are cave sites in South Africa.
One is called Classy's Rivermouth, and one is called Border Cave.
The third site is in East Africa, in Ethiopia, and it is called Omo-Kabish.
Now all of these have skeletons that are, without a doubt, modern.
The characteristics are there, there's no dispute.
What does tend to be disputed is the date.
The best date is around 125,000, but unfortunately it is not extremely precise.
In other words, there is a large waffle factor around this date, a plus or minus accuracy
range.
It might be true, it might be a little bit old, it might be a little bit young, as an
estimate of when these people actually lived.
Classy's Rivermouth is a site that I would very much like to visit.
I have not been able to go to South Africa, but it is particularly interesting.
This is a site showing that early modern humans lived on the South African seacoast.
They set up their living area between the actual cave and a large dune that is apparently
quite old that would have sheltered them from the winds coming in off of the water.
Paleoanthropologists have been able to analyze remains of diets that have been found there
and have showed that these people were very efficient extractors of seafood from this area.
We know that these early Homo sapiens ate clams and mussels and also larger creatures
as well, including penguins and seals.
Now our working hypothesis is in place, but there is a rival to it, and the rival hypothesis
looks at sites of early Homo sapiens in the Middle East, specifically in Israel, and suggests
that these might be as old as the three sites that I've just talked to you about.
To give some specifics we can work from two examples in Israel.
There are two sites, Skol and Kafsa, that have been dated to right around 100,000 years
ago, and obviously that estimate is younger, is more recent than the African sites, but
when you factor in that plus or minus, the fact that the dates could be off one way or
the other, they're pretty close for fine evolutionary modeling.
So there is a problematic nature of trying to come up with a sequence of whether the
African sites were first or the Israeli sites were first, but probably the African sites
are in fact oldest.
Whatever turns out to be the case, we can say with a great deal of confidence that Homo
sapiens is a young species.
Let's consider the whole time sweep of this course.
At 65 million years ago, we had an ancestral population of mammals that began to evolve
in the direction of primates.
Only at 7 million years ago do we have a form that appears to be the first hominid, the
first example on the hominid lineage with a bipedal creature.
At 2.4 million years ago, we get a hominid in our own genus, the genus Homo, that is
of course Homo habilis, and we have to move down the time scale all the way to 125,000
years ago before we get to us, and this is quite recent when we talk about evolutionary
time.
So much for human anatomy.
What we really are interested in is the origins of modern behavior, because of course, being
modern is about more than having a high forehead or a chin.
We want to understand what types of behavioral advances were tied up in this change in evolutionary
time.
The first problem comes in by even defining what could be meant by modern behavior.
Typically, biological anthropologists refer to a cluster of innovations.
As you might expect, technology would be included.
Advances in stone tool and other type of tool technology as well.
But it goes beyond technology to bring in the first appearance of art.
The idea that there is now trading happening over some fairly long distances, and a strong
interest in reconstructing symbolic representation, the idea that Homo sapiens more than any other
hominid and possibly exclusively was able to rely on symbolic representation of let's
say images, and we'll talk more about that in just a minute.
As we have done before, we're not going to worry so much about the great variety in definitions,
but we're going to look at some of the best evidence and some of the patterns that we
can find for modern human beings.
For quite a long time, biological anthropologists traced modern human behavior to a particular
place and a particular time.
That place was Western Europe, and the time was right around 35,000 years ago.
This was given a nickname.
This was called a behavioral revolution, or more informally, the Great Leap Forward
that happened at 35,000 years ago.
Everything was supposed to have made a relatively sudden change so that, in fact, we have to
look at one part of the world to understand how we really became human on this view.
Well, what evidence was there for such a pinpointing of modern human behavior in time and space?
Let's start with the technology.
The so-called upper paleolithic tools that appear in Europe at this time are key.
Upper paleolithic is just a designation of a particular time period, and it refers to
right around 35,000 years ago in Western Europe, and the tools that are found at this time
are amazingly well-crafted.
They are reflective of very precise, very decorative craftsmanship, so that the tools
while for the most part are functional, some are actually decorative and artistic to the
exclusion of function.
For example, wood and bone and antler are now worked and used as tools, as much as stone
actually is, and we don't have that from before.
There are boron tools that are actually used to make other tools.
In other words, the borons work the wood, the bone, and the antler and produce other
tools from there.
We have drilling tools that were used to drill holes.
We can find ancient shells with holes drilled in them, and the tools that apparently were
used to make those holes.
So something new is going on here in terms of innovation, decoration, and craftsmanship.
A very important area of research has been tied up with the appearance of art with modern
Homo sapiens.
There are just spectacular examples of art from Western Europe, and we'll start off talking
about cave paintings, and I want to spend a little while talking about them because
they're so illustrative of what I'm talking about, and they're so much fun to talk about
as well.
Now the cave art tends to be dated to right around 30,000 years ago or after, or more
recently than that, and we've known about this cave art for a while.
I suspect many of you have heard of Lascaux Cave in France, which has been studied for
many decades.
Particularly famous is a room called the Great Hall of Bulls.
There are animal representations, animal paintings in color all over this room, and I should tell
you before we go further that the date for this room in the cave altogether is 17,000
years ago, and we are dealing with France now.
Now when you walk into the Great Hall of Bulls, or any other room in this cave, what strikes
you immediately is the color, there's red and black and other colors that are painted
on the walls, and the real artistic elegance of the animal paintings that you see.
When I was first being taught about this topic, my teacher told me, don't think about
this as being some incipient form of art, some precursor to art, or maybe even something
in between a child's drawing and an adult's drawing.
No, this is full artistic competence at work.
The animal paintings are realistic, they really look like the bison or the deer or whatever
is depicted.
Furthermore, if there's a natural feature in the cave, it was often incorporated into
the paintings.
Let's say there's a very small outcropping coming out of the cave wall, sort of bulge
on the cave wall, that might have been incorporated as a shoulder or a rippling muscle.
So clearly there was full art at this time period.
It's worth learning a little bit more about LISCO, because it has quite a lot to tell
us about prehistory.
Basically, in the art that's on the walls, there are three themes represented.
Animals, humans, and what are called signs, and I'll be defining that for you in a minute.
And the animal representations are far and away the most dominant.
There are approximately 600 animal representations on these cave walls.
A full quarter of them are horses.
There's a great lot of one particular species.
Bison is the next most popular.
There are a few other species as well.
And as I mentioned, you need to be thinking of animals that we can instantly identify,
and we have no problem knowing what they are.
The second category, human representation.
Quite intriguingly, there is simply one example in this category.
In all of LISCO cave, in all the rooms, there is one human figure.
And unlike what we have been talking about with the animal representations, this human
figure is quite stylized.
That is, it is not realistic looking at all.
It is almost at the level of a stick figure, a drawn outline, something that a child might
do, which is very intriguing if we start to think about meanings, which we'll come back
to in a minute.
The third category that has been called signs include things like dots, curves, lines, basically
sort of geometric types of things that aren't representations of living creatures.
So this has been a source of interest and excitement for paleoanthropologists for quite
a long time.
I mentioned when you walk into the Hall of Bulls, and I should explain that.
I have not been there.
I hope to go.
For a long time, it was possible for anyone to walk into LISCO cave and view these cave
paintings.
Of course, the country of France was quite proud of this and allowed people to go in
and see them.
When about 1955, though, it became clear that the paintings, the cave walls and the paintings,
were deteriorating because of the large amount of carbon dioxide that people were exhaling
as they went through, and this, of course, was not a tenable situation.
One doesn't want to take 17,000-year-old cave paintings and have them deteriorating
or even destroyed.
By 1963, the cave was closed, and it just became clear that the paintings could not
withstand the tourism.
And I'm happy to say that the paintings have been restored simply by the passage of time
and not having all that carbon dioxide around their back to their initial freshness and
vitality.
The country of France also made an interesting decision.
They decided to reproduce the full life-size model, the Hall of Bulls, and another room
from LISCO cave and set it up as what's called LISCO 2, and this is a place people can go.
This is a lifelike replica of the very same cave, with everything made just the way that
it appears to be in the original, so that, again, these small outcroppings on the cave
walls are incorporated into the art, and everything is exactly the same.
So if you happen to be going to France, this is a place that you might consider visiting.
If you're not getting to go to France anytime soon, as I am not, you might want to try a
virtual visit.
If you have access to the internet and you're comfortable with search engines, simply typing
in LISCO cave can lead you to a beautiful virtual tour where these images at the Hall
of Bulls and elsewhere are visible to you.
Now I don't mean to focus on LISCO to the exclusion of other caves.
We know of others in Italy and in Spain as well.
There are quite a lot of caves in this western European area.
But furthermore, people are still discovering such caves.
The most recent truly amazing discovery was in 1994.
There was a man called Chevette who was walking on a hiking trail and had known about a cave
that was in this particular area for some time, but noticed some air coming up from
the cave in a way that he hadn't noticed before and was intrigued by.
He collected two friends.
They were all quite comfortable with cave exploration and began to search for an opening
that had not been known about, but that might account for these air currents.
And they did find a hidden opening and push their way through and they found not only
a great big chamber when they entered, but a network of rooms beyond that.
Of course it was dark in there.
They had lights.
They were able to see a little bit.
One of them looked up and saw the depiction of a mammoth on the cave wall in red ochre.
And at that point they knew clearly they had quite a discovery.
And since 1994, there has been ongoing analysis and research at the cave, which is called
Chevette Cave.
Some aspects of this cave are quite different than what we saw in the discussion of Lascaux
Cave.
For example, there are still many animal depictions and animal representations, and they are still
exquisite.
They're just beautiful and elegant, but they tend to be of different types of animals.
For example, what's depicted here includes rhino, lion, and bear.
Animals that are absent from Lascaux.
And they are also animals that tend not to be hunted as much as, say, horses and deer.
Here are, in fact, three animals depicted on the cave walls at Chevette that have never
been seen in any other cave at all, panther, hyena, and owl.
Quite intriguing.
There are also a lot of human hands, in other words, the image of hands around the cave
at Chevette.
In addition to the cave paintings that I've been describing to you at these two French
sites, we know of other types of art from this time period in Western Europe.
And this other type of art can be summarized by the label portable art, things that are
much smaller and can be carried from place to place.
Probably the most famous portable art in the Upper Paleolithic time period are the Venus
figurines.
These are small statues of women, and they tend to come in two types.
One is highly stylized, again, not realistic.
The facial features and even the hair are very blurry, they're not clear at all, but
what gets very exaggerated are areas of the breasts, the hips, and the buttocks, huge
amounts of fat deposits on these areas.
This led to the idea, that has become quite famous, that these Venus figurines might be
some kind of a fertility cult.
I don't know about that.
There are other hypotheses as well, and we need to keep in mind that some Venus figurines
are quite realistic and do not have fat deposits depicted on them.
So here we're not sure what is going on, but there are lots of these statues.
There are also engravings, for example, pieces of stone or bone with decorations on them.
And this is important to keep in mind and should not be overshadowed entirely by the
cave art.
So these kinds of advances that we're talking about are, without a doubt, different than
anything that transitional hominids or Neanderthals has produced, at least to our knowledge, unless
there's a surprise in store for us.
We can then come to the conclusion that there's a new level of symbolic representation with
Homo sapiens.
Of course, the one question that I haven't tackled so far is, what do all these cave
paintings mean, and what do all the engravings mean?
This is what we would truly like to know, but we run up against the same old problem.
How do we interpret from way back in prehistory?
As you would also not be surprised here, there's been no shortage of theorizing.
Let's take, again, the animal depictions at Chauvet and Lusko, for our example.
Could it be that this is a type of hunting magic or hunting ritual?
In other words, for the hunters that go out and try to take down bison or horses, if you
put the image on the cave wall, could that be somehow an attempt to gain power or control
over the animal?
Other suggestions have been that maybe teaching was involved.
For example, adolescents who are about to start hunting might be taught about the species.
But clearly there is more going on than just hunting.
As at Chauvet, we have those rare depictions of the lion and rhino, the owl and the panther,
and so on.
I have always wondered myself, if it couldn't just be art for pleasure's sake, does there
have to be a particular function that we need to figure out for this art?
And scholars who know more than I about art are hard at work on this question.
Well, let's return to the question of the behavioral revolution in Western Europe.
What we have learned so far is that there was reason to suggest such a sudden, abrupt
revolution by all the tools and the art that we know of from this place and this time.
Recent evidence, however, suggests that the conclusion of the Great Leap Forward may well
have been too hasty.
In fact, modern human behavior may have appeared in a more distributed way around the globe
and more gradually.
And there's an interesting question that is hidden behind what I've just said.
The question can be formed as follows.
Has there been a Eurocentric bias to our study of the emergence of modern behavior?
That is, have we been looking in Europe because we expected Europe to be the home of symbolization
and innovation in all of the things that we've been talking about?
Is it possible that scholars who live and work in Europe thought, well, yes, Africa
is a fine home for the early stages of human evolution, but when we really become human
and our behavior takes on the added significance and symbolization that we're talking about,
we'd better look in Europe?
Well, I don't know, but what I do know is that new excavations in Africa are very compelling
to mount a counter-proposal to the behavioral revolution idea.
And we need to talk about two sites in particular in this context.
The first is called Katanda, and it's found in the Democratic Republic of Congo, formerly
Zaire, most people know the country as Zaire, and Blombos Cave in South Africa.
Both places show extremely fine craftsmanship of tools, particularly focusing on bone.
Let's take up first the case of Katanda.
There are two American archeologists who deserve credit for the excavation at this site, Allison
Brooks and John Yellen, and what they have found are finely worked bone harpoon points.
Again, as I indicated, beautifully crafted, but what the real surprise was turned out to
be the date.
Between 80,000 and 90,000 years ago in Africa, we have the very same type of elegant tools
that we were claiming should only appear in Western Europe at 35,000 years ago.
When Katanda was the single example in Africa, it was fairly easy to dismiss it or to say,
well, who knows about those dates or to say, this is a single example.
We are learning from Blombos Cave in South Africa that it is not the only example.
Christopher Henshelwood has been telling us about excavations at Blombos for just a few
years now, and quite recently has made a new exciting announcement.
He has found a piece of red ochre, red stone, two pieces in fact, with triangles and lines
on them that are quite clearly inscribed and engraved.
And again, what is important is the date, 77,000 years ago.
This is not the only piece of information from Blombos.
In fact, he had published earlier about bone tools that are finely worked, and they are
dated to 70,000 years ago.
In this case, we're talking about projectile points that have been made from bone.
So when you put together the evidence from Blombos with the evidence from Katanda, at
the very least you have a strong reason to question the human behavioral revolution
as being centered in one time and one place.
You might ask though, OK, that may work for technology, but what about art?
One poll that I'd be very interested to take, and I think I will do this when I teach this
course next at William & Mary, is to ask this question of students.
How many of you have heard of the cave paintings at Lascaux in France?
And we'll get a certain percentage answer.
And then ask, how many of you have heard about the rock art at Apollo 11 Cave in Namibia
in Southern Africa?
And I can predict for you that the percentage for that second question will be lower than
the percentage for the first.
Namibian cave art is not something that is as well known as the Western European cave
art.
We do find in Africa rock paintings that are just in the same art time period that we've
been talking about for Western Europe.
For example, the Apollo 11 Cave has charcoal and red and white animals that are depicted
just as elegantly as we do in Western Europe, not as many of them.
But one thing that's quite surprising is the date, 27,000 years ago.
So 10,000 years before Homo sapiens was making Lascaux, they were living in Namibia and making
these rock art drawings.
So it seems clear that Homo sapiens is set apart from any creatures that came before.
Where we talk about technology or art or basically clump all of this together into talking about
symbolic innovation.
We also remember from some of these examples and from what we talked about earlier that
Homo sapiens is doing a different kind of hunting now.
There is not the need to do what Neanderthals did, close quarter hunting or perhaps transitional
hominids did of always stampeding animals off of cliffs, but rather projectiles such
as the bow and arrow, the spear thrower, harpoon points, other projectiles are all in use now.
So there's no question about that.
What we have to ask is whether we have been restricting ourselves too much by looking
only in Western Europe at what Homo sapiens was doing.
So we need to ask new questions.
It is possible that Africa may be implicated once again as it has been so many times before
in some firsts now talking about behavioral innovation with Homo sapiens.
Let's sum up this lecture.
It appears that modern human anatomy did evolve before what we want to call modern human behavior.
This is an interesting fact in itself.
Whether we look at Katanda at 80 or 90,000 years ago or we look at the art in Western
Europe at 30,000 years ago, that seems to have happened more recently than what we see
the skeletal and skull changes as being, which can be dated to 125,000 years ago.
And remember that the anatomical changes are slenderizing, if you will, of the skeleton,
the high forehead, the reconfiguration of the face, the loss of the brow ridges in the
skull.
All of that comes about first, and as far as we are able to tell, the behavioral innovations
come later.
And I always want to say that there should be a qualification in there because dates
change and we may find new things.
The old idea that Africa was the home of early human evolution, but that modern human behavior
evolved in Europe, is now suspect.
One area of symbolic representation that I did not touch on in this lecture deserves
a quick mention here at the end, and that is language.
I have left out talking about the evolution of speech and the evolution of language because
I am going to devote an entire lecture to that topic.
Certainly speech and language counts as an example of symbolization, and we will tackle
that in lecture 18.
Before we do that, though, we have more work to do on the topic of origins of Homo sapiens.
We have to ask now, from where did Homo sapiens emerge?
From what other populations did they evolve, and how did it come to be that at a certain
point in human evolutionary history, Homo sapiens became the soul hominid on earth?
So stay tuned for the next lecture.
