Finally, language. We've talked about everything in the hominid lineage, from technology to
art to bipedalism, but we have not talked about the evolution of language, and we will
do so now. I have preferred to give language its own separate lecture in accordance with
its significance and to place it in the course at this point after we have gone through the
basics of hominid chronology. And I do this because language is so critically important
to modern humans. Language involves far more than just the conveying of information or
the sending of messages. I believe, as do most scholars, that language is the way that
we construct our lives and experience our lives. And I say this whether we're talking
about Shakespearean language, elegant plays and poetry, or merely talking about our dinner
table conversation at the end of the day. It's important to all of us. It's how we
come to know others, and I would say come to know ourselves as well. In other words,
language is the basis for human sociality. I try to remember to use the term language
instead of speech. I don't always catch myself, but I want to, because I want to include both
vocal and signed language. People can use both, or either, and in either case it doesn't
matter. Language shapes our world and connects us to others. Language is such a fundamental
part of the human adaptation that we find ourselves sometimes addressing other beings
or other objects that have no hope of comprehending or responding. I'm thinking here about talking
to babies, to pets, even to machines. Let's face it, we do talk to the littlest tiny babies
who cannot comprehend our words, who can't respond. Now, yes, they might be able to follow
along with a voice tone or a facial expression, but they can't understand the words that
we use. Well, you could say, but an infant is going to grow up, and you're teaching
it basically by talking to it. What about a pet? Again, the argument could be made that
pets will understand voice tone. But using myself as an example, I will submit that many
people will talk to animals in full, complex sentences with words and meaning. For example,
in my life, I have uttered sentences such as, now, rabbit, you cannot keep chewing through
the modem cords of my computer, so please stop. There's not much about voice tone here
that we're trying to get across. I live with, in addition to a husband and daughter, three
cats in a rabbit, and I do find myself talking to all of those creatures, knowing that they
cannot respond in the same way that I'm talking to them, and that they understand only some
parts of what I'm saying. You might ask yourself, those of you who are computer users, have
you ever talked in a fit of rage or otherwise to your computers? Well, I think the point
I'm making is obvious about the depth of our adaptation through language, that it's just
what we do, no matter to whom we are speaking. Another corollary of this involves, again,
the topic of children. Children learn our immensely complicated languages all around
the world with little direct instruction. It appears to be relatively effortless for
young infants to do this, and we don't sit them down to teach them this. How this process
of language acquisition is accomplished is fiercely debated. It would be the subject
of an entire course on its own. What we want to note is what I've already said, that the
youngest infants, even from birth, already live in a linguistic world. I don't believe
that we should make a distinction between pre-linguistic and linguistic when it comes
to children. Pre-linguistic is sometimes used for the youngest children that don't yet have
speech. They may babble or have facial expressions or turn-taking in a sort of pre-speech type
of way, but that transition, while important for language theorists, for us, we should see
it all just part of growing up in a language-filled world. The human brain, even from infancy,
as I have said before, is adapted to absorb information. We are adapted to enter into
relationship with our social partners, and it is through language that we do that. So
a key question for biological anthropology is at what point do we see evidence for language
in the hominid lineage? Three distinct possibilities can be envisioned to understand how language
might have come about. The key thing to know is that each possibility is tied to a quite
different definition of language. I want to go through the three possibilities with you
and tie each one to a slightly different understanding of what language is all about.
On the first view, language is unique to modern humans. It is a Homo sapiens phenomenon that
evolved only with our species, and therefore it is of recent evolutionary origin. Now typically
the definition of language that goes along with this view is that language should be equated
with syntax, so that without syntax language does not exist. The complex grammatical patterns
of syntax are thus the key here. Syntax is often defined or loosely understood as word
order, the order of the words that come in a sentence. But in fact the definition that
we need to use is a little bit more complicated because the full definition of syntax should
involve the relationship of elements in a sentence. For example, how the clauses relate
to the main part of a sentence, what kind of hierarchical relationship there is among
the elements of a sentence, what modifies what. Let's take a fairly complex sentence.
I'll make one up. The ape with the hurt leg that just made a gesture is the alpha male
of the community. Now I think most people can follow that sentence, it's a little bit
tangled, but from a syntactical point of view, it's complicated. The syntax there are all
those clauses, the parts that are embedded within other parts of the sentence, and that's
what syntax is all about. On this first view of language being unique to modern humans,
only the modern human brain is capable of generating and dealing with syntax. So by definition
only modern humans can have language. On this view, syntax is governed by a system
of rules that are literally ingrained in the human brain. It's something that's hard wired
in there. It's an instinct, if you will, to be able to see the world, deal with the world,
interact with the world syntactically. So it's just as much a part of our brains as
is our neocortex, the particular part of the brain most involved with thinking and cognition.
So the conclusion can only be, from this first possibility, one of discontinuity, that modern
humans are set apart from everything else in the world, including other hominids, certainly
including non-human primates and any other type of animal. So there's a gap between
modern humans and absolutely everybody else. What follows from this is it doesn't make
sense to talk about gradual, incremental evolution of language. You either have it hard wired
rules for syntax in the brain, or you don't. It's similarly not sensible to talk about
language as we know it, as if there could be some precursor type of form. This first
view is very hard and fast then on what language is. It's pretty cut and dry. For the most
part, this first view tends to be problematic for biological anthropologists. Now of course
we know better than to make full generalizations like that, but on the average I would say
that most biological anthropologists worry about such a hard and fast view because it
does not engage with evolutionary questions. It doesn't even believe that there is a search
that is reasonable to undertake for precursors if we are already tying language to a human
brain specifically. So let's go on with the second of our three possibilities. This is
one that is more compatible with a certain type of evolutionary thinking. So number two,
language is now seen as being unique to the hominid lineage, but not necessarily just
to homo sapiens. So that earlier hominids probably did have language, and we can trace
that in various ways in the fossils or the behaviors. Possibility number two then says,
let's break away from this litmus test definition of language as being equivalent to syntax.
We shouldn't make that narrow equation. A broader view of what language is all about
is more compatible with evolutionary theory. Here typically the search is for the origins
of speech, and I do use this word quite purposefully. In other words, it's much easier to look for
vocal tract or brain configurations for speech, most people think, than it would be to look
for some sort of gestural or signed language. This isn't to say that there are not theorists
who talk about the origins of gesture and non-vocal communication, but rather that the
typical search in fossil hominids has been for something that we can tie to capabilities
for speech. So we're going to review a sampling of both anatomical and behavioral clues to
whether hominids and which hominids might have been capable of language. These clues
do range from vocal tract to brain to behavior. We'll start with the vocal tract. Now the
vocal tract is a soft tissue area of the body, primarily composed of three important structures,
the tongue, the larynx, and the pharynx. The tongue is obvious. We know that the larynx
is the voice box, and just to remind you of basic biology, the pharynx is the combined
opening to the stomach and the lungs. Now in almost all mammals, including cats, dogs,
monkeys, apes, that kind of thing, we see that the larynx is located fairly high up
in the neck or high up in the throat, and it has a particular relationship to the pharynx
and the tongue. That means that there are few sounds that are capable of being made.
In other words, there are sounds that come out, but they're not articulated speech sounds
because the larynx is high up and it does not articulate in the way with the pharynx
and the tongue that is required for sharp, discrete speech sounds to be made. Biological
anthropologists have analyzed the skulls of hominids and found that up until right about
Homo erectus, that very same vocal tract plan was in place. So let's say for Australopithecines
and Homo habilis, a mammalian-like, cat-like, monkey-like, ape-like vocal tract without
the ability for sharply discriminated speech sounds. Well you might ask, there's a problem
here, isn't there? You're looking at skulls, but you're trying to trace the origins of
something that's soft tissue. How does that work? Well as it turns out, of course we don't
have Homo erectus larynxes and pharynxes, we don't find those, but there are clues in
the bony structures of the skull to the position of the larynx. So if you're a real anatomical
whiz, you can turn a skull over, look at the skull base, and look at small bony projections
that will indicate where the larynx would have resided, so to speak, in the vocal tract.
So there tends to be the view here that starting with Homo erectus, there was a so-called
descent of the larynx towards its modern human position. We have a larynx located much lower
down in the throat or the neck, so that it articulates differently with the pharynx and
the tongue to produce the speech sounds that we know of. It's interesting to know that
when modern human babies are born, their larynx is actually quite high and it descends during
development in life, and this is part of the reason why they become better at articulation
in their first months of life. But in any case, we have an indicator here through fossil
evidence that there could have been yet another shift point at Homo erectus. However, there
are some contentious facts about Homo erectus that should be entered into the record here,
and we need to return for a moment to the Nario Katome boy, the fossil dated to 1.6 million
years ago found in Kenya. That's so complete, 80% complete. One thing that researchers
have focused on is the fact that this individual had a relatively small opening through the
vertebrae in the back through which the spinal cord would have passed. This led them then
to interpret to look at that evidence and come up with a suggestion that the spinal cord
itself would have been fairly small or thin, and from there they go on to speculate that
there would have been less control by the spinal cord of the so-called intercostal muscles.
These are muscles around the ribs that control breathing. If in fact the spinal cord was
relatively weak in its control of these muscles for breathing, the view is that speech might
have been compromised, that there might have not been a lot of power muscularly to produce
speech. So the vocal tract evidence suggests a shift, but this other evidence of spinal
cord in muscles leaves us with a type of question. Remember that the Nario Katome boy is the
single most complete Homo erectus. We don't have a lot of other fossil evidence to compare
that with. There are other ways to analyze fossils as well. I'll give you just one more
quick example. If you flip over a skull and you look at the skull base, there's a small
opening that is called the hypoglossal canal, and it is through this small opening that
the nerves run to the tongue, so they innervate or liven the tongue. And if you measure the
size of this opening, biological anthropologists have determined that the origins of speech
are most likely not with Homo erectus, but only later with Neanderthal. In other words,
the size of the opening gives us an understanding of how innervated, how nerve-rich the tongue
would have been. So as with most everything else in anthropology, we come up with slightly
different answers depending on the source of data. Yet I would say that there is still
a type of convergence. We have an enormous time period of hominid evolution and the convergence
for origins of speech tends to be on Homo erectus and Neanderthal. So not on the earlier
hominids, and that is interesting and important in its own right.
So on the second possibility that we have spent some time talking about, significant continuity
exists across at least some of the hominids in this later time period. We might also want
to mention here that some of the behavior that Homo erectus and Neanderthal engaged in,
we can easily speculate, shores up this idea that they might have had some type of speech.
Since we are talking about things like deliberate burial, long distance migration, it is easy
to convince ourselves that maybe they would have needed speech. This is again a speculative
thinking, but anyway it all tends to fit together.
This leaves us with possibility number three. And here there is an even greater extension
of capabilities of language to other organisms. Here language or at least significant elements
of it can be found in primates. Now it's very important to please keep in mind during
this section as I talk about this, that I'll be talking about present day monkeys and apes,
but I'm using them as stand-ins as a reference for creatures who would have lived before
the evolutionary split between the African apes and the hominid lineage. We can only
look at language capabilities in the modern animals that we have now.
From this view, an evolutionary perspective compels us to understand that there was no
major watershed, that language would have evolved quite gradually, even starting back
before the hominids. So we can view language in two different ways. It's really fair of
me to explain that there are two kind of sub-definitions of language within this area. In the first,
language is composed of a series of traits or features. We might look at, for example,
environmental reference, the idea that you can make reference to certain things in the
environment. Or we might look for some type of syntax in language even. We might look
for learnability of language or modifiability of language. And then we go out and we search
for those things in monkey and ape communication. A slightly different view, which happens to
fall more in line with my own research, is that language is not just a collection of
traits, but that it's important, most important in use. That language is about dynamic change
and cohesion. In other words, that language is important for what it accomplishes. And
what it accomplishes is coordination of social action between partners dynamically. No matter
which slightly different view of language you choose, here we go out and we look for
what monkeys and apes do, and we find examples that fit both sub-definitions. You might remember
that we talked earlier about the fact that some monkeys scream in ways when they're interacting
that encodes information about the environment, about their social partners, or possibly about
predators or about food sources. My own work with gestures in great apes, as I've discussed,
shows that gestures can be used as well as vocalizations to coordinate a quite a complex
and subtle level what's going on between social partners in the great apes. So either of these
definitions allows us to find language or its precursors in monkey and ape populations.
Now complex non-human primate communication can be related to human language on this view
by homology. In other words, we're really talking about systems that arose through shared
descent. The fact is that we arise from common stock with these creatures. So the claim on
this third view is that we evolve language from a very important evolutionary starting
base, just as we evolved other things based on the primate grasping hand or the primate
depth perception, the primate brain that we have talked about. So homology is a key corollary
of the third view. Whichever one of these three possibilities seems more sensible to
you, we want to conclude this section of the lecture by emphasizing one point. None of
these three views wants to deny human uniqueness. None of them says that there's something about
language that's so continuous with other primates that it doesn't set apart humans. So we want
to be able to both at the same time account evolutionarily for the language that we use,
but to recognize that it is not exactly like precursor forms. For example, as far as we
know only humans rely on large vocabularies that have specific and distinct meanings.
And these words are used in very complicated intricate ways with long narratives and storytelling
possible. My favorite candidate for a feature of language or an aspect of language use more
precisely, that only humans have, is the ability to talk about the past and the future.
We can enter into conversation with others and share memories. If two people have a long
history together, they can sit back and reflect about things that they shared. Or one person
meeting a new one, a new friend, might want to talk about his past and bring that other
person into his internal reflective world through talking about his own memories. Similarly,
there's strategic planning that can go on for the future. Of course, this is very much
part of human nature to talk and plan and think about what is coming ahead. We don't
think that there's a good deal of evidence showing that hominids or great apes could
do this. It would be hard to know in some cases. It's easier to make that statement
for great apes than it is for hominids. But this seems to be something that was quite
elaborated late in the human evolutionary line. However, what I want to do is talk about
a scenario of evolution of language that can still derive these unique features from
a continuous base of evolution. Remember that we're working with this tricky balance.
Unique features, but we don't want to make them mysterious or enigmatic, or as if they
could not have been derived evolutionarily. You'll notice that what I'm doing here is
I'm clearly citing against possibility number one in which language is syntax and is uniquely
modern and only in the human brain. I am speaking from my position as someone who writes a lot
about evolution of language, my bias, if you will, that there is some type of continuity
in language evolution. So when I give you a plausible scenario for language origins
as I'm about to do, I don't just pick one at random. I pick one that I like. I pick
my favorite one and it's going to reflect some continuity. The scenario for language
origins and evolution that I will describe for you was created by the anthropologist
Robins Burling and he explains in a very detailed way key steps that can get us to human language
through a series of evolutionary shifts. Now I invited Robins Burling along with eight
other people and myself to an evolution of language seminar that was held in 1996. This
was held at a wonderful institute in Santa Fe, New Mexico called the School of American
Research. I had written my dissertation there and was later funded by the school to bring
together ten scholars from various disciplines, various states and various countries to come
together for five days to talk about origins and evolution of language. And I have to tell
you that there's nothing better for academics than to be flown to a beautiful city, put
up and stored and housed on a beautiful campus with good food with five full days of no distractions
and nothing to do than to talk about something that is important to you, in this case evolution
of language. Robins Burling came, participated and contributed to the book that resulted
from this seminar. Here's what he had to say. Burling starts us out in this quest to
really delineate the steps and origins of language with apes. He starts out at a starting
point that we before have mentioned as well. And that is the iconic gesturing of apes.
Burling uses a slightly different term for iconic gesturing. He refers to it as motivated
signing, but we are going to use them as equivalent terms. Iconic gesturing, motivated
signing, same thing. You'll remember that iconic gestures are ones that in some way
depict the action that is being made or requested. So an iconic gesture might be something
like putting the arm forward and making a come here gesture or by making a rotational
turn around type of gesture in the air. The gesture depicts the action so it's pictorial
in a certain sense. Great apes can do iconic gestures we know and Burling calls this a very
key ability that sets apart the great apes from other primates such as monkeys and from
other animals as well. Now there's a shift at the start of the hominid lineage that Burling
finds important. And this shift relates to both increased brain size, so I am talking
about homo habilis here, not earlier astellopithecines, homo habilis increased brain size and increased
imitative capability. Oddly enough we have found out somewhat to our surprise that apes
are not particularly good at aping at imitating. Some are, I wouldn't say that it's a completely
absent type of skill, but for the most part apes do not do particularly well imitating
skills or gestures or vocalizations of others. So Burling envisions as many other anthropologists
do a leap in this capability at some point in relatively early human evolution. And the
key to this is the fact that it would have resulted in a reduced reliance on iconic
signs. If you can imitate, then you can work towards collectively a conventional system
where not everything has to be depicted in space, but there can just be a symbolic type
of collective understanding so that there would be increased ability to adopt utterances
whether vocal or gestural made by social companions. Over time then these signs, we
now will call them these linguistic utterances, would become more and more arbitrary, in other
words not pictorial, but arbitrary without a necessary relationship between what is uttered
and the actual object or event referred to. Words could emerge or gestures that could
begin to refer to very specific objects, events or actions. And again the key is to remember
we're talking about social conventionalization. These hominid brains paying attention to other
hominids, absorbing what others are doing, imitating, coming to a collective understanding.
Eventually then vocabularies would have built up and using words in orderly combinations
would have become more and more beneficial. Again we want to insert the concept of reproductive
success here, that it is possible that those hominids that were able to speak and use words
in this way could have improved for example their ability to find mates, their ability
to talk about survival against predators or survival in hunting in such a way that it
could have resulted in a reproductive advantage. So you get syntax at the end of this scenario
emerging from all of the evolutionary steps that went before, but it is not mysterious,
it does not have to be hardwired suddenly in the human brain, but rather it comes out
of all the steps that were prior. Of course Burling admits that this is in some ways speculative.
Parts however are quite testable. The parts that I have described for you fit very nicely
with both the non-human primate data and with evolutionary logic. As with all the other
hypothetical scenarios we've been reviewing in this course and there have been quite a
few, this one at the same time both requires more data and will stimulate more research
and that's exactly what we would require a good evolutionary scenario to do. I think
there is a role for scenarios like this as I have said so many times. So I will conclude
by reaffirming my particular conclusion that there has been significant continuity over
evolutionary time in the development of language and this is again one of those times when
we really see the articulation of different sub-areas of biological anthropology, primatology,
the paleoanthropological literature and evidence and so forth. Now we are going to make a big
transition in this course because the last chunk of lectures will turn to a very different
focus. We are going to move a little bit away from the very direct consideration of our
evolutionary past and move to the present but our focus will be asking how the present
has been affected by our evolutionary past. We will talk about race, human variation,
evolution of human diet and so forth. We'll begin with race in the next lecture.
