Starting now with lecture 19 we head in a slightly different direction in order to engage with other topics in biological anthropology.
In this final section of the course we will explore issues that relate to contemporary human populations.
It's probably worth noting at this point why the course leaves off at about 30,000 years ago in terms of the hominids that we have been talking about.
We just finished up talking about hominid language and we stopped really with the whole hominid spectrum at 30,000 years ago with modern homo sapiens dominating the world in terms of the human type lineages.
Well, this is one of those disciplinary boundary issues. In other words, biological anthropology leaves it up to other parts of anthropology and to history to talk about what happened after 30,000 years ago.
The invention of agriculture, the initiation of domestic animals, all of these things are important topics in prehistory that they don't tend to be studied by biological anthropologists.
They're studied by archaeologists, also historians who are interested even in the origins of writing and that sort of thing.
So this is an explanation for why we are shifting direction at this point.
The first topic we'll consider in this final section of the course has to do with race.
The question before us is, can the human world, human populations on earth, be carved up into biologically distinct races?
And for some people, this is a somewhat odd question.
Some people would ask, well, isn't it obvious? Look around the world.
Isn't it clear that people of different races exist in the world?
After all, the term race is completely ingrained in the American vocabulary. It's just part of our lives.
We want to consider this very question in lecture 19.
As the biological anthropologist Michael Blakey has said, that people can be grouped into races may seem as obvious to us as the fact that the sun rises in the east every morning.
Part of the reason for this is that the idea of taxonomic categorization of races has been with us for so very long.
It's been with us for centuries, scientifically.
We know that the 18th century Swedish anatomist Linnaeus was the first to come up with a very scientifically based categorization of people according to race.
Now, before this time period, others had used racial categorizations based on, for example, skin color.
If we look at the ancient Egyptians, we find that they referred to themselves as red people and talked about other societies surrounding them in the world as white and black and yellow.
But with Linnaeus in the 1700s, we get a very specific scheme.
You'll recall he's the very person who gave us the binomial system for calling ourselves homo sapiens, for calling Lucy, Mastrelopithecus afarensis, and so on.
Well, he went much further than that with his typology of human races.
He suggested that there are four major human races that can be divided up according to geography and skin color.
He called homo europeus the first race, not in terms of chronology. This is just a list of his races.
These were white people of Europe, homo aphor, the black race of Africa, homo asiaticus, yellow people of Asia, and homo americanus, red people of America.
Very simple, skin color times geography, and that was the answer for him.
Yet, even though we're so used to thinking about race and we have had various taxonomies that have grown out of the one that Linnaeus had done,
in other words, people have played around with that particular classification, we know that science pushes us to ask questions even when things seem obvious.
To continue with the words that Michael Blakey uses, after all, we know that the sun doesn't really rise every morning, does it?
Every school child knows that it may seem as if we get the sun rising and crossing the sky, but that is not really what's happening scientifically.
And similarly, we need to look harder at the phenomenon of race.
We wish, of course, to explore race only from a biological anthropology perspective.
And biologically speaking, a race would represent a grouping of people in between the species level and the population level.
It would be some kind of cluster that would be an intermediate level between those two.
So, by this definition, then, a race would be a cluster of people with some genetically determined traits that they have in common.
Skin color, hair color, possibly even body shape, nose shape, eye shape, any number of these things would be held in common by a group of people living in a particular area
or being able to trace their origins back to that particular area.
We want to emphasize that when we talk about race, limiting ourselves to biological anthropology in assessing the concept is important to keep in mind.
Sociologically and historically, there's no question that the concept of race is useful.
It would be very difficult to talk about American history without recourse to the concept of race,
but we are going to confine ourselves only to the question of biological validity.
And finally, at this point in the course, I can tell you that there is a topic on which almost all biological anthropologists agree, a rare situation,
and it is not 100% consensus as we will hear, but it is relatively close.
Most biological anthropologists today reject the idea that the concept of human race has any biological validity.
Instead, they maintain that race is a purely socially constructed concept and must be kept in the realm of sociology, history, and so on.
Why? I want to present a series of arguments that support the rejection of race as valid biologically.
What evidence do biological anthropologists marshal to support what they say?
First, there's no agreement at all as to how many races we should be identifying in the world.
We started out noting that Linnaeus some time ago came up with four.
But you could compile a whole textbook just on the basis of the different types of taxonomies that have been delineated.
Some have only three races. There have been others that have over 200 races.
This is obviously a subjective thing. One decides what's important and then clumps people on the basis of subjective decisions.
For example, let's consider the Indian subcontinent. There are people in India who have skin color darker than some people living in Africa.
They also have facial features that appear to be somewhat Caucasoid-like, Caucasian-like, white-like, if you will.
But they live in Asia. What would Linnaeus have done with these people?
You've got them in one place, but their skin color looks like they should be someplace else, and their facial features would point to yet a third place.
This is a simple example, but we can see that there's all kinds of disagreement about simply how to do the carving or where to draw the lines.
Second, we know to a certainty that there's no such thing as a pure human race in the world today.
There is too much intermarriage, interbreeding, and gene flow among the various groups that exist.
And the idea that there is some race somewhere in the forest, you know, mythically primitive that's been held apart from all of society or was anytime recently is just that. It's mythical.
Even more, there has been no known entity as a pure human race anytime in human prehistory, and this may be more surprising.
This is a claim I'm making calibrated to our best anthropological knowledge.
The idea here is that there's a very long history of gene flow, migration, and interbreeding, so that our human history is one of mixing from the very start of our species.
And remember that that's not really such a long time ago, 125,000 years ago, to begin with.
The multi-regional and the partial replacement models that I talked about last time for the origins of Homo sapiens depend deeply on hybridization or interbreeding.
That is the way those models are conceiving of our origins, whether that is true or not is still an open question.
But we do know from the time of Homo sapiens early on, there's been a lot of migration, movement, and intermarriage.
We can also think back to times in our more recent past that have been studied by historians as well as anthropologists.
You might think of a phenomenon such as the Silk Road, this very famous trade route that started in China, went across 7,000 miles of space, of land, to end at the Mediterranean.
The Silk Road was highly active as a trade route starting in about the second century B.C., and there were movement of peoples all along this road back and forth over vast differences in space.
And not only the objects then moved, but the people and their genes and interbreeding and all sorts of things happened.
These are just some examples to back up the claim that we shouldn't think that there were human races that were pure and isolated at some point before, but that that has somehow disappeared.
The better idea is just to think of migration and interbreeding all along.
Another central fact. It has been found in quite a robust and convincing manner that if you look at variation in the world today, only about 15% of human genetic variation occurs between races.
Fully 85% of such genetic variation occurs within a race.
To be honest, it took me a while to really believe this. I had to read it a whole lot, but consider this. Two people may be grouped into the same race based simply on skin color.
This seems to be a particular feature that Americans especially are very keyed into. So you may say, OK, look at two people, have the same skin color, they should be in the same race.
Whereas in fact, in our example, the two people share almost nothing else. No other genetic origins, no place of origin, geographic place of origin.
They may have completely different traits otherwise. And in fact, their genetic variability is quite great even though superficially the skin color is the same.
So the cultural history may vary and the genetics may vary very much within a race.
History tells us something as well about the way that the term race has been used. We've mentioned before that biological anthropologists say that race is socially constructed.
Well, the arguments I've just given you are meant to attempt to be convincing that race is not biologically valid, but we also must recognize a fact that is crystal clear historically.
The definition of what kind of person counts as being part of a race changes with historical context and it is not only subjective, but has been used with quite conscious manipulation of power.
The history of biological anthropology is, if you go back far enough, I'm not talking about recent decades, unfortunately also the history of racism.
That race for a long time by biological anthropologists and other scientists were used to construct the other, if you will.
That race was used to divide the single human species to set some people apart as better and some as worse. Some is superior, some is inferior.
Let's go back to the example of Linnaeus for a moment with his four races divided by skin color and geography.
In fact, he did go a little bit further as he developed this taxonomy and he imputed to certain races better qualities.
Perhaps unsurprisingly for his time, Homo Europeus, the European race, he found to be of superior intellect compared to all others.
And this is a theme that we find over and over again. It's not just the idea that people look different or have different genetic origins,
but race has been used to enslave and to dominate, to suggest who should have power, who is lazy, who is smart, who is not, who should govern and who should be governed.
So we should have a skepticism and at least a desire to question the use of the concept once we see how it's been used and once we understand the biological facts behind human variation.
I have to admit, as I indicated earlier, that not all biological anthropologists are of this view and it's only fair to include the minority viewpoint here.
A few scientists disagree with everything that I have just told you. And these scientists can be divided into two different camps.
One are biological anthropologists, two are academics or lab scientists who say that race is valid.
The other group are forensic anthropologists who are out working practically in the field using race as a concept.
And we want to go through these counterarguments.
According to some biological anthropologists then, there is obvious evidence for human race.
We're back to that point again of evidence being irrefutably obvious, visibly obvious.
They would say, let's do a simple test. Let's compare a man from Stockholm, Sweden to one living in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
Let's ignore all the cultural trappings such as clothing or other contextual factors such as objects.
There are obvious differences that are going to be visible that will be markers of race according to these people.
In other words, the skin color, the facial features, the hair, everything else is going to be racial and that we cannot get away from in this minority view.
A second point these people suggest is that there are diseases that cluster according to certain races.
We have talked before in this course about sickle cell anemia.
And it is true that in this country, the overwhelming majority of the victims of sickle cell anemia are African-American.
So some biological anthropologists say this too is evidence that race is real.
Occasionally, although not often, there are claims still made that there are racial differences that are measurable, quantifiable, even in intelligence.
These are rarely biological anthropologists but sometimes.
And there's a recent series of publications not by a biological anthropologist but by a scientist insisting that there's measurable differences in IQ and intellect
showing that Asians are the smartest race and Europeans are in the middle and Africans are at the bottom.
And this continues to be showing up in publications, although atypically.
Now what is the problem with this type of view?
Some might say, well, to start with they're politically incorrect.
Yes, but they may be they may not be who knows.
Science does not care about what is politically correct or politically incorrect.
We want to evaluate the truth of these statements.
If in fact there was scientific evidence for them, however uncomfortable they might make us, we would have to investigate them.
However, there are flawed assumptions at the heart of these claims by these minority biological anthropologists, minority in terms of how they think about race.
First of all, let's revisit the Stockholm versus Dar es Salaam test.
The problem with it is it's picking extremes and it ignores all the gradual shifts in the middle.
It also completely forgets the fact that you're looking at just these really obvious markers without taking into account all the ways in which two people in Stockholm will be different from each other
and two people in Dar es Salaam will be different from each other.
There are tremendous ways in which those two individuals in the same place, possibly looking superficially alike, will vary genetically and that gets lost.
We also must not forget the lesson of the question of pure race.
In other words, there never has been just a group of people who've been isolated in Stockholm or isolated in Dar es Salaam and who have not interacted with others.
These so-called biological differences that are supposed to be present may not completely disappear but they diminish in significance when we understand this fact of long mixing between populations and overlap genetically between populations or the so-called races.
What about the forensic anthropologists?
Here we have the second group of counter thinkers, people who say, yes, I really want to embrace race because I don't want to go with the flow and reject it.
I don't believe that that is correct.
Forensic anthropologists routinely classify individuals using their skeletal remains in various ways.
They want to find out sex of an individual, age, and also use race quite routinely.
You may remember from the introductory lecture that I talked about a forensic anthropologist called Clyde Snow who does what he called osteobiography.
He reads the bones, whether that's in Argentina or Oklahoma City, all those examples that I gave you of his career.
Well, forensic anthropologists attempt to discern race because they are trying to solve a question about a person's identity.
Forensic anthropologists are often working in a practical arena.
They're trying to solve crimes or intersect with the legal system.
And in the courts and in police files, race is a very routine category.
It's one of those things that just gets used all the time.
These scientists, the forensic ones, say that using categories really makes a practical difference.
Categories such as Caucasian American or Hispanic, African American, something like this.
Native American would be another example.
As I understand it, 80% of the time forensic anthropologists can get race correct.
They can be accurate about identifying a particular individual to the so-called racial category.
And by the way, there's a big interest in American popular culture right now in forensic anthropology.
If any of you watch CSI on television, as I do, or you may read books about fictional forensic anthropologists,
these techniques are a lot of fun to read about.
There's an anthropologist called Kathy Reichs who is a working academic anthropologist who writes very good fiction,
a whole series of books about a woman forensic anthropologist who goes out and makes these kinds of identifications.
However, biological anthropologists once again have a response.
They say that this type of classification, yes, is practically useful for crime identification,
but beyond that it has very limited use.
If forensic anthropologists want to help legally, fine.
To help identify individuals and help families of crime victims, this is a good thing.
But in fact, the information tells us little that it's genuinely interesting or useful about the people involved.
So biological anthropologists concede the narrow point about racial factors helping with identification of individuals.
But what they want to go ahead and say is that race is not a meaningful cluster.
It is not a meaningful way to learn anything about people beyond that low level of individual identification.
I want to tell you about a project that involves biological anthropology and that works with skeletons,
but in a way that goes beyond forensic anthropology.
The example I will use is the New York African Burial Ground project.
This is headed up by the same biological anthropologist I mentioned earlier, Michael Blakey,
a colleague of mine at the College of William & Mary.
He works with a large interdisciplinary team of other anthropologists and scientists from other disciplines at this particular site in New York.
These project scientists have analyzed over 400 skeletons that were buried in Manhattan in the center of the city during the 17th and 18th centuries.
These were enslaved individuals, people from Africa who had been forcibly brought to this country and made to be slaves.
The site was rediscovered in the early 90s during construction of a building in Manhattan.
I say rediscovered because obviously it was an important place in the time that it was being used,
but it had been covered over and forgotten and lost to the world until the 1990s.
I also want to say as a sort of preface that the project scientists quite consciously use the term enslaved individuals
when they describe who was buried in the cemetery.
And it is a descriptor term that I like because to reduce people to being slaves, to call people slaves,
makes them into a sort of reduced type of person.
These were individuals who had no choice in coming to this country and they were men and women with lives in histories
and we don't want to refer to them simply and reductably as slaves.
Now the entire project reflects this emphasis on taking into account the whole individual or the whole population.
The project's focus has been to explore the culture and the history of the population
rather than simply going through and saying yes these people were of African descent.
There is interest in the original populations from which these people came,
but the questions are deeper and go further.
So there's work with both the anatomical data from looking at the skeletons.
There's recovery of some genetic data that is underway.
In trying to trace back where these people came from, there has been a suggestion that we have many African groups represented
in these buried individuals in the cemetery.
Some of these names you might know as being culture groups from Africa.
The Estante, the Tuareg, the Ibo and the Yoruba are all represented in this one cemetery in Manhattan.
Beyond that there's been work on the demography of who's represented in the cemetery.
Only 21% of the burials are infants.
There's quite a high amount and the demographers connected with the project have used this to suggest
that there was probably about a 50% mortality rate of infants,
which may not be unsurprising as much as it is tragic given that we know the conditions that went along with this enslaved condition.
An interesting fact emerged in the demographic profile.
There was a high representation of individuals between the ages of 15 and 25 in the cemetery.
This is, of course, the prime of life.
This is the reproductive prime of life, but it is also the time when young adults would probably be asked to work,
told to work more intensively.
They would be considered the strongest and most capable individuals.
So clearly we have a real impact on reproductive success if the cemetery is representing and over-representing individuals of these ages.
Now the artifacts that were associated with this population have been studied for cultural links to Africa.
The diseases and the traumas that these individuals suffered have been studied to find out about their lives.
So the important point is that we can find out what happened to them as enslaved individuals,
but we can also trace the population and culture history back to their place of origin.
Interestingly, the scientists have worked very closely with what's called the descendant community in New York.
These are people who would be the present day relatives and kin of the individuals in the cemetery.
This is a commitment that the project has made to not just dig up these skeletons and work with them without permission from people in the community,
without working closely with the ideas and suggestions that people in the community might have.
Michael Blakey has summed up the project in noting its real attraction for the media and for people who like to read about it and learn about it,
by noting that it accomplishes a certain combination of factors.
It brings together a vivid contrasting of a human face of slavery with its dehumanizing condition.
So in other words, the project recognizes the conditions, but it wants to bring life to the people and to their population and to their culture.
And the kind of take-home point here that I'm working towards is to suggest that this is a much fuller type of analysis that does not depend in any meaningful way on race.
We can say forensically that we're dealing with people who have African origins, but that it is not very interesting or very informative to stop with that racial identification.
And what we want to know is much more.
This, by the way, intersects with a modern issue that biological anthropologists deal with frequently and archaeologists deal with frequently.
And this is the question of Native American burials and Native American skeletons.
You may know that there's a big issue about reburial.
What will happen to all of these skeletons that are in museums and labs over across the world?
Who should have control over these?
The descendant communities in this case, present-day Native Americans, quite understandably want to be involved in what happens to the bones of their ancestors rather than having control rest in the hands of the biological anthropologists.
So all of these issues intersect with some very real-world ethical questions that the African burial ground project is probably at the forefront of dealing with.
In conclusion then, human variation is a fascinating topic and it is absolutely worthy of study.
But race is not the way to go.
For the reasons that we have discussed, it does not amount to a concept that means anything biologically.
And we need to go beyond it in order to really get to an anthropological understanding of variation.
So we have begun to talk about some alternative approaches to simply settling for racial markers.
And we want to continue and look at some other ways to study modern human variation when we return in the next lecture.
