In this lecture, we ask the question, if we are going to reject race as a reasonable
way to study human variation, how do we proceed?
What approaches have biological anthropologists used to study variation in modern humans?
Well the answer brings us right back to the concept of the population, a term that we
introduced back in lecture two.
We can now relate the concept of the population to contemporary human life.
One way we can start is by talking about skin color.
You might think that that's immediately a throwback to talking about race, but that's
not the way in which I mean it.
Skin color is overemphasized when we talk about human variation as racial clusters,
but there should be and there is no taboo on studying skin color as long as we do it
at the population level, and in fact, done correctly, a study of skin color provides
an excellent example of natural selection at work in human evolutionary history.
Now first we need to understand how skin color comes about.
There are several biological substances that work together to produce the pigment in one's
skin.
The key factor that we will focus on is melanin.
Melanin is a pigment that acts to absorb ultraviolet light, what is sometimes abbreviated
as UV light.
Ultraviolet light can be quite dangerous because it can actually cause mutations, and it can
for example, cause mutations that may lead in the future to skin cancer.
So what happens is that melanin can act as a filter to ultraviolet light, and melanin
is produced right in the skin on the epidermal top layer of the skin.
So it is synthesized naturally in the human body as a protector against UV light.
Let's apply this concept to human evolutionary history.
We know that the earliest hominids originated in Africa in the tropics.
We know that they originated from a common ancestor with great apes.
We believe that the earliest hominids likely had dark skin.
It's somewhat tricky to know when the fur, the type of body covering that apes today
have, would have been lost in the evolutionary line.
There's no way to test that since fur or hair does not fossilize.
At some point there was a transition from having a great ape type of body covering to
having skin as we have now.
In any case, we know that when fur was lost and skin color was evolving, that dark skin
would have been the ancestral condition because we're talking about the tropics.
There would have been a need to block dangerous levels of ultraviolet light.
One way to put this is that we can see ultraviolet light as a kind of selection pressure on early
hominid populations.
This is one reason why it's so fascinating to figure out where we evolved and then begin
to look at the implications of that geographic origin.
Now we also know that Homo erectus evolved and migrated out of tropical areas.
Some populations stayed in Africa, of course, but others migrated north and went into fairly
cold areas, for example, of Asia.
At this point, the selection pressure for dark skin would have relaxed.
In fact, we would get a very different type of selection pressure.
Now typically, when people think about the Homo erectus migration, we do tend to think
of it in terms of the temperature gradient going from a hot area to a cold area and
what impact that might have on body shape and body form and innovations culturally,
such as fire and so forth.
But we can also think about it as a shift in available light.
The different selection pressure that would have emerged at this point involves the need
for enough vitamin D. Vitamin D is synthesized when sunlight strikes the skin.
So a combination of dark skin and little sunlight would have been dangerous.
And that may be the combination that the very earliest migrants from Homo erectus populations
in Africa might have had.
Why would it have been dangerous?
Well, of course, at that time, there were no good alternative sources to vitamin D.
There were not convenient stores where you could run to for milk and butter and fish
to increase the levels of vitamin D. So you needed to have it by sunlight striking the
skin.
In northern areas, there's less available sunlight, darker skin.
And what could result from this is the diseases or traumas that go along with a decreasing
level of vitamin D.
There are, for example, bone deformities that result if one doesn't get enough vitamin
D. And it's possible that these bone deformities can affect the pelvis.
And the pelvis would indicate that reproduction would be involved.
So if there's a deformity of the pelvis, there could be complications in the birth process,
which of course gets us to reproductive success.
So this might have been quite serious.
What I'm suggesting then is that the relaxation of selection pressure from the tropics combined
with the need to synthesize vitamin D would have pushed hominids towards lighter skin
color as they went north.
So perhaps the origins of skin color can be related to migration.
This leads to another question, though.
Why has the great variety in skin color that we see today been maintained when there are
all different kinds of ways to synthesize vitamin D in one's body and diet now?
Well, there's all kinds of mobility in different places in the world.
People don't stay where they were born.
People don't reflect tropical origins where they're living and so forth.
We need to keep in mind that the maintenance of diversity of skin color is very much a
biocultural phenomenon.
Biological origins, surely, but now cultural patterns have to be taken into account.
I'm referring to things here such as partner choice in mating and marriage.
Remember back to our initial definition of population, that a population tends to be
where breeding takes place, not completely, but almost always.
So there is a lot going on that maintains the origins, the patterns of skin color that
can't be tied to biology, but must admit also cultural practice as well.
We know that human variation goes far beyond skin color, of course, and I want to revisit
a topic that we briefly discussed earlier, having to do with variation in human body
shape.
This was a topic that we introduced in connection with Homo erectus and the Nereocatome boy,
talking about that boy's hypertropical adaptation, long, slender body.
So the two points that I want to remind you of that we learned before were, first of all,
populations that inhabit tropical areas tend towards having both long, slender bodies and
long, slender limbs.
This is the optimal shape for heat dissipation.
By contrast, populations that inhabit colder areas tend towards having shorter, stockier
bodies and shorter, more robust limbs, which is the optimal shape for heat retention.
I was quite careful in those preceding sentences to use the words tens toward, rather than
to say that this is an absolute 100% fulfilled pattern.
Not all human populations conform to these expectations or these predictions.
Let me give you one interesting exception.
Let's consider the African pygmy populations.
Pygmies are people of quite short stature who live in the wet, humid tropical rainforests
of Africa.
We know, in fact, that there are pygmy populations across the world.
They are not confined to Africa.
We can find others, for example, in the Philippines and in Brazil, but the African pygmies are
particularly well known and well studied.
They happen to be the shortest population of all of the pygmies, compared to the so-called
typical height for a population.
They're much, much shorter.
Well, why is the question?
After all, they're living in the tropics, so how come they do not have long, slender
bodies and long, slender limbs?
Well, the key here is the wet part that I was talking about, the humid part of the rainforest.
If you're dealing with this extra factor, then all bets are off, essentially, about
body shape.
What you have to be able to do to cool yourself is to sweat, but in a humid environment, if
you sweat, the sweat does not evaporate, and therefore it doesn't help you just to be able
to sweat to deal with the heat.
So the short stature is an adaptation to the humidity part.
It is energetically efficient to be short and small.
It also is true that this body shape gives the largest surface area per body mass possible
for getting rid of heat.
So we can explain the addition of humidity to the hotness as the factor that implicates
the short stature here.
Now let's leave the body shape and limb shape example, because we have talked about it before,
and get into a new area that involves modern variation according to extreme climate.
Biological anthropologists have, for a long time, studied high altitude populations and
are interested in finding out how populations can manage the stresses that go along with
living in such a place.
Their overarching research question is an attempt to distinguish or disentangle different ways
of adaptation, genetic, developmental, cultural, how do all these things intertwine, and how
can we tell in any given situation which of those is primary?
I want to start with a kind of personal example.
I have visited high altitude areas, as I suspect many of you may have as well.
If you visit a high altitude area, you will notice pretty quickly, for most people, that
there are biological stresses.
There's a reduction in available oxygen at high altitude, and this may manifest itself
upon a person's arrival to high altitude and some unpleasant symptoms.
This may include shortness of breath, a feeling of kind of heaviness in moving around, getting
tired.
If it gets bad enough, it may include headache and nausea and dizziness.
Now I'm actually referring to relatively low high altitudes, if you will.
In other words, not the extreme extreme areas.
I lived for a time in Santa Fe, New Mexico.
I mentioned in the language lecture convening a seminar there, and I also lived there for
a year.
The part of Santa Fe in which I resided was 8,000 feet up, which is not extremely high,
but even so, I felt some of these symptoms upon arrival, and they fairly soon diminished.
When I held that language origins seminar that I mentioned for you earlier and brought
in the nine other scholars, one of those people had quite a time adapting to the altitude.
It's very individual, but she was ill enough that she had to rest, and some of us had to
go and get her some medical attention.
So it can be a prominent syndrome at relatively low levels for some people.
Anthropologically, however, we define high altitude as 10,000 feet or above.
So Santa Fe doesn't even make it for the anthropological study of high altitude.
Anthropologists are talking about places like the Andes in South America, where the higher
reaches of the Rocky Mountains.
Himalayas also would be another example.
So what happens there?
In some cases, there can be quite life-threatening altitude sickness.
This has become well known to popular culture through some highly profiled mountain climbing
deaths in recent years.
We have had a lot of attention in the media focused on mountain climbing, for example,
Mount Everest.
And deaths that have occurred, of course, can occur for different reasons.
There may be falls and accidents, bad weather causing problems, avalanches.
But there is a contributing factor of the type of altitude sickness or mountain sickness
that I'm talking about.
Not only the difficulty in breathing and the dizziness, but this can actually involve
real impairment of coordination and a real inability to think clearly well beyond dizziness,
involvement of the brain.
When I was doing some research about high altitude areas, I read that when the base camp for
mountain climbing was established for Mount Everest, there was a really high death rate.
One in 50 people going to the base camp died.
This was quite a while ago now, historically.
Whereas now, the death rate is one in 10,000 to 50,000 people.
It's a wide range of statistical reporting, but very, very few deaths.
What this indicates to us is that with proper knowledge, these symptoms can be managed,
but they cannot be completely eliminated.
And we want to talk about what is it about these stresses that causes this type of problem
and how human populations have adapted.
Well, what do we mean specifically by less available oxygen in the air?
It's important to know that the same percentage of oxygen is in the air in high or low altitudes.
There's no difference there.
But what is different is the atmospheric pressure so that at high altitude, for every
breath that you take, there are fewer oxygen molecules available to take in.
And as a result of this, the body responds by increasing blood flow to the brain.
So it really changes the physiological functioning of the body because of this inability to get
enough oxygen.
Some populations who have been living for thousands of years at these high altitudes
appear to enjoy a kind of genetic advantage to these extreme stresses.
Because we know that their reproductive success is not diminished by where they live.
Now let me back up just a little bit.
In some places, we can document the fact that women who live at high altitude have higher
rates of infertility, higher rates of miscarriage than women who live at lower altitudes.
That is what we consider a kind of typical predicted pattern.
This isn't too surprising given the problems with getting enough oxygen.
But there are these exceptional situations with some populations that have a particularly
long cultural history of inhabiting high areas.
And this difference in reproduction is erased so that high altitude women do not suffer
from these problems.
Anthropologists think that this is a kind of gene pool response that was gradual.
But those people who were able to tolerate the stresses would have differentially contributed
to the gene pool in a type of thinking that you are familiar with by now in this course.
It is also interesting to note that individuals who are native to high altitude but who may
not have such a long cultural history are still born with larger hearts and greater
lung capacity than people who are born lower down the mountain.
Again, I'm not speaking of things that happen everywhere without exception, but that there's
good data to indicate that this happens in some places.
Let's consider the high altitude Andes.
We know that there are 10 million people living above 10,000 feet in the Andes.
Of course, this is the major mountain chain that goes from Ecuador through Bolivia to
Chile.
And there's been good work from anthropologists, particularly in Bolivia.
And it's been noted that Bolivian natives develop larger lungs very early in life compared
to low altitude counterparts.
This is a developmental trend so that, in fact, their bodies are primed by the altitude
to have a response early in life that's part of maturation that enables them to cope.
This is a type of process that we call acclimatization.
In other words, it is a gradual bodily response.
It may be partly genetically controlled, but it is not genetic in the sense that I was
talking about before because it occurs in response to the stressors and develops slowly
over life.
Now I have talked about acclimatization in those individuals who are born in a certain
place.
What about if we revisit the idea of somebody just immigrating to high altitude or showing
up for a trip, for a tourism, or work?
Recent immigrants or visitors to high altitude also show a type of acclimatization, but it
is different.
Of course, this is not involved in lung formation early in life, but rather a type of amelioration,
if you will, of the symptoms that go along with the stressors of high altitude.
So there's a gradual adaptation where one may be able to walk longer after three or
four days without shortness of breath or dizziness.
The body simply is adjusting to these stressors.
What's interesting about this is that every human being does have this ability to differing
levels, but it does not cause by living in any certain area.
It's just the human body's flexibility in acclimatizing or adapting.
It is also very true that it's completely reversible.
In other words, you leave the high altitude area and you go back to the way you were before.
Let's say two weeks go by or two months go by and you return to high altitude.
There's that need to reclimatize.
And I have discovered by talking with people who go back and forth between high and low
altitude that that can be quite difficult on the body to constantly readjust one to
the other.
And being good anthropologists, we never want to neglect the cultural adaptations as well.
We know that high altitude populations may take certain cultural precautions against
these stressors.
For example, if there are situations in which women suffer reduced reproductive success
and that that has been known historically in a population, often they'll become a cultural
tradition where pregnant women are sent down the mountain to give birth somewhere else.
So let's say they're fairly advanced in their pregnancy.
It's coming time for them to actually labor.
And this may not be right in the ninth month, but earlier they are sent elsewhere perhaps
to live with relatives and to have a chance to give birth with a lot of available oxygen
and also to complete the development of the baby.
There are simpler cultural mechanisms that may be at work, shelter and clothing, the
type of food that one eats.
There are certain dietary traditions that increase the ability to cope with stresses.
For example, some populations to coca leaves and get certain benefits from doing that.
It can be very cold at high altitude as well as all the other stresses that we've been
talking about.
So heat retention is an important part of this and these can be accomplished in a lot
of ways.
So the next time you travel to the Rocky Mountains or some high altitude area or know someone
who does, you might be aware of this process.
It's something we can see in ourselves no matter where we were born, but it is also important
and I'll come back to this in a minute to remember that there are limits to the acclimatization.
Now the anthropological issue, the research issue that we started out talking about is
how to disentangle these different levels of adaptation.
And what this requires is anthropologists to study populations or individuals who move
around.
It's very helpful to find out what happens when you compare a population who say has
lived for a thousand years at low altitude but then recently moves to high altitude versus
populations who have lived at low altitude for a thousand years versus high altitude
for a thousand years, even better, a longer time period of comparison.
So the migration and the movement that we have talked about become factors in terms
of time of residence, time of gene pool to adapt, time for developmental acclimatization
to occur.
And basically what biological anthropologists say then is we want to keep in mind that there
are these different levels of response.
We have the genetic on the one hand at the level of the gene pool which requires time.
We have developmental acclimatization which requires being born somewhere perhaps not
with as long a cultural history.
We also have the immediate or near immediate and temporary acclimatization that's available
to anyone and then we have the cultural factors.
And it takes a lot of work to disentangle these in a lot of experimentation.
We do know that high altitude is not part of our human evolutionary history as far as
we know.
In other words, we don't have evidence that there were hominid populations evolving at
these very high altitudes.
I suppose we could find out otherwise in the future but that would be a surprise.
So when I talk about a long cultural history, I'm talking about fairly recent homo sapiens
in the thousands of years.
We're not talking about millions of years of adaptation here.
And that is probably part of the reason why there are such limits to our ability to cope
and why individuals do succumb to altitude sickness and mountain sickness.
In other words, it is possible to manage this syndrome but it is not possible to overcome
it.
And there are elevations at which it is simply impossible to function.
There is not an infinite capacity for adaptation.
In fact, human adaptation to extreme heat appears to come somewhat more naturally to
our species than does adaptation to extreme altitude.
And the very fact that this is study tells us something about biological anthropologists.
There's a whole cadre of biological anthropologists who put themselves into extreme climates
to make these sorts of studies and furthermore who subject recent immigrants to these extreme
climates to test what happens to them.
If you want to test hypotheses about long-term genetic adaptation versus short-term acclimatization,
you have to get people who are not used to these conditions into these conditions.
So there are all kinds of jokes about the sadistic tendencies of these anthropologists.
I have read about experiments where biological anthropologists go to high altitude and immerse
people's fingers in ice-cold water for as long as they can stand it and then compare
that data to the same type of cold water immersion at low altitudes.
I read of a study that relates more to heat, which we're getting to now, in which volunteers
– I'm glad they were volunteers – went into the laboratory that was kept quite hot
and quite humid, and they were made to step up on high boxes for a long period of time
up and down off the box, you know, rigorous exercise until they got very tired, very hot,
to see what kind of acclimatization response they would have over 10 days.
Not something I would want to do for 10 days.
So getting back to this question of do we adapt more readily to heat?
Well, we've already seen that some human populations are adapted by skin color and
body shape and limb shape to the tropics or for the heat of the tropics.
So we have that level that we've already discussed.
However, beyond this, we can note that all human populations have evolved significant
capacity to cope with heat, and they have evolved to cope relatively rapidly and efficiently.
And I think more thoroughly and more completely than to high altitude.
And a key part of this adaptation is sweating, and we know that there can be problems with
sweating and evaporation in humid areas, but for the most part, sweating is a very efficient
response to heat.
If you look at your cat or dog, and it's a very, very hot day, you can clearly tell
that they are not cooling themselves through sweating.
They are having their mouths open, they're panting, and perhaps in some cases, swishing
their tails, but in any case, mostly panting.
They don't have sweating because they're covered with fur.
At the time that we had loss of fur in the human evolutionary line, we presumably evolved
sweating.
It's a very robust response.
Now, interestingly, during these experiments that I mentioned, where, for example, people
are given a work task in a very hot environment.
We notice that part of the acclimatization is better recruitment of body areas for sweating.
What I mean by this, there is actually better and less good ways to sweat, something I had
never thought about before.
But where you sweat on the body can differ, and there are places that it's more efficient
to sweat from, places it is less efficient to sweat from.
So while everybody sweats immediately, there can be a recruitment of an increasingly efficient
sweating pattern.
And that happens relatively quickly, no matter what population you come from.
Now, I think that this tells us something interesting about our species.
That makes some sense.
We after all, if you think about it, are tropical in our long-term heritage, right back to the
origin of primates.
We have been talking about tropical and semi-tropical species, back in the beginning of 65 and 55
million years ago, with a primate lineage.
We had not completely exclusive tropical origins, but overwhelmingly so.
And the history of the more recent monkeys and apes has been the history of the tropics,
the common ancestor as well, and then the division of the lineages from there.
So what I'm suggesting is that we are tropical animals, and that our adaptation and the flexibility
of our bodies at the population level reflects this.
Now, I've been talking about extreme climate, and this kind of study that biological anthropologists
do is an extremely important part of the field.
It's an active, vital area of research, just as much as paleoanthropology is or primatology
is.
So there are journals and conferences devoted to this type of subject, and I think it's
very important.
I also want to press on with a different angle about modern human variation, though.
It's important to understand extreme climate, but probably extreme climate doesn't affect
all of us as individuals on a day-to-day basis, unless we travel a lot or we have interesting
ancestral population histories.
What does tend to affect us in our contemporary lives on a more daily basis is our diet.
And there have been some fascinating studies about the history of how diets have shifted
over time, and what impacts this shift is having on modern human populations.
It is becoming nearly a truism now to turn on the television and hear about the epidemic
of obesity in this country, and how fat is a problem for Americans, and how our diet
is troublesome and problematic.
How does all that relate to the way that we evolved?
How does access to different foods in the present, compared to our ancestral past, impact
the way that we live today?
Let's continue with that question in lecture 21.
