In this lecture and the next, we bring the evolutionary perspective up close and personal
to examine aspects of our own lives in the 21st century.
And we'll start that exploration with a consideration of diet and how diet has shifted over
human history and prehistory.
We can lay the groundwork for this exploration by remembering that modern humans vary within
populations as well as between them.
Until now we've been talking mostly about inter-population variation.
Now let's consider a little bit of within population variation and a significant source
of this, as we already know, is variation by sex, differences in body form between males
and females.
And we have already defined this as sexual demorphism.
If we look in the primate lineage, the quintessential example for a striking way to picture sexual
demorphism is with the gorilla.
The adult male gorilla is two times as big as the female.
The adult male has a differently shaped head than the female.
We know also that most paleoanthropologists believe that the earliest hominids were fairly
sexually dimorphic for the most part, with a shift point at about the time of Homo erectus
when female body size increased, equalizing more closely the sexes away from a gorilla
type of model.
Now in modern humans, we know that typically males are a little bit taller and a little
bit heavier than females.
With lots of exceptions, this is the basic trend, but it is not a very exacerbated difference.
In other words, it's relatively slight considering primates and early hominids.
And furthermore, this difference only appears at the time of puberty.
Before that, for example, at birth, there's statistically no real difference between male
and female modern humans.
So you might think of sexual demorphism first when you hear the term in terms of height
and weight, but a completely different factor turns out to be the most important one for
sexual demorphism in Homo sapiens, and that is the distribution of fat on the body, where
fat is located in males versus females.
In women, body fat tends to cluster in the so-called reproductive areas around the breasts,
the hips, and the buttocks.
These are the very same areas we talked a few lectures ago about when we mentioned the
venous figurines, the portable artwork that was fashioned by early modern humans.
We talked about the possibility of there being a type of fertility cult reflected in these
small statues because the faces and the features of these women were completely blurry and
underrepresented where the fat areas were extremely exacerbated on the statues.
Women today may find it especially difficult to lose weight in those particular areas.
Even if women diet and exercise and manage to lose weight overall, targeting weight loss
in those particular areas can be difficult.
It can be a stubborn type of thing.
In contrast, the typical modern male tends to accumulate fat around the stomach.
This is what's been nicknamed the beer belly.
So if you go out and you simply observe a group of humans and you tend to look at fat
patterns with a great deal of variation of course expected, you will tend to see these
different patterns.
We of course want to ask the reason for such a sexually dimorphic pattern, a fat deposition,
and to look back in the evolutionary past in seeking our answer.
By now you will wholly expect to hear a type of correlation between prehistorical reproductive
success and modern day patterns.
You're steeped in thinking this way by now in the course.
Fat acts as a buffer in the body.
It's a buffer against food shortage and specifically against reduced caloric intake.
So should food become scarce, and if that continues in either an intense way or for
a prolonged period of time, the body can begin to metabolize fat and use that as a hedge
against malnutrition or starvation.
What we can do then is think of thinness as a lack of such a buffer.
This is in our culture an unusual way to think of thinness.
We live in a cult of thinness, but here I'm looking at it from a very different perspective.
This is the lack of something important.
Now food shortages, whether they would be seasonal or occur on a different pattern, not quite
so frequently as seasonal, are a likely factor of ancestral, hominid life.
We know this from a combination of factors, paleo-climate, paleo-ecology data indicate
this to us.
So also do the types of models that we have become familiar with using modern human foragers
as reference for the past.
We can review a basic fact that until approximately 10,000 years ago, all creatures on the hominid
line were hunter-gatherers, living by hunting, gathering and fishing, in other words, off
the land, without agriculture, without animal domestication.
And what that meant is they were particularly vulnerable to ecological trauma to food shortages
engendered perhaps by drought or even possibly by competition from other species.
Let's look a little bit at modern foragers as a model for this situation.
We know in modern foragers, I'm talking about various Indian groups in different rainforests,
like Kong San in Africa and so forth, there tends to be no stockpiling or storage of food.
Food is gathered and food is shared, but there is not a resource to draw on in times of trouble.
There are, however, strategies of insurance against failure of having enough food, but
the strategies tend to be behavioral and biological in a different sense.
Now by behavioral, I mean that food sharing is extremely important socially for hunter-gatherer groups.
The food sharing occurs at several levels.
We know that there tends to be a sexual division of labor in modern foragers, in that to some
degree, men tend to get one type of resource and whim in the other.
Sometimes there's cooperation, but often there's a kind of bifurcated pathway there, and then
within the family, the two sexes share.
There's a higher level of food sharing, though, because food sharing occurs across families.
So if one family has a particularly successful hunt or other infusion of resources, there's
often sharing down-belined to other families.
At times, if there's a drought or a shortage of food in a wide area, the entire group may
simply pick up and move.
Hunter-gatherers tend to live in semi-permanent shelters.
They must be able to carry their belongings with them and go when they have to go, and
this includes carrying dependent offspring as well as tools and artifacts.
So they may distribute themselves differently in relationship to available food by moving
to perhaps where relatives may live or striking out in a new area.
We also know that measurements of hunter-gatherer fat, literally on the body, shows a kind of
curve with seasons.
In other words, there's often seasonal weight loss, that there are often times in certain
seasons, the dry season, when there simply isn't enough food, even though all these social
insurance policies are taken into account.
So food sharing is very critical.
I remember when I was in graduate school, and we all were told to learn about modern
foragers because they're so important for modeling the past.
One study that struck me in particular about the Kong San in Southern Africa involved the
training of children for learning how to share.
From the time a small baby can walk, a baby is explicitly guided in sharing.
So this is an ethic of the group from the very youngest ages.
Children are given beads, for example, or other small objects or food, and they're kind
of gently pushed over to another adult, told to open their hand, rewarded for food sharing.
All of this indicates that food shortages and periodic weight loss are a problem perennially
across the globe for modern human gatherers and hunters, and we want to then use that
as our model for the past.
What we're suggesting in this lecture is that there well may have been such social
insurance policies as we've just talked about with food sharing and moving, but there might
have been also a real selection pressure for biological buffers, i.e. fat stores.
In other words, hominid females who had fat in these reproductive areas that the body
could metabolize would have had a hedge against these periodic caloric reductions.
And the key point again is differential reproductive success, that those hominid females with such
fat would have done better in terms of producing healthy offspring than hominids without.
Now, why really is fat so important for females? It's probably obvious to you by now, but
I do want to talk a little bit more about the reason, which has to do with carrying
a child, and particularly lactation, nursing a child, the great energy-related expense
of these processes, which of course affect women rather than men.
Again, we are going to rely on models in the present day to infer something about nursing
in the hominid past, and here the data from primatology and paleoanthropology nicely converge.
Both the great apes, chimps, gorillas, orangutans, binobos, and modern foragers tend to nurse
infants for the same period of time, three or four years. There's a very robust pattern
and statistic that emerges. This is very interesting, and this is a long time, and I'm not talking
about just the occasional nursing bout either. The type of nursing that goes on in these
creatures is around the clock, 24 hours, and on demand, so the infant tends to be in control
when the infant wants to nurse day or night the mother's responsive. Now, this of course
may change in the third and fourth year. It may not be quite so much on demand, but in
any case, in the beginning years, it very much is, and we can see then how much energy
and how many calories would be required to sustain this type of behavior, and how dangerous
it would be not to have a buffer in case of trouble. I'm often struck by the difference
in nursing today in the modern world as contrasted with this, what appears to be a very evolutionarily
robust pattern of three and four years of nursing. I'm sure we all know women who have
breastfed their babies, but I doubt there are very many of us who know women who breastfed
on demand around the clock for two years, much less three or four, and certainly I include
myself in the category of women who did not do that. I was able to breastfeed my daughter,
but not on that schedule, and this is of course because the modern world has simply different
constraints. Many women work, many women have less support for childcare, there are not
extended families, but it's just an interesting sort of comparison that we can keep in mind
when we think about nursing in the past. So what am I really saying about hominids?
I'm not trying to claim that hominid women were obese or fat, clearly not. This would
not have worked with their active lifestyle in all the food shortages that I've been implying
here. What I am suggesting is that some access to bodily fat in the reproductive areas of
the body would have been beneficial. And now we can take our shift to the modern day.
And the central claim that I'm making following other biological anthropologists is that the
increasing rate of obesity we see today in the United States and elsewhere is the manifestation
of this ancestral adaptation that is essentially gone out of control, something that was adaptive
in our ancestral environment, no longer being so because of changing conditions. Let me
give you some statistics that have been released in 2002 by the Centers for Disease Control,
the CDC in Atlanta. These of course relate to the United States. According to these data,
87% of adults in this country are obese today. That is, of course, over a quarter of us in
this country. The figure for children is equally, if not more alarming, 15% of children are
clinically obese. So we're beyond just a little overweight here. We're talking about
obesity. Now I want to stick in a kind of comment because I have been following these
numbers and the play in the media around them. And already, even though the statistics
are quite new, there's a backlash to them. And the reason there's a backlash is that
it turns out that these statistics are based on pure poundage and height. So you give your
height, you give your weight, and then it's decided whether or not you're obese. So even
if you're extremely fit and well-muscled, but you have a lot of body mass, you can still
be classified as obese if your pounds are high for your height. So there was a kind
of sarcastic media story about how a lot of very fit athletes would be considered obese
on this measurement system. And Arnold Schwarzenegger would be considered obese on this system.
And so there may need to be a little bit of tweaking of the measurement system. But I
also know that other studies, too, in the U.S. and elsewhere have all come up with the
same trend. And I actually have quite a lot of confidence in these figures. I think we
do have a problem. And, of course, it's not only the obesity per se, but the danger to
health that this indicates via, for example, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and so forth.
So the obesity in our terms is evolutionarily recent and increasing. Now in the hominid past,
we've talked already about food shortages that were periodic. But we also need to point
out another factor, that there would have been perennial shortage of three critical substances,
fat, sugar, and salt. From all the evidence that we have at our fingertips as biological
anthropologists, we know that there could not have been an abundance or an excess of
any of these three critical elements in the past. Yes, there was some fat available through
hunting, but not very much. Yes, there's some fruit that has sugar, and there may be
small sources of salt. But the point for our purposes is that it would have been, ancestrally,
for hominids, virtually impossible to ingest too much of these substances. Of course, the
situation is different today and dramatically different in many parts of the globe, although
not all. In many parts of the world, we have quite easy access to sugar, to salt, and to
fat. And in some cases, humans may find themselves literally craving these substances. Now in
the past, if there was such a desire to eat these substances whenever they would have
been found, that would have turned out quite okay because there weren't so much of them.
Now, however, with easy abundance, if there is either an unwillingness or inability to
moderate our intake of these, problems can result. I have often joked with my students
about my own addiction to chocolate. This is the one substance in the world that I've
funded hard to resist, and I've often wondered if I am not just showing my well adaptedness,
if you will. I was preparing this morning, going over my notes for this lecture, and
I had the TV on in the background. And at one particular news story, my head snapped
up with attention, there's a department store in London some of you may have heard of called
Fortnum & Mason's, very famous. And it, the department store is seeking right now a chocolate
taster to fly around the world to sample gourmet chocolate and to report back. And my attention
was caught by this story. So if I ever give up anthropology, I know where I'm applying.
But of course, the situation really isn't so funny. Because of the link that I mentioned
earlier, between the obesity that can result from such types of food desires that we feel,
the abundance that is out there of these elements in the world, and the disease. And again,
I mentioned heart disease and diabetes, particularly. I was reading the New York Times the other
day, and I read a phrase that struck my attention also. It referred to the cornified food system
in the United States. The great dependence we in this country have on corn and corn products.
And I was reading this because of my interest in the evolution of diet. And I thought, well,
that actually sounds quite healthy. How bad could corn be? Until I realized that the thrust
of this particular essay had to do with high fructose corn syrup. In fact, most snack companies
and cola and soda companies in this country no longer use sugar, but they use high fructose
corn syrup. It is much cheaper than using sugar, and it is not very healthy. One study
suggests that the typical American adult ingests fully 10% of his or her calories through
corn syrup in all the products that we eat without even necessarily realizing it. And
this is another example of really refined and processed food that tends to appear in
the items in our diet, possibly without even realizing it. Of course, this type of situation
is only exacerbated by a shift away from a very active lifestyle to, for many of us,
a more sedentary lifestyle. Of course, many of us exercise and work out, but on the whole
over time. And again, we're talking evolutionarily here, the long sweep of time. There has been
a decrease in physical activity. Many of us work at desks and commute via cars or trains
or subway cars. We're not necessarily walking to work and bisoning to work or walking out
in the world every single day as people did in the hominid past. So we don't want to forget
that aspect that contributes in a dynamic way with the changes in diet. I used to teach
until quite recently that this phenomenon of dietary shift, and also we could add in
the exercise sedentary shift, was pretty much an artifact of developed countries, urban,
suburban environments, the type of countries like the United States, and that the rest
of the world was still protected from all of this to some degree. Well, it turns out
that I was wrong, and recent data underscore the inaccuracy of that particular view. Populations,
for example, in the South Pacific and Africa are showing similarly increased obesity levels.
I can give you one specific example that emerged from the annual meeting of anthropologists
recently that relates to the South Pacific. The Cook Islands in the South Pacific was
the locus for the study, and men were measured for obesity levels. And in the year 1996,
fully 52% of men were measured as clinically obese. Compared to 30 years earlier, 1966,
only 14% of men were obese. This is a rapid and alarming change in a short period of
time, and it doesn't bode well, especially because it's coupled from similar data sets
from other societies in undeveloped countries around the world. So we need to start to think
of this as more of a global trend rather than simply a developed country, Western Europe
and the United States type of trend. Some anthropologists suggest in wanting to help
out with the situation that a partial return to our ancestral diet may be useful, that
it might help some modern populations or modern individuals. In fact, there's what
we can think of as a new cottage industry that emerges from this concern. I've spoken
with you before about how biological anthropologists want to be of practical use in the world
rather than simply academic theorists. Well, this emerging cottage industry can take the
term paleoneutrition studies. The idea that if we look back at what happened in the past
and emulate some of the dietary choices that our ancestors made, perhaps we can in some
way improve our health. There are a wide range of paleoneutrition type of self-help guides,
books, journal articles, TV essays and stories out there, and they are probably what you
would expect. Some of them are more sensational, kind of trading on the idea of let's return
to our past where our others are much more scientific with more data. Some of them converge
on conclusions that really are a lot of common sense conclusions to avoid high levels of
processed refined food and high levels of sugar, salt and fat. Some of them get more
specific and they can be both quite fun and informative. One book that I read compared
what it's like to go to McDonald's and get a quarter pounder to have eaten in the past
a quarter pound of relatively lean meat such as might have been gained from hominid hunting.
So there's a certain amount of speculation here, but it's possible through experimental
archaeology and other things to actually, as we know, bring down the carcass of an animal,
hunt something or scavenge something from an animal that has died using old one type
tools. Experimental archaeologists do this all the time to try to replicate what might
have happened in the past. So if you get a quarter pound of meat from something like
a modern day animal that might have stood in for some prey in the past, you can compare
the sort of chemical or nutritional composition of that piece of meat to what you find when
you lay your money down at the McDonald's counter and you say quarter pounder please.
There's an enormous difference in fat level, in salt level, potassium level, even all these
other things so that we can get a sense of just how much our diet has shifted. Of course
when we go to fast food places, and I don't mean to pick on them, this can happen in our
own homes, Americans tend to think now in terms of super sizes, there's biggie fries,
there's big drinks, there's enormous amounts of things. So we're used to a whole different
societal context now than we had in the past and these books make that very, very clear.
So some anthropologists have been co-authors or co-producers of such attempts. Other anthropologists
however remain quite skeptical of such attempts and feel that they may be harmful or at the
very least not helpful to dealing with medical problems that relate to our increasing obesity
levels. For example, the real worry is that what these paleoneutrition people are suggesting
is that there was a type of single diet in the hominid past, that we can somehow look
back and say this is what hominids did as if there was a homogeneous environment and
a homogeneous response. So this is the first of two problems that some biological anthropologists
have. In other words, it's a problem we've come up against time and time again, essentializing,
making things too simple, saying that things were a certain way, one in fact we know that
there would have been a lot of different environments in which hominids lived, a lot of different
dietary patterns depending on where the group was living.
The second concern biological anthropologists express has to do with the fact that this
tends to romanticize the past, the kind of noble savage idea if you will, that hominids
were all in tune with their environment and they instinctively knew what to do and they
just ate so well and modern times are just completely out of whack and everything is
wrong today and we can better ourselves by going back into the past. And this is surely
simplistic. I can give you an example that I think speaks to both of these concerns in
different ways and the example has to do with lactose intolerance. Lactose is a sugar that's
found in dairy products such as milk and ice cream and some people find lactose intolerance
results when they do drink milk, have a lot of cheese, yogurt and ice cream and lactose
intolerance can result in some pretty unpleasant symptoms, diarrhea and other digestive upsets
and this has been a concern to a lot of people. However it turns out if you look at this from
an evolutionary perspective lactose intolerance is actually the general condition of mammals.
In other words all mammals by definition are adapted to drink milk as infants, this is
their source of nutrition, mother's milk. They have an enzyme that allows them to process
easily the milk but typically in mammals ranging from cats and dogs straight on up through
other mammals that enzyme is lost as adolescence is approached and it is typically quite difficult
for adult mammals to process milk. So what we think of as a strange abnormal syndrome
is actually quite an evolutionary type of platform for the whole mammalian lineage. Now it's
very interesting to note that there were certain populations in relatively recent history for
our purposes for example European dairying populations that really relied very very heavily
on milk and through an apparent combination of mutation and natural selection these populations
lost the problem of lactose intolerance because a lot of these populations were in western
Europe a lot of people of European descent today do not have lactose intolerance. So
for example if you ask people in the United States who does and who doesn't have lactose
intolerance you can draw sort of population or cultural history lines back to different
origins and different diets in the past. Here there's clear variation showing up and it's
also pointing up that medical knowledge and technology has been a great help in a condition
that has arisen from our past. We now have access to milk and ice cream dairy products
and medicines that help with lactose intolerance. So we neither want to forget about variation
nor romanticize our past. Whether or not specific pieces of advice about how to eat, how to
exercise, go back to our past, are adopted or not it is undeniable I believe that the
field of biological anthropology can increase one's awareness and understanding of how our
modern habits do depart from the way in which we evolved and simply becoming aware of our
habits and that they might be problematic can be very important when we reach for french
fries or a very large hamburger or in my case that gooey piece of chocolate cake we might
realize that we are departing from the healthy habits of our past and isn't everything else
moderation is the key. Now in the next lecture we will continue our discussion of how the
evolutionary perspective can illuminate patterns in our everyday lives in the present.
