In earlier lectures, we have proposed that certain aspects of modern human life can be
illuminated by looking not just at cultural pressures and learned traditions, but also
biological selection pressures from our past. Can we push and extend this evolutionary perspective
beyond even what we have talked about already? Will it explain other areas of physical and
emotional health? It's good to start out the exploration of this question by appreciating
what a radical inquiry it really is. We know that the acceptance of human evolution has
come quite slowly and is not yet complete. We think back to some historical figures that
have been mentioned in this course. Charles Darwin, Raymond Dart, Eugene Dubois, we can
remember that all when they made their discoveries were met with resistance. Dart discovered
Australopithecines, Dubois found the first Homo erectus, and Charles Darwin of course gave us
a mechanism for evolutionary change, natural selection, and thought it would apply as well
to humans. All of these men were met with skepticism from the scientific community. We also know
that even in the modern day, in popular culture, there's a great deal of rejection of the idea
that modern humans evolved. So it may not be surprising to learn that it is still a very new
field to ask about whether health and other aspects of the body and aspects of the mind and
emotions might be explained on the evolutionary perspective. And as with most things, we need
to consider this topic in a balanced way, to have caution in how we approach the topic,
but also an open mind with much to be learned from doing so. The term Darwinian medicine is a
good example of what I'm talking about. This is a term that's been coined recently, an acknowledgement
of the fact that some diseases or symptoms or syndromes might have evolved for actually
adaptive reasons, that they may be around for some beneficial reason. And fever will provide
us with a quick example. We know that in this country, when somebody comes down with a fever,
a very typical first response is to run to the medicine cabinet and get the aspirin or
botanical and medicate. And this tends to happen, not always, but in a lot of households at relatively
low degrees of fever, 100, 101, and so forth. There are physicians now and biological anthropologists
as well who think that we may be medicating too quickly, that after all, fever is a process at
work in the body. It is the body's attempt, often successful, to rid itself of infection,
so that it is not just a symptom and something that we should get rid of immediately. Now,
of course, common sense needs to be applied. If fever gets up to 103 and 104, we're not
going to sit around and be adaptive about it, and these decisions should be made in consultation
with a physician. But the very sort of common sense approach would indicate that it might
make sense to let fever do its work unless it reaches dangerous levels. And the idea
that we're getting at here is that there's an acknowledgement of the adaptive history
of fever in our species. Let's look more closely at a different kind of health issue and explore
it more thoroughly. We're going to talk about morning sickness in this context. The phenomenon
of morning sickness during human pregnancy is a good opportunity to consider whether the
evolutionary perspective works or doesn't work in this particular way. I'm going to
rely on the work of the evolutionary scholar Margie Profitt, use her definition and her
analysis of morning sickness. Profitt defines morning sickness in a particular way to include
two clusters of feelings or symptoms. The first is the nausea that women may often feel,
not only but often worse in the morning, sometimes it happens all day. The second kind of cluster
has to do with food aversions. That often women will feel that food that they routinely
had ate before, that routinely had appealed to them before, is just distasteful in thought.
They don't want to get near it, they don't want to eat it, they don't even want to smell
it. There are all kinds of pregnancy jokes about food cravings, you know the old pickles
and ice cream joke that you'll see on old TV sitcoms, but less often discussed are food
aversions, but they're really quite common. In fact, Profitt has found in consulting with
anthropologists that virtually all women in all cultures feel some degree of morning
sickness when it is defined in this particular way with both clusters of symptoms or feelings.
Of course, we can find the occasional woman who will say that neither nausea nor food aversion
has ever entered into her experience of pregnancy, but yet it is mostly a robust phenomenon that
is not tied to a particular culture or a particular diet, and that's key to this analysis. Women
and their doctors, at least in this country, often consider morning sickness to be a real
nuisance, which it certainly can be, but more to the point, an unnecessary nuisance,
something that's just there as a kind of side effect of pregnancy that should be wished away
or dealt with. It tends to cause concern and to cause alarm. Sometimes, just as with fever,
such concern and alarm is highly justified, particularly if the symptoms are very strong
and really incapacitated women so that she can't eat, or alternatively, if they're still
relatively mild, but get prolonged beyond the first trimester, beyond the first three
months of a woman's pregnancy. In this case, of course, the doctor and the patient together
do need to work out a strategy and do need to realize that something has gone astray,
but what we're going to talk about is mild to moderate morning sickness, which is the
typical condition. The Heart of Profits analysis is her pointing out that the concentration
of morning sickness during the first trimester coincides with organ formation that is going
on in the developing fetus. This is called organogenesis. Genesis meaning start. When
the organ, such as the heart and the lungs, the digestive organ, the brain, everything
is developing, starting to develop. This is a time of extreme vulnerability for the human
fetus. It is a time when toxins in the diet can very strongly affect healthy development
of a developing baby. The fetus is, of course, much more vulnerable to toxins to the same
level of toxin that an adult could take in and have very little or no effect can be quite
dramatically difficult for a fetus to handle, despite some maternal filters. This can still
be a problem. Profit is suggesting that morning sickness may have evolved via natural selection
as an adaptive response to protect the developing fetus from ingestion of maternal toxins. Now
in our evolutionary past, the foods that would have been available to hominids broadly and
widely are likely foods that would have had such toxins. We had talked before about how
sugar, salt, and fat probably would not have been around in much abundance for hominids.
But it was around. Well, some meat, lots of plants and tubers. And these tend to be,
from what we know of the present day plus paleoecology data, these tend to be foods
that do have toxins in them. So there does seem to be a fit, however, not imperfect,
not really speculative, but it's not 100% tight. There does seem to be a fit between
the foods that hominids might have eaten and this entire idea. So the idea now is that
women, when they're pregnant, are evolved to be either unable to eat foods that could
cause problems for the fetus, or they just don't want to eat them. They can't keep them
down or they don't want to ingest them in the first place. So in other words, women
today who experience morning sickness in the way I'm describing it, relatively mild to
moderate, may be feeling exactly what evolution designed them to feel in order to protect
their babies. Of course, you can conduct for yourself the analysis that's at the heart
of this, the reproductive success based analysis, that women in our developing ancestral past
with morning sickness would have produced children who are healthier and more capable
of themselves going on to have reproductive success than other women. I don't know by
now how many times you've had to hear me say differential reproductive success, but
it continues to be the key concept. I mentioned in an earlier lecture that when I crave chocolate,
I feel well adapted. Well, I learned this theory of profits just before I became pregnant
and it really helped. I don't think that it is possible to overestimate the psychological
relief that women can feel when they understand that at least there's a strong possibility
that their bodies are acting in a beneficial way when they don't feel so well. I happened
to be pregnant in 1993. I attended a biological anthropology conference in Toronto, Canada
and remember flying and being very busy and a little bit stressed and not feeling very
well. And again, telling myself, well, this is a good thing. I understand what is happening.
And of course, I want to stress again that this will not work for every woman, that there
will be women who do need to understand that the symptoms have gone awry and they need
really a lot of medical attention. But it is, I think, a very nice analysis that should
lead to more research. When I teach this in my classes at William & Mary, I teach a gender
and evolution class. I ask my students to think, well, what types of questions does
this view cause you to come up with? What would you like to have answered? And we always talk
about better data on cross-cultural experience of morning sickness. What specific foods are
we talking about that have these toxins? How much do they match up in the present day,
the foods that women don't want to eat? Are they really dangerous now or how has that
changed over evolutionary time? What about non-human primates? Is there any such thing
as morning sickness? And how would we know if there were? So, Profit's analysis was
a starting point and other scholars have taken it up and continued to write about it and
continue to investigate it. Health issues may also be studied with looking at more recent
population histories rather than going back quite as far as the hominid past. We will
consider this by discussing the phenomenon of hypertension in the United States. Hypertension,
as you'll know, is just another term for high blood pressure. And recent medical analysis
has found that there are higher rates of high blood pressure in African Americans in this
country than in their white counterparts. Now, we want to be careful here because it
sounds very much like we're reverting to the very type of racially based analysis that
we rejected several lectures ago. So, I want to say a word about that. First of all, when
I'm reporting medical data, I do need to use the categories that the physicians and the
researchers have used. And we know that racial categories are quite common in such reporting
as they are in the police reports and the forensic reports that we talked about before.
But the way we can kind of translate that is we should be thinking populationally rather
than racially. And we can realize that there are going to be overlaps between groups and
that we are not making claims of genetic isolation or pure groups in any sense. All right, the
medical researchers expected to find that African Americans ate more salt and that this
was at least in part contributing to their higher levels of blood pressure because we
do know that salt has been implicated in blood pressure problems. However, this dietary
difference that had been hypothesized turned out to be absent when the diets of the two
different populations was studied. This was a very good time for evolutionary scientists
to come in and to look at the problem. And there has been a very interesting publication
on this topic that I think might help to account in part for the difference in high
blood pressure. And I want to stress that I'm not suggesting that this could be the
entire answer, but rather a contributory factor. And it's again one of those things that is
so new that it will require more research. Many Africans, as we are well aware, were
brought forcibly to this country from West Africa. I'm talking here about enslaved individuals
we discussed this population in an earlier lecture as well. Some people who have studied
paleoclimate have noticed that at least some of the areas of origin in West Africa from
which these people were taken and brought here seem to have very little salt available
in the past. This is not all that surprising. We've talked before about how in natural environments
in the past there doesn't tend to be a lot of salt anyway. But in these areas of West
Africa, as far as people can tell, there seem to be a little bit unusual reduction in available
salt. What this would set up then is a kind of selection pressure for people living in
this area generally to have pretty efficient kidneys. In other words, to process the salt
that was in the environment in an efficient manner. We can think of this as a relatively
mild selection pressure. It's nothing drastic, but it could have set in motion gradual sort
of natural selection over time. The type of process we've talked about quite a lot.
There was a second type of factor that might play a role that we can think of in an additive
sense that might have overlaid, if you will, this ancestral condition. And this involves
the actual journey from West Africa to the United States. We know that enslaved individuals
were forced to endure very difficult, torturous journeys across the Atlantic to get here.
They suffered many stresses, and among them were prolonged and quite intense thirst. This
is seen as what scientists call an intense selection funnel, a very short but very intense
period of time where there's really exaggerated natural selection, so that what might have
resulted is a type of super efficient kidney to really take up and process what is available
in the environment, that there wasn't much salt, there wasn't much water, so the kidneys
responded in a short term way. This would have been adaptive in the short term for survival,
for dealing with the little salt and the little water that these people were able to
get hold of. And then we want to move again to the modern condition, just as we had in
the last lecture in talking about sugar, salt and fat, because then over time people would
start to live in an environment in which salt became much more abundant and the stress conditions
were relaxed or released. So under current conditions, with the salt available and the
water available, then the typical levels, what a person could normally typically ingest
and have no medical problem, might in fact cause a problem. In other words, to describe
this in a kind of informal way, the kidneys might perceive a so-called normal intake of
salt in a very different way because of the ancestral past, both in the way, part of the
past and in the more historical past. So here we have a double sort of analysis, one that's
more historical and one that's more prehistorical, talking about selection pressures on a particular
population that can explain a modern-day disparity in hypertension levels. And I'm saying, by
can explain, again, I mean provisionally and partially, with more testing needed. As with
our morning sickness example, I think that this can be a useful analysis because it gives
physicians and their patients, at the very least, a new starting point. We can discuss
with such people, physicians can discuss with such people these conditions and possibly
family histories, talk about possible reasons why things might have happened and have a
new armament of tools to really try to deal with and fix the problem with medical treatment.
So far, our examples have all tended to cluster around health, physical health, health of the
body. What about if we move more to the arena of the mind and emotions? A very new field,
even newer than what I've just been talking about, is emerging that is called evolutionary
psychology. And here, the very same principles are borrowed, but they're applied to the mind
and the emotions. The underlying idea is why not assume that the human mind has been subject
to selection pressures, just as has the human body? And what we'll do here is use human
mate choice as an example from evolutionary psychology. The evolutionary psychologist
David Busse is important in this context. Cross-cultural data that he has collected
point to strong patterns in which human males choose a different kind of partner using different
characteristics than do human females. He has data from 10,000 individuals from 37 different
world cultures to back up his analysis. And what he suggests is that human males tend
to choose as partners, females who are young and physically attractive, whereas human females
tend to choose as mates, partners that have power and status and the ability to acquire
resources. And this was a pretty key finding that went across the world. Now I should interject
at this point that a lot of the characteristics that both males and females said were important
to them were the same. Not everything fell into different groups by males and females.
For example, everybody asked across the board, and I'm talking statistically, most people,
said that what was important was a smart, kind, healthy person, partner, somebody who
was dependable and somebody who they could love. And we often forget to emphasize when
there's no sex difference. How many times do you open the newspaper and you read a big
headline saying, new brain study, no sex difference. You don't read that. You read the things that
emphasize male and female differences. So we need to lay that down as a platform. However,
it is still true that age and visible markers of youth and beauty were more important for
and resource acquisition and power were more important for females. This is something that
has become known as a kind of a shorthand or an abbreviation among evolutionary psychologists
as the Bill Clinton-Monica Lewinsky syndrome. You remember the ex-president Bill Clinton
and his involvement with the White House intern, Monica Lewinsky. Here we have the quintessential
powerful male, a sitting president at the time, and a young, youthful intern. And this
is an example that we can use to kind of encapsulate this phenomenon. Now, some anthropologists
suggest that we can use the hominid past to understand this kind of sex difference.
Let me underline that verb. Understand, not justify. No one is suggesting, well, few people
are suggesting, I did read one column that suggested this, that this kind of thing, the
Bill Clinton phenomenon, is all explainable by the past and therefore it's perfectly justified.
This is not the direction we want to go. We want to analyze this scientifically. Women,
of course, are the ones who bear a nurse young. We've been over that many times for its implications
in evolutionary terms. So their youth and health are critically important and are signaled
to men by their visible appearance. So being young and looking healthy are reproductive
markers in this analysis for men, for increasing men's reproductive success. Men, on the other
hand, of course, contribute to reproduction, to making babies, clearly. But after the initial
contribution, they are not absolutely necessary as caretakers in the same way that women are,
women carry the infants and then lactate. What may be critically important as we have
discussed is the resources that males may provide. We've talked before about multiple
dependent infants and hominid evolution, the need for hominid and later females to have
input from resources. And what we are then doing in this analysis is correlating power
and status with ability to get resources. One prediction that follows from this analysis
with just a little bit of intervening logic is that greater male sexual jealousy would
be predicted than female sexual jealousy in the present, in other words. Now, how do
we get to that point? Well, we know that when women have babies, it's very obvious who's
the mother. You produce a baby, you're the mother. In theoretical terms, paternity is
always in doubt. I'm not making a comment about families or individual behaviors, but
I'm speaking only theoretically that there's always what's called in science paternity
uncertainty that no father ever knows perfectly for sure that a child is his, theoretically.
This would predict that there would be male control of females, male control of reproduction
and sexual jealousy by males towards females in a greater and exacerbated way compared
to the reverse. In trying to find some information about male sexual jealousy in this country
in the present, I decided to use as a kind of proxy variable domestic violence. So I
collected some data using the American Bar Association statistics for the 1990s on violence
in this country. And I want to give you some of this background information. First of all,
the most general statistic is that in this country every year about a million women experience
some type of violence, non-lethal violence we're talking about in this case from what
are called intimates. Anybody with whom they have an intimate relationship. So this is
very general. It doesn't get specific as to who the intimates are. Now we can get a little
more specific. Of all annual violence against women, 28% is committed by intimates. And
only when you look at men, only 5% of violence against men is committed by intimates. So
here you have an important sex difference. That's over a quarter of violence committed
by people who are very, very close to women. Now if we add this to one other factor we
can get some place. And the other factor is relating to domestic violence. Between 90
and 95% of all victims of domestic violence, violence by people you live with are women.
And the picture that's beginning to emerge here is of domestic violence that occurs not
only with people that you live with but also at a really higher level, a higher risk level
after there's been a split. So in other words what I'm saying is that domestic violence can
be quite high. We can relate this back to the difference between male and female paternity
certainty, maternity certainty. But also if a woman tries to leave a very bad domestically
violent situation, to leave her batterer, her chance of serious injury or lethal violence
goes up 14 times, it is at that point that we become very interested. When a woman tries
to break that bond and leave that reproductive context, she's at extreme risk of what I am
calling male sexual jealousy as expressed through violence. So this whole area of mate choice
and how it plays out in behavioral terms is also on the rise in research with an evolutionary
psychology. Of course some biological anthropologists are skeptics. Where would we be without anthropological
skeptics? And they fear that both Darwinian medicine and all of that type of analysis together
with evolutionary psychology is very much too close for comfort to biological determinism.
In other words, the idea that we can take this too far and that as I alluded to earlier
some of this behavior could possibly be excused or there could be a sense in which it was
taken as natural that being sick is natural or being in a situation in which male sexual
jealousy is expressed is natural and that is a concern. The reliance of both these fields
on a specific hominid past again may be spurious, something I brought up in the last lecture,
but we need to revisit here. Both Darwinian medicine and evolutionary psychology refer
to a particular concept called the environment of evolutionary adaptiveness. This is so typical
a term that we call it EEA, just like we call it reproductive success RS. Use this term
a lot. The idea is again, hominids evolve in a certain type of environment and we are
going to show the effects of having evolved there. And of course by now you can fill
in the critique yourself. We really know very little about the social aspects of the EEA.
We have to keep in mind the variation in the EEA, the fact that different hominids would
have lived in different places. So to lay these patterns at the door of a single set
of selection pressures is very simplistic. Let me return briefly to morning sickness.
I had talked about how we need so much more data about morning sickness and its relationship
to environmental selection pressures. And I talked about wishing that we had more cross
cultural data on the modern manifestation of morning sickness. Something I do know from
work that I have done on menopause is that menopause is also a relatively universal experience
for women, not only in the fact that of course women everywhere cease their menstrual cycles,
but rather that there are some symptoms or unpleasant feelings attached to that. We know
that this is not something that's in women's minds, but rather is a real partly biological,
partly cultural syndrome. And the reason I say it's partly cultural is because there
are interesting cross cultural differences in how the symptoms are actually felt. In
America there's a much higher incidence of reporting unpleasant symptoms like hot flashes
and the like than in a country say for example like Japan. Why this might be the case isn't
totally clear. Suggestion has been made that women, older women, have a more respected
and active place in Japanese society as opposed to are really putting youth on a pedestal
here in this country. And this may ease the transition to menopause for Japanese women,
ease their experience of symptoms we don't know. We may conclude that the evolutionary
perspective has merit when applied both to the human body and to the human mind. I have
gone through these case studies for you because I think they're quite promising if they are
applied with caution, with remembering, hominid variation, and with certainly avoiding any
analysis suggesting that this is the way things were, so this is the way that things
should be. We must not empower the past or past selection pressures to the exclusion
of what's really fundamentally human social learning and social flexibility. Biological
determinism is such a concern that I am going to devote the next lecture to it in a different
way. We are going to talk about gene determinism or the lack of gene determinism in the next
lecture.
