Well, we've arrived together at the final lecture now.
Before we sum up and talk about the evolutionary lessons of our past and present, let's spend
a few moments talking about evolution and the future.
Science fiction writers in particular love to imagine the future of Homo sapiens.
Maybe we are going to evolve enormous heads to encase our brains that are being so stuffed
full with information in the computer age and the internet age.
Maybe our limbs and the rest of our bodies will dwindle away as our heads get bigger
and bigger.
Maybe we will even become Homo sedentarius obesis, which is one of those Latin fictional
names that I think Linnaeus, the taxonomist, would have appreciated.
Obviously, biological anthropologists don't subscribe to these fanciful types of theories,
but we do have things that we can say about evolution and the future.
We can start by reminding ourselves that we Homo sapiens are a very young species.
We've talked about this before, how we've been around for 125,000 years, how we've
been the soul hominid on the earth for 30,000 years.
And of course, at one and the same time, as we realize this, we also look around at
the creatures with which we share this earth and we see some very ancient creatures.
When I go to the National Zoo to study gorillas, I pass the giant tortoises and I remind myself
that they have been around a lineage for millions and millions of years, that the ancestors
of those very tortoises coexisted with the dinosaurs.
And we know that it's true as well about some insect species and others.
What biological anthropology teaches us might be seen as a kind of negative lesson, if you
will, that it's really not possible to predict precise ways in which humans will evolve as
our species does move beyond its infancy.
Of course, we know that any traits that would evolve in the future are those that would
be naturally selected for differential reproductive success in our local environment.
And that word environment provides us with a key to understanding why we're dealing
with an unpredictable future, because we simply can't predict how the environment may change.
Shifts in the environment are not foreseeable.
We may try to model changes using our understanding and our technology, but it is impossible to
know for sure where we're headed.
The anthropologist William Calvin makes a very interesting statement in this regard.
He talks about how there's so much concern now about global warming, the fact that the
Earth's atmosphere may be heating up a few degrees in temperature as a result of human
activity, for example, emission of certain gases into the environment.
And of course, this is a worthy concern, one that we should pursue and think about.
However, Calvin says that in the rush to talk about global warming, most people forget about
the possibility of global cooling.
And if we look back at our environmental history and prehistory, we see a pattern and a cycle
of global cooling happening over and over again.
Furthermore, Calvin says, we're about due.
About 11,000 or 12,000 years ago, we went through the last of such a cooling cycle.
In the North Atlantic region, temperatures decreased by about 8 degrees centigrade, which
is quite a lot.
You can imagine what would happen if such a thing were to happen today.
And really, Calvin is not trying to say, yes, there's going to be global cooling and there's
not going to be global warming.
But he's underlining the fact that we can't predict what will happen, definitely.
Let's take some examples from the type of prehistory and paleoanthropology that we've
talked about in this course.
We know that the robust Australopithecines went extinct at about a million years ago.
You can recall that these are the creatures with big, powerful jaws, big back teeth.
They have a crushing and grinding complex, and they probably were quite specialized on
hard, tough foods such as nuts.
And we believe that they went extinct because they were over-specialized, and they were
either out-competed by other hominids, or the environment changed, most likely a combination
of the two.
If the environment changed and these foods were not so available anymore, then their specialization
would have been quite a critical problem.
In any case, they went extinct.
But it's not as if we could imagine any robust Australopithecine or a fictional researcher
projected back into the past saying, yes, well, we're on an over-specialized line here
and we're heading towards extinction.
We are too involved with crushing and grinding and tough foods.
In other words, this isn't something you can see in the present.
It becomes clear with hindsight, but when you're in the middle of living and being adapted
to whatever local environment there is, this is not a clear process.
Another biological anthropologist has something to say on this score.
Chris Stringer has mentioned that the trend for many millions of years in hominid evolution
was to get heavier, bigger-boned, thicker-boned, more robust, and only quite recently did that
trend reverse.
So if you think of the grassal lineage that we talked about some lectures ago, the grassal
Australopithecines evolved into Homo habilis, and Homo habilis likely evolved into Homo
erectus.
And some populations at that time period evolved into Neanderthals, and what you get over this
time is a general trend towards just what Stringer said, heaviness, robusticity.
With Homo sapiens, that is no longer the case.
But this was not foreseeable or predictable what selection pressures and the interaction
of tools and the environment that caused this reduction in robusticity we have already
talked about a little bit.
Again our point is about unpredictability.
So evolutionary scenarios that feature big heads and small bodies, or that call us Homo
sedentarius obesis, are in fact fanciful.
What is more worthy of our consideration are efforts that recognize something about selection
pressures.
We participate in communities of animals and plants, and this community is a hotbed
of reciprocal selection pressures, and I'll explain what I mean by this.
Courses about human evolution, and certainly I include this one, tend to squarely highlight
Homo sapiens.
Yes, we talk about other primates, yes, we talk about other hominids, but it leads up
to a glorious crowning achievement of Homo sapiens.
And in this sort of depiction, Homo sapiens comes about as a creature that defied challenges
adapted to various selection pressures, coped with selection pressures.
Less often made obvious is the viewpoint that Homo sapiens generates selection pressures.
This is something we should remember.
And this is a discussion that should take place, thinking about modern technology, yes,
we generate selection pressures now in the modern day, for example, global warming, because
we have invented all types of new things.
But we also can think of this in a wider sense, that naturally in our past, before current
day technology, we would have generated selection pressures as well.
So let's focus on this idea of the hominids as part of a community of plants and animals
with reciprocal selection pressures, and I have to credit here the anthropologist Robert
Foley.
I'm sure others have written and spoken about this too, but he wrote a book that came out
in the late 1980s called Another Unique Species, and in this book he really was able to get
across to me the idea of a hominid community very effectively.
Well let's start with some pressures on hominids.
We can see back in fairly early hominid times that hominids were sometimes prey, were eaten
by other creatures.
We have dismissed the possibility of the australopithecines as being hunters.
We don't really accept the idea of hunting as a prime mover in early hominid evolution
as we know.
Recent researchers have shown that the early hominids were sometimes eaten by big cats.
Let's take South Africa as an example, and go back to about two and a half million years
ago.
The hominids that are involved are probably the robust australopithecines for the most
part.
And what we find is that through chemical analysis of the fossil teeth of the predators
alive at that time period, we can discover that they ate hominids.
Now remember that we've talked before about how Neanderthal teeth can be analyzed chemically
to see what they were eating.
Well a similar type of analysis carried out on the predators, for example hyenas, sabertoothed
cats that lived in the past, show that hominids were lunch or dinner, definitely a selection
pressure on hominids.
In the current day, we can identify some viruses as selection pressures on modern human populations.
Viruses after all are living organisms, and that means that they have evolved to survive
and reproduce.
That reproductive success can be applied to viruses just as much as to humans as a measure
of evolutionary success.
I'm thinking here about diseases such as AIDS and Ebola.
We know that the HIV virus underlies AIDS, and what these viruses have been selected
to do is to invade human hosts and to reproduce themselves.
And the more that we have encroached on previously fairly pristine environments, the more we
have unleashed, if you will, these viruses.
Now I'm not suggesting that the viruses themselves are recent in origin.
They may be quite ancient.
They may have lived in animal hosts, animal reservoirs, if you will.
But the interaction of humans with animals has been increasing as population increases
and as we go into forests and eating of animal flesh.
Some of these more exotic species, such as monkeys and apes, has increased a lot.
And there are some very interesting publications that you can seek out that suggest that the
HIV virus evolved from a simian type of virus, a monkey or ape type of virus, and that in
fact there has been a process by which HIV and AIDS jumped to humans and possibly did
so through consumption of ape flesh or monkey flesh.
And of course we know that here, with this example, we're beginning to get into the fact
that humans generate selection pressures.
I've just been talking about killing and eating other animals and encroaching upon
other territories.
Well we now, we homo sapiens, live in the earth in unprecedented numbers.
There are six billion of us now.
Our actions create selection pressures on a scale that must be considered unprecedented
in terms of our past.
The disappearance of animal life that's happening on the earth today is not in my estimation
just a normal turn of the wheel, if you will.
It's not just a normal cycle.
We know of course that extinctions have occurred all along in prehistory and in history.
And we can document them and chart them.
Mass extinctions even, we know this.
But humans are, in my view anyway, not just another species in the sense that we now have
become so dominant on earth in the sense of what we do and how we act that the way that
we're interacting with other species is of a different order.
And an example that I can give you involves the way that we interact with the rainforests
and the forests of the Amazon in South America and of the Congo in Africa.
And of course I'm referring here to logging.
This is an example that I use whenever I have students or an audience to listen to me because
I think it's a very important one.
Logging causes habitat destruction, of course, and it causes destruction of animal species
because so many animal species are actually consumed.
This is the part that people don't as often know about.
We know that habitat destruction, knocking down trees, can cause problems for lots of
animal populations.
Their shelter and their food may be destroyed.
What is less well known is what's called the bush meat trade, the fact that monkeys and
apes and elephants and other big creatures are eaten, are killed and eaten.
Now they're killed and eaten because they're used to feed logging crews a lot of times.
As the loggers go into the forests, they destroy the forest as they go, but they're way out
away from cities because they're going into this new territory.
And these multinational corporations that underlie this logging bring out lots and lots
of workers that are fairly poor.
They don't have access to a lot of resources and the logging companies feed them.
One way they feed them is through bush meat, animals living in the forest.
So therefore the animals that I study, gorillas and others like them, become food and this
food gets exported also to other countries and can be used as delicacies in restaurants.
In any case, this type of action which is causing death of animals of all kinds in very
high numbers does not really match the type of actions that have caused low animal numbers
or extinctions before and the apes and others are headed for extinction if something does
not change.
I would like to believe that social learning and social activism and the very behavioral
flexibility that I have so often talked about as part of our nature can turn this picture
around.
Right now the predictions are pretty bleak.
So when I talk in academic terms about humans generating selection pressures, what this
would translate to is animal extinctions and loss of diversity, loss of some of what makes
this such a wonderful world to live in.
Awareness of course is important, but awareness only works if it translates into action.
What I'm talking about here is not only that I want to push a particular agenda, but that
I want to bring back the bio-cultural dimension to these selection pressures.
That now we are capable of all kinds of reflection and activism as we collectively realize the
effects that our six billion numbers have on the world.
To give you two quick examples, there's an organization called the Bushmeat Crisis Task
Force that's at work trying to deal with these big corporations and you have to be able
to really make a difference at a very high level to begin to work against logging and
against Bushmeat.
We're talking about world bank level, getting at the economics of the situation, trying
to stop this type of action is very, very complicated because it involves so many countries
and so many economic factors.
At a slightly different level, there's a wonderful organization that Jane Goodall
has founded, the famous chimpanzee researcher.
She calls it Roots and Shoots and it's targeted at children to understand the diversity in
the world, the extinction problems that the animal populations are facing.
So children are taught about their actions and the ability to make a difference.
This can be quite remarkable when children living in Africa and in the Amazon are included
in these programs, in other words the children of the very people who may be involved in
some of this destruction of the environment.
And I suppose the message that I'm thinking about here is that it is possible for individuals
to make a difference, something that Jane Goodall has stressed for so long.
Just yesterday I was reading the Washington Post, there was an interview with a young
social activist who has worked in another arena and he said that he made a decision to devote
a certain part of his life to a cause, that is a very difficult global cause.
And he said, well, a normal rational person might have thought about the social problems
in the world today and concluded individuals really can't make a difference.
This man, young man said, in fact it is probably correct to say that any given individual can
make only a little difference.
He then went on to say, but I am delighted to make a little difference because what is
the alternative, making no difference and that is not acceptable.
And this speaks very directly to the human brain and the human will that it can be used
in all different ways and need not just be used to generate negative selection pressures.
So I want to give a fairly optimistic look here when I talk about reciprocal selection
pressures.
The emphasis in this course has been on the fact that there are simultaneous and multiple
influences on humans.
Our evolutionary past has been an influence on our present.
We also adapt ourselves to local conditions where we live now and what impacts us in our
lives, but that we are capable also of rapid social and cultural change.
Before we get to the very end conclusions of this course, I want to go through a kind
of intermediate level of summing up and I want to make just a few points.
We are now and we will remain one species.
We are Homo sapiens.
We are divided into populations that undergo a great deal of gene flow.
We know that gene flow has been part of our history for a very long time, but it continues
and probably at unprecedented levels as well.
We know that all populations of Homo sapiens are equal at the biological level, a fundamental
lesson of this discipline.
Of course, there is social inequality.
Access to resources, to medical care, even just to food is not equal across populations
in the world, but there is no way to say that that social inequality can be linked to biological
inequality.
There is no biological difference that is meaningful in terms of intelligence or adaptation
across populations.
So to understand social inequality, we of course have to look elsewhere, not the realm
of biology, but the intersection of power, class, gender and that whole different type
of analysis.
Further, differential stresses that might result from social inequality across populations
will not result in biological speciation.
What I'm talking about here is the conclusion that biological anthropologists have reached
a kind of prediction for the future.
Here we're going to predict that there will not be some new species.
Why?
Of course, this is because human mobility and human interbreeding across populations
occur at such great rates, even more so than in the past.
I've continued my strong addiction to reading the New York Times and the Washington Post
to glean these little facts that I can stick into my lectures and something I learned recently
is a current estimate that every single day, one million people cross national borders
on an airplane.
I found that to be fascinating and at first I was skeptical.
It sounds like a really high number, but since coming to this particular location, from
where I'm speaking to you, I've been hanging out in a park and watching all the planes
coming in and out of Dulles Airport outside Washington, D.C. and I can tell you that
if you multiply the number of international carriers by all the airports in this country,
by all the airports in the world, I believe that that's probably a right number.
So I did my own little mathematical test and, of course, it doesn't even count people who
just cross state borders.
So as you can see, I've been caught up in thinking about this.
Another biological anthropologist, in fact, I think he's an evolutionary scientist.
He may not be an anthropologist, suggested recently that the only case in which we would
see speciation in the future, a new species, Homo, whatever, would be if there was colonization
of space, if humans went and lived on the moon or another planet.
And this is, of course, because then you'd have very different selection pressures combined
with isolation.
There might be some travel back and forth, but gene flow and interbreeding would be greatly
reduced, and the extent to which those processes were reduced would control whether or not
there was speciation.
So that's my sort of nod towards science fiction in the future.
The simultaneous facts of our biological equality and our social inequality is a challenge for
our species.
I think, at least I'm hopeful, that it might be beneficial to really reflect upon the fact
that we are a single species.
We are linked to each other across populations and by our common evolutionary history, by
our recent development as a species as well.
So it gives me some hope to think that this knowledge might be able to help reassert priorities
and perspective in a world that, at some days, at least, can seem very troubled.
All right, we need to spend some minutes really summing up the course as a whole in this final
lecture.
And I'm going to do this by suggesting that biological anthropology can help us reflect
on two specific issues of supreme importance to our species.
And I'll sum up, so I can give you an indicator of where we're going, I'll sum up these two
issues with two phrases.
The first is continuity and the second is dynamic interaction.
We'll start with continuity.
Our data that we have in biological anthropology shows that humans of today have continuity
with the non-human primates and with hominids that are now extinct.
You can think back on the content, the whole middle section of this course, think back
on particular examples that show that we have inherited a legacy from the past.
It is not a deterministic legacy, but it does influence us.
So let's think of some examples that go back over the span of the course.
Let's start with monkeys.
Monkey mothers, for example, at Cayo Santiago in Puerto Rico, differentially behave towards
kin in positive ways.
In other words, act more positively towards kin than towards non-kin.
For example, a mother may rush to support a daughter, a sister, or a mother when that
other animal gets into trouble, gets into a fight.
Even if the mother herself was not threatened in any way, her resources were not threatened,
she puts herself in harm's way.
And we can think of ways in which we may do this as well with our own relatives.
And we can also extend this to an emotional analysis of the way we act with relatives.
Perhaps you can think of an example that goes something like this, a person reflecting
and saying, you know, there's a person who is really very nasty to my mother.
And although that person never did anything to me, I'm finding it hard to think of that
person in positive tones.
Someone in your family or relative is injured or hurt in some way emotionally or physically.
This clearly has an effect.
Chimpanzee mothers, we know, spend time guiding and instructing their infants.
They may facilitate the learning of tool use.
They may facilitate proper social behavior, how a youngster should approach a dominant
alpha male.
And of course, this has immediate resonance for us.
Those of us who are parents know that it is a lifelong job, that guidance and instruction
crosses all kinds of contexts.
If we switch to the paleo-anthropological side of things, we can look at other aspects
of human prehistory.
For example, the modification of stone tools.
We know that for two and a half million years, we have been making stone tools as a human
line.
But there's been a process, not linear, but basically progressive, in which we continue
to invent new types of tools and new ways to manufacture tools.
Sometimes the progress was slow.
There were periods of stasis.
Sometimes it speeded up.
But there's a clear platform in our evolutionary past for inventing and solving problems via
technology.
Let's look to Neanderthals for a moment.
With this hominid we had, for the first time, intentional burial of the dead.
At times the dead were even buried with grave goods, possibly some type of symbolic marker.
We're not sure how symbolic, but in any case, it is likely that there was some degree of
ritual if only reflecting respect and emotional ties.
Yes, this is a bit speculative.
We don't want to stretch it too far, but I could also ask, how much of a stretch is
it to suggest emotion at, say, 100,000 years ago when we know that there has been socio-emotional
ties way back in our hominid past?
If we can take great apes in the modern day as any example, we've talked about chimpanzees
as having theory of mind, as having empathy.
And of course, to make this work in the past, we have to use them as stand-ins for animals
that were alive before the common ancestor, very typical approach in biological anthropology.
And then finally, a final example, Homo erectus as migrants.
We know from about 1.8 million years ago, if not even earlier, hominids began to wander
the earth.
They began to explore other worlds.
We could even say that the age of exploration started about 2 million years ago when hominids
left Africa and went to Asia.
So continuity is the first issue.
The second issue is this dynamic interaction, and this is the note on which I'd like to
conclude.
Human evolution has been far too dynamic for us to give too much weight to biology alone
or genes alone.
And I want to think a little bit about what dynamic really means.
Dynamic as a term calls to mind change.
Yes, that's part of it.
But even more, contingency and unpredictability are important.
Contingency refers to the fact that things might have turned out another way.
They happen a certain way, but they might not have.
Diversity means that the outcome of some process cannot be known at the start.
This is what Steve and Jay Gould talked about when he favored the out-of-Africa replacement
model in suggesting that we evolved in Africa because of a certain combination of selection
pressures, but it might have turned out a very different way.
Human evolution has been dynamic in a broader sense as well.
What biological anthropology tells us is that we can't separate our biology and our culture.
We can't separate out genes and learning.
In each case, the relationship between those processes is contingent and unpredictable,
intertwined totally so that you can't parse them out and say something is half biology
and half culture or half genetic and half learning.
That goes against everything we know, that when you bring these things together, something
comes out that is more than the sum of the parts in an unpredictable manner.
Biological anthropology teaches us that we must understand this kind of complexity in
order to understand the challenges of our future as well as our history and prehistory
in the past.
Well, this brings us to the end of Lecture 24.
I'd like to conclude by saying how much I've really enjoyed constructing and delivering
these 24 lectures.
I hope that some of you will decide to pursue reading about biological anthropology.
There are many wonderful books, which you know from the written material that you have
for this course, that I have recommended.
There are wonderful journals and magazine articles, and if you do have access to a computer,
do check the internet.
Again, I've given you some clues.
I've included in the written material packet my email address.
I'm very responsive to email.
If you'd like to discuss possible sources to read or internet sites or have questions,
I'd be delighted to hear from you.
So I'd like to conclude by thanking you and wishing you good fun and good luck with anthropology
in the future.
