In the previous lecture, we met Archimedes, a great thinker.
In this lecture, I want to look at a great theorem that he contributed.
We want to look over his shoulder as he determines the area of a circle, one of the most amazing
proofs I know.
Before we get to this, let me say that this lecture, more than any of its predecessors,
is highly mathematical.
The whole lecture, in fact, is going to be devoted essentially to this one proof.
So it's going to be a bit challenging, but here's my pledge.
I will try to break it down into easy-to-follow steps, and the hope is that by the end, you
will understand that you will be able to appreciate this genius who's working before us over whose
shoulder we are looking.
So that's the object.
Let's begin.
The issue, as I said in the previous lecture, is addressed by Archimedes in his work, Measurement
of a Circle, from about 225 B.C.
And it's the first proposition there that I want to look at, and I'll show you that to
you one more time.
Here's what it says.
The area of any circle is equal to a right-angled triangle in which one of the sides about
the right angle is equal to the radius and the other to the circumference of the circle.
It's like a very strange statement here.
What's going on here with all these words?
Well, what he's really saying is that a circular area is the same as that of a particular triangle.
So imagine we have a circle.
Here it is, radius R, and he says, let's build a right triangle.
It's going to have a right angle in it.
There it is.
One of the sides about the right angle is R, the radius, and the other is the circumference
of the circle.
So if you imagined snipping the circle and straightening it out, that's going to be the
other side.
So we have a circle.
We have a triangle.
He says they're equal in area.
Now this strategy is something that the Greeks generally, and our comedies particularly,
would employ.
You want to compare a complicated figure to a simpler one.
We saw this in the last lecture.
Remember when he was looking at the surface area of a sphere, complicated, he says that's
four times the greatest circle within.
Circles are simpler than spheres.
So the complicated spherical surface is cast in terms of the simpler circles.
Or he talked about the volume of the sphere, complicated, and compared it to the volume
of a cylinder, simpler.
So to here, the circle this time is the complicated figure.
He says it's going to equal this triangle, and triangles are much easier than circles.
So this is the way the Greeks would do this, compare the complicated to the simple.
Now I say the triangle simple, but maybe we better stop and make sure we believe that.
What's the area of a triangle?
If I'm going to say the area of the circle equals the area of the triangle, I better
be sure I'm on top of triangles.
Well, that's not hard.
This shows up, guess where, Euclid's elements.
So you thought you were done with Euclid.
He's back again.
He always is.
This is Proposition 41 of Book 1 where Euclid proves this proposition.
He says if a parallelogram have the same base with a triangle and be in the same parallels,
parallelogram is double of the triangle.
Now again, it's not a formula, but it's a sort of wordy statement, but let's see what
he's getting at.
See, we can unpack this and see what's up.
There's a triangle.
Let's say its height is h, its base is b.
And what Euclid is saying is put it within a parallelogram so that the triangle and the
parallelogram have the same parallels and the same height.
And in this case, I'll just put it inside a rectangle.
There's a nice simple parallelogram.
So the triangle and the rectangle fall within the same horizontal parallels and they have
the same base.
So according to Euclid, Book 1, Proposition 41, the area of that rectangle is double the
triangle, two triangles.
Well the area of the rectangle, that's easy, base times height, so that's two triangles.
And so divide everything by two and what this proposition is saying is the area of a triangle
is one half base times height.
So there's a famous formula we all know, triangular area is half the base times the height.
Where did it come from?
Well if I were asked that, I'd say it comes from Euclid's elements.
But as you can see, it wasn't exactly expressed this way.
Again, the limitations of the Greeks, not having algebra, they had to give you a verbal
statement but you can rather easily see that's what Euclid really was getting at.
Okay so areas of triangles we know.
So back to that one Archimedes was looking at.
Remember he said the circle equals that triangle.
One side is the radius, one side is the circumference.
So what is the area of the triangle?
It's one half base times height.
For that particular triangle, he's talking about the base is C, the circumference, and
the height is R. So the triangle in question has area one half C times R.
And that'll be important to remember as we walk through this proof.
Well now to proceed further, Archimedes needed a pair of preliminary results.
Two things he has to establish, they're not the proof but there are going to be tools
needed in the proof.
Sometimes in mathematics these are called lemmas, L-E-M-M-A, a lemma is something you
prove because you're going to need it later.
And we have two lemmas if you will for this argument.
So let's take a look at these.
The first one involves regular polygons.
We've encountered them before, remember polygons are regular, if all their sides are the same
length, all their angles are the same.
So they're these beautiful symmetrical polygons.
What Archimedes is trying to do in this first lemma is figure out the area of this thing
based on other measurements.
And in particular he wants to introduce something called the apothem.
Now the apothem, that might be a term you're not familiar with, but it is the perpendicular
distance from the center of the polygon to any of the sides.
So what you'd have to do first is find the center of this regular polygon, you could
just draw two diagonals and where they cross will be the center.
And then you go out perpendicularly to any side because of the regularity you have the
symmetry that you can go any direction you want and that length will be the apothem.
So in my picture I've drawn my perpendicular from the center upward and that length is
h.
So the apothem is going to figure in this.
The other thing he's going to need is the perimeter.
Now that is much more familiar, the perimeter of a regular polygon is just the distance
around.
If you were taking a stroll around the polygon that's how far you would travel.
And so what he is seeking is an expression for the area of the regular polygon in terms
of these two quantities, the apothem, the perpendicular distance out to any side and
the perimeter the distance around.
Now the Greeks knew this, I don't know if modern people are familiar with this but let
me show you what this formula is.
There is my regular polygon, I've drawn in the apothem h and the way to derive this
formula is to draw from that center two lines to two adjacent vertices.
So let me do that there, two dotted lines there that form a little triangle thus formed.
The height of this triangle is h and the base of the triangle, the horizontal side, let
me call that x.
So I've put in a little wedge if you will, a little triangular wedge inside my regular
polygon.
The area of that triangle, well we just saw that from Euclid, the area is one half base
times height, it's going to be one half x times h.
So that's the area of that particular triangle.
Now what you do is you draw other lines emanating from the center to the other vertices.
So there's a second and a third and a fourth, I have an octagon here so I'm going to have
eight of these but it could be any number.
So you've put in lots of little wedges and the bases of each of these triangles thus
formed are the same, x, x, x all the way around because it's a regular polygon, all their
bases are equal.
And so this picture is sort of the decomposition of the regular polygon into the various little
triangles and now what you say is the area of the whole polygon all the way around is
just the sum of the triangular wedges shooting out from the center.
But each of those is the same as this one we did up above, one half xh plus a one half
xh plus a one half xh all the way around until you get to the end, how many ever there are.
So that's the area of my regular polygon and now what I'm going to do is factor out
a one half, every single term in that expression has a one half, I'm going to pull the one
half out to the left and I'm going to factor out an h, every single expression has an apotheon
in it, an h in it, I'm going to factor that out to the right.
And when I do that I'm going to be left with this expression, one half the quantity x plus
x plus x plus x, finally times h, one half out one side h out the other and all those
x's added up in between.
But wait a minute, if you add up all those x's, xxx, you're just going around the polygon
and so the sum in the middle and the parenthesis is just the perimeter.
And so there is the first result we're going to need, the area of a regular polygon, if
I want to put it in words, is one half the product of the perimeter times the apotheon.
So we'll see Archimedes using this in a minute.
But there's another preliminary result he's going to need and it is a little more wordy,
let me state it this way, given a circle you can inscribe within it a square and then double
the number of sides and get a regular octagon.
And then double the number of sides and get a regular 16 gone and continue until the difference
between the circles area and that of the inscribed polygon is as small as we wish.
You can put within a circle a square, 8 gone, 16 gone, as it sort of fills up the circle
from within, you can make the difference between the circular area and the polygonal area as
small as you like.
And you can do the same with circumscribed polygons.
You can put a polygon around the circle, say a square around the circle, then an 8 gone,
an octagon, a 16 gone and sort of approach it from outside in and make the difference
between them in area as small as you wish.
Now this idea is sometimes called the method of exhaustion.
You're exhausting the circle from within, you're exhausting it from without.
And this predates Archimedes.
This was due to a Greek mathematician named Eudoxus from around 370 BC.
Eudoxus introduced the method of exhaustion, which is quite sophisticated, but Archimedes
was the real person that exploited it so nicely.
Now I want to show you a picture of what it is he's saying here.
Maybe my verbal description isn't as good, but I can show you this and you can believe
it.
Let's suppose we have a circle, there we go.
Now I'm going to inscribe within it a square.
So I have my blue circle in which I'm putting a square.
Now notice the difference between these two areas is that excess blue around the outside.
And there's kind of a lot of it, right, I didn't, I'm not very accurate here.
My square doesn't fill up the circle very well.
But now what I'm going to do is take twice as many sides, go to an octagon.
You can actually do this with a compass and straight edge, if you wonder how to do it.
You would take the side of the square, you would bisect it, and then put up a perpendicular
and where it hits the circle, you now draw two sides where you had previously one.
So instead of four, you get to eight.
And that process can be repeated to get to the 16 and the 32 and all that.
Anyway, in my picture, there's my circle.
Now I'm putting in an octagon and notice there's still an excess of blue over white.
The circle's a little bigger, but the difference is much smaller.
And what Archimedes needed was the fact that we can make that blue ring on the outside
as small as we want by just repeatedly doubling the number of sides by exhausting the circle
from within.
So if I want the inscribed polygon to be within one half a square inch of the circle, I can
do it by taking enough sides.
If I want it to be within one one millionth of a square inch of the circle, I can do it
by taking enough sides.
I can make the polygon as close as I want to the circle.
Now if you've seen calculus, this certainly sounds like the notion of limits.
What we would say in modern language is the limit of the areas of these polygons is the
area of the circle.
It is approaching it as closely as we want.
One thing we should note though, it never gets there.
There's no polygon whose area is exactly the area of the circle from the inside because
polygons always have straight sides, even if there's millions of them, whereas the circle
is round.
So it's not going to ever reach it, but the important thing is we get as close as we
want.
So the picture I think shows that.
Now let me show it from the other side.
How about the circumscribed approach?
There's my circle.
I'm going to circumscribe about it a square.
So there's the circle and I put the blue square around it.
Now obviously there's excess blue, it's much more area in the square than the circle.
All that blue stuff is the excess.
But now if I go from the square to the octagon, I will see the picture look like this.
There's the circle.
There's the octagon.
Much less excess blue.
I've gotten closer to the circle's area.
Do it again and go to a 16-gon closer yet, 32-gon closer yet.
We have a limiting process going on from the outside.
And so what Archimedes needs is that no matter how small a gap you can make the polygon be
it inscribed or circumscribed within that gap to the circle's area.
All right, those are the preliminaries.
Here we go.
Now we're ready.
The lemmas are out of the way.
Let's see how he does this.
So the proposition, remember, was that the area of the circle equals the area of the triangle.
The circle had radius r.
The triangle was this very special one with one side r and base c, the circumference.
Well, here comes a surprise.
How do you prove that the circle equals the triangle?
He does it in a most strange fashion.
He does it using what we'll call double reductio odd absurdum.
Now, reductio odd absurdum, reduction to an absurdity, that's the sort of Latin term
for contradiction.
So he's going to show that this circle equals this triangle by double contradiction.
It's a real surprise for the readers the first time they see this.
They wonder why he's doing this.
Just hang on, because this is beautiful stuff.
So double reductio.
What he does first is, in case one, remember he's going to end up getting two contradictions
here.
First case, suppose the area of the circle is bigger than the area of the triangle.
Now, that's not what he wants to show.
He wants to show the area of the circle equals the triangle, but let's suppose, for the sake
of argument, that the circle is larger.
So let me draw a picture like that.
Here's the circle.
I've drawn it really large, and there's the triangle with sides R and C, and my picture
makes it pretty clear that the circle is bigger.
So this is what the kind of thing he's considering in this case.
All right, now Archimedes says, let's inscribe within the circle, inscribe within the circle,
a square, and then an octagon, and then a 16-gon, and so on, using his second lemma,
until he gets the area of the circle bigger than the area of this inscribed polygon, which
in turn is bigger than the triangle.
So I'm going to say a word about it, but let me show you the picture of how this could
work.
I've put an octagon in there, but it might take more than eight sides.
It might take 800 sides, or who knows what.
In any event, the area of the circle is bigger than the area of the polygon inscribed within
it, which is bigger than the triangle.
Now, can he do this?
Is this legit?
Yeah.
Because remember what the second lemma said, that if you give me the area of the circle,
I can make the area of the inscribed polygon as close as I want, as close as you want.
How close do I want it?
I want it to be closer to the circle's area than that of the triangle.
Remember, the circle was bigger than the triangle, so there was some gap.
The triangle's down here, the circle's up here.
I can do my inscribed polygon so they get as close as I want.
All I need is to make sure the polygon is closer to the circle's area than was the triangle,
as my picture indicates.
So, he's exploited that second lemma.
Okay.
Now what?
Well, look at that circle with the inscribed polygon.
Let's take a look at the apotheon.
Now, you've got to remember, what's that?
Oh, yeah.
The line from the center perpendicularly out to one of the sides of the polygon.
And then there's the radius, which is the distance from the center out to one of the
vertices.
So, I've drawn in the radius here, there comes the apotheon.
So, you can see the two lines going out from the center, the apotheon perpendicular to
the side, the radius out to the corner, the radius of the circle in which this polygon
is inscribed.
Now, look at the picture.
These aren't the same length.
One is shorter, one is longer.
Clearly, the apotheon is shorter than the radius.
Actually, if you look at that little triangle that appeared there, the radius is the hypotenuse
of the right triangle, and the apotheon is a leg, and the hypotenuse is longer than any
leg.
So, what I have observed is, h is less than r.
The apotheon is shorter than the radius.
Okay.
Store that information.
Now, how about let's compare the perimeter of the polygon in there to the circumference
of the circle.
Which is shorter?
Walk around the polygon or walk around the circle, which would be the shorter journey.
Well, since it's inscribed, since your polygon's inside the circle, p, the perimeter of the
polygon, is less than c, the circumference of the circle.
From that, we make this conclusion.
The area of the polygon, remember our committee's first preliminary, it's one-half perimeter
times apotheon.
One-half pH.
So there we're going to explain that.
But wait a minute.
h is less than r, we just said, p is less than c, so one-half pH is less than one-half
cr.
Now, at this point, you're thinking, you know, where's this going?
Is he adrift?
Is there an end to this?
Yes, it's very close, actually.
In fact, it's staring you in the face.
There is a contradiction right in front of you.
I don't know if you see it, but let me show you where this is.
There's trouble here, logical trouble.
Look at the line above, that the area of the polygon is greater than the area of the triangle.
Let me put a circle there.
But what I just showed was the area of the polygon, which is less than one-half cr, which
was the area of the triangle, is less than the area of the triangle.
Look at these two lines.
The area of the polygon is more than the area of the triangle.
The area of the polygon is less than the area of the triangle.
That can't be.
That is a logical contradiction and impossibility.
So what we conclude is by jumping into case one
and deducing all of this, we've reached a contradiction.
Case one is impossible.
Throw it out.
Can't be.
Remember what case one said?
The circle is more than the triangle.
We've just eliminated that.
That's one contradiction.
All right, case two.
Archimedes says, all right, maybe the circle's
smaller than the triangle.
Now, he doesn't want this either.
He's hoping to eliminate this option as well.
And he does.
And here's how.
If the circle's smaller than the triangle,
let me draw the picture where the circle is little
and the triangle is big.
So I make it look like the circle's certainly
smaller than the triangle.
It's that same triangle, r and c, being its dimensions.
And now what Archimedes does is exploit the second lemma
and says that we're going to circumscribe
about the circle of square, then an octagon, then
a regular 16-gon, until the area of the circle
is less than the area of the polygon,
is less than the area of the triangle.
And my picture would show this polygon
surrounding the circle, whose area is certainly
bigger than the circles, but smaller than the triangles.
And here we go again with this lemma.
Remember, the circular area is here.
We said the triangle's bigger than the circle.
And what I want to do is take a polygon surrounding
the circle, circumscribe, until its area gets so close
to the circles that it's less than that level at the triangle.
And that's what we've got.
So that is legitimate via the second lemma.
Back to the circle on the polygon.
Let me draw the radius of the circle, r,
and compare it to the apotheon, as we did in case one.
Now, in this case, the radius goes
from the center perpendicular to the side of the polygon.
It's exactly the same as the apotheon.
You see, in this case, since we're circumscribed,
the radius goes out to the circle.
The apotheon goes out to the polygon,
but it's going out the same distance.
So in this case, h is r.
We don't get an inequality in this case.
But we do when we compare the perimeter of the polygon
to the circumference of the circle, which is bigger.
Again, if you had to take the journey around the polygon
or around the circle, which is the farther walk,
well, because we're circumscribed this time,
the polygonal perimeter is more than the circular circumference.
So p is bigger than c.
All right, from that, we deduce that the area of that polygon
by Archimedes' first lemma is 1 half perimeter times apotheon.
There, that comes again.
But the perimeter, we said, is bigger than c.
The apotheon, h, is equal to r.
So 1 half pH is bigger than 1 half cr.
And 1 half cr is the area of the triangle,
as we saw earlier, 1 half cr.
And now, again, a contradiction is staring you in the face.
Can you see it?
In the line above, we said the area of the polygon
is less than the area of the triangle.
In the line below, we said the area of the polygon
is more than the area of the triangle.
That can't be.
They can't both hold.
Something's wrong.
We've got a contradiction.
We, therefore, can eliminate case 2 as impossible.
Well, we're almost there.
Now, here's what Archimedes said.
Case 1, he showed it was impossible
that the area of the circle is more than the area of the triangle.
That disappeared in case 1.
Gone.
Can't be.
Then he said, he showed it was impossible
that the area of the circle is less than the area of the triangle.
That went down the tubes.
In case 2, what's left?
Well, Archimedes puts it this way.
Since then, the area of the circle
is neither greater nor less than the triangle.
It is equal to it.
That's his result.
That's his proof by double contradiction, which
seems to me to be really quite amazing.
A eureka moment.
There we go.
That's it.
That's what he wanted to prove.
Now, a modern reader looks at this and says,
this is strangely indirect.
What a strange way to prove that two things are
equal to show that one can't be bigger than the other
or smaller than the other.
Hence, they must be equal.
We sort of eliminate all the other possibilities.
Seems peculiar.
Here would be an example.
Suppose somebody said, let's prove 2 plus 3 equals 5.
Which it does, right?
Well, the Archimedean approach, the double reductio
out of certain approach, would say,
let's first assume 2 plus 3 is more than 5.
And you do some reasoning, and you get a contradiction.
So that can't be.
And then you assume, in case 2, 2 plus 3 is smaller than 5.
And you do some reasoning and get a contradiction.
So that's out.
And if it can't be bigger than 5 or it can't be smaller than 5,
you would be justified in concluding the 2 plus 3 is 5.
But what a strange route to that end.
So it's surprising.
But as I've said before, the history of mathematics
holds interesting surprises.
Hey, two other things.
First of all, is he right?
We're back to this question.
All right, the area of the circle
equals the area of that triangle.
We proved it.
But what's this got to do with the formula
that I know for the area of a circle?
It doesn't look like it.
I don't learn it this way.
Well, that's easy to fix.
Look, the area of the triangle, we said, is 1 half cr,
1 half base times height.
But c wasn't just anything, remember.
It was the circumference of the circle.
So c is the circle's circumference.
Now, we've seen that c over d is pi.
So the circumference is pi times the diameter.
But the diameter is 2r.
So c is 2 pi r, famous formula.
Stick that in there where the c is.
And you'll see that what he's telling us
is the area of the circle is 1 half 2 pi r times r.
Cancel the 2s.
Ah, the area of the circle is pi r squared.
That's Archimedes' result in our language.
So if you ever see that area of the circle's pi r squared,
where'd it come from?
Right here, Archimedes' measurement of the circle.
Well, let me conclude with how a modern mathematician
would do this.
How would we determine the area of a circle today?
And in particular, how can we avoid this roundabout method
of double reductioid absurdum by sort of doing it
by eliminating the other cases?
Is there a direct attack and a direct assault
on circular area?
And there is, but it's going to take integral calculus.
Again, we see Archimedes ahead of everybody
as he's sort of anticipating integral calculus.
Now, if you don't know calculus,
just hang on for a minute, because I
want to make a point here about this derivation.
But if you do, you'll recognize some of the symbols.
Let me just show you how this works.
I take a circle.
I would insert the axes.
The origin is there.
Let's say the circle is going to have radius r.
So that's r units out to one end of the radius, r units up.
And if you're doing this with calculus,
you then need the equation of that circular arc, which
you can determine in a pre-calculus course
to be y equals the square root of r squared minus x squared.
Then the calculus argument would say,
let's go after the area of that blue region.
That's sort of the upper quadrant,
a quarter of the circle.
Let's figure that out.
Calculus says that the shaded area is an integral.
It's the integral from 0 to r of y dx.
But y, we said, is the square root of r squared minus x squared.
So the problem as a calculus problem
gets converted to this thing.
Can you evaluate the integral from 0
to r of the square root of r squared minus x squared dx?
You can do this if you know calculus.
You spend weeks and weeks and weeks doing things like this.
Let me just quickly tell you what happens here.
This comes out to be the anti-derivative is 1 half r
squared times the arc sine of x over r plus 1 half x times
the square root of r squared minus x squared.
And then the calculus, of course,
teaches you to evaluate this between 0 and r.
If I put in r for x, I end up having
to know the arc sine of 1, which is pi over 2.
Everything else cancels out until I get 1 half r
squared times pi over 2.
And the shaded area, therefore, is 1 fourth of pi r squared.
And you finish up by saying that the shaded area is
pi r squared over 4.
Therefore, the whole area of the circle
is 4 of those 4 times pi r squared over 4 is pi r squared.
Now, the details of this aren't so important.
But what's important is that this is a direct attack
on the problem.
I didn't have to eliminate the other candidates.
I went straight at it and got the area of the circle
is pi r squared.
That's what calculus does.
That's why calculus is such a great advance over what came
before.
It gives you this direct assault on problems like this
and so many others.
And it's got another advantage.
What I showed you there, this calculus derivation
in the circular area, is just a bunch of steps.
You just follow the rules from one to the other,
and you can do it.
You don't have to be brilliant like Archimedes
and figure out the roundabout way to do this.
Calculus turns all of us into little Archimedes
who can do these very difficult problems.
So calculus sort of sold itself.
It made a name for itself by arguments
like this that could turn a complicated problem
into a simple one.
But Archimedes was certainly great in spite of the fact
that he was centuries before calculus.
And I'll leave you with a quotation from Voltaire
celebrating the great Archimedes.
Voltaire, in the 18th century, wrote these true words.
Archimedes had at least as much imagination as Homer.
Archimedes was really great.
