We've taken our tour of Greek mathematics, we've met Thales and Pythagoras, Euclid and
Archimedes and Heron, but now it's time to move beyond the classical era and take a look
at some of the mathematics of Islam and particularly the work of Al Quarizmi. Let me give you some
dates. The year 476 Rome fell. This is the date traditionally attached to the end of the Roman
Empire and in 529 Plato's Academy in Athens was closed. This great center of learning for so
many centuries was shut and this marks as well as anything the end of the classical era of Greek
and Roman scholarship. In the year 641 the library at Alexandria burned. No one quite knows how this
happened. It was a great conflagration and so much was lost and I think modern classes wish they
could get in a time machine and go back to 640 and rescue all these documents because we just
don't know what burned up in 641. Well this brings us to the golden age of Islamic science,
scholarship and mathematics usually set between the 8th and 13th centuries. This is the time
period when Islam had grown from its origins and spread across North Africa into Spain,
into Sicily and then spread eastward to India. In this glorious civilization there was a center,
an intellectual center at a place called the House of Wisdom in Baghdad. Baghdad of course in
modern day Iraq. Now the House of Wisdom was like a great university. It was the successor to the
Pythagorean Brotherhood in southern Italy that we talked about to the library at Alexandria in
Egypt. Now the center of mathematics moves to Baghdad to the House of Wisdom. Islamic mathematics I
will say went off in three important directions. Let me address each of these separately. One thing
they did was they studied and translated the great Greek texts. They had imported many of these
back to Baghdad. They read them, turned them into Arabic and found them as fascinating as we all do.
They revered Euclid's elements, they revered Archimedes and there was another text that they
liked quite a lot. This was Ptolemy's work. We haven't mentioned him but he was a Greek
astronomer, Claudius Ptolemy and he had written a great treatise on astronomy called the Syntaxis
Mathematica in Latin of course. This one back to Baghdad was translated in the year 827 and the
Arabic scientists thought this was quite impressive. It was in a sense the astronomical
counterpart of Euclid's elements. It was great. In fact they called it Al Majiste, the greatest.
This was the greatest astronomical treatise they knew. When this Arabic translation goes back to
the Renaissance Europe and is turned back into Latin they needed to translate Al Majiste and it
became the Al Majiste. Nowadays we talk about Ptolemy's great work, the Al Majiste, but Ptolemy
never called it that. That's what happens when the language sort of goes around in a circle. The
Al Majiste was a work preserved and studied by the Islamic mathematicians. Second thing they did was
absorb Indian mathematics. Remember the Islamic Empire had extended all the way to the Indian
subcontinent. They met the Indian mathematicians. There was a great tradition of Indian mathematics
that had been flourishing. Islam was in well position because it was close to Europe and the
Greek tradition, but also contacted the Indian one. The Indian mathematicians did trigonometry.
They're often considered the founders of that subject. They did arithmetic and equation solving
and they gave us a wonderful numeral system. Let me talk a bit about their mathematics and
show you something called Brahmagupta's formula, an Indian mathematician from the 7th century.
This should ring a bell in some ways. Brahmagupta is looking at a quadrilateral ABCD, a four-sided
figure that's inscribed in a circle. Such a thing is called a cyclic quadrilateral,
a quadrilateral in a circle. Here's a circle and there's quadrilateral ABCD.
I should point out not every quadrilateral can be inscribed in a circle. If you imagine a diamond,
a very long, narrow, four-sided figure, no circle can go through all four of those vertices.
They're not properly positioned. Brahmagupta is talking about very special kinds of quadrilaterals,
those that can be inscribed in a circle. Let's say the length of the sides of this quadrilateral,
ABCD. You go around, there's the sides. He wants to find the area of this inscribed quadrilateral,
of this cyclic quadrilateral. First, he's going to find the semi-perimeter.
This is where bells should be ringing. The semi-perimeter is the perimeter, A plus B plus
C plus D, four sides now, over two. Then Brahmagupta shows that the area of the
cyclic quadrilateral is given by this formula, the square root of S minus A times S minus B
times S minus C times S minus D. That certainly harks back to Heron.
In fact, you can think of Heron's formula as nothing but a degenerate case of Brahmagupta's,
a special case of Brahmagupta's in this sense. Let me show you how you can get Heron's result
from Brahmagupta's. Suppose I'm given a triangle, triangle ABC. Okay, so there it is.
Now, what I want to do is put a circle through the three vertices. I want to circumscribe a
circle about this triangle. Can you do it? Yes. How do we know Euclid? In book four,
proposition five, Euclid shows you how to circumscribe a circle about any triangle. What you do is
you bisect each of the three sides and then draw perpendiculars upward from there. They meet in
a point. That point will be the center of your circumscribed circle. You make the distance from
that point to any vertex, be a radius, draw the circle, bingo, it goes through all three points.
So any triangle can be put inside a circle. Not any quadrilateral can. So there's the special
quadrilaterals, the sickly quadrilaterals, but what it turns out is any triangle is a sickly
triangle. So I put a circle through these points. And now what I'm going to do is imagine the triangle
A, B, C, as if it were a quadrilateral, A, B, C, D, except D is the same point as C. So suppose
it's got four vertices, it just happens the two of them land on top of each other. C is equal to D.
That's what it means by a degenerate case. The four sides degenerate down into three.
Now watch what happens to Brahma Gupta now. The sides will have length A, B, C, and that
extra side has length zero. D is zero because C and D are in the same spot. So one of the sides
is of length zero. When we go to the semi-parameter of the quadrilateral, which is really a triangle,
we will add A plus B plus C plus D over two, but D is nothing, zero. So it just amounts to
adding A plus B plus C over two. In other words, the semi-parameter of the quadrilateral is just
the semi-parameter of the triangle. And now you look at Brahma Gupta's formula, which was that
the area of the triangle, when thought of as a quadrilateral, is the square root of S minus A
times S minus B times S minus C times S minus D, but S minus D is nothing but S minus zero.
In other words, it's just S. And so Brahma Gupta tells me the triangle has area, the square root
of S minus A times S minus B times S minus C times S, and that really should look familiar
because that's Heron's form. So Brahma Gupta's formula yields Herons.
Okay, the Indians also gave us a fabulous numeral system. We still use it. The numerals
in a base 10 system appeared around the year 500. You find them on temples carved on temple
walls in India. And soon thereafter, the zero appeared. And so you can look on one of these
ancient temples and you see, oh, there's a three. You know, there's a seven. I recognize it. And
there's a zero. Now, the Islamic mathematicians, whenever they encountered the Indians, loved
this base 10 numeral system and brought it back with them to Baghdad and to the Islamic world.
They called them the Hindu numbers, as indeed they were. But then when these numbers got transferred
back to Europe, the Europeans called them the Hindu Arabic numeral system, which we still do.
But in fact, they're the Hindu numbers. The Arabs had just transferred them back to Europe.
So the Islamic mathematicians studied and translated the Greek works and they studied
and absorbed the Indian works. But they were more than just conveyors of past work. They were also
original creative mathematicians in their own right. And in particular, the Islamic mathematicians
are known for their advances in equation solving. The name that comes up most in this regard is
Muhammad ibn Musa al-Qarizmi, whose dates are roughly 780 to 850. He was the great master of
equation solving. Here's an image of him. Some artists imagine this is what he looked like.
Al-Qarizmi's origins are not quite clear. He might have been Persian. He might have been Uzbek.
But eventually he gravitates to the House of Wisdom in Baghdad and is a major scholar there,
working not only in mathematics, but in geography and in astronomy and in astrology.
In those days, astronomy and astrology were sort of linked, unlike the present.
Now, Al-Qarizmi wrote two important books. One was on the calculation with Hindu numerals.
That's the translation of it. And when this was put into Latin, this is how these
Hindu-Arabic numerals were introduced into Europe around the year 1200.
So, from Al-Qarizmi, these ideas get back to Europe. His other great work has, in its title,
the words Hissab al-Jabbar wal Mukhabala. This is a work on equation solving.
When this gets translated back into Latin, they had to do something with these words.
In particular, they had to make something out of al-Jabbar. How do we write this in Latin?
How do we Latinize al-Jabbar? Well, it turned into algebra.
And so this word that is so pervasive in all of modern mathematics, algebra, is really the
Latinization of part of the title of Al-Qarizmi's equation solving book.
But actually, Al-Qarizmi himself got Latinized because his name,
whenever it was brought back and garbled a bit, turned into algorithm.
So whenever you talk about the Euclidean algorithm or a computer algorithm,
you are paying homage, in a certain sense, to Al-Qarizmi. That's what happened to his name.
Now, Al-Qarizmi, through a process he called restoring and comparing,
could solve linear first-degree and quadratic second-degree equations.
And he did this by transferring them into one of six forms. Now, it seems to us,
if I have to solve linear and quadratic equations, it's two forms, linear and quadratic.
The Islamic mathematicians broke this into six forms because negative numbers,
what we call negative numbers, were forbidden. They were not unknown. They were not considered
legitimate. So if you wanted to solve an equation, it could not have a negative in it.
That required some gyrations, some fancy footwork, to move things around and thus get six forms.
Let me show you the six forms. One type of equation Al-Qarizmi could solve is what he
called squares equal to roots. Now, what's that? How would we write that? Well, squares mean something
like ax squared, a bunch of squares. The root, the square root of x squared is an x, so there's a
bunch of x's. So we would convert this, squares equal roots to ax squared equals bx. So if you
wanted to solve an equation like that, you go to one chapter. But another chapter would be squares
equal to numbers. This is approached differently. Now, what's that going to be? We would write it as
ax squared, some squares, equals c, a number. So that's a different kind of equation. One is roots
equal to numbers. Well, roots would be some x's equal to some numbers. We would write that as bx
equals c, a linear equation. One would be squares and roots equal to numbers. So that would be ax
squared plus bx equals c, a quadratic equation. Squares and roots equals c numbers. But you also
better handle squares and numbers equal roots, ax squared, squares plus c, numbers equals roots bx.
And one more, roots and numbers equal to squares. So that would be bx plus c equals ax squared.
Six different treatments. And we think, boy, that seems like an awful lot of extra work, but
negative numbers could thus be avoided. So for instance, if we had to solve this quadratic,
3x squared minus 5x equals negative 2, we'd be fine with it. The negatives wouldn't bother us.
But if negatives are not allowed, you can't deal with this. This wouldn't have been something
Al Corvizmi would have worked with. Rather, you'd move things around and write it as 3x squared
plus 2 equals 5x. There's no negatives in that. And now you'd look up the chapter he has on
squares and numbers equal to roots, which is what this is, some squares plus 2 numbers equals 5
roots. And you'd see how to solve it that way. So another one of those strange surprises from
the history of mathematics. Now, I want to give an example of Al Corvizmi in action
while he actually solves a quadratic equation. And I hope this will be illuminating because
it's really quite an impressive piece of work. Here's the problem he gives. What must be the square
which, when increased by 10 of its own roots, amounts to 39? It's expressed verbally. Remember,
algebraic notation is still far in the future. So Al Corvizmi is doing all this verbally,
even as the Greeks had to do their geometry verbally. So this is his problem. And here comes
his solution. Here's what he says to do. And I'll read this to you. It's a bit long, but it's
illuminating. He said, you have the number of roots, which in this case yields 5. Sure,
there were 10 roots. Half of those is 5. This you multiply by itself. The product is 25. Add this
to 39. The sum is 64. Now take the root of this, which is 8, and subtract from it half the number
of roots, which is 5. The remainder is 3. This is the root of the square which you sought.
Well, like so much of this old mathematics, you've got to dig through this to see what
in the world he's doing. And the best way to do that is to look at this geometrically.
So here's the problem again. What must be the square which, when increased by 10 of its own
roots amounts to 39? We would write it this way. x squared, there's the square. I increase it by 10
of its own roots, so I add 10x to it. And this should be 39. So you can see that what he's solving
in our notation is x squared plus 10x equals 39. Now how can we approach this as a geometry problem
to see what he's up to? Well, let me take a square. And let's say it's x by x. So its area is x squared.
So the area of that square is the x squared. Now remember what he says to do. You have the
number of roots, which in this case yields 5. So we've got the 10 roots, the 10x's. So what I'm
going to do is sort of augment this square by going over 5 units and going down x units,
and there's a blue rectangle there. It's 5 units across x units down, so its area is 5x.
So there's half the roots over there. Then you do the same thing below. I drop down from
the square 5 units, go across x units, and there's another 5x. So if you look at the picture as it
now stands, there's a square and two rectangles tacked on the edges. But if you add up all those
areas, you've got x squared plus 10x's. You split them, the 10x's into the two 5's. Well,
x squared plus 10x is equal to 39. So at the moment, the area of this strange shape here is 39.
All right, now what? Well, if you go back to Alcorhismy's recipe, he says this you multiply
by itself. This meaning the number of roots, 5, you multiply it by itself and get 25.
Now, look at the little lower right hand corner of my picture. It's sort of missing a piece there.
Something's missing. What are the dimensions there? 5 by 5. If I were to fill that in with a green
square, 5 by 5, I would have just added on 25. 5 times 5. And so what I'm going to do is, according
to him, he says, add this to 39 and the sum is 64. So if I take the 25, the little green square,
add it to the 39, which I started with, 39 and 25 is 64. So we're doing some geometry here of
some sophistication and where's it going? Well, let's look at the picture again. Remember, we're
trying to solve x squared plus 10x is 39. We have taken this square, added on the two rectangular
strips, put in the little green corner, and we know that that comes out to be 64.
So what's the area of this big square we've created? Well, look at it. It's x plus 5 in each
direction. So x plus 5 squared is its area. That area has to be 64. Now, what does our
charisma tell us to do next? He says, take the root of this, which is 8. That is, he says, take
the square root of both sides. If x plus 5 squared is 64, then the square root of x plus 5 squared
is the square root of 64. In other words, x plus 5 is 8. And then he tells us to subtract
from it half the number of roots, which is 5. The remainder is 3. So he says, take the 8,
subtract half the number of roots, 5, and you get 3, and that's what he claims the answer is, 3.
So this is the geometrical explanation of this kind of strange recipe he gave for solving his
quadratic. Now, the proof of the pudding when you solve an equation is, does it check,
is x equal to 3? Let's see. You check this. What do you do? Well, if I'm trying to solve
x square plus 10x is 39, I put in 3. So I get 3 squared plus 10 times 3. Well, 3 squared is 9,
and 10 times 3 is 30, and 30 plus 9, sure enough, is 39. It checks. So the result comes out as
advertised. So this is right, and this is the explanation for this. And you know what he just
did? It's what we call completing the square. You might have seen this in school, completing
the square. Why is it called that? Look at the picture. That's exactly what he did. He filled
in little green square in the corner from which the solution of the quadratic equation became
simple. So the technique of completing the square, we can trace back to alkyrismy.
We now would apply this to the generic quadratic equation, and I want to just do that because
I'm going to need to solve quadratics later in the course. So as we would think of this,
with all of our modern algebraic notation, we would write ax squared plus bx plus c is zero.
If there's negatives here, I don't care. Let's say we'll be very modern in our approach to this.
We just want to make a general formula for the solution of the second degree,
the quadratic equation. Now, how do we do this? When we want to complete the square,
we're taking our q from alkyrismy. We're going to do the algebra. Here's what you do. You first
of all divide everything by a. So instead of ax squared plus bx plus c, you're going to have
x squared plus b over ax plus c over a is zero. And then what I've done is moved the c over a
to the right, so it shows up there as negative c over a. So there's my equation, x squared plus
b over ax is equal to minus c over a, and now you have to complete the square. What you're doing
algebraically is what he was doing geometrically. I want to add something to both sides of this
that'll turn the left side into a perfect square. Now, you can fiddle around with this for a while,
but what you have to add to turn the left side into a perfect square is b squared over 4a squared.
And then that left side, x squared plus b over ax plus b squared over 4a squared will be the square
of something. Well, if I add it to the left, I better add the same thing to the right. So over
there, I will put b squared over 4a squared as well. And then if you look at that right side,
you probably want to get a common denominator minus c over a plus b squared over 4a squared.
Collect that all over 4a squared. It will require you to turn the first fraction into minus 4ac
over 4a squared plus b squared over 4a squared. Turn it around and you get b squared minus 4ac
over 4a squared, which might start to look familiar. Okay, so the next thing you say is the
left-hand expression, x squared plus b over ax plus b squared over 4a squared is just the
square of something. It is a perfect square. We have completed the square. It's actually the square
of the quantity x plus b over 2a. The right side, I don't do anything to, it's still b squared
minus 4ac over 4a squared. And now in our road to solving this, I take the square root of each
side. The square root of x plus b over 2a squared is just x plus b over 2a. You just get rid of the
square there. On the right, I got to take the square root of the top and the square root of the
bottom. The square root of the 4a squared I write as 2a. The square root on the top, that's where
I'll put the plus or minus. Again, we realize you can use either plus or minus the square root to
insert there. So let's do as they always do and put the plus or minus up there. So I end up with
plus or minus b squared minus 4ac over 2a. That's x plus b over 2a. Finally, you take the plus b
over 2a to the other side and you get x is minus b plus or minus the square root of b squared minus
4ac over 2a, the famous quadratic formula. This is the most famous, the most useful formula in algebra.
This will solve any quadratic equation for you. All you got to do is spot the a, b, and c. Stick
the numbers in here. If there's two solutions, this will find them. If there's one solution,
this will find it. If there's no real solutions, this will tell you that. And in fact, this even
works if you want to enter the realm of complex numbers. This is an all-purpose, wonderful
formula for solving second-degree equations. Is it from Alcorismi? Well, not exactly. He wouldn't
have expressed it this way. But the strategy he employed of completing the square is exactly what
you need in order to get this. Well, there are other great Islamic mathematicians of note
who came after Alcorismi. One of them is Tabet Ibn-Qura. I mentioned him because we'll see
him again. He was a great number theorist. And later in the course, we'll see a result that he
stumbled upon. And then it was forgotten. It was not transferred to Europe. And people were
retracing his steps many centuries later. And another mathematician of note was Omar Qayyam,
1048 to 1131. Yes, this is the same Omar Qayyam who is the author. We know him for his work on
the Rubiot. Famous author. People aren't so aware that he was also a very good mathematician.
What he did was he tried to take a look, not at second-degree equations as Alcorismi had done,
but third-degree equations, the so-called cubic equations, to see if there was any way to solve
cubics. And he gave a technique, a geometrical technique, that would provide some sort of idea
of the solution of a third-degree equation. But it wasn't as clean as an algebraic solution
of the sort that I've shown you for the quadratic. Nevertheless, it was a step in the right direction
toward solving third-degree equations. Well, Islamic works eventually found their way back to Europe
through the Islamic Empire, particularly in through Spain and Sicily. And they helped to revive
mathematical learning in the 12th century in Europe. As the Renaissance is getting going,
what's happened is these works have come back from the Arab world into Europe, filtered up into the
early universities, and started the return toward the Renaissance toward a knowledge base in Europe
that had been lost for so many centuries. Alcorismi's work, in particular, was translated into Latin.
That's where the word algebra came from. In 1140, someone named Robert of Chester translated it,
and just for good measure, in 1170, Gerardo of Cremona did. So Alcorismi's work is available,
and it's a big hit in the mathematics of the time. People were reading this to learn about
how to solve equations. A math historian named Carl Boyer has surveyed the history of math
and decided on the greatest textbooks of various eras. Here's his list. He says,
the greatest textbook of classical times is Euclid's elements. Well, that was a no-brainer.
That was easy. He said, the greatest textbook of modern time is Euler's Introductio in
Annelissen Infinitorum. This is a great work. We'll talk about it when we get to Euler. This
is from the 18th century. This is where Euler introduces functions, which become so important
in modern mathematics. But according to Boyer, the greatest work of medieval times, the greatest
math text of that middle period, is Alcorismi's algebra. And it's pretty hard to argue with that.
This was a real masterpiece. Where we're going from here is back
to Renaissance Europe and back to one of the questions raised by Alcorismi's work. Yeah,
we can solve second-degree equations. How about third-degree? How about an algebraic solution
for cubics? Is this possible? The Arabs couldn't do it. The Italian mathematicians of the 16th
century, in what is the weirdest story I know from the history of mathematics, figured out how.
And that will be the subject of our next lecture.
