In this lecture, I want to show you Newton's proof of Heron's formula. We'd seen Heron's
formula earlier. We used it to find the area of a triangle and of a quadrilateral, but
we didn't prove it. At that time, I said, we'll defer the proof until later. Later has
arrived. Now, I should say that this particular argument is one that's laden with algebra.
There'll be formulas marching across the page in great abundance. So, as always, I'll try
to go very slowly, very carefully, in order to derive this formula. Nothing here is harder
than high school math. It's just high school math with a vengeance. So, let's see what
we can do with this great proof. First, I better remember what Heron's formula is. Remember
that it was a way to find the area of a triangle. If you have a triangle with sides a, b, and
c, remember the formula says you first take the semi-parameter. So, you take a plus b
plus c, the perimeter, divided in half, and then the area of the triangle is the square
root of that s times s minus a times s minus b times s minus c. This extremely implausible
result. We really need to prove this, so you believe it. It's such a strange formula for
a triangular area. Heron's original proof, which is dated at around 75, was quite complicated.
That's why I didn't do his proof. He started, of course, with the triangle, whose area you
need, and the first thing he did was inscribe a circle within it. To inscribe a circle means
the circle is tangent to the three sides of the triangle. That seems like a strange way
to begin, but that's how he did it, and how do you know you can inscribe a circle in a
triangle? Euclid, book four. He then used properties about cyclic quadrilaterals. We've
met these before. A quadrilateral is cyclic if it can be inscribed in a circle. Heron needed
special properties of these things, which we would have to have stopped and done separately
had we gone down Heron's proof. And he needed to introduce three pairs of similar triangles.
So when you take it all together, it was quite a sophisticated geometrical argument. Here's
his picture. This is the proof that Heron uses. You can see the triangle ABC. You see
he put a circle there inscribed in the middle. He drew all sorts of lines all over the place,
so it's quite cluttered with lines. And I don't know if you see it, but there's actually
a cyclic quadrilateral there someplace, a quadrilateral in a circle. It's AHCO, and there's
the circle that goes through the points. He put all this together. It was a beautiful
proof, but kind of sophisticated. So that's not the way we're doing it. We're going to
go to Newton's proof. Now, his proof of the same result is much more algebraic, much less
geometric. He starts with the triangle, of course, as does Heron. No need for an inscribed
circle. That's good. No need for cyclic quadrilaterals. There aren't any in Newton's proof. And
only one pair of similar triangles, and they're easy. So the geometry in Newton's argument
is much reduced from that of Heron. But there's a price to pay. If the geometry goes down,
the algebraic sophistication goes up. And as you'll see, the algebra is where the heavy
listing occurs in Newton's proof. So you win some, you lose some. The proof itself appeared
in Newton's book, The Arithmetic Universalis, published in 1707. This was his textbook on
algebra. It was actually his best-selling book in his lifetime. His other more sophisticated
books didn't actually sell very well, but this one did. It was more elementary. He promised
in the preface to let the learner proceed to exercise himself by bringing problems to
equations. So we're going to give you a problem, and we're going to bring it to an equation
and then employ the techniques of algebra. Here's a problem that he gave in this Arithmetic
Universalis. He said, if the number of oxen A eat up the meadow B in the time C, and the
number of oxen D eat up as good a piece of pasture E in the time F, and the grass grows
uniformly to find how many oxen will eat up the like pasture G in the time H. This
is a horrible problem. This is the sort of thing that gives students nightmares, right?
It's like fingernails down the blackboard. I don't know why Isaac Newton put this in
his book. It doesn't excite anybody, I don't think. He has other things in the book that
are better than this, but I just wanted to show you that horrible algebra problems go
all the way back. If you want the answer, the number of oxen is given by that horrible
formula, which I'm not even going to read. But if that problem wasn't particularly successful,
others were pretty good. Derek Whiteside says that Newton turned his attention to geometry
here and that his proof of Heron's formula, which is in this book, occurred when Newton
experienced a renewed interest in pure geometry. So at this point in his career, he was looking
back at geometry, and he devoted himself to constructing improved proofs of elementary
theorems. So what Newton said before him as a challenge was to go find an elementary theorem
like Heron's formula or some other geometrical result and give a nice proof of it using algebra.
See, this was supposed to be the book that showed the value of algebra. Newton observed
this in the book. He says, geometrical questions may be reduced sometimes to equations. A geometrical
problem can be turned into an equation, an algebra problem. But he warned, in geometrical
affairs, they so much depend on the various positions and complex relations of lines that
they require some farther invention and artifice to bring them into algebraic terms. So geometry
problems are challenging to turn into algebra problems. He says, because of the way the
lines stack up, so you have to be careful. Need some artifice, but boy, Newton was great
with his artifice, so he could do this. Let me show you one geometry problem before we
get to the Heron. He says this, the area and perimeter of a right-angled triangle being
given to find the hypotenuse. So here is a little problem that sounds geometrical, but
he's going to make it algebraic. So you suppose we're given a right triangle whose area is
given, we'll call it A, whose perimeter is given, we'll call it P, challenge, find H,
the hypotenuse. So there's the triangle, I supposedly know its area, I know its perimeter,
I got to find its hypotenuse. This is a good problem to try at home. See if you can solve
one of Isaac's problems, he tells the answer, I'll tell you what it is, the hypotenuse is
P over 2 minus 2A over P, half the perimeter minus twice the area over the perimeter. It's
a nice exercise. He did other things here, he did things like problem 19 of the book,
he wants to show you how to surround a fish pond with a walk of given area and the same
breadth everywhere. So here's a geometry problem that again is going to turn into an algebra
problem. Imagine you have a fish pond and you have a given amount of asphalt, let's say,
so that's that given area. So you only have so many square feet of asphalt, you want to
surround the pond with a walk that's the same width all the way around. How do you do it?
He shows how to use algebra to solve that problem. So he's doing geometry via algebra.
But the problem that's particularly important for me is this one, problem 12, where he says
having the sides and base of any triangle given to find the area. Give me a triangle,
A, B, C, I'll give you the sides, A, B, and C, what's the area? Well if you look at this
you'll see what's up here. He's given you the three sides of the triangle on once the
area, what's he after? He's after Heron's formula. Here is his page of scratch work.
Here is where he did this. This is actually Newton writing the proof. You can see his
handwriting, you can see the crossings out. Let me just call your attention to a few things
in this page from his notes. In the upper right you see his diagram, the little triangle
he's going to use to prove this. I will reproduce this in better form on the screen, but notice
it's much simpler than that diagram that I showed you from Heron, that Newton got away
with a much simpler picture. Notice also, perhaps you can see this, at the very top
on the upper left it says propositio. So in Latin he's saying here comes the proposition.
A few lines down it says constructio. Ah, here comes the constructions he's going to
need to do his proof. And a little further down yet it says demonstratio, the demonstration,
the proof that it works, the proof that Heron's formula is true. So it's all set up, ready
to go on that one page from his notes. Okay, here's how he states the theorem. Newton
says if from half the collected sum of the sides of a given triangle, the sides are individually
subtracted, the square root of the continued product of that half and the remainders will
be the area of the triangle. It's a much strange way to state Heron's formula. I don't know
why he didn't just write down the formula. He was trying to extol the virtues of algebra,
but seemed like a great place to give this as an algebraic expression, but he chose to
write it in this prosaic form. It's kind of neat though, and if you look at it you see
what he's up to. He says to find the area of the triangle you take half the collected
sum of the sides. Well, the sum of the sides is the perimeter, half the collected sum.
He's talking about the semi perimeter there. And he says suppose these are individually,
suppose the sides of the triangle are individually subtracted from this. So we're going to take
s minus a, s minus b, s minus c, subtracting the sides from this semi perimeter. Then he
says the square root of the continued product of that half and the remainders will be the
area of the triangle. So the product of that half, s, and those remainders, s minus a,
s minus b, s minus c, that product, take the square root, you've got the area of the triangle.
So he's put it in a rather strange way, but that's it if we can prove it.
One more result before we plunge in, and this is something we saw in an earlier lecture.
This is from Euclid, Proposition 8 of Book 6. We saw that if you have a right angle triangle
ABC and you draw the altitude down to the hypotenuse, it splits the right triangle into
two right triangles that are similar to one another. We did this. The green triangle is
similar to the blue in the picture. And we're going to need this, Newton's going to need
this, particularly in this sense. If I call the length of the altitude h, that perpendicular
h, and it breaks the hypotenuse AC into two pieces, one of which is x and one of which
is y, then the similarity of the triangles will allow me to build a proportion here.
So for the green triangle, I can say long leg is to short leg, that is, x is to h, as
in the blue triangle, long leg is to short leg, h is to y. And if you cross multiply
this, you get that h squared is xy. When you draw the perpendicular from the right angle
to the hypotenuse, the square of that altitude's length is the product of the two pieces of
the hypotenuse, x and y, into which the altitude splits it. That will need as well.
Okay, now we're ready. Here goes Newton's proof. Here comes the algebra. So we will
take a deep breath. There's the triangle, ABC, sides, A, B, and C. Our object is to show
that its area satisfies the wonderful result of Heron. Newton says, first thing, bisect
AC at M. So AC, we'll put the longest side, AC, down there along the bottom, and I split
it in half at M. You can do this with a compass and straight edge, so there it is. So from
A to M is B over 2, and from M to C is B over 2, because AC, that whole side there, was
of length B. Next he says, on CA extended, construct AF equal to C. So I take that line
CA, and I keep it going off to the left. And I go as far from A to a point F so that AF
is C. Now what was C? Oh, C was that side of the triangle from A to B. So what I'm saying
is that you just take CA and go out exactly as far to F as it is from A to B. Next up,
he says, go the other way. Construct AE rightward from A so that AE is also equal to C. So in
my picture, I'm going to go to the right of A to some point E so that AE is C in that
direction. So at this point, we've gone from A leftward to F, C units, and rightward to
E, C units, C being the distance from A to B. So he's building an interesting looking
picture here. A couple more steps in his construction. He says, draw BF and BE. So we draw the line
from B to F. There it is, the line from B to E. And drop BD perpendicular to AC of length
H. So we're going to drop the perpendicular from B straight down to AC. There it is, of
length H. Now that's all he needs to do. That's his whole picture. That's the construction.
It's pretty simple. It's just a matter now of finding our way through the thicket that
will appear here in terms of all the algebra that will arise. So let's begin. First thing
Newton says is, look at that. Triangle ADB. I've turned it into a blue triangle. That's
a right triangle. Yeah, because we drew BD perpendicular. So that's a right angle. That's
a right triangle. We can invoke our old friend, the Pythagorean theorem, and conclude that
C squared is equal to H squared plus the horizontal leg AD squared. So C squared is
H squared plus AD squared, and actually I want to write it this way. C squared minus
AD squared is the H squared. The Pythagorean theorem sort of moved around a bit. Okay.
Now look on the other side. To the right of that altitude, I have a red triangle. It also
is a right triangle. The Pythagorean theorem applies just as well to it, saying that A
squared is H squared plus DC squared, or if I isolate the H squared, H squared is A squared
minus DC squared. You see, the H is common to both triangles. The H squared shows up
in both Pythagorean theorems, and I isolate it and set them equal. So now C squared minus
AD squared on the far left equals A squared minus DC squared on the far right, and I
move things around to get C squared minus A squared is AD squared minus DC squared. Now
what? Well, look at that thing on the right side. AD squared minus DC squared. That looks
familiar. You know, that's called a difference of squares. You see this in algebra. We've
actually seen it in this course already. X squared minus Y squared. You have a difference
of two squares, and you can always factor that into X plus Y times X minus Y, basic
high school algebra. Well, that's just what I'm going to do with that AD squared minus
DC squared. So let me look at that. The difference of squares that will factor into AD plus DC
times AD minus DC. Now you look at the picture and see what you can identify here. What is
AD plus DC? I'm going to look up at the picture from A to D, and then D to C is like going
from A to C. It's the whole base of the triangle. In other words, it's B. And so where AD plus
DC was, I'll put B, where AD minus DC is, I'll just leave that there for now. And so
we see that C squared minus A squared is equal to B times this expression AD minus DC, and
I'll solve for that. And I'll get that C squared minus A squared over B is AD minus DC. And
that's one of the steps along the way in this algebraic journey we're taking. All right.
There it is. C squared minus A squared over B is AD minus DC. That's where we are. Now
Newton is going to look at these two expressions, is AD and this DC, and see what we can make
of that. Now look at AD. Look at the picture. That's just AM plus MD. I mean, if I'm going
to go from A to D, I could just as well go from A to M and then the rest of the way from
M to D. Sure. And look at DC, the other part of this expression. DC is the same as MC
minus MD. And again, you can see it right there on the triangle. If I went from M to
C but then subtracted the piece from M to D, I'm left with DC. So there's where I am.
And now something important here. M, remember, was the midpoint of AC. So what is AM? AM
is B over 2, half the base. And what is MC? Well, that's B over 2 also, half the base.
So we stick those variables in, and we get, as my expression, B over 2 plus MD minus the
quantity B over 2 minus MD. The B over 2s will cancel and you'll have two MDs left here.
So C squared minus A squared over B is two MDs. Therefore, MD is C squared minus A squared
over 2B. And that's another step along the way. Trouble is, that isn't the real important
piece he's after. MD isn't the real issue. The real issue, believe it or not, from this
picture is to figure out DE. So that comes next. So here's how he's going to do that.
He's going to say, what is DE? How long is that? Well, again, looking at the diagram,
we can see that it has to do with other pieces here, other segments. Isn't it just ME minus
MD? So look up there, ME minus MD. Yeah, that would leave me with D. What's ME? Well, Newton
says that is AE minus AM. So we look at the picture once more. AE minus AM, yep, that's
ME. Meanwhile, we still have the minus MD there, tacked on the end. So we have to attack
this thing. But now all the pieces are finally going to come clear. AE, if you look at that,
was C. Remember, that's how we did that. We constructed from A over to E, C units. So
where AE is, C's going in. AM is half of the base. That's B over 2. And MD is this expression
we figured out previously, C squared minus A squared over 2B. So here comes the algebra.
Everything goes in there. We get C minus B over 2 minus C squared minus A squared over
2B. A common denominator would be called for. How about that would be 2B. And thus DE, it
turns out, is 2BC minus B squared minus C squared plus A squared over 2B, the result
of combining all those fractions over the denominator 2B. Now, we're going to store
that result for DE for just one minute. We will return. But I have one more observation
here. Newton says triangle FBE is a right triangle. Triangle FBE, the ones with the dotted
lines on it, FB and BE, that's a right triangle. Why is that? Well, here's why. Suppose you
took your compass and put the center at A and had your radius C. Well, then that drew
a circle. From A to F is C units, so F would be on the circle. From A to B is C units,
so B would be on the circle. And from A to E is C units, so E would be as well. If I
draw in the circle, you see that angle FBE is an angle inscribed in a semicircle. But
what do we know about an angle inscribed in a semicircle? It's a right angle, and we know
that from Thales. So we go way back to our original proof. One of the early theorems in
all of mathematics is just what we need here, Thales theorem. Remember I said in my initial
lecture, I gave that old quotation that logic can be patient because it is eternal. Well,
Thales proof is eternal. We can still use it. And so triangle FBE is a right triangle.
Therefore BD is an altitude to the base, to the hypotenuse FE, and I can use the similarity
argument from Euclid to conclude that FD, that piece of the hypotenuse, is to H as H
is to DE, the other piece of the hypotenuse. And hence by cross multiplying, H squared
is DE times FD. But FD, we want to break it up. This is our last break up, I promise.
FD, if you look at the picture, is FE minus DE. FE minus DE, yep. And so H squared is
DE times the quantity FE minus DE. But FE, we can see what that is. From F to A is C.
From A to E is C. FE is 2C. And so I've reached this conclusion that H squared is DE times
the quantity 2C minus DE. There it is. But remember, we knew what DE was. We had found
that a couple steps ago. DE is 2BC minus B squared minus C squared plus A squared over
2B. So where the DE is, I put in that big monstrous fraction. Then come the parentheses
and I have 2C minus DE. So it's 2C minus that big monstrous fraction, 2BC minus B squared
minus C squared plus A squared over 2B. The first expression is fine. I'll just let that
be. But the second expression, the one in the parentheses, I need a common denominator
there to put that together into a single fraction. The denominator is 2B. That will
require a 4BC to show up in the front end. And then you get minus the 2BC minus minus
plus B squared plus C squared minus A squared. And so this is what H squared is. If you combine
that second, the terms in that second numerator, you'll just get 2BC plus B squared plus C
squared minus A squared. That's what H squared is. The denominators aren't bad, but the
numerators are in need of repair, need of work. So let me look at that left-hand numerator.
It was 2BC minus B squared minus C squared plus A squared. Okay, we can fiddle with this
a bit and write it as A squared minus the quantity B squared minus 2BC plus C squared.
If you check the minus signs through the parentheses, you'll see that's still equal.
But that thing in the parentheses should look familiar. That is B minus C, the quantity
squared. B minus C, the quantity squared is B squared minus 2BC plus C squared. And so
I have A squared minus the quantity B minus C squared. Well, that's a difference of squares
again. You see it? It's that same structure, X squared minus Y squared. And you can factor
it into X plus Y times X minus Y. So I can factor A squared minus B minus C, the quantity
squared, into A plus B minus C and A minus the quantity B minus C. In other words, it'll
come out to be A plus B minus C times A minus B plus C. So back I go to H squared, DE times
2C minus DE. We had those two fractions. I just cleaned up the numerator of the left
hand one. The right hand one, 2BC plus B squared plus C squared minus A squared, that numerator
can also be repaired. So the first fraction we said broke down into A plus B minus C times
A minus B plus C over 2B. The right hand numerator, if you look at that, the 2BC plus B squared
plus C squared, those first three terms are just B plus C, the quantity squared. And so
the numerator on the right is B plus C, the quantity squared, minus A squared, lo and
behold, the difference of squares again. And so if I can put all this together in the one
gigantic fraction, the bottom will be 4B squared when I multiply the two B's together. Up on
the top I have A plus B minus C times A minus B plus C, and then I employ the difference
of squares for that upper right hand expression, and I get B plus C plus A times B plus C minus
A. That's H squared. We're almost there, except it seems like something's missing here. The
semi-parameter. We're trying to get something about Heron's formula. I don't see a semi-parameter
anywhere. Here it comes. Remember the semi-parameter was A plus B plus C over 2. If I cross multiply
that twice the semi-parameter, that is 2S, is A plus B plus C. But look at my expression
for H squared. One of those terms, the third one in the numerator, is A plus B plus C. That's
going to become 2S. How about S minus A? What's that going to be? Well, S is A plus B plus
C over 2, the semi-parameter, minus A. Put that into a fraction and you get minus A plus
B plus C over 2, cross multiply, and twice S minus A is negative A plus B plus C. There
it is. It's in that numerator for H squared. Likewise, you can show that twice S minus
B is A minus B plus C, and twice S minus C is A plus B minus C. All of those expressions
are showing up in my formula that I've developed at great cost for H squared. Here we go. Let's
revisit it. H squared, we said, has a 4B squared in the bottom. Up on top, there was an A plus
B minus C, but I'm going to replace that with 2S minus C. That's what that is. Next up in
the numerator was an A minus B plus C, but that's twice S minus B. Next up was a B plus
C plus A. That's twice S. Lastly, B plus C minus A is twice S minus A. There's what
H squared is in terms of these semi-parameters. Now we're almost home. Because there's my
triangle ABC, let me look at the area of the triangle squared. I'll drop the H, drop
the altitude. The area of the triangle squared is one-half base times height squared. Sure,
I used the old formula for triangular area, one-half base times height. If you square
that, you'll get B squared over 4 when you square the one-half B times H squared. But
after all this work, I finally know what H squared is. H squared is twice S minus C
times twice S minus B times twice S times twice S minus A over 4B squared. The triangle's
area squared is that expression. Now the exciting drum roll. The B squared on the top cancels
the B squared on the bottom. In the numerator, I see 2 times 2 times 2 times 2, 16. In the
bottom, 4 times 4, 16. All that cancels and you get just S times S minus A times S minus
B times S minus C. But that's the area of the triangle squared. Well, if the area of
the triangle squared is S times S minus A times S minus B times S minus C, it follows
that the area of the triangle is the square root of S times S minus A times S minus B
times S minus C. That is Newton's algebraic proof of Heron's formula. I think that's a
wonderful argument. It's a lot of work. It's very clever. It's kind of a conversation between
the great Newton and Heron from so long before. And it reminds us why Isaac Newton belongs
on the mathematical Mount Rushmore.
