Neither Isaac Newton nor Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz ever married, and they had no children
to pass along the calculus gene.
But Leibniz had the next best thing, he had two dedicated disciples, the Bernoulli brothers
of Switzerland.
These are the Bernoullis, older brother Jakob Bernoulli, younger brother Johann, perhaps
you can see some resemblance there, I don't know, maybe in the sneer that they're giving.
The Bernoullis were known as rather hard, sharp people.
I want to introduce them to you, talk about their mathematics, and talk about Johann's
role in the calculus wars between Newton and Leibniz.
So let's first meet Jakob, older brother.
He was a very accomplished mathematician.
He investigated infinite series, this subject that keeps coming up as being so important
at this time.
He also published posthumously, in 1713, the Ars Cognectandi, the Art of Conjecturing.
This was the greatest treatise to date on probability theory.
We've seen that Cardano had written a book about probability as it related to gambling,
so he could win more at the table.
And then we saw that Fermat and Pascal had exchanged letters that helped establish the
study of probability.
But this was a real beautiful tome, the Ars Cognectandi, that pushed the boundaries of
probability theory even further.
In particular, Jakob in this work proved the law of large numbers, and if you know probability,
you know this is one of the foundational results in the theory of probability.
It says more or less that if you do an experiment over and over again, a large number of times,
the proportion of the times you'll see a success will get very close to the true probability
of that success.
So that if you flip a coin a thousand times, you're going to get pretty close to 50 percent
heads and 50 percent tails, assuming the coin is balanced.
But if you flip it a million times, you're going to get even closer to 50 percent heads
and 50 percent tails, the large number of trials starts to yield this probability.
It's a critical result, it's a theorem, and Jakob proved it.
He was very proud of that.
He also helped push for with the frontiers of calculus.
In fact, with his brother Johann, Jakob and Leibniz formed a kind of triangle who helped
refine the subject.
I had mentioned that Leibniz first published a calculus in a paper that was, the Bernoulli's
called it more an enigma than an explanation, it was hard to follow.
So Jakob and Johann Bernoulli would talk with Leibniz and they'd suggest maybe we should
change this, why don't we try it this way, and the three of them together refined the
subject into what we know it as today.
And one other thing, Jakob suggested the name, integral calculus.
Leibniz had talked about calculus differentialus and calculus sumatoris, the sumatory and the
differential calculus, and Jakob said, nah, that doesn't sound good, that's sumatoris
thing, how about integralus, calculus integralus, oh yeah, that's the name, and that's the
name that stuck.
So Jakob had quite a legacy.
So did younger brother Johann.
What did he do?
Well, he too investigated infinite series, made good progress and raised a very important
question or two about these incredible mathematical entities.
He too pushed the frontiers of calculus and he did two other things of particular interest.
One is he mentored a young lad named Leonhardt Euler, who happened to live in Johann's hometown
of Basel, Switzerland, and young Euler would grow to become the dominant mathematician of
the 18th century in the subject of our next lecture.
And Johann Bernoulli was hired to provide calculus lectures to the Marquis de l'Hobital.
And this is a kind of curious story from the history of mathematics.
This is the multiply named Guillaume Francois Antoine de l'Hobital, a French nobleman.
And I think you've got to agree, this is the greatest wig we've seen yet.
This is a nobleman's wig.
Lobital wanted to learn about this new fangled subject called calculus he'd been hearing
about, but he needed help.
And so in 1691, Bernoulli, Johann Bernoulli, met Lobital in Paris and Lobital said, let's
let me hire you to teach me this new subject.
And by 1692, Bernoulli is lecturing Lobital on calculus, either physically lecturing him
speaking to him or sending him documents he's written.
Bernoulli would write something, mail it to Lobital, and in that way teach him the subject.
The two had an agreement, a monetary agreement.
Here was Lobital's stipulation.
He said to Bernoulli, I shall give you with pleasure a pension of 300 libra.
I ask you to give me occasionally some hours of your time to work on what I shall ask you.
But also to communicate to me your discoveries with the request not to mention them to others.
So Lobital said, you send me your works, I will send you money.
Lobital was the rich nobleman, Bernoulli was the professor, not very rich.
Just don't tell anyone what you're doing, says Lobital.
Just send it to me.
Well, Lobital takes all of this that he learns from Bernoulli and a lot of the written work
that Bernoulli has sent him and publishes in 1696 the first calculus textbook ever.
This is it.
The analysis of the infinitely small for the understanding of curved lines.
This is the title.
What this is, is a compendium of Bernoulli's writings.
Johann Bernoulli essentially had written this, but Lobital compiled it, edited it a bit,
and got it published.
And so now there is a calculus textbook.
Leibniz has published the papers on calculus in the 1680s, but now there's an actual book
in 1696.
In the preface, Lobital writes this.
He's referring here to the Bernoulli brothers and to Leibniz.
He says, I have made free use of their discoveries, and I frankly return to them whatever they
please to claim as their own.
So he's not asserting that he made all this up.
He acknowledged that he was borrowing things from Leibniz and the Bernoullis to compile
this calculus, and if they want the rights to it, they may claim them.
Here's the title page, the table of contents for the first calculus book ever.
Section one was on the rules of differentials, and that's where we see these rules on what's
the differential of the sum, what's the differential of the product, the kinds of things that appeared
in Leibniz's original paper, although here, Lobital proves them.
He gives reasons why these should work.
So now you've got the rules.
In section two, he uses differential calculus for finding tangent lines.
One of the great things you do with calculus.
Next section, he shows you how to use differential calculus for finding greatest and least values.
That sounds like Max Min problems.
Section four, using differential calculus for finding points of inflection.
If you've taken differential calculus, usually calculus one as it's called nowadays, chances
are this is your table of contents.
It hasn't changed much over the centuries.
We're really quite fortunate that this first book on calculus was so good, Lobital's book
really was a masterpiece, and it got the subject off to a good start.
Let me mention a result in there just to give you the flavor of this first calculus book.
This is example six from section three.
Lobital poses this problem.
Among all cones that can be inscribed in a sphere, determine that which has the greatest
convex surface.
Greatest surface?
A maximum.
We are in a Max Min problem.
What he is looking for is the greatest surface of the cone, the convex surface would be the
slanty part, not the bottom, not the circle on the bottom, but the sides.
Let me show you a picture here.
Suppose you have a sphere.
When I inscribe within it a cone, what that means is let's say we'll put the vertex of
the cone up at the top, and then the circular base of the cone will be a circle on the sphere.
You can imagine putting it in various spots.
You could put it way up near the top, for instance.
There's a picture of the cone inscribed up near the top of the sphere.
Its surface wouldn't be all that great.
It's not that big a cone.
You could lower that circle of the cone, maybe put it at the equator, and now get a cone
with the same vertex up at the top, would probably have more surface.
You could even put the circle down below the equator, such as in this picture where I have
the sphere, and my cone now sort of dips below the equator.
Or you could actually put the cone so that the vertex is at the top, and the circle where
it meets the sphere is way down at the bottom.
That would be a long, skinny cone, probably not much surface.
So what Lobita is saying is, as you move this cone around, up and down the sphere, the surface
will grow and then shrink.
How big can it be?
Where do you put this cone to get the greatest convex surface?
It is not a trivial question.
What's he do?
He sets up an equation.
He takes the differentials.
He sets them equal to zero.
He solves.
He gets the answer.
It's just how we do it today in differential calculus.
In fact, this is a great problem even today in differential calculus.
I like to give it to my students and see if they can do a problem from the first calculus
book.
What's the answer?
The answer is this.
The height of the cone should be two-thirds the diameter of the sphere.
This is what the calculus yields.
So you make your cone go down two-thirds the diameter of the sphere.
That will give you the maximum surface area.
It's a wonderful problem from the first calculus book.
I should mention another result from that Lobita calculus book.
In section nine, there appears what we now call Lobita's rule, which is a famous result
in differential calculus.
We call it Lobita's rule because it's in Lobita's calculus book.
But it actually wasn't his rule.
He didn't invent it.
It was made up.
It was discovered by Johann Bernoulli, who passed it along dutifully in exchange for
the money that was coming the other way.
So Bernoulli discovers this great rule, sends it to Lobita, Lobita publishes it, and it
gets called Lobita's rule.
Well, ever since, people have said, really, we should call this Bernoulli's rule.
Shouldn't we?
We want to give him credit.
He discovered it.
But the 20th century math historian, Dirk Streik, said, no, no.
He said, Streik, let the good marquee keep his elegant rule.
He paid for it.
He bought the rights, and so maybe we'll just continue to call it Lobita's rule.
Well, the Bernoullis were notoriously argumentative, combative, cantankerous, contentious.
They wanted always to have the glory aimed at them.
They resented it when the glory was going elsewhere.
I like to say that they were the kind of people that gave arrogance a bad name.
If you want to be alliterative, you can call them the brilliant but bickering Bernoulli
brothers.
They would have been really difficult people to know.
And although they like to argue with others, they particularly liked to argue with each
other.
They didn't get along very well much of the time.
You know, the older brother, Jakob, had cornered the market in the Bernoulli family on mathematical
expertise, and along comes younger brother, Johann, who's just as good.
That undoubtedly caused some sibling rivalry, which they never really got over.
Let me tell you a story that illustrates the brilliant but bickering Bernoulli brothers.
The year is 1691, and the problem involves the challenge of the catenary curve.
Now, this requires a little bit of background.
What is that?
Suppose you took two nails and pounded them into the wall, and hung a chain from these
two nails.
You know, the chain would hang down in a shape something like this.
That shape, the shape of the hanging chain, is called the catenary.
It actually comes from the word in Latin, the word catenary means chain, comes from
the Latin root for that.
Okay, so now the issue is, what's the equation of that?
Can you use your mathematics to figure out the equation of the hanging chain, the equation
of the catenary?
Well, Jakob Bernoulli, the older brother, wanted to find this out.
He had worked on it for the better part of a year, and it stumped him.
He couldn't do it.
It's not simple.
It kind of looks like a parabola if you look at it, but it isn't.
It's way more sophisticated, and he was stuck.
So what does Jakob do?
He publishes his problem, and he says, I can't do it.
Can anybody do this problem?
So this goes out to the wider audience.
Can anybody help me figure out the equation of the hanging chain?
Well, Jakob got stuck.
He couldn't do it.
But younger brother, Johan, looks at it and gets an idea and solves it.
Of course, this was good news for younger brother Johan and bad news for older brother
Jakob.
Now, let me tell you how Johan described this.
So now this will be Johan speaking, the younger brother who could solve it and figured out
what the catenary was as he reports what happened next.
Johan says, the efforts of my brother, that is Jakob, were without success.
But for my part, says Johan, I was more fortunate.
I found the skill, and I say it without boasting, but why should I conceal the truth?
I found the skill to solve it in full.
It is true that it cost me study that robbed me of rest for an entire night.
Yikes, an entire night.
His brother had been working on this for a year.
Johan says he then ran to his brother and showed him the answer and told his brother
to stop working on it.
I've solved it.
I, Johan, have solved it.
After this, they hardly spoke to each other.
This was not a good moment.
But that's the Bernoulli's.
Well, let me get to the calculus wars.
The calculus wars, remember, developed between the British and Newton and the Europeans and
Leibniz who should get credit for calculus.
Newton read Leibniz's papers in 1684 and 86.
Newton sort of thought maybe Newton's name should appear in there somewhere, but it didn't.
Newton was a little grumpy right from the get-go.
But things heated up in 1708 when the philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London
described, quote, the arithmetic of fluctuations which Mr. Newton beyond all doubt first invented.
The same arithmetic under a different name and using a different notation was later published,
however, by Mr. Leibniz.
So this appears in the Royal Society's transactions.
Now, if you read that, it isn't an explicit charge of plagiarism, but it's close, right?
It says Newton discovered this and Leibniz sort of changed the name, changed the notation
and later published it, however.
It's rather dismissive.
It seems to be pretty clear who the Royal Society thought deserved credit.
Now, you might want to remember who was the head of the Royal Society in 1708, Newton.
Who wrote this?
Newton.
So he takes a stand.
Okay, now Leibniz reads this and he's infuriated.
He thinks he's been charged with stealing the subject.
And so he demands an investigation.
He wants his name to be cleared.
He asks the Royal Society to look into this.
Big mistake, because who's running the Royal Society?
Who's going to be his judge, Newton?
This didn't work for Leibniz.
And near the end of 1712, the Royal Society issues its verdict.
It's called the Comerqueum Epistleicum and it asserted, it concluded, that Leibniz had
had no inkling of calculus until after 1677.
Now you've got to stop and remember some dates here.
Remember Leibniz had gone to England in 1673 and in 1676 had seen Newton's De Annalisi.
Taken some notes on this document.
And then there had been those letters exchanged, the epistola prior, the epistola posterior.
All of that happened before 1677.
What the Royal Society said was, only then did Leibniz have any idea what calculus was.
Conclusion, he stole it.
He gathered the information from Newton's manuscript and from these letters and only
then did he have the subject in hand, which he then published before Newton had a chance.
That was sort of the conclusion.
Leibniz was guilty, according to the Royal Society.
Well, Leibniz wasn't going to take this.
He responds in 1713, it appears that there is room to doubt whether he knew my invention
before he had it for me.
He's responding to Newton.
Maybe Newton didn't know calculus until he read it in my paper.
Leibniz, after all, had published first.
How do we know that Newton had it in his desk?
Maybe he just learned it from Leibniz.
So these two giant figures are going at each other pretty seriously.
And Leibniz said in 1714 that the new discoveries that were made by the help of differential
calculus, which remember was what Leibniz called it, were hidden from the followers of Newton's
method, nor could they produce anything of value, anything of real value.
Now, so Leibniz was certainly rooting for himself on this one.
The battle continued.
The war raged on until Leibniz died in 1716 and kind of lost by default, I guess.
No one else was going to be arguing for him.
So those are the wars.
What's the conclusion?
What happened?
They deserve credit for this.
I mean, calculus, arguably the greatest discovery in the history of mathematics.
How do we resolve this?
And the answer is the following.
They both deserve credit.
They both discovered it independently.
This is now clear.
Now it's true that Newton got there first.
He had worked on it first while he was a student at Cambridge.
Leibniz, however, had possession of all the rules before he went to London, before he
wrote the letters and exchanged the correspondence with Newton, before he saw the manuscript
from Newton.
We have Leibniz's notes from 1673 and 1674, and it's all there.
Even the integral sign, the DX, the differential symbol, Leibniz was on top of this.
Now it's true he saw Newton's manuscript, and it's true he took notes, but the notes
weren't about anything that looked like fluctuations or calculus.
The notes were about some of the neat infinite series work that Newton had done.
That Leibniz thought was new and wonderful, but the calculus stuff Leibniz already had.
So we're not going to have to decide.
We're going to give them both credit.
Here's some comparisons.
If you said who did it, I'm saying Newton did it, and he called it fluctuations.
I'm saying Leibniz did it, and he called it calculus.
Where was it done?
Well, Newton did it in Cambridge.
And Leibniz discovered calculus in Paris.
So if you want to do a vacation tour to the origin of calculus, there's where you want
to go.
Cambridge and Paris.
It would be a great vacation.
When was it done?
Newton comes first, 1664 to 1667, his Annie Marabalais.
Leibniz does it during his wonderful years as a diplomat in Paris a decade later.
But when was it published?
Well, Newton published a little piece of his fluctuations in 1704, but as we mentioned,
the full blonde version of his fluctuations wasn't published until after his death, whereas
Leibniz beat him to the punch with those 1684 and 1686 papers.
So if you're going to count priority in terms of who did it first chronologically, Newton,
who did it first in print, Leibniz, I'm going to say they both get credit.
Well, what remains then is the most famous battle in the calculus wars, and it involves
Johann Bernoulli, who came to be known as Leibniz's bulldog.
He was Leibniz's disciple, he revered Leibniz, and he was going to go to bat for his hero
Leibniz against those British that he didn't like very much, and he figures prominently
in this story of the challenge problem of the Brachistochron.
Now, here's the problem.
The year was 1696.
Johann Bernoulli had solved this problem, and now he writes it up and puts it out as
a challenge to the world.
He says, here's a new problem which mathematicians are invited to solve.
And here it is.
Here's the problem.
Assigned to a mobile particle M, the path A, M, B, along which, descending under its
own weight, the particle passes from A to B in the briefest time.
Briefest time.
Brachistochron, chronos means time, brachisto means shortest.
So we want to get from A to B, rolling a marble, say, down a ramp of some shape, fastest.
What's the one that'll get you from A to B in the briefest time?
That curve is called the Brachistochron.
That's the curve that Johann Bernoulli had brilliantly been able to discover.
He knew what it was, and now he's challenging the world to see if other people can send
him their solutions.
See who else is as good as he is.
Johann writes this.
This is still in the challenge, in the statement of the problem.
He says, to forestall hasty judgment, although the straight line A, B is indeed the shortest
between the points, it nevertheless is not the path traversed in the briefest time.
So hang on here, before you send me the straight line, that's the wrong answer.
Now initially you'd think that is the right answer, isn't it?
From A to B you'd sort of go down the straight line, because that's the shortest distance.
But if you think about it, if I let a marble go, and it's rolling down a straight line,
it's going to go kind of slowly at first, then it'll pick up speed.
It doesn't have so far to go, but it doesn't start off very fast.
Suppose you had some sort of arc instead, and you let the marble go.
It would fall almost vertically at the outset, and pick up a lot of speed, and if you did
this just right, it might actually go so fast that although it has a further distance to
travel, it might beat the marble that's rolling down the ramp to the finish line.
And in fact, Bernoulli says, the answer is not the straight line.
However, he writes, the curve A and B, whose name I shall give, if no one else has discovered
it before the end of this year, 1696, is one well-known to geometers.
So he's giving a hint.
You know the answer, it's a well-known curve, it's not a straight line, send me your answers
by the end of the year.
So that's the challenge of the Brachistocrat.
Okay, what happens when the end of the year comes?
He's only got one solution, and it's from Leibniz, his hero.
The line that says to Johann Bernoulli, he says, you know, I think people didn't see
your problem.
You know, they might not have read that issue of the journal where he wrote it.
I think you should give people more time, you know, we've got to sort of extend this.
Students always like this, give them some more time, extend the deadline.
And so, at Leibniz's suggestion, Bernoulli restates the problem in the next issue of
the journal, and extends the deadline.
So the problem's still there, what's the curve of quickest descent?
And now, Johann says, if Easter of 1697 passes, and no one is discovered who has solved our
problem, then we shall withhold our solution from the world no longer.
Okay, so you got to Easter, and that's it.
All right, so that's published along with the problem in this second go round.
But then Johann couldn't help writing more.
So this is still in print, and he says this.
So few have solved our extraordinary problem, even among those who boast that through special
methods they have not only penetrated the deepest secrets of geometry, but also extended
its boundaries in marvelous fashion, although their golden theorems, which they imagine known
to no one, have been published by others long before.
Now, who's he talking about?
Who had his results published by others long before, but claimed that they were his golden
theorems?
That's definitely a slam against Newton.
So this is in print, Bernoulli attacks Newton right there, who hadn't submitted a solution.
And then just to be sure, Newton didn't miss this, Johann Bernoulli takes an issue of this
journal with the challenge in it, puts it in an envelope, and mails it to Newton in London.
Newton is not going to escape the challenge.
Well, now, let's hop the channel and pick up the story in England.
At this time, Newton was at the mint, working hard, he was living with his niece, and she
reports this.
She said, when the problem in 1697 was sent by Bernoulli, Sir Isaac was in the midst of
the hurry of the great recoinage, and did not come home till four from the tower, very
much tired, but did not sleep till he had solved it, which was by four in the morning.
So the old man, Newton, trudges home after a hard day at the office, finds the challenge,
reads this attack upon him, and solves it by four in the morning.
It has been said that this showed Newton was getting old, that the young Newton would have
solved it by midnight.
In any case, he gets the answer, he writes the solution down, doesn't sign it, and sends
it anonymously back to Bernoulli.
Okay, now, what is the answer here?
The answer, what is the brachistochrome?
What is the curve of quickest descent?
It's the cycloid curve.
That's the curve it is.
We've seen this before.
Pascal had studied the cycloid.
It was this amazing curve.
Remember what it was?
If you rolled a circle along a horizontal line and followed a single point on the circle,
it would trace out these cycloidal arches.
Except what you do is you drop this below the curve, so now the cycloidal arches are
going this way, and if you roll down a cycloid from the point A to the point B, that's the
curve of quickest descent.
It's an amazing problem.
When Easter arrived, five answers had come in to Bernoulli.
So here's who could do it.
Well, Johann Bernoulli could do it.
Of course he could.
He only made the challenge because he knew the answer, so he was one.
The celebrated Leibniz sent in a solution, his hero.
Jakob Bernoulli sent in an answer, his brother.
I'm sure Johann was upset by this, but his brother did it.
Okay, three.
Lobbytel sent in a solution.
Makes you wonder if he bought it from somebody, but in any event, Lobbytel got one.
And then there was this anonymous solution that arrived from London.
Well, Johann Bernoulli was not a particularly gracious person, but he knew he'd been beaten.
He knew where this had come from, and famously he said, I recognize the lion by his paw.
I recognize Newton.
He's the solver.
He's my anonymous source.
And so Bernoulli concedes that he's been beaten in the Brachistochrone skirmish.
Newton was not quite so gracious.
Newton's response was, I do not like to be teased by foreigners about mathematical things.
So there.
Well, let me end with the two great discoverers of calculus one last time.
There they are, Newton and Leibniz looking down upon us.
And let me give you a quotation from a later mathematician named Wolfgang Boleyi.
He was talking about something else, but it fits very well our story.
Boleyi said, it seems to be true that many things have as it were an epic in which they
are discovered in several places simultaneously, just as violets appear on all sides in the
springtime.
And so it was with calculus.
