In this lecture, we'll meet Carl Friedrich Gauss.
Gauss was six years old when Euler died, and it's easy to see this as a passing of the
baton from one towering figure to another.
In my book, the mathematical Mount Rushmore contains Archimedes from classical times,
the Great Newton, Euler, and Gauss.
So our object in this lecture is to meet Mr. Gauss.
This is a picture of him as a young man, very good looking.
Notice he's not wearing the head warmer because he didn't do the wig.
This is a more modern era.
He looks almost like he's wearing clothes we would recognize, maybe from a Jane Austen
novel.
He lived about that time.
He was born to a poor family in Brunswick, Germany, did not have the advantages of wealth.
It was said that little Gauss could calculate before he could speak.
He was obviously gifted in terms of his work in mathematics, and there's a story that
at the age of three, he was correcting errors in his father's account books.
This might be legendary, but you can sort of imagine this little boy barely able to see
over the table, but pointing out that this column of numbers had been added up incorrectly.
Famous story from Gauss' childhood involves something that happened at his school where
he was asked to sum the first hundred whole numbers.
The story, again, its authenticity might be suspect, but the teacher sort of wanted a
break, and so asked the students to add up the first hundred numbers, figuring that would
occupy them for some time.
Well, in an instant, little Gauss comes up, puts his slate on the desk, and it's got the
correct answer, and so how in the world did he do this?
Did he add up a hundred numbers in a split second?
No, no, he saw something.
So the way the story goes is this.
You imagine the sum of the first hundred numbers, one plus two plus three, all the way up to
a hundred, and call that S for sum.
Now, little Gauss imagined writing that same sum right below, also S, but this time, write
the numbers in descending order, same sum, but now I'm going to take a hundred plus
ninety-nine plus ninety-eight down to three, two, one.
So you haven't changed the value at all, just the order in which you've written them.
Now, draw a line and add in columns.
Well, on the left side of the equal sign, you get two S plus S is two S, obviously, that's
easy enough.
Look on the right side.
That first column, you have a one plus a hundred, that's a hundred and one.
Next to it is two plus ninety-nine, well, that's a hundred and one.
Three plus ninety-eight, again, a hundred and one.
Each time we raise the number above, we lower the number below, same sum, a hundred and
one.
It continues all the way across, ninety-eight plus three, a hundred and one, ninety-nine
plus two, a hundred and one, a hundred plus one, a hundred and one.
So two S is the sum of all these hundred and ones.
How many are there?
Well, there's exactly as many as there are columns, and there's a hundred columns.
So there's a hundred, hundred and ones, which even I can do in my head is ten thousand
one hundred.
If two S is ten thousand one hundred, S is half that, five thousand fifty.
In other words, the sum of the first hundred numbers is five thousand fifty, and in a shorter
time period than it took me to explain it, little Gauss had seen it, written it on his
slate and handed it in.
So obviously, this is not an ordinary student here.
By the age of fifteen, Gauss's academic training was being funded by the Duke of Brunswick.
His talents were so evident that the Duke said, we have to support this young man through
his training, even though he is not a person of means, we'll find the money.
And Gauss certainly benefited from the training he got.
He read the works of Newton, of Euler, and others, and became inspired by the great predecessors
who had blazed the path for him.
He said, I became animated with fresh ardor, and by treading in their footsteps, I felt
fortified in my resolution to push forward the boundaries.
So read the masters, he read the masters, and now he's ready to push further.
As an adolescent, he kept a notebook with his mathematical discoveries and conjectures,
written in a very cursory fashion, but he would just make these little notes of this
or that that he discovered or believed.
This is now a treasure trove of great results as he's anticipating so much mathematics that
would come forth in the nineteenth century.
His first great discovery occurred in 1796, and he announced it this way.
Gauss wrote, it is known to any beginner in geometry that various regular polygons,
for instance the triangle, the square, the pentagon, the fifteenth gone, and those which
arise by the continued doubling of the number of sides of one of them, are geometrically
constructable.
So what he's saying there is that people know that you can take out a compass and straight
edge and do an equilateral triangle, a regular three-gone, of course that was the first thing
Euclid did in book one.
You can do a square, a regular four-gone, a regular pentagon, a regular fifteenth-gone.
We've seen all this, and Gauss acknowledges one was already that far in the time of Euclid.
So that was known.
So much the more, me thinks, he writes, so much the more, me thinks, does my discovery
deserve attention that besides those regular polygons, a number of others, for instance
the 17-gone allow of a geometrical construction.
What he's announcing here is that you can take out your compass and straight edge and
construct a regular 17-sided polygon which no one had ever even imagined was possible.
His teacher appended a little note to this announcement and said, it is worth mentioning
that Mr. Gauss is now in his eighteenth year and has devoted himself here in Brunswick
with equal success to philosophy and classical literature as well as higher mathematics.
So this is an endorsement from the teacher.
Gauss later attributed his mathematical career to this discovery of the regular 17-gone.
That convinced him that maybe he had a future in mathematics, otherwise he might have become
a philosopher or a classicist.
In 1799 he obtained his doctorate from the University of Helmstadt.
His doctoral thesis, his dissertation, was the first proof of the fundamental theorem
of algebra.
Now what's that?
It's this statement that any real polynomial can be factored into the product of real linear
and or real quadratic factors.
You give me a real polynomial, maybe of degree 80 or 800.
You can shatter it down into the product of first and second degree pieces.
It's called the fundamental theorem of algebra.
For example, if I looked at x to the fourth minus one, that's a fourth degree polynomial,
you can obviously break that into x squared plus one times x squared minus one and further
break the x squared minus one into an x plus one times an x minus one.
The fourth degree is written as the product of a quadratic, the x squared plus one, and
the two linear pieces.
That's the phenomenon that he's getting at in his dissertation, but he proves this is
true of any real polynomial.
It's an existence proof.
He shows that there exists such a factorization.
It doesn't demonstrate how to find it explicitly.
If I gave you an 80th degree polynomial, it wouldn't show you what the factors were, but
it shows they exist.
This was a giant advance.
Euler in the previous century had given a clever but ultimately unsuccessful proof of
the fundamental theorem of algebra.
In 1749, he had advanced it, he thought it was true, he gave a proof, and it wasn't a
valid proof, so Euler had sort of flubbed it.
Gauss, in his dissertation, mentioned Euler's proof and criticized Euler, saying that Euler's
argument was shadowy.
Gauss then proceeded to prove the result.
He was willing to take on even Euler in his dissertation.
The fundamental theorem of algebra, as the name suggests, is really important.
How many people prove a fundamental theorem in their dissertation?
Not many.
In fact, it's been said that Gauss's was probably the greatest doctoral dissertation in the
history of mathematics.
It proved the fundamental theorem of algebra.
In 1801, he published his Disquisitioni's Arithmetichai.
This is a deep and difficult book on number theory, and here we are again with that old
subject, number theory, Euclid, Fermat, Euler, and now Gauss puts his name in the chain of
great number theorists, the Disquisitioni's Arithmetichai, but it's very hard going, it's
very difficult reading.
Someone has said that the book is no easier to understand in its English translation than
it was in its Latin.
It doesn't matter if you translate it, it's still going to be hard to get through.
This was sort of typical of Gauss's writing.
He was terse, he left out a lot.
This contrast with Euler, Euler's writing was very discursive, very expository.
He would tell you what he's thinking.
He said, I would try this, and that didn't work very well, now I'll try that.
As you read it, you're following his thought processes right along.
It's very user-friendly, shall we say.
Not Gauss, Gauss would remove the extraneous details.
He wasn't going to tell you what he was thinking, he'll just show you the steps, and sometimes
only every other step, and you kind of had to fill in the gaps yourself.
Reading a Gaussian work is a lot harder than reading an Eulerian one.
Gauss has been compared to the fox that walks through the sand dragging its tail behind
it, so as to erase its tracks, so you don't know that it even passed by.
There's no record of the fox having gone by.
Gauss kind of removed himself from the story, but on his behalf, people would say, wait a
minute, now the architects of the great cathedrals don't leave the scaffolding out.
You remove the scaffolding, and you see the art, the cathedral behind, Gauss would remove
all the extraneous material and leave just a gem of the theorem.
So as a contrast, the Gaussian and the Eulerian way of writing mathematics.
In 1801, Gauss became famous for finding a missing asteroid, so they lost an asteroid,
and he found it.
Now that requires a little story too here.
What happened was that the asteroid Ceres had been observed by Giuseppe Piazzi in January
of 1801.
Piazzi discovered it, he'd had a few readings of where it was, but then it was lost in the
glare of the sun.
The asteroid was too near the sun, you couldn't observe it anymore.
Now what happens is that you know that it's going to come out on the other side of the
sun eventually, and then you could look for it, but they couldn't find it.
They didn't have enough information of its orbit, and so although they sort of suspect
that it was out there in the sky someplace, they couldn't find Ceres.
So Gauss is given the limited data that Piazzi had acquired, he had a little bit of information
of where this asteroid was, and what he had to do was try to use this to figure out its
orbit and tell the astronomers where to look for this thing.
Well, Gauss used a refined theory of celestial mechanics that he had worked on, and a personal
invention of what we now call the method of least squares, quite important today.
Using this, he made his prediction, and he told the astronomers where to look for Ceres,
and they turned their telescopes to that spot in the sky, and voila, there it was.
So he found the lost asteroid using his wonderful mathematics, his fabulous mind.
In 1807, he became the director of the observatory at Goettingen in Germany, and remained there
for the rest of his career.
So he was an astronomer as well as a mathematician, and he made other contributions to the sciences.
As I mentioned, the theory of least squares has become a very important subject.
It now underpins the whole theory of regression, and regression is something that's used in
business and economics and psychology and all sorts of subjects.
If you dig deeply backward, you'll find the theory of least squares there.
That's one of Gauss' great contributions.
He worked on geodesy, the study of the Earth's surface, did maps, measured the Earth.
He worked in differential geometry, a very abstract theory of surfaces in space.
It's a very hot item right now in mathematics that tends to be traced back to Gauss.
Along with Wilhelm Weber, he worked on the theory of magnetism.
Gauss and Weber jointly did experiments, studied magnetism.
They kind of invented the telegraph, although his name isn't attached to that.
But we did have a, or do have a unit of magnetic flux called the Gauss, and people honor him
with that unit.
He also looked at something called the Gaussian distribution in probability.
We call it the normal distribution, the bell curve.
Now, that's pretty important.
It permeates all of statistical analysis.
Gauss was one of the first to look at this carefully to understand that this shows that
the distribution of error, random error, follows this bell curve, this Gaussian.
When the Germans still issued marks rather than the Euro, this was their 10 mark note.
And here's Gauss on the bill, you can see him.
And if you look just to the left of his cheek and a little above that 10, you see a bell curve,
the Gaussian distribution.
In Europe, it's more likely to be called the Gaussian.
Here in the U.S., I think it's more likely to be called the normal.
But it's the same distribution, and it's just as important, no matter where you are.
Gauss also worked in non-Euclidean geometry.
Now, I'm going to talk more about this in the next lecture, but let me just say what was going on was,
he was going to replace Euclid's theory of parallels with one in which triangles have
fewer than 180 degrees in their angle sum.
You know, with Euclid's geometry, if you take his fifth postulate, you prove that a triangle has 180 degrees.
He said two right angles in its angle sum.
But Gauss fiddled with that postulate and came out with triangles that have less than 180 degrees
and studied this, what we now call non-Euclidean geometry.
He said it's a special geometry, quite different from ours, which is absolutely consistent
in which I have developed quite satisfactorily.
So he believed he had followed the path into non-Euclidean geometry, and he understood it.
As I say, we'll talk more about this in the next lecture.
In the personal side, he married wife Johanna, and he had two children, and then she died tragically.
So he remarried wife Minna, and there were three more Gaussian offspring.
He was known as glacially cold as a personality.
And indeed, in the family, there weren't warm relationships.
It wasn't a warm and fuzzy family that were falling out, the scenarios among the children and the parents.
Gauss was conservative in his mathematics, conservative in his politics.
He had a motto, palca sed matura, which is Latin for few but ripe.
And the idea was he would publish few results.
He wasn't like Euler that filled 75 volumes and 25,000 pages.
Gauss's collected works are much more modest, so they're few, but boy, are they ripe.
He's not going to publish them until they're just perfect, ready to be plucked,
and he gave the world some very ripe mathematics.
Now, I want to tell you a little bit about the regular Heptadecagon, as it's called,
the regular 17-sided polygon, Heptae 7-deca-10.
And how it was that Gauss pursued this and showed that you could construct such a thing
with a compass and straight edge.
Much to the surprise of everybody, this resulted.
All prior geometers had missed, even though it was lying right under their noses.
A couple of preliminaries you need.
One is from Descartes.
René Descartes had shown in the 17th century that it is possible to construct with a compass and straight edge
any length that is built from the whole numbers and the operations of addition, subtraction,
multiplication, division, and the extraction of square roots.
So if you can build an expression from the whole numbers in these algebraic operations,
up to and including square rooting things, then you can actually construct that length.
Now, these are now called the quadratic SIRDS, S-U-R-D, SIRDS, which means roots.
It's actually a contamination of a word from Al-Quarizmi, our old friend from medieval Islam,
the great Algebraist, the word SIRD comes from him.
A quadratic SIRD, thus, would be something like the square root of 2,
because that's made out of the number 2, square rooted.
So you can construct a length of the square root of 2 with a compass and straight edge.
Or how about 3 plus the square root of 5?
Yeah, because it's 3 and 5, square root, add, all of that's legit.
You can construct that, or even some monster like this,
1 plus 2 times the square root of 3 plus 4 times the square root of 5
over 6 minus the square root of 7 over 8.
That looks pretty nasty, but it's made out of the whole numbers,
added, subtracted, multiplied, divided, and square rooted.
Maybe square roots within square roots, but that's okay.
That could be constructed with a compass and straight edge.
Any quadratic SIRD could be so constructed that from Descartes.
Second preliminary Gauss needed was this fact.
You can construct a regular heptadecagon, a regular 17-gon,
if you can construct the cosine of 2 pi over 17.
So he's sort of replacing the challenge.
Instead of having to construct the 17-gon, he said,
look, if you just can construct the cosine of 2 pi over 17, that'll be enough.
And I'll show you then how to go from there to the 17-gon.
Now, this takes a little bit of background.
First of all, once this 2 pi over 17 doing here,
remember, in radians, 2 pi is one loop around the circle.
So an angle with measure 2 pi over 17 is exactly 1 17th of the way around.
So somehow, if I can construct the cosine of 2 pi over 17,
and we'll see what that is in just a minute,
but if I can do that, I'm sort of onto the problem of going exactly 1 17th of the way around,
but exactly 1 17th of the way around is what you need to do a regular 17-gon.
So somehow, there's this connection, and here's how it goes.
Let's suppose I have constructed the cosine of 2 pi over 17.
So somehow, I got out my compass and straight edge, I did all my work,
and I did it, and there it is.
It's red.
I've constructed that length.
Now, how do I go from that and make a regular 17-gon?
Here's what Gauss says you do.
You get a point O to be the center of a circle, draw a circle of radius 1,
so there's an arc, I just have the first quadrant there,
and take your little red line, your cosine of 2 pi over 17,
which you have constructed, and copy it along the horizontal axis from O to A.
So that length from O to A is cosine 2 pi over 17, the length you have constructed.
From A, you put a perpendicular upward till it hits the circle at B,
and you draw OB, the radius, which of course is also 1,
because this is the unit circle, and this forms a triangle here, a right triangle, OAB.
Let me call the angle down there, angle AOB theta, we'll think of that in radians,
and now we want to look at triangle AOB and get this cosine into the picture.
Now, we've talked about sines in here, I don't think we've previously mentioned cosines,
so let's just remember that the cosine of the angle theta is the adjacent side over the hypotenuse.
Remember the sine is the opposite over the hypotenuse, cosine's adjacent over hypotenuse.
So in triangle AOB, the adjacent side is OA, the hypotenuse is OB, and so my ratio of OA to OB,
remember OA was the cosine of 2 pi over 17, OB was the radius of 1, so the cosine of theta
is just the cosine of 2 pi over 17. Well, that means if you look at the drawing there,
if the cosine of theta is the cosine of 2 pi over 17, since we're in the first quadrant,
you can conclude that theta is 2 pi over 17. So that angle there, angle AOB, which I had called
theta, I'm going to remove the theta and replace it with 2 pi over 17, that's what that must be.
But that means that the arc, thus created, the arc from B to C is exactly 1 17th of the way around.
Notice I haven't drawn this to scale, that picture doesn't look like 1 17th, but I wanted it to be
big enough to see what was going on. In any event, the arc BC is 1 17th of the way around,
so if you draw the line along BC, the chord, from B to C, that is the side of the regular 17
gun, get out your compass, copy it 17 times, bingo, you got it. So that's the second fact,
if you can construct the cosine of 2 pi over 17, you can do a regular 17 gun.
And now the third and really most amazing part of Gauss' reasoning is this. He looked at what's
called the 16th degree cyclotomic polynomial, x to the 16th plus x to the 15th plus x to the 14th,
all the way down to x squared plus x plus 1. He figured out the roots of this, and using that,
and some really amazing and ingenious mathematics, he concluded that the cosine of 2 pi over 17
could be written as minus 1 16th plus 1 16th the square root of 17 plus 1 16th the square root
of 34 minus 2 times the square root of 17, but there's more. There's another gigantic square root
with 1 8th in front of it, and I'm not even going to read this last part, but notice there's square
roots within square roots within square roots. This is exactly what the cosine of 2 pi over 17 is.
Nobody, nobody had ever seen anything like this, but Gauss proved it by studying that 16th degree
polynomial up there. This is the hard part of the proof. This would take many, many, many lectures
to go through, so I'm just going to tell you he did this, but here's the critical issue. Look at that
monstrosity there. It is a quadratic surd. It's nothing but the whole numbers added, subtracted,
multiplied, divided, and square rooted, so that's a surd. Although some people when they look at it
say that's absurd, that's really ridiculous, but this is a surd. And now here comes the argument
that Gauss cobbles together. He said, look, I just showed you that the cosine of 2 pi over 17 is a
quadratic surd because I figured out what it is, and it had nothing but square roots and numbers in
it. So the cosine of 2 pi over 17 is a quadratic surd, but that means it's constructible from what
Descartes had said. You can construct quadratic surds. So with a compass and straight edge,
I can actually make a length cosine 2 pi over 17, but then Gauss had shown that if you could do the
cosine of 2 pi over 17, you could do the regular 17 gone in the fashion I showed you. What's the
conclusion? A regular 17 sided polygon is constructible with compass and straight edge. It's
astonishing, and it was from an 18-year-old kid. Well, actually Gauss proved more than this,
more than just the 17 gone. He proved this amazing fact that if the number p equals 2 to the power
2 to the power n, so we have a stack of exponents here, 2 to the 2 to the n plus 1, if that number
is prime, 2 to the 2 to the n plus 1, then you can construct a regular p gone with a compass and
straight edge. So this was his generic theorem. Now, let me just look at a few values for n here
and see what's up. If n is 0, then the number is 2 to the 2 to the 0 plus 1, and what you do is you
go up to that exponent, you look at the 2 to the 0 up there, which is 1, and so I have 2 to the first
plus 1, which is 3. 2 and 1 is 3. That's a prime. And so Gauss's theory says you can construct a regular
3 gone, an equilateral triangle. Well, people had known that before Gauss's theory, but it's nice to
see that falling out of his ideas. If n is 1, 2 to the 2 to the 1 plus 1, now it looks like 2
squared plus 1, 2 to the first up there is a 2, 2 squared plus 1 is 5, that's a prime,
so his theory says you can do a regular pentagon. Again, we knew this from Euclid,
but there it comes from his theory. But now he moves into new territory. If n is 2, I'm looking at 2
to the 2 to the 2 plus 1, well, that 2 squared up there is a 4, 2 to the 4th plus 1 is 17,
and there's the regular 17 gone that he discovered. If n is 3, I now have 2 to the 2 to the 3rd plus
1, 2 to the 8th plus 1 is 257, that's a prime, and so you can construct a regular 257 gone by his
theory. And if n is 4, you have 2 to the 2 to the 4th plus 1, which is, these numbers are getting
huge, 2 to the 16th plus 1 is a 65,537 gone, which is a prime, and that can be constructed.
Now, there's not much point to it, because if you actually constructed a regular 65,537
gone, it would look like that. Can you imagine how big the radius would have to be before you
could see the little sides there? It would look like a circle, but it can be done. That's the
amazing thing. It can be done. It falls out of his theory. Now, the next candidate would be 2 to the
2 to the 5th plus 1, which is 2 to the 32nd plus 1, and if you multiply that out, you get
4,294,967,297. Can you do one of those? Well, that doesn't come out of his theory, because guess
what? That's not a prime. That number isn't a prime. It factors into 641 times 6,700,417,
and the person that first saw that was Euler, who was looking at this number for a completely
different reason and managed to factor it. So, since that's not a prime, it doesn't fit Gauss's
pattern, nor have any of the other numbers yet explored 2 to the 2 to the n plus 1 turned out
to be prime. So, it was just those first few, at least as far as we know at the moment, where his
theory works. Now, I should stress that the importance of all this is not because we really
care about constructing regular polygons with compasses and straight edges. We don't have to
do this for any particular reason. It's not that this has any practical use, but rather it's
theoretically so fascinating that it can be done, and Gauss's insights opened doors to explorations
into abstract algebra that became so fundamental as we move into the 19th century. You can trace a
lot of the theory of abstract algebra back to things like this from Gauss. Well, here's a picture
of Gauss laid in life, and his epithet by then had become the prinkeps mathematicorum, the prince
of mathematicians, and that was certainly accurate.
