What are nitrofex?
Generally means a chemical that increases some aspect of cognitive function, maybe its
focus or memory or creativity or something, but increases some aspect of cognitive function
beyond your normal healthy baseline without meaningful side effects.
Cognitive enhancement, that is the subject of today's show.
The desire to boost our mental abilities is nothing new, yet the field of nitropics and
cognitive enhancers is really growing rapidly.
I heard a statistic on my friend Josh Trent's podcast, Wellness Force Radio, that this subject
is now one of the top 10 fastest growing health trends in the world.
And it's not a surprise, our world is filled with cognitive work, we are no longer tilling
fields or hunting and gathering, we're in meeting rooms, we're giving presentations,
we're typing code, etc, etc.
We are required to spend hours upon hours focusing and performing well mentally while
at the same time being bombarded with interruptions.
If you're dubious at all that society wants the semi-equivalent of brain steroids, go
back and listen to my show with Professor Stephen Hinshaw, who is the vice chair of
psychiatry at UCSF on the remarkable rise of off-label usage of stimulant, smart drugs
like Ritalin and Adderall.
Now we have over-the-counter substances that are claiming to not only be able to enhance
cognition, but also be able to keep the brain healthy as we age.
Oftentimes these cognitive enhancers are provided in what's called a stack, which theoretically
means several complementary compounds that are combined for synergistic effect.
Today my guest is Daniel Schmacktenberger, who is the head of product at Neurohacker
Collective, an organization that is dedicated to optimizing cognition and human betterment.
In the show we discuss the product qualia, although Daniel and I are talking about ways
we can work together since we have overlapping objectives and perspectives on how to make
the world a better place.
I have no financial relationship with the company at the time of the recording, but
I do have a favorable opinion about the product.
I just want to let you know that I receive no financial remuneration from you purchasing
the product because of our discussion.
And with that, I bring you my discussion with Daniel.
Daniel Schmacktenberger, welcome to HumanOS Radio.
Glad to be here.
Thanks for having me.
To begin, I'm interested to know more about you.
What were the conditions under which you developed your mind as a young person and how do you
continue to do that even today?
Fun question.
I think one of the key defining things for me was I was homeschooled throughout most
of my childhood.
And the reason for it was my parents were educational philosophers, theorists, and they
had the idea that if kids were given pretty much no curriculum but exposed to as many
things as possible and then their interests were facilitated that they would kind of blossom
in the unique way that they were most innately suited to.
And so it was an educational theory experiment.
And so I had no curriculum at all.
I never did handwriting, spelling, state capitals, and it happens to be those three
or good examples of things that I never learned well.
Spell checking later taught me how to spell and made the fact that my handwriting is
illegible, tolerable, and I don't have state capitals.
But I was fascinated by all of the sciences, I was fascinated by all the philosophic disciplines
and so I got to start working in understanding modern physics as a little bitty kid and Eastern
and Western schools of philosophy and et cetera.
And one of the other cool things was not having subject divisions.
I didn't know there were subject divisions.
So there was no arbitrary break between physics and chemistry or chemistry and biology or
any of the disciplines.
So we'd be as a little kid and ask a question like why is the sky blue?
And part of that answer has to do with the physics of diffraction and the molecule size,
the upper atmosphere.
That means you have to understand sun and stars and solar formation and atmospheric chemistry
and how diffraction works and the physics of light waves and the actual molecules in
the upper atmosphere.
But it also means you have to understand how a retina works and what subjective blue is
and what is the difference between subjective blue and objective blue and then the hard
problem with neuroscience.
And like all of that comes in through the answer that well, almost everything was a
movement between various sciences and then getting into the deep philosophy of the ground
of the sciences where the hard problems were.
And so that led to a interdisciplinary and systems orientation to understanding the nature
of reality that we live in.
And of course for me it was always implicit that because understanding early on evolutionary
theory universe was going somewhere and it was organizing itself towards more orderly
complexity.
And with that more complexity, new emergent properties with more evolved physiologies,
there were new capacities of consciousness.
And so it's clear that something like we had a role to serve in participating with that
evolutionary impulse of universe.
And as the one creature here that we know has the abstraction capacity with our certain
structures of prefrontal cortex to understand evolution itself, to not just be a part of
the grand design, but be able to think about the whole thing, the direction of evolution,
the principles of it, that we really have the meaningful capacity to consciously participate
with it and looked like the evolutionary impulse is evolving everything, all of the universe.
So my interest early was how do I understand universe, how do I understand where it's going
and how to help participate with the evolution of everything.
So that also looked like activism in terms of how to actually support the evolution of
quality of life for all sentient things.
And one thing I'll add because it's so important for people to know is that for the most part
when kids ask questions that they're really interested in, like why is the sky blue and
we don't really understand the answer, we don't facilitate the interests well.
And then we try to force them to be interested in or at least do shit that they're really
not interested in at all.
And the process of forcing them to do uninteresting things will not facilitate interest is what
breaks people's interest in life.
And then you have to extrinsically motivate them with money or reward or whatever.
And otherwise they want to chill and watch TV or play video games.
But if people's intrinsic fascination with life gets fed and facilitated, then they are
innately and ongoingly highly agentic by nature.
Your background is particularly interesting to me.
We are seriously considering homeschooling our four-year-old boy.
Hearing you explain your background is motivating to me and that this is indeed a good course
to pursue.
I was a solid student growing up, but I became a much better student later when I found myself
in learning environments where I had more freedom to do things like, for example, spend
long periods of time on a subject versus changing my focus every 50 minutes like you do in most
schools.
For me, changing class that frequently was really disruptive.
I'm more of a type of a learner where I like to go deep, I build momentum and then I want
to stick with a subject for a while.
And then also whatever typically has my attention has all of it.
So I would do very well in some classes and just okay on others.
Also the more I advanced my own education, I had the freedom to learn more about how
I learn.
And if I knew some of these things earlier in life, my ability to advance my own knowledge
with the effort I was putting in, I think would have been greatly accelerated.
So for my boy Desmond, I think about how to create this custom learning experience that
adaptively contours to his interests, a way to always harness that natural curiosity that
we have as children and to empower that level of learning by all means necessary.
So it's really nice to hear about your experience and that you look back on it with appreciation.
I think about this.
Technologic unemployment is going to end something like 30% of all jobs in the next 15 years.
It's going to start with a lot of labor jobs, but it's going to move with AI to a lot of
non-labor jobs.
When we think about the history of education, if a kid was going to grow up and take over
the family business or the family work, whatever that was, so they had to kind of learn how
to do those things from a skill location point of view, or then it became more infrastructuralized
and they were going to just get some job within infrastructure, within microeconomy, they
had to be prepared for the workforce.
The workforce is going to get progressively more and more automated by the time that people
who are kids now will be moving into what we would have called the workforce previously.
And what will be unique is things that are uniquely human.
And so if there are things that robots can learn to do well and AI can learn to do well,
and obviously there's a deep question around strong AI, but let's just take strong AI off
for now, the things that are uniquely human are going to be the only things that are really
adaptive for humans to do.
And they also happen to be the things that are most fascinating and fun and intrinsically
rewarding for humans to do.
So this has always been a relevant conversation, but it is relevant in a way that it never
has been right now.
So these are some big global issues that we are facing.
How it's all going to play out is yet to be told.
But what I'm hearing is that the need to be able to maximize some of our innate human
capabilities is of paramount importance for the next generation.
And even for people that are going to go through this transition, when you think about a cognitive
enhancer, which is ostensibly the topic of today, you think about something that might
make you focus better, remember more, be able to task switch better.
But if you remove a layer from there and you think this is far more important for overall
humanity for us to be able to figure out ways to optimize our mind's ability to interact
with this world and to be our very best on a consistent basis.
So what was the first experience that you had that motivated you to explore this space?
Well, I've been interested in human potential development and what the space of possibility
was and enhancement capabilities my whole life, whether we're talking about meditation
and psychotherapy, personal development or physiology, brain chemistry.
And so as far as chemistry goes, an interest in natural medicine and healthcare, biohacking,
neurohacking, EEG, neurofeedback, these are just always kind of hobbies.
And so far as the topics that I was really committed to for the world required high-level
cognitive capacity, continuously supporting that was an important topic.
I got more acutely involved when I actually was diagnosed with some kind of mysterious
autoimmune diseases that were very rapid onset and that didn't have adequate cures in the
allopathic or the holistic alternative worlds.
And it had a shitty prognosis and other physical pain, disability kinds of symptomology.
They also had decreased cognitive bandwidth symptomology, which was the center of abilities
that didn't work for me to lose.
And so I knew that if I was going to be able to fix these issues that didn't have adequate
solutions, I was going to have to figure it out.
And I knew that was going to take cognitive bandwidth.
So my first focus strategically was use the bandwidth that I have to focus on increasing
cognitive bandwidths, then use that to figure out the underlying pathophysiology, et cetera,
what's going on and correct it and then get back to work.
And so that led to a very deep dive in the whole topic of cognitive chemistry.
And this was rugs, brain, nutrients, natropics, understanding neurotransmission optimization,
et cetera.
So as I was diving deep into that space and looking at what's been done well and where
they're pretty significant holes, one of the big holes that I'm always wanting to look
at is the topic of synthesis.
Where do we have a lot of knowledge of acetylcholine role or dopamine role or glutamate role or
neurotrophin role, but not the complex relationship between those or even between different aspects
of the regulatory system on any of them?
And so looking at how do we support many complex systems that are self-regulating to have increased
regulatory capacity became the deep question for me.
So synthesis there that led to me doing work on myself where I was able to actually increase
cognitive bandwidth to beyond what my previous healthy baseline had been even while I had
pathophysiology going on and then was able to figure out underlying cause of what was
going on for me, correct it, reverse autoimmune antibodies, that whole fun thing that led
to doing that with quite a few other people that had various forms of disease that didn't
have adequate solution in clinical settings and to formalizing a model of how health aging
illness and reversal of illness could work.
There was a complex systems and formed model for medicine and well-being.
And so that really was a lot of things that that would pertain to, but the psychoneuro pharmacology,
the cognitive psychological stuff was really essential because almost everyone who is dealing
with complex illness has some brain fog, cognitive effects and has some emotion affected by hearing
that they've got incurable prognoses and they have to have their psyche and their cognition in
the right place to do everything that it takes to get better, right?
So focusing on that first became a central thing.
So I would say that's where I went from it being a area of general interest to an area
of central deep dive.
Yeah, so what I'm hearing is there was a need that arose for you personally that fostered
a deep dive to understand the overall system with which any possible solution would be
working over your health, aging, etc.
From there, then you wanted to understand not only how we might be able to utilize some sort
of exogenous chemical to amplify a process, but rather how can we help make the entire
mind that is doing the thinking stronger and better over time?
It seemed like that was the goal.
And then you've been working to solve that.
Yeah, the last thing that you said, I think is absolutely central to what our goal as
modernization is, is that when we think of psychopharmacology as a field or really just
pharmacology as a field, there are exceptions and I don't mean to over generalize, but generally
there is less focus on fundamental causation and especially if it is multifactorial, right?
Like we focus on cause and we're usually quite good in Western medicine if it's an acute
cause, right?
Injury or acute infection or acute poisoning is quite obvious.
And so then you reverse that acute cause.
But if the cause is time delayed, so it's hard to find out what it was or it's multifactorial.
There are multiple things that are involved independently or multiple sequence steps.
There's a causal cascade.
It's hard to actually understand what it is.
And so we'll cluster symptoms into disease names.
But if we look at what was the path of the deviation from homeostasis that led to this
person's MS or cancer or rheumatism, a hundred different MSs have a hundred different patho
ideologies, right?
And there are commonalities in them.
But this is why personalized medicine is so critical.
So generally, given that understanding cause has been difficult, the focus has largely not
been on what's actually imbalanced and how do we correct it?
Because it's not a small number of things, right?
It's usually a large number of things.
The focus has largely been, is there some kind of exogenous chemistry or treatment that
we can give that will limit the symptomology or some aspect of pathogenesis?
And that's better than not doing anything, but we can take the next step in our science,
et cetera, is good enough to take the next step.
And so our focus is rather than give some exogenous external override to an internal
regulatory system that is radically complex and intelligent and brilliant.
Let's work to understand what's actually wrong with the regulatory systems or deficient
in them and up regulate the regulatory capacity of the system so that it's
fundamentally more adaptive, more resilient, et cetera.
I've done research in the condition of narcolepsy for over 10 years now.
Gosh, maybe 15.
And I have an example that's relevant to what we're talking about.
Narcoleptics are missing a protein in their brain called hypokretin.
One result of that pathology is excessive daytime sleepiness, which is what usually
is synonymous with the word narcolepsy for most people.
But another symptom is called cataplexy, which is the loss of muscle tone or
partial paralysis when somebody experiences emotion usually.
So Daniel, you tell me a joke and I experience weakness in my limbs.
And in fact, it might be where the term weak from laughter comes from.
Narcoleptics also experience depression with greater frequency than the rest of
the population.
So early on in the treatment of this condition, narcoleptics were given a
class of drugs called tricyclic antidepressants.
Turns out that this medication also improves patients cataplexy, which was
totally serendipitous, but the medication is not directly confronting the cause of
narcolepsy, but rather it is ameliorating one of the symptoms, but only temporarily.
So here's the problem, tricyclics do reduce cataplexic attacks in these patients,
but the medication loses its potency over time.
Over the course of several months, the patient will build up tolerance to the
drug and they will take what's called the drug holiday to allow the receptors to
resensitize to the medication.
And in the scenario, however, when a patient goes off of the drug, they are
essentially paralyzed for days at a time where they're having up to 60 cataplexic
attacks per day.
So they basically have to stay in bed until the brain resensitizes and readjusts.
In some conditions, that's the best we can do, but it does highlight how when we
try to exogenously override, as you say, a system in the brain, usually we only
provide a short-term gain, but there's always a long-term price to pay.
No, so let's take narcolepsy, for instance.
What is the cause of narcolepsy?
Well, it probably has quite a few distinct causes, many of which can be
happening or not in any particular situation, right?
So can someone have sleep issues that are causing narcoleptic like symptoms?
Sure.
Can they have sleep issues from structural pain somewhere in their body, or from
waking up in the night to urinate too much, nocturia, or from apnea, or from head
injury that caused firing pattern injuries, or from gut brain access disorders, or
from toxicity or methylation disorders?
There's so many underlying mechanisms that can lead into a particular set of
symptomology that in order to really be able to address it comprehensively, our
approach is identify everything that has statistical correlation that could be
causal, even if it's not one-for-one correlation, because we're not looking at
one disease, one cause, we're looking at multifactorial possibilities, and then be
able to do differential diagnosis across the entire causal phase space, all the
things that could be involved to see which ones actually are, and then look at
treatment that is specific to pathways rather than to symptomology or disease
clusterings.
You're describing a very sophisticated approach to address a problem, and the
body is sufficiently complex that if we really want to do better with our health
in the modern world, we need to be able to implement this degree of
sophistication in diagnosis and in treatment.
So I'd like to segue to using this sort of approach to support optimized
cognitive enhancement.
Let's start, if you will, by describing first what is a
neutropic substance for our audience, and then tell us about your product,
Qualia.
Sure.
So Qualia is the first product that we've released to market.
We have many other products in the nutraceutical category that are in various
phases of R&D or testing and will be released soon for various different
goals, mostly in the upgrading mind-brain interface space.
So looking at things like pain and sleep and anxiety and etc.
Qualia is largely what people would think of as a cognitive enhancer, but the
focus that we have is not adequately summarizing the word cognitive.
So answering your first question, what are neutropics?
Neutropic is a kind of loosely defined term.
There's ambiguity of definition, but it generally means a chemical that increases
some aspect of cognitive function.
Maybe it's a focus or memory or creativity or something, but increases some aspect
of cognitive function beyond your normal healthy baseline without meaningful side
effects.
So we're used to things that can increase cognitive function back to baseline if you
had some kind of deficit, cognitive decline or whatever.
And we're used to the idea of something that can be enhanced beyond baseline, but with
meaningfully negative side effects like amphetamines that can increase focus.
So the idea of neutropic was, can we understand some of the mechanisms that
cognition operates through neurochemically and be able to support those in ways that
don't create meaningful side effects or externalities?
The term was coined with the development of a chemical called paracetam that really
started out a whole new category of drug research, racetams, and then amphetamines,
and mostly they were receptor site modulators for certain neurotransmitters.
Smart drugs is a related but slightly different word, which generally means
pharmaceuticals that have some cognitive enhancing potential.
These are usually either drugs for narcolepsy or for ADD or for certain kinds of depression
or certain kinds of neurodegen issues like Alzheimer's or Parkinson's.
And so we would look at things like Adderall, Medaffinil, Wellbutrin, Depranil.
And these are things that can increase some aspect of cognitive baseline, but oftentimes
do have some meaningful consequences.
So the risk reward is a tricky thing to consider.
Notropic is also in contra distinction to the term brain nutrient, which is just fundamental
nutrients that we need dietarily that many people don't get enough of for optimum,
even though they're not in acute deficiency, they're in kind of what we call subclinical
deficiency. And so this is the right fatty acids, the right amino acids, minerals,
vitamins that support normal brain function. Those aren't going to bring you beyond baseline
because the body's going to convert as many as it actually needs and then not more,
but they will keep you at optimum baseline or bring you back to it if there's deficit.
So the quality actually involves key brain nutrients that are actually needed for the way
some of the notropic ingredients function, their cofactors or transform factors and that are
chronically at suboptimal levels and then include something that would be more in the
notropic category, some of which are synthetic, some of which are plant derived.
I've been exploring the space for about a year and a half. And I have to say that my
own personal experience with qualia has been very noticeable and very impressive. We've not
discussed this before. So for the listener, Daniel is hearing my feedback for the first time on air.
My experience with qualia has been different, I would say, than with other new tropics I've tried.
First, let me discuss energy. When I take it, I feel a calm energy that lasts. I don't experience
a drop off like you get with caffeine. I don't feel overstimulated either. So that's really
an ideal situation. Next, my focus is stronger with it. I feel like I can take a dip in the
afternoon, though my energy doesn't necessarily flag. So I still, I think it's just a sign that
my brain wants to take a break and go for a walk. So I try to attend to that, but it's still a
different feeling than simply feeling exhausted by work. My ability to task switch is improved,
which is actually a huge impact on my productivity because in today's world, there's
just a lot of task switching that we all need to do with email and notifications, etc.
Also, I'm a happy go lucky guy, but I even wake up in an annoyingly good mood, but I actually
experience a mood elevation with qualia. How did I notice? Well, I caught myself saying hi to random
strangers more on the street, generally just feeling more outgoing. And at first I was a
little worried about this because things that can elevate mood also are subject to a reduced mood
later, but I didn't experience a dip and either the day of taking it or during the weekends when
I don't take qualia. And on that note, you instruct people to take the weekend off from
taking it, which I do. But again, I didn't feel the dip and energy focus mood, which indicates to
me that what you've created really supports the health of the entire system versus trying to
squeeze all the cognitive enhancement out of one pathway, leaving you feeling depleted later.
And lastly, I also noticed that I have really good sleep on them on qualia,
but even on the days where I don't get what I consider to be adequate amount of time in bed,
so for me, that's about seven and a half hours, I am less sleepy and more capable the next day
when I take qualia than I am when I don't. So there you go. There's a live testimonial for you.
I'll share a couple of things on that. First, two disclaimers on our side. One is not a drug,
can't treat anything and is not prescribed for any diagnosed things, etc. This is a supplement
without FDA classification for any drug stuff. Second thing is that we are absolutely not
recommending it as a way to deal with lack of sleep. As far as general lifestyle optimization
goes, exercise matters, food matters, mindset matters, being outdoors matters, there's a lot
of things that matter. We would probably put sleep in its own category and everything else
in the second category in terms of just how important it is for overall physiology repair.
And one of the things that we push heavily is to really support people getting enough and
good quality sleep and that qualia works radically better in well rested people than in
people that are dealing with some sleep deficit. So just that public service announcement.
Yep, and I agree with that fully as a sleep researcher. There is nothing that's been identified
that replaces the need for sleep. What I would say is that I think I perform better, but that
does not encourage me in any way to then cheat sleep. There is a exponential benefit to getting
better sleep and then having quality in my system than getting not enough sleep on a regular basis.
Totally. If someone is getting insufficient amounts of sleep acutely rarely, then we're
going to deal with that much better than chronic sleep deficit. Even if we're only talking about
an hour less than the person actually needs, but over a period of time, that can really start
to have profound effects. Moving on to the effects you experience, I'm delighted because you said
things related to most of the goals we had in the development of this particular product.
One thing that we said was essential to our focus was how do we up-regulate regulatory capacity
rather than up-regulate particular state in a way that creates external dependence.
We saw how many people were using Adderall, not even on prescription for appropriate purposes,
but off-label as a way to get through midterms or finals or their tech startup or whatever.
It's a dopamine agonist, but it's going to be flatlining your dopamine while you're on it as
opposed to having your dopamine regulatory system responsive to what's happening because we don't
want the same dopamine levels all the time or any neurotransmitter. We want them to be responsive
so our state can shift to be appropriate to the environment. Two, it's affecting dopamine
without paying attention to its relationship in healthy cognitive function. Two, acetylcholine,
and two, so many other transmitters and then aspects of transmission and post-synaptic D1,
D2 receptor sensitivity and et cetera. You end up getting imbalances and really key ratios and
dynamics. That will end up looking like it increasing focus but not increasing key aspects
of memory or even decreasing some of them or decreasing things like empathy or presence.
Then because you are getting an exogenous override to a key in-chain chemical,
it can create dependence and down-regulation. Our goal was the exact opposite. It was,
we know people weren't going to use something if they didn't feel it right away. It would just fit
in category with all their other vitamins and supplements, so it had to produce the kinds
of immediate effects that they were looking for. We wanted it in a way that would not produce long
term down-regulation and that would ideally produce meaningful long-term up-regulation
while even in the short term having a much wider scope of positive impact. Can we increase focus
and concentration in short-term memory and work memory, long-term memory, creativity,
analysis, synthesis all at the same time? A lot of things that are actually almost
opposite functions, like the ability to stay very focused independent of environmental noise,
but then the ability to task switch when one needs a task switch are opposite kinds of functions,
but we really want them both. The ability to have very high drive, but also to be able to
let go of it and be empathetically, interpersonally responsive when necessary, analytic and synthetic,
and so our focus was, can we do comprehensive brain chemistry in real time that makes people
that up-regulates comprehensive capacities that is also up-regulating over the long term?
Those were the things that we saw and we have been quite happy with what's happened so far.
The one other component to my feedback is that as you recommend you take
qualia during the week and then you don't take it on the weekends, I still feel very energetic.
I feel my brain is actually even smarter having taken it, but not having it in my system on a
weekend. That would support what your end goal was here. One thing I'll say about that is
the most addictive chemical that's in the stack is caffeine. That's a chemical whose
addiction curve most people are pretty familiar with and is pretty benign. Everyone metabolizes
caffeine differently and some people can drink it daily for quite some time and then not drink it
and be fine. Other people will get headaches and it does have a lot to do with caffeine metabolism,
which is genetic and other factors. What I'd say is this has a relatively small amount of caffeine.
We have 90 milligrams, but in a unique form where it's bound to an antioxidant from blueberry
skins, terostilbine, which has it basically be slow release. It feels like 30 milligrams when it
kicks on, which is very subtle, but then it lasts for quite some time. Instead of getting a spike
and a drop-off, you get a very subtle long-term effect, why it's important to take in the morning
again because it will last longer. For people who are used to drinking a big Starbucks where they've
got 150-200 milligrams of caffeine and it kicks in right away, they will still want to do that.
They just might down-regulate the amount a little bit because this isn't going to match with that
amount of caffeine. On people's off days, we tell people to do five days on, two days off of quality
so that they don't desensitize to any of the chemicals that are here. On their off days,
if you can't get off caffeine without headaches, you can still do your coffee or
mate or whatever it is on your off days. Caffeine doesn't need to be cycled as frequently as other
chemicals. What we'd say is our recommendation is that people should cycle off caffeine if they
use it on a daily basis for about one week per quarter. They're adenosine cycle gets to reset.
The other dynamics that are involved get a reset. We do find that people will start getting
decreased meaningful response from caffeine over longer periods of time. Obviously,
there's problems if people are using it again as a replacement for sleep or to push through too
much fatigue when they actually need rest. If people are well rested and they're taking
appropriate amounts of caffeine, it can actually be an efficiency increase or metabolically for
their system. We say two days off of quality each week and one week off of all stimulants per quarter.
I was never much of a coffee drinker growing up. Several years ago, I started to drink it and it
became a part of my daily routine rather fast. I enjoy my coffee with cream and I recognize
that I was adding hundreds of calories to my day from my coffee routine. We know from an energy
balanced perspective that the body doesn't compensate for calories that are consumed
in liquid form as much as it does when they're consumed in solid form. Now, I get my morning
boost without those additional calories. Honestly, I thought I was going to have a hard time giving
up my coffee, but that's not been the case. This is another reason why I enjoy qualia.
Well, and I think since Bulletproof coffee has become as popular as it has,
this is a topic people are aware of because they're putting a lot of calories in the form of
MCT or XCT oil in there and butter, but if someone's doing that and then eating the same breakfast,
they're kind of missing the point, right? Exactly. Most people are doing that to then
not eat breakfast for quite some time or they need to down-regulate the caloric intake of the
breakfast. Right. Yeah, exactly. I was doing the latter.
What other tools do you use to either monitor your cognitive performance or to enhance it?
Assessment-wise, there are some apps that are fun. There's a quantified mind. Love them. Is a
publicly available app that anybody can use and expensive. And then there are some apps that you
can pay just a little bit for that have a lot of increased capacities like Cambridge Brain Science
app. There's actually two different Cambridge Associated Cognitive Assessments. Berkeley's
Greater Good Science Center has a positive psychology assessment. UPenn has some pretty
great non-symbolic experience assessments. So there's a number of good online assessments.
We have a friend, Dr. Zachary Stein, who was in the education department,
philosophy education at Harvard and worked with Howard Gardner on what was next beyond
multiple lines of intelligence. And I would say he's one of the top theorists in developmental
psychology. He and a group of friends made an assessment system called Lectica. And if you go
to lectica.org, you can see it, which is probably all that I'm aware of the most advanced human
cognitive psychological assessment system anywhere. And it assesses for things like how complex
someone's thinking is, how abstract their thinking is, levels of moral reasoning, a lot of things
beyond basic psychological and cognitive assessment, using really quite deep and good and nuanced models.
So those are ones that we like and support. We're actually working on synthesizing elements
from many of those into apps that can provide better resources for people in the future as one
of our goals. So those are some things. As far as biometrics go, I use a lot of blood chemistry
testing for biometric assessment. And I'm a big fan of QEG assessment. I'm a big fan of
biodata and psychodata. And then the key becomes the interpretive process to be able to put it
together and really understand what it means and how to respond to it. The hard part. That's the
part we're really focused on is because the data collection is getting better on Moore's law curve
we're focused on how do you actually put all the various parts together where you're not just
looking at each thing in relationship to a reference range, but each thing in relationship
to all the other things to get a synergistic picture. And then as far as other things for
cognitive performance enhancement. So things I do personally, there's a lot of cognitive
chemistry that I play with. And so Paulia is a base stack. I still even after years with it
and having formulated it and previous stacks that led up to it, I still use that five days a week.
But for different goals, if I'm wanting to be in much more new idea of creative space or much
more execution oriented space, there's some number of hundreds of other chemicals that I'll
play with. And so some of those chemicals will come to market. Some of them will be things that
we educate people about, but we could do a whole talk on no tropic chemistry sometimes. But also,
again, that's based on me knowing my actual bio data and then optimizing towards that with
qualia since we weren't able to do it in a personalized fashion to begin with, even though
that's a goal for us in the future is to be able to do personalized chemistry at scale.
The infrastructure for that takes quite a bit of development. We focused on what meets
center of bell curve chemistry best. Beyond chemistry for me, the other things that I will do,
meditation every day is actually one of the foundational ones. So enough sleep, meditation
every day, exercise that is focused specifically. I mean, obviously we get neurogenesis from high
intensity exercise, we get neurotrophin up regulation, the circulatory effect is important,
et cetera. But new skill acquisition is huge for neurogenesis more than anything else. And new
skill acquisition in the form of learning new languages, learning new musical instruments.
But it seems right now that learning new motor functions, sensory coordination,
motor functions has the deepest evolutionary biology on creating new neural pathways. And so
the key is whenever you try and do some new activity, like say you're going to slack line
or you're going to whatever that requires a balance or coordination, you just don't have.
And it seems almost impossible. Your nervous system is trying to use the much larger bandwidth of
other than conscious processing to handle it than just conscious processing. But that means
driving new neurogenic circuits. And then you start to get a hang of it. As soon as you start
to get a hang of it, that effect starts decreasing. But in process, you actually increased the neural
hardware for automating learning. And so then you switch and do some other one. And so continuously
focusing on things that are really hard until they start to become easy and switching again,
that hardware where you take new learning and automate it, then translates to new cognitive
and interpersonal and psychological things that you actually, your rate of learning goes up.
There's many more, but those are a few examples.
There's an approach to physical activity that I promote called in tune training.
It stands for integrative and opportunistic training. The goals of it are this to support
its efficiency of physical activity in one's life, to reduce longer periods of sedentary time.
So even if you're somebody who's getting a good total amount of physical activity, think of the
weekend warrior concept where somebody is getting all their physical activity during the weekend,
but they're largely sedentary during the week, in tune helps you fit smaller bursts of physical
activity into your days, which makes it easier to make it more regular. One of the objectives
of the program is to optimize mental performance. And it does it in several ways. First, there are
brain benefits to regular physical activity. Second, there are acute benefits to getting
physical activity within your day, especially when your active activity isn't too intense.
And third, since it instructs you to do some, but not a lot of physical activity day by day,
you're left with a good energetic reserve. And what I found is that when I do work out in this
manner, I wake up with a lot of energy every single day. So that is validating to the concept.
And then lastly, I also dance during the day. So I try to mix in more complex movement patterns
aside from just squats and push-ups and this sort of whole body coordination supports cognitive
strength. And in support of that idea as well, I also have a slackline outside, which I use for
similar purposes. I think there are specific insights that can teach people what is optimal
more like what we just talked about with the benefit of dance or slackline or balance or whatever.
But everyone knows quite a bit that they don't fully apply already,
regard to things like sleep and exercise and lifestyle. And it's one of the things I'm most
excited about with your human operating system as you continue is all the kind of behavioral
support dynamics you're building in so that people can actually start getting traction. So
yeah, makes me delighted to see that continue awful.
Well, last question for you. What would you tell somebody who has never taken
new tropics before but is curious to try them? Do some research, educate yourself.
That is going to be a general MO for me and any health, well-being performance related topic.
One of the core kind of concepts memes that we hold really heavily here at Neurohacker is
topic of empowered responsibility. And the idea that people take relatively little responsibility
for their longevity, health, well-being, and then trust other people who don't know them that well
to tell them what to do and then have side effects and get mad at the doctors for it is
just lame. It doesn't work, right? Nope. And so since you're the one that lives in your body and
your mind, you've just got to fucking take full responsibility for it, which you can't do if you
don't understand how it works. Great. A hundred percent. Well said. That's the key thing that we
would say is study, learn, and then do experiments as they seem appropriate to you that you feel
ready for. And of course, as part of your study, consult the appropriate people that you want to
consult. And you can go to our website and research how we formulated this. You go to the
formulation page. It has all the ingredients and all the research on each ingredient pathway,
et cetera. And then you can try it. And it's intended as a potent natropic stack that is
relevant even for people that have a lot of experience with biohacking, but also as one that
is very good in entry fashion for many, many people. And in general, if you're new to it,
I would say start with the lowest doses possible. And if you don't notice or the effect feels good,
but subtle, move up and kind of titrate your way up, paying attention to your experience.
Great advice. One thing I'll say about the experience some people have with new tropics is
you might not feel it unless you're doing something that's really challenging your mind.
If you take it and you're just walking around the day doing remedial tasks,
you might not experience the benefit. But if you are doing something where you have to concentrate,
write, code, something that is challenging your mental resources,
that's where you might notice the effect. One of the classic places where people report,
like we didn't anticipate this upfront, but I mean, perfect sense afterwards was
people have reported in huge number ending procrastination. And specifically that things,
whether it was their taxes or their desk or whatever, that was normally put off a law that
they could have sustained attention, not just at things that they liked, but they could have
sustained attention without a terrible things that they had previously not liked. So there was
focus with better neutrality. And so when you say you'll notice when you actually engage it,
that's one of the areas that has been really fun people noticing when they're engaging in,
oh, should I actually move the things that continuously get on my to-do list and then get
moved because I never do them and actually did. Daniel, this is important work. I've benefited
from using qualia. I have loved hearing your approach on how to create the very best version
of a cognitive enhancer. I've been recommending it to friends when the discussion comes up on
the subject. And interestingly, several of those people who have tried it have spontaneously
written back to me to tell me what a positive experience they've had with it. Becoming better
at getting stuff done that we care about is hugely valuable. This can mean better overall work
quality and it can even release you to have more free time if you can be more efficient
getting your tasks done. I believe your system thinking has really helped to develop this
product and it's really paid off. And I'd like to thank you for taking the time to have a conversation
with me. I'm sure our listeners will appreciate the discussion and I'll be sure to put information
on where people can find you in the show notes. Awesome. And we continue to roll out new technologies,
new products. Our website is a good place to check in with it. And if you feel like it,
given your email, we'll definitely let people know when new things come out.
And we are excited to explore more partnership with you and Human OS and being able to share that
as an education and training resource for people that's aligned with our goals. So thank you.
Thanks for listening and come visit us soon at humanos.me.
