The Bell Telephone System brings you one of a series of programs on science to understand nature's laws.
The Bell Telephone System brings you one of a series of programs on science to understand nature's laws.
Let's try that focus again, Jim.
Coming up.
The title's okay.
Now let's test that first animation.
Roll two.
Okay, hold it.
Now sharpen the focus.
Right.
Hold roll two.
Doctor, how is the son born?
Don't know exactly.
You're a scientist and you don't know?
Could use my imagination, but you're the fiction writer.
Imagination?
Well, we could ask Mr. Sun himself.
Yes, if we had a magic wand.
Sure, sure.
You've got it.
Magic.
Your science and my magic.
We'll open up our story of our Mr. Sun with a little fantasy.
You know, showmanship.
Go back into time.
Show the birth of the sun out of time, stardust.
Here, we'll turn back the clock.
Oh, that'll only take you back 12 hours.
Oh.
All right.
We'll open up the curtain of our imagination.
This'll be our magic screen.
Yours will be just for facts.
We'll pull back the curtains of our magic screen.
We'll dream up a clock.
There you are.
A clock that's been ticking since time began.
Our solar system wound up by Father Time himself.
Do you see what I'm seeing?
Well, certainly.
Maybe I could talk to him, huh?
Hey, Father Time, how long has that sun clock been going?
A few billion years.
Why?
Well, could you unwind it for us?
Unwind time?
Man, are you crazy?
Well, I'm a fiction writer.
We're auditioning a show about our Mr. Sun,
and I thought that...
Show about me?
Well, well, about time.
Look who's here.
Hi.
Yeah, we were wondering how it all happened at the beginning.
Nobody knows what happened at the beginning.
Oh, come on.
Pop, unwind us.
They want to see how I was born.
You... you old hot gas bag.
You keep still.
Now, don't flip your sickle, Pop.
The man says it's just a show.
He's a romantic fool.
If you want facts, ask your scientists.
Oh, we've got doctor research here for facts.
But what I need right now is something to open this thing up with a bang.
You know what I mean?
Certainly.
My story should be colorful, romantic, not just facts.
Here, I'll tell you how it should open.
Wait a minute.
I'm telling this story.
You're just imaginary.
Quiet.
You want a show, don't you?
Go on.
Yes, sir?
Set the stage for me.
Oh, yes, sir.
Uh-uh.
You had an Academy Award, really.
Hey, he's taking over.
How do you like that?
I like it.
Let him go on.
Music.
Lights.
Color.
And here, Mr. Sun from the East.
Good morning, Brother Earth.
For the empty billionth time.
Good morning.
Good morning, Brother Bird.
Brother Mountain.
Brother Sea.
Morning to you, Brother Gal.
Brother Bee.
Brother Fish.
Good morning, all of you.
Great day.
Every day's a great day.
You know me as the sun.
Of course, what I really am is a star.
An average, everyday type of star.
Billions like me.
I remember when Primitive Man first began to look up
to gaze in wonderment at the stars and planets
sweeping across the face of the sky.
That primitive curiosity was the beginning of all your science.
Of course, they had some pretty odd notions about me.
Some thought I was an enormous beetle
crumbling a fiery ball across the heavens.
The ancient Eskimos thought I was a little man
wearing thick furs to keep myself warm.
But to most, I was a god.
Fancy names and wardrobes.
In Babylon, I was Shamash.
And my sun temples were observatories.
In Persia, I was Mithras.
And to ancient Egypt, I was the great god Rah.
Glory to the great sun god.
Hold our perfect, our eternal, our only one.
Blame me for getting the swell head.
Ah, but the name I like best was Phoebus Apollo.
The Greeks always didn't have a word for it.
In my case, it was handsome.
Apollo racing across the sky in his fiery chariot
making heavenly music on his golden ukulele.
Oh, that was for me.
I loved it.
And then along came another Greek to spoil it all.
A Greek who would rather think than worship sun gods.
Anaxagoras was his name.
The sun is not a god or a person.
It is a mass of red hot stone,
only 40 miles across and 4,000 miles away.
For blaspheming against the beautiful Apollo,
Anaxagoras was banished from Athens.
And I wasn't a bit sorry for him.
But man had fallen for this new and fascinating mistress, his brain.
Thinking began spreading like the measles.
Everybody got the bug.
The Greeks with their logic and philosophy.
The Hindus with their algebra and your present number system.
The Arabs with their early instruments like the astrolabe.
And today instead of temples, rituals and hymns to the sun,
it's domes, gadgets, charts and numbers.
I'm demoted to a specimen, a pile of facts and figures.
A big blob of mass holding little blobs of mass together with gravity.
Instead of with love, I think you're all through.
Who's all through?
Earthman. He's had it.
Why you flaming idiot, I haven't even started yet.
In worshiping me, ancient man was reaching for the great light beyond.
But modern man, he's got all the answers.
Mr. Sun, you mind if I butt in a moment?
Who are you?
Who me? Oh, I'm the...
Never mind. Thank you very much. Goodbye.
Would you mind if we listened in?
See here, you're not even real. I just made you up. You go wind your clock.
No, let them stay. I like your magic. Father Time, my name's Research.
Who?
A scientist.
Hmm.
Howdy, Doctor Research.
I'd like to hear what you have to say about Golden Boy here.
Well, it's a delightful experience talking directly to you and to Mr. Sun, especially for a scientist.
I was just going to relate a few facts about Mr. Sun.
Facts? If you're going to tell my story, don't give the people equations and figures.
Give them the real old doubt. Tell them what I mean to them.
They've forgotten that. When they eat corn or bread or grapes or meat, they're eating sunlight.
Their houses, furniture, cars, they're nylons.
Yes, even their moonshine is sunshine.
Tell them if it wasn't for me, they'd have no eyes, because there'd be nothing to see.
That's enough. You're getting purple.
Why, if I put my light out, every living thing on Earth would be frozen stiff.
And you scientists who know would be just as cold and stiff as the people that don't know.
Through blowing sunspots?
Yes.
Then apologize to Doctor Research.
Well, I'm sorry, Brother Research.
No apology necessary. Mr. Sun is almost right.
Almost?
Yes. Mr. Sun, your logic is a little on the romantic side, too.
You say that you don't like facts, and yet you've just given us quite a list of them.
This may turn out to be fun.
No, Mr. Sun, we haven't got all the answers.
Science has just opened the book, yet in seeking for more knowledge,
we, too, in a way, are reaching for the great light beyond.
Doctor, that's it. That's it.
What's it? The gimmick.
Come into my office here.
We put the show on for him.
For the Sun?
Sure. It's a tough audience.
Science shows Sun were not all through, you get it?
Could be boring to him.
Could be.
You keep your corona on.
Science has found out about you as more exciting than any fiction.
You stick around, you'll see.
What we really don't know very much about him.
Oh, we know plenty about him.
What about the television people?
Never mind him.
Just think, we've got a real show here.
Well, you remember where you come in.
I remember the weather, the fuel, the entertainment.
And you cut in on me if I get stuff in.
I'll cut in on you, but come on.
Roll him, roll him.
Roll to.
Here we go.
Although Mr. Sun is 93 million miles away,
and it takes his life eight minutes to reach us,
we're pretty close.
The light from the next nearest star,
traveling at 186,000 miles per second,
takes over four years to get to us.
We know Mr. Sun is so large,
our Earth is barely visible alongside him.
It would take some 340 worlds, like beads on a string,
to make a necklace around his shining sphere.
How much does Mr. Sun weigh?
1,000 worlds?
100,000?
No, sir.
He weighs as much as 330,000 Mother Earths.
We also know that Mr. Sun is not solid or liquid,
but a fiery ball of hot, glowing gases,
consisting of some 95% hydrogen and helium,
and a few percent all other elements.
We know that this huge cloud of hot gases
would expand, float away, dissipate into space,
unless gravity squeezed it together into a tight sphere.
The gases at the center of the Sun are so densely packed by gravity
that they're about 100 times heavier than water.
And the pressure is around 1 billion tons to the square inch.
While at the surface, the gases are so thin,
the pressure is only about one pound to the square inch.
We know too that the temperature at the core of the Sun
is incredibly hot, around 30 million degrees Fahrenheit.
While at the surface, it drops down to just about 10,000 degrees.
But here's a strange thing.
As we go out from the Sun into the corona,
the temperature goes up again
to over 1 million degrees at the outer edges.
Tell them why, Dr. Research.
We don't know why.
You don't? Well, what is the corona anyway?
We don't actually know that yet.
But we do know there's more to Mr. Sun
than the shining surface we normally see,
which we call a photosphere or sphere of light.
Only when the moon moves between us and the Sun
and covers the photosphere completely in a total eclipse
can we see the rest of Mr. Sun's thin atmosphere,
the beautiful and mysterious corona.
For many, many years, scientists have lugged their instruments
to all parts of the globe chasing eclipses.
Music
Expedition spending months,
just for a two or three-minute opportunity to see,
measure, and photograph the eclipsed Sun.
Sometimes heavy clouds, failure, complete washout.
Sometimes light clouds, measurements uncertain.
But on happy occasions, perfect conditions.
The corona is studied and photographed
in the fullness of its glory.
Music
Your corona is most puzzling to us, Mr. Sun.
We know that it rotates with you,
but at no two eclipses does it look just the same.
It pulsates, changes shape,
and at times extends out millions of miles.
Why is that?
Just one of the many things we still don't know about the Sun.
Look, have we better tell him something we do know?
Want to hear any more, Mr. Sun?
I like your pictures of me.
Got any more?
Oh, yes, lots.
Roll six.
The camera's one of our main tools.
Now, here's a normal picture of you taken by direct sunlight.
It's rather flat.
Your face has little expression.
But about 60 years ago,
Dr. George Ellery Hale of America
and Dr. Henri Delant of France
conceived this ingenious instrument
called the spectrogeliograph.
It filters out all the light waves,
except the light from some particular glowing atom,
as for instance, hydrogen.
Let's look at a normal white light picture of the Sun again.
Now, here, taken at the same time,
is a spectrogeliogram that photographed
only the red light from glowing hydrogen atoms.
Now, your face is interesting, reveals character.
Here's another spectrogeliogram taken at the same time,
that photographed only the violet light
from incandescent calcium atoms,
which tells us even more about you.
With the spectrogeliograph,
Dr. Robert R. McMath
of the McMath-Hulbert Observatory near Pontiac, Michigan
made the first time-lapse motion pictures
of the prominences and wrinkles on the face of the Sun.
From his pictures and from the many thousands of photographs
taken at observatories all over the world,
particularly at the Mount Wilson Observatory,
we've learned a great deal about Mr. Sun,
especially about those much-talked-of sunspots
that mystified Galileo.
Ah, sunspots. There are such things, of course.
Oh, yeah.
They're not just something that scientists see when they're tired.
Oh, they're very real, but very mysterious.
They mystified Galileo
and through his original telescope,
he first saw them moving daily across the face of the Sun.
And they've been mystifying us ever since.
Spots can appear singly, like this one,
or in groups like these,
and quite often in distinct pairs.
When photographed by red hydrogen light,
they look something like giant, violet tornadoes
seen from above.
Spots range in size from mere pinpoints
just a few hundred miles across,
into which you could drop the British Isles,
to huge ones,
into which you could drop 100 planets as big as the Earth.
Spots look dark, although they really aren't,
because they're cooler than the rest of the surface.
7,000 degrees is against 10,000 degrees of the surface.
Also, over the years,
we notice a strange fluctuation in the number of spots,
increasing to a maximum, decreasing to a minimum,
in more or less regular 11-year cycles,
which many of us believe affect our weather,
our crops, and the growth of our trees.
One of the most astonishing mysteries
revealed by study of spots, Mr. Sun,
is that your equator, or the middle of you,
rotates faster than the rest of you.
The middle rotates faster?
Yes.
For instance, if a line of spots
were placed like runners at a starting line,
from the sun's north to the south pole,
and a signal raced around the sun,
they would end up like this.
Equator wins in 25 and one-third days.
Half north and half south tie for second,
time 27 and a half days.
Why is that?
You don't know why, okay.
Have you got any more pictures of me?
Hey, would it please you to know, Mr. Glory Puss,
that you've been photographed
more than all the Hollywood stars put together?
The most dramatic pictures, roll seven,
the most dramatic pictures are taken with a chronograph,
which creates automatic total eclipses
whenever the sun is shining.
This very remarkable instrument was first constructed
by Dr. Bernard Leo of France in 1930.
Today, there are improved chronographs
at the High Altitude Observatory at Climax, Colorado,
under the direction of Dr. Walter Roberts,
and at the Air Force installation
at Sacramento Peak, New Mexico,
presided over by Dr. J. W. Evans.
The first user of the chronograph in America
was Dr. Donald H. Menzel of Harvard University.
What happens in these red-hydrogen
chronograph motion pictures in one second
actually took place in about five minutes on the sun.
The small sphere you see here
represents the size of the Earth in comparison with the sun.
Your surface, Mr. Sun, is a stormy sea of violent motion.
Small spicules or geysers like these
continually burst from blisters on the surface
and jet up like little fountains,
if you can call five or 10,000 miles up, little,
compare them to the size of the Earth.
Big flame-like eruptions like these are called prominences.
They're vast clouds of gas that sometimes float idly
and other times shoot out at thousands of miles per minute
as if they'd ever heard of gravity.
Sometimes they rise in graceful ribbons or tangle streamers.
Beautiful, beautiful.
Some surge up like gigantic geysers.
Others flow sideways and downward,
at times forming natural bridges.
Portions of the prominences may even break off
and go floating away as in this picture.
But the baffling part is that most prominences flow downward.
Gases materializing from seemingly nowhere
and flowing down into sunspot areas for days at a time.
Coronal rain, it's sometimes called.
Where does it come from?
Of course, when it rains on Earth,
we don't actually see the rain go up either.
We only see it come down,
although we know it evaporates up from the seven seas.
But where coronal rain comes from, we can only guess as yet.
Given the whopper, Doc,
biggest solar explosion ever recorded
greatest photographic shot in history.
On June 4th, 1946,
a great arch of gas hundreds of times as big as the Earth
rose up at a speed of 400,000 miles per hour.
And the arch expanded clear out of rains
of the instruments at climax in less than an hour and a half.
I remember that one.
Sure blew my top that day.
Yes, we heard you.
Roll 15.
You heard me.
Oh, yes, we hear you every day.
You not only send us light waves,
but you broadcast radio waves,
which we're able to pick up quite clearly
at special radio astronomy stations,
which receive radio signals from outer space.
Here's a sample of the radio message you send us
on one of your noisier days.
In Australia, they've recently done some brilliant work
with radio astronomy.
Dr. E. G. Bowen heads the group of radio astronomers.
It's only in the past few years
that we have discovered some strange things in the sky.
Radio waves coming to us from many places in outer space.
In Australia, they've recently done some brilliant work
with radio astronomy.
Dr. E. G. Bowen heads the group of radio astronomers.
Radio astronomy is an outer space.
Radio astronomy is a brand new exciting tool for scientists,
and with it, we found out quite a bit about you, Mr. Sun,
through the noises you make.
I'm beginning to feel like a goldfish.
You got him going, doctor.
Well, doesn't all this spouting and erupting
have some effect on the Earth?
Oh, yes, tremendous out of there.
Roll 8.
Well, for instance, when a large flare
flashes up around the Sunspot area,
it immediately sends out a burst of powerful ultraviolet rays
that hit the Earth in 8 minutes.
But it also sprays streams of slower electrified fragments of atoms
out into spaces if from a hose.
This solar spray of fine particles usually misses the Earth,
but at times the Earth is in its path.
Now, the Earth is a magnet with north and south magnetic poles
and a magnetic field around it.
The spray of minute particles shot from the Sun,
which takes some 30 hours to reach the Earth,
is deflected toward the poles by the Earth's magnetic field.
As this solar dust, stardust, you might call it,
comes down into our atmosphere near the poles
and collides with air molecules,
it creates the most beautiful spectacle of the aurora,
also called the northern and southern lights.
Dr. C.W. Gartline of Cornell University
took this unique time-lapse motion picture
of the actual aurora borealis.
The Earth's rotation produces the apparent motion
of the stars in the background.
But the effects of these ultraviolet bursts from the Sun
are not so beautiful.
Voltage fluctuates, radio communications are disturbed,
and although our radio engineers have performed near miracles
in protecting our radio waves from this solar sniping,
Dr. Rural 7C, sometimes this happens.
We take you now to London for a direct report from Sam Johnson.
Come in, London.
This is Sam Johnson.
There's an air of tense expectancy here in London.
This morning, the prime minister...
Will you stop playing with that radio?
I'm not even trusted.
But then do something!
That was the momentous statement
the prime minister read to us this morning.
And now, back to New York.
What an engineer!
Wasn't the shoe? No, it wasn't the shoe.
Let's recreate what actually happened
in terms of atmosphere and radio waves.
Radio waves normally move in a straight line,
but about 50 miles high in our atmosphere,
there isn't a lot of light.
But about 50 miles high in our atmosphere,
there's an electrified layer called the ionosphere
that reflects radio waves,
making it possible to bounce them around the Earth.
Now let's listen to Sam Johnson again.
This is Sam Johnson.
There's an air of tense expectancy here in London.
Suddenly a bright flare occurs on the sun.
First, the ultraviolet rays disrupts the ionosphere.
This morning, the prime minister announced...
But radio engineers are right on the ball.
Bill, London's folding. Another SID, eh?
Yep.
I've got another frequency ready for you.
Not yet. Wait a minute.
An SID means a sudden ionospheric disturbance,
which is unpredictable.
But usually, in a matter of minutes,
the ionospheric layer reforms again.
And that was the momentous statement
the prime minister read to us this morning.
And now, back to New York.
But when big regions of the sun are intensely active,
the spray of solar particles that causes the aurora
can disturb communications for hours, even days.
But this type is predictable.
Oh, yes. Fortunately, it usually is.
And since radio communication is so vital to the services,
airlines, radio stations, telephone companies,
ships at sea,
recently observatories all over the world
have begun to keep watch on the sun
and make up a worldwide radio warning service
at the High Altitude Observatory at Climax, Colorado,
at the Air Force Observatory at Sacramento Peak,
at Kota Canal, India,
in Japan,
in stations all over the globe,
observers keep tabs on you, Mr. Sun,
and send in information to the Central Collecting Agencies,
such as the Radio Storm Warning Service
of the National Bureau of Standards,
where men under Alan Shapley analyze the data
and try to predict when the solar storm
strikes the Earth, especially the vital
North Atlantic communication lines.
Then, by radio, by teletype, by phone,
the warning goes out.
Severe magnetic storm will affect North Atlantic circuits.
Lower frequencies or use southern roots.
That's fine.
But, Dr. Research,
what has puzzled you scientists most about the sun?
Roll nine.
Even I can give you that in one word.
Energy.
This lady's parasol has one-and-one-half horsepower
of sunshine continually poured on it.
Enough to run her washing machine, sewing machine,
refrigerator, and vacuum cleaner.
In full sunlight, our family car receives
almost enough sun power to run it,
if we only knew how to use solar energy directly.
At the common rate of two cents per kilowatt hour,
the sun sends the Earth $1 billion worth of energy
every second, and it's coming to us free.
Five minutes' worth would pay our national debt.
One minute's worth of the energy that hits the Earth
would pay the total annual income tax
of all United States citizens.
Oh, happy day.
Yet what the Earth receives
is only a minute fraction of the whole,
only one part and two billion of the total solar energy.
The rest of the $500,000 billion-billion horsepower
goes out into space.
How does the sun generate this enormous amount of power,
Dr. Research?
Yes, I don't eat, drink, or take vitamins.
I never sleep or rest.
Then how do I do it, brother scientist?
Well, we know at least part of your secret now.
MUSIC
We know the answer not only to your energy,
but to what makes other stars in the universe shine.
Thermonuclear reaction.
It's the key word that wound up the universe.
Thermonuclear.
Eight to five, they've made a hydrogen bomb.
We certainly have, Mr. Sun.
And the news rocked the world.
But with you, it's old stuff.
The equivalent of four billion hydrogen bombs
have been going off inside you every second
for some four billion years.
Give or take a billion.
MUSIC
What smart guy figured that out?
Dr. Hans Bethe of Cornell is the gentleman.
In 1938, he announced that the source of the sun's energy
is the fusion of 564 million tons of hydrogen
into 560 million tons of helium each second.
564 to 560, where did the missing 4 million tons go?
Just disappear?
Disappears as mass, as matter,
but reappears as light, heat, and all sorts of radiation.
Quite a trickster, old Sol, making 4 million tons disappear.
4 million tons?
That he is.
Roll 12.
I brought along a trickster friend of mine,
Thermo the magician, who has an act which he claims
explains the sun's magic.
I am Thermo.
I will do for you such a trick.
Only me and the stars can do.
Pay attention.
This is one way to make a hydrogen bomb.
Nature's way.
So, hydrogen.
One, two, three, four.
What is hydrogen?
The smallest atom from which you build all the other atoms.
So, we will weigh the hydrogen.
Scale.
Each bottle weighs exactly 100 ounces.
For bottles, 400 ounces.
Remember that.
400 ounces.
So, now, carbon.
This is carbon.
A piece of coal for you.
That is what I start with.
Hydrogen and carbon.
So, now I will heat them.
30 million degrees, I will heat them.
How?
Hydrogen bomb.
It is done by exploding an ordinary atom bomb
to ignite the hydrogen bomb.
But the stars, they do it by pressure.
Gravity.
Like our Mr. Sun.
So, now I play Mr. Sun and heat the hydrogen
and the carbon to 30 million degrees.
Fire.
Fire.
Fire.
Fire.
Now I am ready.
One hydrogen, come.
I thermal now give the command.
Fusion.
So, what have we here?
Nitrogen.
The gas what makes four-fifths of the air you breathe.
Air.
Now, number two and number three hydrogen,
come.
Fusion.
Now we have oxygen.
Another-fifth of the air you breathe.
Number four.
Fusion.
Huh?
Now we have coal again.
Same piece.
And we have helium.
What you feel ballooned with.
Four hydrogens, if they are 30 million degrees hot,
30 million degrees.
It is not children playing with matches.
The four hydrogens come out one helium.
The carbon comes back the same.
You see, same way, no change.
That's why we call this the carbon cycle.
Now we weigh the helium.
Should weigh 400 ounces like the hydrogen.
Oh yes, naturally.
But it can be.
The helium weighs three ounces less than the hydrogen.
Where did the three ounces go?
That is the magic of the stars.
That is the secret of the hydrogen bomb.
I show you.
Come back three ounces.
Here is where they went.
They changed into...
Now the energy in those three little ounces
that completely disappeared as matter,
that energy is enough to raise
the Empire State Building 2,500 miles high.
Now the carbon cycle, which is what Thermo just explained to us,
is not the only way in which you can change hydrogen
into helium plus energy.
You may also use a very special and rare process
in which you put two hydrogen atoms together directly.
Is that the famous proton-proton process?
See, you've been reading.
Mr. Son, you do not annihilate or destroy
just two or three ounces.
But four million tons of hydrogen matter each second.
That gives you your unbelievable energy,
which you radiate out into space.
We think that originally,
you were a great loose cloud of gas,
mostly hydrogen, being contracted by gravity.
As you were compressed, the temperature went up.
Just as the air in a bicycle tire gets hotter and hotter
as you pump it.
Finally, the temperature in your core
reached the necessary 30 million degrees
needed to trigger the thermonuclear reaction.
Presto, the furnace was lit.
Never to go out again as long as you live, Mr. Son.
The hydrogen began burning into helium and energy.
Gravity tries to compress you.
Burning hydrogen tries to expand you.
The two forces just balance each other.
What's perfection itself?
A furnace made of its own fuel.
An immense, continuous hydrogen bomb
operating at an even heat for billions of years.
What a wonderful invention you are, Mr. Son.
Which brings up a point.
How long before he runs out of this here now, hydrogen fuel?
Oh, he still has about 98% of his fuel left.
But 50, 100 billion years from now, Mr. Son,
you'll perhaps run out of fuel.
You'll expire, go wherever good stars go.
We'll go with you because as you go, we go.
You see, you're not just a big blob of hot mass to us.
You're the head of our family.
We want to know more about you.
We depend on you for our very existence.
Yes, in fact, we're depending on you heavily
for the solution of two of man's biggest problems.
Well, at last I'm being appreciated.
What did you say your name was?
Dr. Research, your big...
What are those two big problems you spoke of, Dr. Research?
The first is the age-old problem of food.
Roll five.
And boy, the number of miles that need food keeps increasing.
In 1650, after 25,000 years of man,
our population had reached half a billion.
By 1950, only 300 years later,
the population climbed to two and one half billion,
five times as many.
Out of all human beings who ever lived,
one out of 20 is alive today.
One out of 20? Alive today?
Isn't that amazing?
We never had food enough for all in the past.
We don't have enough for all today.
Two out of every three persons on Earth
naturally eat below the minimum necessary for health.
Yet 100 million new babies are born every year.
A yearly baby crop nearly equal to the population
of all of South America.
And all born hungry.
Yes, our population's practically exploding.
I bet he doesn't know who grows his food for him.
Oh, yeah, we know quite a bit about that.
That is he does.
Roll four.
Our food is grown by a natural process called photosynthesis,
which means putting together with light, your light,
the oldest, biggest and most important manufacturing operation in the world.
99% of all our food and fuel is created by photosynthesis,
a process that goes on only in plants, never in animals.
On every green leaf, there are millions of
sub-microscopic little one-man factories
turning out more sugar than all the ships and railroads in the world could carry.
And the head man of each factory is a little green molecule called chlorophyll,
the only engineer with a know-how about this still secret life process.
Chlorophyll is so small and so secretive
that not even the most powerful microscopes can spy on him.
Here's the way we think he works.
The veins of the leaf bring him water from the roots.
From the air, he grabs a molecule of carbon dioxide, CO2.
He puts a water molecule and a carbon dioxide molecule together.
Then he reaches for a piece of sunlight,
and this is what we don't quite know how he adds this sunlight.
And I'm not going to tell you either.
You can darn well find out for yourself.
Quiet.
Piece by piece, he adds more sunlight to his sugarcane.
Then he pulls out an oxygen atom from the mixture and releases it into the air.
And the Russians didn't invent me either.
I invented myself.
Then he takes some sauce that come up in the veins,
sprinkles them over the mixture for icing,
and puts the completed sugar cake into a waiting artery.
Out of this sugar or sunshine cake,
the tree makes leaves, trunk, roots, and fruit.
In the sea, chlorophyll produces even more food than he does on land.
The whole surface of the seas is teeming with billions of tons of a minute,
single-cell vegetable called phytoplankton.
These in turn are eaten by countless, almost invisible little animals called zooplankton.
Which are eaten by little fish.
Which are eaten by bigger fish.
Which are eaten by still bigger fish.
Yes, all fish are ultimately made of chlorophyll sunshine cake.
And when we catch them and can them, we're catching and canning sunlight.
In fact, all animals feed on sunshine cake in one form or another.
The energy the junior gets from milk was in a contented cow 24 hours ago.
24 hours before that, the same energy was in clover,
which had absorbed it from sunlight that had come 93 million miles in eight minutes
from the surface of the sun,
but had taken 20 million years to find its way to the surface from the sun's central furnace.
So you see the energy that makes junior run,
that makes a porpoise leap,
and makes me talk so much.
That energy is hydrogen that burned in your central furnace
long, long before man walked the earth.
You know, brother research, I'm beginning to like you.
Do all the people know these things about me?
No, that's why this program.
What's the big hitch in the food problem?
For one thing, chlorophyll is too slow.
Take any acre of forest or vegetables.
The amount of sunshine converted to plant food
averages only two tons of vegetable matter per year.
But if all the lights you send us could be used by chlorophyll,
we could raise 2,000 tons of food per acre per year.
A little chlorophyll may know the big secret, but he's awfully inefficient.
Oh, who's inefficient?
I just make sugar.
Can I help it? It's so silly. Please build a trunk soon.
Branches and roots out of it, but you can't eat.
What you're looking for is a plant that's all fruit.
Oh, there is such a plant.
Oh, edible, too.
And it multiplies faster than rabbits.
But you scientists are too dumb to find it.
There you are, Mr. Man. Find the plant.
Oh, we found it already, Mr. Son.
Roll ten.
Found it in freshwater lakes.
A kind of green algae called chlorella,
a tiny one-celled plant that has learned the mathematical trick
of multiplying by dividing.
Each cell gives birth to from four to 16 daughter cells,
which all grow up and repeat the process.
Chlorella contains fats, carbohydrates, and up to 50% proteins,
and is all edible.
All fruit is, Mr. Chlorell would say.
All over the world, scientists are doing research on chlorella.
In Japan, Dr. Hiroshi Tamia of the Tokugawa Institute
has done some of the most interesting and practical work.
For there, food is definitely a problem.
Into these troughs, water containing chlorella cultures is pumped.
Nutrient salts are added.
The troughs are covered with plastic sheeting to let in sunlight
while extra carbon dioxide is bubbled into the solution.
When the culture becomes intensely green,
the chlorella crop is harvested.
After washing and drying, the fine powder looks like green flour.
Mrs. Tamia, wife of the director, has added this to regular flour
and made excellent biscuits and cakes out of it.
If these processes ever become practical,
underfed populations may have a new, rich source of food.
Yes, indeed.
An acre of chlorella can convert sunlight into some 20 tons of plant matter
against one or two tons of an ordinary crop.
But there's a second great problem facing us eventually.
For thousands of years, we got our fuel from burning wood.
Sun power, Mr. Sun stored up in trees.
Next, we put animals to work.
Sun power from grass.
Then came educated power to do work animals couldn't be taught to do.
Human slave power to build roads, pyramids and row ships.
Sun power with brains.
But slaves had to be fed.
So we discovered power that didn't eat, like windmills and water wheels.
The machine age was born.
But modern machines need to be fed too, fed with fuels.
Where do we get the fuels?
From the big fuel man himself.
Over the ages, Mr. Sun was kind enough to store them up for him.
Chomp for living sunshine.
Thing for fossil sunshine.
Drill for liquid sunshine.
Dams for silent sunshine.
Fuel.
Fuel.
More fuel.
How much fuel is in the bank?
How big is the trust fund the old boy left us?
Roll 13.
Well, suppose all our energy had been deposited
in the Sun power bank incorporated,
founded millions of years ago with assets unlimited.
In 1850, each American for instance,
withdrew enough fuel from the fuel bank
to generate 400 horsepower hours for himself.
But nobody worried too much about it.
Our assets still appeared unlimited.
In 1950, each American withdrew 10,000 horsepower hours
from Sun power incorporated,
while atomic scientists were making some minor deposits.
This began to worry us.
Our assets were becoming definitely limited.
By 1975, we'll probably be able to do something
but by 1975, we'll probably withdraw 20,000 horsepower hours each.
Atomic energy fuel deposits will stave off the run for some time,
but there's only so much uranium and thorium in the world,
and that will go too.
When the principal's gone, you're going to have to live on your income, huh?
But our income is only about 10% of our power spending.
We need help.
Every day I send you a thousand times more power
than you use in a year.
It's up to you, fellows.
Anybody working on getting power direct from old blowhard here?
Oh, yes, but not nearly enough.
Roll six feet.
Some years ago, Dr. Charles Greeley Abbott,
an enthusiastic pioneer in solar engines,
designed this vacuum-jacketed boiler tube
at the focus of a parabolic mirror,
which will convert sunlight to engine power.
Today, the French laboratory of solar energy
has an enormous solar furnace at Mont Louis
for metal research at high temperatures.
In India, Dr. S. Batnagar,
the famous Indian scientist,
experimented with solar cookers for home use.
On one of these cookers,
an Indian family can cook its noonday meal
with no heat other than the sun's heat.
Some other ways depend on glass.
Sunlight coming through a window,
heats up everything in the room,
but heat radiated back from furniture and floor
is long heat waves,
which the window glass stops from going back out,
thus trapping the sun's heat.
Is that why greenhouses covered with glass
are warmer inside than the air outside?
Right.
That's why your closed car gets so unbearably hot
standing out in the sun.
Dr. Maria Telkis has designed a model house in Massachusetts
in which solar heat is ingeniously collected,
stored, and distributed throughout the whole house.
Now, these are more or less well-known mechanical ways
of using sun power directly.
There's exciting research going on with some brand new ways.
You think Mr. Clarifill was pretty smart
with his tricky sunshine cake
that makes food out of your sunlight?
Well, the science boys have come up with a sunshine cake
that makes electricity out of your sunlight.
Oh, yes. You mean the solar battery?
That's hardly even a cookie yet, let alone a cake.
Doc, that's big news.
Well, it was the solar battery.
Now, held in the sun, this thin little cell,
a sunshine wafer we might call it,
produces a usable amount of electric current
out of the sunlight that falls on it.
It was cooked up out of basic research
at the Bell Telephone Lab by three scientists,
Darrell Chapin, Calvin Fuller, and Gerald Pearson.
You know, although this is quite expensive at the moment,
the simplicity of this sunshine wafer is startling.
What bake one for a glory, Puss Doc?
I'd be delighted.
Look at him. Oh, pastry cook research.
The recipe for this solar wafer
sounds just like a vacation.
Just sand and sunshine.
Thank you, son.
Ah!
Plain old sand is composed of silicon and oxygen.
It's time to go to meeting name as silicon dioxide.
Separate out the oxygen and the bits of seaweed,
bottle tops, and other odds and ends.
And we have left a metal silicon.
Ah, but our silicon must be pure silicon.
So we purify it, and purify it until it's as pure as the driven snow.
Now melt the silicon,
and add just a pinch of arsenic for flavor.
Mix thoroughly.
Then cool until it crystallizes.
Then from the arsenic flavored silicon roll,
slice off a razor thin wafer.
Put the wafer into the oven.
Fill oven with a boron gas,
and bake the white heat.
The boron cooks into the surface, forms an extremely thin icing over the wafer.
Remove finished wafer.
Connect one wire from electric motor to boron icing,
and the other wire to the wafer itself.
Expose wafer to sunlight.
Presto!
The motor starts running with the efficiency of an automobile,
and nothing is used up but the sunshine, which is free.
Is that something?
Well, I'll be darned.
So you see in a solar battery,
it's energy from the sun that moves the electricity,
which in turn rotates motors.
It's energy from the sun that moves the electricity.
It's energy from the sun that moves the electricity.
It's energy from the sun that moves the electricity.
It's energy from the sun that moves the electricity.
Or as in this case,
powers rural telephone lines by charging storage batteries.
But the solar battery isn't all.
There's other important research in changing sunlight into power.
Dr. E. I. Rabinowitz has put together a chemical cell
that'll change light waves into electric current.
But storing sun power for night use
is a big part of this energy from the sun problem.
Well, Dr. Lawrence J. Height of MIT
is experimenting with a process
in which sunlight decomposes water back into oxygen and hydrogen,
the hydrogen being a storable fuel.
Another possibility.
Phosphors are chemical powders that absorb sunlight
and can give it back slowly in the dark.
I read where Westinghouse engineers predict a wallpaper
containing phosphors which will absorb daylight during the day,
then glow for hours after dark.
A city painted with phosphor paint of the future might glow all night.
These are some of the processes
that are being researched on a small scale today, Mr. Sun.
But our engineers can't turn the wheels of industry on little wafers.
They'll have to build efficient generators
that spread out over acres, even square miles,
to compete with the cheap, cold, and oil still available to us.
And the doctor, what about atomic power?
Oh, great hopes for it, of course.
Especially now, since atomic plants can make their own fuel
with so-called breeder reactors.
Some even dream of imitating the stars,
getting power from hydrogen fusion.
But if dreams fail, the answer must be sun power from our Mr. Sun.
What if you don't find ways to use my free sunshine for fuel?
Then the machine age is over.
We'll have to go back to muscle power
and the half-billion population that muscle power alone can support.
But that will never happen.
Oh, no, why not?
Because man's greatest power source is his mind.
God gave him that, not you.
Without taking a step, he can travel faster and farther than any animal.
Without even getting wet, he can out-swim any fish.
Without a fell on him, he can fly faster and higher
and farther than any eagle.
He can send his eyes and ears hundreds of miles into space
where he's never even been.
And his pride opened the secret of the atom,
which he's never even seen.
When his fuel's run low,
man's mind and imagination will meet the challenge
and invent undreamed of ways to use the free sunlight
God showers down upon him.
Just remember, somebody must love you very much.
That planet that you live on is not like all the rest.
You're blessed with just the right size,
the right temperature, the right atmosphere,
the right composition.
Everything just right to produce the biggest miracle of all.
Life.
So go ahead, ask, inquire, seek the truth.
It's right that you should know
or the good Lord wouldn't have given you that driving curiosity.
Measure the outside with mathematics,
but measure the inside with prayer.
Prayer is researched to study man as well as the world.
So keep on pitching.
The best is yet to come for you.
I predict man's next great adventure will be the sun age.
When that happens, you'll be rich beyond all dreams.
I predict great sun cities built on desert wastelands
where everything is run by sunlight.
I predict...
Oh, sure, that's fine.
But suppose I begin cutting up, then what?
You won't.
But if you did, man has migrated many times before
and he'll do it again if he has to.
If you make it too hot for him on Earth,
man is capable of conceiving a way to move the whole kitten
to bootle the greener pastures on some other planet.
Oh, no, we like it here.
Don't change on us, Mr. Sun.
We used to worship you as an unknown god.
But now that we know you better,
we love you as our great and good friend.
So keep on shining, Mr. Sun.
Thanks for all the radiant riches you showered down upon us.
Thanks for our eyes and all the glories we behold.
Thanks for all the green forests,
the great deposit of black dimes,
the deep pools of liquid gold you put in the bank for us.
Thanks for the wheat fields,
all the fruits and flowers you grow for us.
Thanks for feeding our animals,
our birds, our insects,
all the fish in the sea.
And thanks especially for the glory and beauty of your good mornings
and your good evenings
and the words of St. Francis.
Be praised, my Lord, in what you have created.
Above all else, be praised in our brother, Master Sun.
Good night, brotherhood.
Now you're hooking the sunshine.
The Bell Telephone System takes pride in bringing you this program
in its series of shows on science.
We wish to express our gratitude
to the distinguished board of advisors
who guide the choice and treatment of scientific matter for the series.
For the program you have just seen,
our thanks to the special advisors
who have suggested and checked the scientific material.
The Bell Telephone System is indebted to all these men
and to many institutions
for the generous support they have given this venture
in public education through entertainment.
