Welcome back to the Demystify Sci Podcast. I'm Michael Shiloh.
I'm Anastasia.
Today we have Dr. Mike McCullough from the University of Plymouth talking about quantized inertia,
a new way of looking at how it is that physical bodies stay put or stay in motion and what's
going on there. And what's really, really cool about his work is that it's highly integrative.
He's taken an assessment of the unsolved mysteries in physics and tried to address them in a very
integrative, a very simplified fashion.
Yeah, definitely. He's clearly thought really deeply about these questions through the lens
of Mach's principle, which is the idea that the physical phenomena that we see around us are not
due to some intrinsic property of the objects that are producing the phenomena. It is the results
of the interactions of the cosmos, and we love that. The sum total of everything in the universe
conspiring to affect your local environment.
If you enjoy the conversation, share it with somebody. That's how we reach people.
Please leave a comment. Tell us what you think. Tell us if you have ideas. Tell us if you liked
this line of investigation, if you hated it.
Honestly, if you watched, just leave a comment.
Leave a comment.
It helps tremendously with the algorithm for whatever reason. I think because it's,
I don't know, something about platform engagement or something, I'm sure. But
if you're watching and you have a YouTube account, just drop, even just say hi. That would be enough.
100%. If you've already done that, consider coming over to our Patreon and join the community
so that we can get your regular input. We have a nice close-knit circle
where we hang out once a week and discuss what should be happening on the show,
what's exciting in the world that we should be exploring more of, and we'd love to see you there.
Enjoy the conversation. We'll see you next time.
The scientific revolution starts now.
Indeed, Mr. Sassard, for a test.
Let us see you return.
I'm trying to understand inertial mass. I've suggested a new model for inertial mass,
and that gets rid of a lot of problems in astrophysics, such as the galaxy rotation problem.
And it also suggests an entirely new physics.
Why is inertial mass not understood as it stands?
It's always been assumed, so ever since Newton said or Galileo before him that things tend to
keep going in straight lines until you push on them, it's almost been just language. There's been no
mechanical model for it. So in my opinion, I've provided the first mechanical model for
inertial mass to explain why things keep going in straight lines.
And the flip side of that, I guess, is why do they stay still when they're...
Why is it difficult to move something that's at rest, essentially?
Yes, but as relativity teaches us, the velocity does not really matter.
It's meaningless, really, to talk about a speed, because it's a speed relative to what?
Yeah, well, to something else, I guess. I guess motion doesn't make sense without at least two
bodies, right? That's right, yes. So that's like Max Principle, isn't it?
Yes, Max Principle. Love it. We love Max Principle. I'd be curious to get into that.
I remember I was having a conversation with my brother and he's a computer programmer,
and I was trying to explain to him the idea of inertia through Max Principle, and I explained
to him what Max Principle was, which is that, I mean, it's interconnection on a fundamental
subject. Well, I mean, yeah, I guess in Max words, it's more just that things far away affect
things that are like the entire universe affects. What's happening here? And I told him that and
he's like, that sounds crazy. And I was like, it's a named principle, and we looked it up. And I
think that it wasn't, wasn't it Einstein who formulated it? Well, Einstein drew heavily upon it,
I guess, from what I understand. I'm not an Einstein scholar by any stretch, but a lot of
people have drawn on it, right? And I don't, I don't think Max called it Max Principle or anything
like that. That's right. And it's quite vague as well. Right.
I'll try and explain how I think I have the first theory that incorporates it.
Mac had this famous, it was actually Newton who started it with the Newton's bucket,
where you have a spinning bucket, and the surface of the water becomes concave.
And he argues that's not because of its motion relative to the side of the bucket,
but relative to its, it's responding to its motion relative to the rest of the cosmos.
But Mac had the famous question, what would happen if instead of rotating the bucket in the
cosmos, you rotated the cosmos around the bucket? And that there is no theory which could explain
what would happen or predict what would happen in that case. But my theory does explain that.
What's the difference between rotating the bucket or rotating the cosmos?
Is there a difference? Well, well, it was, it was unknown. But
what I predict is that when you start rotating the bucket, sorry, the cosmos around the bucket,
the bucket will, will rotate with it, which is a newly predicted effect. And I actually have
some empirical evidence for that in the flyby anomalies, which are spacecraft passing by the
Earth. And it turns out that if they, if they leave on the equator, they have a different
behavior than if they leave close to the spinning pole. And I can predict that. And that that's a
direct observation of Mac's principle, in my opinion. Can you elaborate on that?
Well, it's, it's probably difficult to do it before I explain the theory itself.
Okay. Well, so let's, let's do that. Do you have, do you said that you wanted to pull up a slide?
Yes. Okay. I'll, I'll share a screen. So the idea is that we have this ball here,
this black ball, and we assume it's accelerating to the right.
So this way. And according to quantum mechanics, when anything accelerates, it sees a kind of
radiation, which is called UNRU radiation, proposed by Bill UNRU from Canada in about 1976.
And I've shown this radiation with the red color. And this radiation pushes on the object.
It hits it from all directions. But also, according to Einstein, from this area on the,
the left, this black area, the non radiating side, or non radiation receiving side.
That's right. This object will never know what's in this black area because information travels at
speed of light. So accelerating to the right, information from this area will never catch
up to it. So there's a kind of shadow zone here and a horizon separating it from the,
the rest of the universe. The, the new thing I'm suggesting is that this horizon
damps the UNRU radiation in just the same way as if it was a Casimir effect occurring between
the object and the horizon. So I've shown that with the blue here.
Can you explain the Casimir effect for us?
Yes. The, the Casimir effect from physics is if you have two parallel metal plates and you place
them within a micron or so of each other, then the, the quantum waves that are usually ubiquitous
in space everywhere, cannot fit between the plates. So that means there are more quantum waves
outside the plates than inside. So there's a net force inwards pushing the plates together,
and that has been observed in the lab. Do the plates have to be charged?
They don't have to be charged, but they do have to be conducting. So what's happening is the
electrons are moving within the plates and cancelling the, the quantum fields, creating a
sort of a super vacuum, if you like, between the plates, which sucks them together.
Is this distinct from the way that current carrying wires attract?
Yes. This is, this is a quantum effect. And although some people claim it is a van der
Waals force, a van der Waals attraction, there's a bit of a debate about it.
But I'm assuming it's a quantum effect. And that's the same effect occurs whenever you have
an accelerating object and a horizon. So you see in the picture, there's more red on this side of
the ball. So it gets hit more from this side than from this side, and it gets pushed back
against its acceleration. So this provides a model for inertial mass. And if you calculate it, you,
you get a result close enough, given the uncertainties in the calculation,
to exactly predict inertial mass. What we see is inertial mass.
So it's like a photon pressure. There's a shadow from the photon pressure. I guess the photon
pressure itself is the inertial resistance in this model. That's, that's right. Although I now
have a different way to, to derive it using information. But that's another story.
That's really interesting. Yeah, I, I guess the ubiquity of photon pressure is,
is really curious, right? Like everywhere you would go in the universe, you're going to be
receiving light from somebody, and it's going to put a slight pressure on you. What about gravity,
though? Because I always think about gravity as being the opposite side of that, because just as
you're getting pushed on by different atoms, you're also getting tugged on by the same atoms.
Well, that's true. And this, this theory also explains gravity
in a very similar way. So gravity is a sheltering effect of these, of this honoru radiation between
bodies. Like the sage or something. Yes. But the sage model had a defect in that the radiation
occurred at all times. This, this is different because the honoru radiation only occurs when
you accelerate. Only in a particular direction. So whereas the sage was disproven because there
should have been radiation in front of orbiting bodies, slowing them down. In this case, there
wouldn't be. There's some thermodynamic problems with the sage too, which I've never fully
comprehended. Some, some arguments about overheating with this constant bombardment of
particles. Yes, that's, that's true. And the interesting thing about honoru radiation is that
it's only, it's only perceived by the accelerating object. I mean, that's very interesting. So
somebody in the same space as the accelerating object would not see the heat, but the accelerating
object would. So that's very bizarre. So inertia has to do with continuing to move in a straight
line as much as it does with the resistance to starting to move. And so if this is an acceleration
based model, how does it relate to something that experiences inertia when it's moving much
slower than the speed of light? So this, this applies to any acceleration that you, you have.
If, if an object has a speed that's constant, then it won't see a horizon at all. And so it
wouldn't have an inertial mass in this model. Because it's receiving the radiation from all
sides at that point. Yes, yes, exactly. And also, can I just show one other slide? So if the
acceleration is incredibly low, so here's the ball again, and it's acceleration is incredibly low
as for stars at the edge of galaxies, for example, then this horizon moves so far away that it goes
beyond the part of the cosmos that we can actually see that there is a part of the cosmos from which
information could not have got to us in the, the age of the universe. And that's called the, the Hubble
horizon. And if this horizon goes beyond that, then it becomes irrelevant. And the cosmic horizon
damps the underwaves all the way around symmetrically. So this predicts that the process of inertia will
not, but will collapse for very low accelerations. That's interesting. That's interesting. It fits
really nicely with the definition for the universe that astronomers will finally come down to if you
squeeze them hard enough, which is the edge of what we can see essentially, right? People, people
have this very conflated, like philosophers tend to think of the universe as everything in existence.
But astronomers really, when pushed, well, it's sort of like when pushed about time, like they'll
be like, it's what a clock does. But when you talk about astronomy and the radius of the universe,
it's really just a matter of how far we can see. Yes, that makes sense.
There are different ways of looking at it. Some people would say this Hubble horizon is a distance
at which things are moving away from us faster than light, because the speed of recession increases
as you go away. But I say I prefer the idea that it's just the distance from which information could
have got to us in the age of the universe, or at least are part of it.
What do you mean by information in a physical sense? I hear you talking about information
moving around, and it's hard for me to imagine that. Okay, photons then. I suppose I could say
photons. Photons make sense. They carry information.
So we're ultimately talking about the photons being unable to reach back, essentially.
That's right, yes. So photons from beyond this boundary could not have got to us
in the age of the universe if there is such a thing.
Yeah, it seems like it's interesting because it doesn't really depend on
there having to be an age of the universe necessarily.
That's right. So what the theory predicts as well is that, well, there are different
ways to interpret it, but it doesn't need an expansion of the cosmos. Just an expansion
of the horizon that we can know. So it's kind of an expansion of information rather than a
physical expansion. But why would the information horizon expand?
That's because as time goes on, information can reach us from further and further away,
and that defines the horizon. So over time, but it seems like what you're saying here is
there is a fixed horizon or is it a horizon that will in perpetuity be moving outward?
It will move outwards all the time at the speed of light.
It almost strikes me like ripples on a pond sort of disintegrate. I don't know what the word is,
but dissipating, I guess, at great distance. You don't necessarily feel a ripple from the
other side of the ocean. So this makes me think of redshift, which increases as you go to the
edge of the cosmos. And so I wonder if your theory deals with redshift and how does it do so?
Yes, that's a very good question. So the usual idea is that as you look further and further away,
things are moving away faster and faster from us, and that the light emitted is redshifted because
of the Doppler shift. So what I say instead, what the model says is that when you look at
objects very far away, you're looking at them in the distant past. When the universe was smaller,
and because the physics I'm proposing depends on the size of the universe,
this changes the inertial mass of the electrons in the atoms in such a way that they have less
energy because they have less mass. Because they're interacting with more, it's like a
divisible property. It's because they're in a smaller universe. So their inertial mass is lower,
so the energy they contain is lower, and so the light they emit upon electron transition
is redshifted.
Why is, yeah, can you break down for me? I missed something about the smallness of the universe
related to the inertial mass. Can you explain that? The usual thing I do at this stage is to
show the equation, but I can't really do that. But all I can say then is that as the...
Well, maybe just explain it with like three atoms or something, right? Say the universe only had
three atoms and there's light between the three of them, and then you move them apart, right?
Is that the idea? Or you're saying there's less atoms in the first place or something like that?
So... Like, what do you mean by smaller universe, I guess, is what I'm trying to understand.
Okay, so at the moment, we see the edge of the cosmos is about 10 to the 26 meters away,
because light has had a lot of time to get to us from that distance.
In our distant past, the universe would have been smaller because we could only see...
We would only be able to see to a much smaller distance.
Presumably because the atoms would have been closer to us?
Were that fewer atoms had had time to interact? So I guess the question is...
Yes, that's right, yes.
So the interaction is mediated by light, fundamentally.
And so as the horizon expands, what's expanding is the place that you are standing
is being reached by more and more light in a spherical way. And so you're basically at this
focal point of a gradually expanding sphere of light and everything is feeding back onto you.
And as there's more atoms that have more light impinging on things at the center,
it changes the energy of the electron, or am I wrong?
It changes the inertial mass, the phenomenon.
That's right, yeah. Yes, because the inertial mass collapses in the theory when
this Vindal horizon, this close horizon, goes behind the cosmic horizon.
And if the cosmic horizon is much closer, then that occurs at a much lower acceleration.
So inertial mass, sorry, a much higher acceleration, so inertial mass is less.
And the Vindal horizon is the one that you were showing in the first slide,
which is that as the particle is accelerating, it's that break that's behind its path of motion.
Yes, that's right.
So let me see if I can... I think that one last piece that I'm missing for this is
like a single sentence definition for inertial mass.
Or a brief definition, I feel like a sentence is a lot to ask for.
Yeah, can I try it? And you can tell me if I got it or not.
Yes, yes, please do.
All right. So I think what he's saying is that inertial mass is the result of
interactions that occur during acceleration. These are photonic interactions, essentially,
and they appear as a resistance to motion, to acceleration, essentially.
So it makes the object seem heavy.
Yeah. And so, yeah. And so I'm not... I mean, I think I understand the cosmology is just that
there's more interactions available on this timeline of the universe as it evolves
under this big bang type thing.
It doesn't necessarily have to be a big bang, right? Because...
What's an inception?
Yeah. So that's another piece that I want to fold in.
Okay. So we have inertial mass that as a particle accelerates, it is heavier
because it's being pushed on by the things that are out in front of it.
The light.
The light.
Via the light.
Via the light. Via the light. I think that's important.
Well, it's a quantum background, really, but they are photons as well, so virtual photons.
What do you mean by quantum background?
The onru radiation is a quantum radiation. It's a random thermal
thing. It's like a warm bath of photons. So they are photons, but they are from quantum mechanics.
Well, presumably they're coming from an atom somewhere, right?
It's hard to imagine light without an atom making it happen.
This can happen. It's well known that there's a quantum background, a zero point field, if you like.
So the way that when we do the material atomics explanations, we model the photon as traveling
along an interconnection between atoms. I'm not nervous. I'm just being careful.
I mean, you're diving into like a pit of snakes about the photon is an activity, right?
Would you agree that the photon's an activity? So it must be occurring within some actor,
like some actor must be participating in the activity. It's not possible to imagine
an activity without an actor, essentially. And so we end up...
And if you go to quantum field theorists, they'll tell you that there is not an actor.
There's just the field, and the field is a measurement, and that's kind of the baseline
of reality. And so we were frustrated by that, and we were like, okay, what if there actually
is an actor? What would be the architecture of that actor that would allow for something to be
moving to generate the measurement? And so we... Do you know Carver Mead?
I've heard of him, yeah. He was a big semiconductor guy at Caltech. He worked with Feynman back in
the day. And he at the sort of... And the latter part of his career started to get really preoccupied
by the fact that he thought that quantum electrodynamics was...
Overly complicated?
Was overly complicated. And he was like, I think that you can simplify this by going back to the
work of Gian Loomis, who at some point was like, light is not something that radiates into space.
Light has to be something that is a communication between atoms. And so if you simplify down to
a single atom universe, you can't have light because it's not just this like stuff that gets
shot away. It's... Yes, I like that idea.
So if you have two atoms and they're in communication, then there's a connection that's between them,
and the light travels along that we call it a filament. And you can kind of model it roughly
off the electron, the radial distribution function of the electron, which goes off to infinity.
If you treat the electron as the surface of the atom.
Yeah. So if the electron is the surface of the atom, the surface of the atom goes off to infinity,
but it's very, very, it's a very, very small amount of it. It's like either 0.01 or 0.001%
of the atom extends. And so if those extensions are significant, then those extensions would be
running between all of the atoms in the universe. And so your zero point energy is the sort of the
baseline readout of the interconnections. And so as you increase the number of atoms that are
connected to one another and could transmit light, then you have an increase in the zero point energy
of the universe because you have more filaments in a cross section of space.
And the photon travels between atoms. And so it sounds like what you're saying.
I guess, go ahead.
Sorry, go on.
No, no, go ahead.
The, so the, the honor of radiation is I think quite an accepted prediction of quantum field
theory. And it's supposed to be a wave in all the fields. So matter waves as well as light.
So I guess I'm trying to say that the, the actor that you're looking for is also present
in the honor field.
Yeah.
I mean, that, that would, it would be unfortunate if it wasn't because I feel like that would
invalidate the project. And so I guess I'm, so you, you have, let's say a smaller,
can we call it a light cone?
Yes, I suppose you could. Yes.
So you have a smaller light cone. And in that smaller light cone, you have fewer connections
by virtue of fewer atoms being inside of that light cone. And then as you expand the light cone,
you have more atoms. And so what is your theory say about the transition between fewer atoms
to larger atoms in terms of the physical properties of the objects within that light cone?
Let's say the electron.
So the more, the more interactions you have, the higher the inertial mass is, which seems to
make intuitive sense. I've not particularly thought about it that, that way before, you know,
counting up the number of interactors, but it's an interesting way to look at it.
What, what causes the light cone to expand? Because it seems like if there is a light
cone that expands, it requires a genesis moment.
Well, I suppose so. There must have been a time when our part of the universe was created.
And, but I try now to get to, to hung up on things like that. I mean, I think
people should try to predict galaxy rotation before talking about the beginning of everything.
So, yeah, let's talk about galaxy rotation. That's a huge astrophysical. I was gonna ask,
like, what this, you know, we had a really, do you know, Mike Levin that Tufts, he does this
really fascinating bioengineering stuff. I've heard of him as well, but yeah, Mike put Mike
said something really profound the other day about science in general and evaluating
a scientific theory. And he was like, what does it allow you to do? Like what new questions can
you address that haven't been able to be addressed by the former theory? And so I really want to
hear about this galactic rotation business, because that's a nightmare, of course.
Okay, so the problem is, of course, when you have every galaxy that they can see
spins far too fast at the edge. So the gravitational mass that they calculate
from the light in the galaxy is too small to hold on to the stars at the edge. So of course,
they add dark matter. But I don't like that explanation because they add it just where
they need it to make the theory work. And that seems rather unscientific. And it turns out that
what I'm proposing predicts galaxy rotation exactly and without dark matter. So this is what I was
saying earlier, that if the acceleration is very low, this this Rindler horizon moves behind the
cosmic horizon. So instead of having any symmetry in the under irradiation on both sides causing
inertia, now you've got a symmetrical distribution of under irradiation and know it or less inertial mass.
Because it's interacting with less, right? Less, I mean, there's less interaction set,
there's less acceleration, relatively speaking. Because there's less acceleration,
the Rindler horizon moves further away, very far away. And so it's behind the cosmic horizon now.
So the under irradiation distribution is now symmetrical, as in the second picture I showed.
So there is effectively no inertial mass. So it collapses.
I'm thinking about that second picture that you showed. And in the second picture you showed,
you had this object that was surrounded by a circular field. And on the right side,
you had the cosmic background or the cosmic horizon. And on the left side was the Rindler horizon.
And that's hard for me to totally understand. Is it more that the cosmic horizon is circular
around that entire space and the Rindler horizon is like outside of that?
That's right, yes. So the cosmic horizon is symmetrical sphere. So it can't produce any force
because the distribution of this under irradiation is the same from all directions.
Whereas if the acceleration is high, then you get this Rindler horizon coming very close.
You can think of it that the horizon attracts in a way. So when you have a close Rindler horizon,
it pulls the object back against its acceleration.
And put this into context of the galactic rotation problem for me.
So this predicts that at a particular acceleration, the Rindler horizon will move
behind the cosmic horizon. And at exactly that point, the inertial mass will start to disappear.
This means that the centrifugal force, if you put it that way on the star, pushing it outwards,
will decrease. And if you apply the theory to galactic rotation, it predicts the behavior
exactly. You get the edge stars with less inertial mass and less centrifugal force.
So the little amount of mass we can see in the galaxy can hold them in.
And it works exactly and there's no adjustment needed to the theory. It predicts it exactly.
I've published this in many papers.
That's so interesting. Yeah, it's almost like they have less photon pressure out there.
It's essentially what it comes down to.
Yes, it's a bit like that.
I'm trying to conceptualize it on the order of the cosmic horizon, though, because are we talking
about this as bordered by the massive interaction of things inside the galaxy,
or are we still talking about it in terms?
It's a local phenomenon, I guess. I'm just trying to jump in there because I think
I wouldn't get too lost in that terminology because it's just telling you what your
interactome is like. It's like your local interactome is less. That's your horizon,
essentially. It's easy for me to think about it in terms of a single particle that's moving
and is being affected. And for some reason, I'm having a hard time getting a mental picture
of the galaxy and how this mixes. Well, so for stars in the center of the galaxy,
their acceleration is relatively high. So they see a Rindler horizon, where would it be?
It's closer.
Yes, so their acceleration is towards the center of the galaxy, so the Rindler horizon will be out,
and it will pull them out, and this will be their centrifugal force.
But as you go out to greater radii in the galaxy, at some point you'll reach a star
whose acceleration is so slow in its orbit that the Rindler horizon will be exactly
on the cosmic horizon. And then for the star beyond that, the Rindler horizon will be outside
the cosmic horizon. So its inertial mass should decrease. And when you look at the data, you see
that at exactly the point that you predict that the Rindler horizon is on the boundary,
on the cosmic horizon, that is when galaxies start to misbehave.
Beyond that radius, they do not obey Newtonian mechanics. And that proves that it has to be
on the radiation and quantized inertia that's causing it.
Because it's exactly the exact radius.
That's where the mathematics, that's where the quantitative depiction becomes very useful.
Yeah, of course, because I'm fundamentally allergic to mathematics. I spent a lot of time
in the car as a child with my dad making me do mental math problems and then yelling when I
didn't get them right. And so as an adult, I have a very tenuous and tentative relationship
to mathematics. And so I understand its utility, but I feel like I approach it from the standpoint
of like, okay, at least let's understand the pieces that are interacting.
I think you need both. You need intuition and mathematics. And I think Feynman was,
or Feynman was very good at that. He had both capabilities.
Did you come at this from an, how did you, how did you come to this? Because this is
not the way that most people think. I came to it from physical oceanography, ocean physics.
I studied waves at the UK Met Office. And I learned about a thing called the maritime
casimir effect, which is if you have two ships side by side, there'll be fewer waves between them.
So the waves on the outside of them will push them together.
So then I was also interested in astronomy and physics, of course. And so I applied it to physics.
You know what I love about this that I haven't loved about the sage ideas is that it seems
integrative, right? You're using the photon and standard empirically derived quantum mechanics
to explain something like you're not, you don't have to invent anything new to,
to make this explanation make sense. It's kind of like, for me, it just seems like it's a statement
of how photon pressure has been ignored, whatever, however you want to put that. That's what it seems
like to me, which is, I think really brilliant. The only new thing I'm saying is I'm allowing
relativity to talk to quantum mechanics. So I'm allowing this horizon to damp the quantum field.
Yeah, that that's the only radical thing in it.
Have people been resistant to this idea?
Yes. Most, most people have, have been resistant. I guess that's part of the course,
really, that that tends to happen. Most people believe in dark matter, I think, still.
But, well, it's, you can't ask for, well, you can ask for a lot of money to build dark matter
detectors, but it might be harder to build a, you don't really need to build a machine to
understand this idea. It's the kind of the, the trouble of working in a purely theoretical space.
If you can look at a bunch of data that's already there and explain things better,
then, you know, how do you really build a huge research program around that and
capture the public. I mean, people love dark stuff too, let's be honest. The magic, you know.
It's like, and that's, that's no small phenomenon, right? It's like, where people want the magic
back? They lost, they lost religion in the last century or so. I mean, not, not by and large,
but it's obviously not as popular and people miss the magic.
Yeah, that's interesting. Maybe, maybe that's part of it. But the great thing about this is
it brings cosmology into the lab. Because the thing I haven't mentioned before is that
I say that horizons attract. You can think of it that horizons attract. I think you can make a
horizon from a metal plate. So because a metal plate is rather like a horizon, because electrons
can move and cancel the quantum field. And it's already been shown in the Casimir effect that
if you put two plates together, they attract. Well, I think we can do, we can do better.
So I said this in a paper about, was it seven, seven years ago, and then DARPA invited me to
apply for funding to test this in the lab. And what you can do is you can,
you can have a very highly accelerated system. For example, picture an electron jumping between
two plates, two metal plates. And that will produce extremely intense unradiation. And then
if you make the system asymmetrical, you put another metal plate in there, or you can just
use two plates, actually, then the inner field will become inhomogeneous in space.
And it will push on the object. And then you can have a new kind of thrust.
Let's unpack that a little bit. I want to... Spaceships.
Well, yeah, definitely. So how does, so when you say that you make the system asymmetrical,
what does that mean? So you have to have a very intense unroof field and then damp it in one
place and not in another place. And then things will move from the, the second place to the first
place in a new way. They will float down the quantum, the gradient and the quantum vacuum,
if you like. Can you imagine what that kind of a propulsion system would look like?
Would it be like, how do you have a trailing plate and a leading, how do you, how do you set
up that asymmetry in a propulsion system? Well, a couple of engineers read my papers,
and they came up with the capacitor. They had looked at the capacitor before and seen some odd
thrusts coming from it. And they read my papers and they said, oh, maybe it's this. So they tested
it and they sent me their data and the theory predicts exactly what the thrust they were seeing.
So I set up a lab here at Plymouth to try that as well. And also an American company called
Ivo Ltd tried as well. And they're actually launching a test article into space in June,
June 10th to see if they can see this thrust in space.
Are you getting measurable effects here in the lab?
Yes, it's, it's quite hard to get. So it only works so far in 30% of cases. But we've shown
it's reversible. So if you turn the capacitor upside down, it's thrust down. And if you turn
it the way up, it's thrust up. It's in line with the theory. And the theory predicts that if you
narrow the gap between the capacitors, if you halve the gap, then you should get four times the
force. So I thought we should try to look for that. And we have seen that as well.
So there's a one over D squared dependence there.
Why do you think that it's so inconsistent? Why do you only see it 30% of the time?
Well, yes, that's a good question. The, I think what's happening, what we do is we put a dielectric
in between the capacitor plates. We, we want the electrons to jump across at an incredibly high
speed. So the acceleration is very high. That that produces underwaves, which are short enough to
interact with the capacitor. Otherwise, it just won't work. So unless the electrons jump across,
it's not going to, it's not going to happen. And we found that these two engineers, Beco
and Bat, found that you have to heat it up to about 50 degrees C to get the electrons to jump
across in this way. It's, it's almost like quantum tunneling.
Why does this? Oh, God.
So, so my answer would be that it doesn't always happen. Only in 30% of cases does it seem to
happen at the moment. But that's more than we had the beginning.
Why does increasing temperature affect the effect?
That's associated with the, it's similar to the photoelectric effects. The electrons have more
thermal energy to use to jump out. There's something called the work function in metals.
You need a certain amount of energy to get the electron out. And if you provide heat, you, you
help them. And does the dielectric effect, I assume that you would have to have a really
high dielectric material in order to generate sufficient speed? Yes, that's right. We use capton,
which is, I feel like I know that. Yes, it's used in space a lot. It's very,
you know, I think it's 308 volts per micron or something. That's the dielectric breakdown of
it. It's got a very high dielectric breakdown. So it's like a barrier we put in between the
plates, this barrier. And in order to jump across, the electrons have to be very energetic.
And that encourages them to leap at great speed.
But for right now, it seems like the experiment has run across really, really small distances,
because the Casimir effect you said was on the order of micron separation between plates.
That's right. Yes. So the plates are only about 10 microns apart in our experiment.
And so do you think that that's something that's possible to scale up?
Or is that separation the order of the device that would be developed?
I think that you'd have to have a lot of these plates in asymmetry, something like that.
Yes, that's right. The theory predicts that the force goes up as you bring the plates together.
So it's one over D squared. So if you, as I said, if you halve the separation, you quadruple the
force. So you can imagine. That's your gas pedal. Yes, that's right. Yeah. So you could go down to
the nano scale, and then you might get an awful lot more force. But then you would need a very good
dielectric. And I don't know if one exists yet. Oh, that's fascinating. Yeah, I'm curious what
portions of this development process are the most restraining at the moment? Is it
material science? Or is it a matter of scaling up the system? Or what are the main implement?
Or you said it, you know, it only happens 30% of the time. Is there a way to crank that up? Or
what are the different directions that you're working in towards of just improving the technology?
Well, yes.
If I knew the answer, I'd go and do it straight to my head, I suppose. We haven't
worked out yet how to improve from 30%. 70% of the time, we get nothing. 30% of the time,
we get what we expect. There are certain things we can try.
I guess the question would be like, you went from less than 30 to 30, right? You've mentioned that?
That's right. Yes, it's been a year and a half or so for the first,
well, six months, we didn't really see anything.
And so what did you do to achieve the gains that you saw, however large or small?
Okay, so we improved our system. So we have our capacitor
freely floating inside a shielded cage. We implemented heating in various ways.
We tried using light bulbs, for example, but the problem was that there were
interactions, electromagnetic interactions. So we now use a different method.
We've used different materials. We came across Capton. So we've slowly improved the system.
And the results have slowly improved, but we need something that works every time, of course.
How are you heating it now?
We're using, well, it doesn't last for long, but we're using just a hot plate.
Just like a resistance-based heater. That's right, yes.
Yeah. So I'm fascinated by this 30% of the time problem.
Do you think that it's just an issue with the way that the materials are breaking down or
interacting? Because I assume that if you're passing really high, can we call it current?
Yes. Well, the potential difference between the plates is typically
2 kilovolts, something like that. The current crossing is only a few microamps.
So that is to say that the dielectric is so good that it's preventing a large
quantity of things passing across. Yes. The trouble is we don't want an ionic
transfer of electrons. We want a uniform quantum tunneling of the electrons.
And it seems quite hard to always achieve that. We want them all to jump across simultaneously.
Okay. So what's the difference between ionic transfer and quantum tunneling?
So with ionic transfer, the electrons find a weak point in the dielectric
and then cross there. They all cross at that one point. And that's too chaotic.
It explodes. It's like a lightning bolt, basically. It's like a lightning bolt.
So you want some sort of serious insulation between your plates, essentially.
That's like perfect instructor. Okay. Well, so what about turning,
is there a material that you could turn the dielectric on and off? Because if you had a
material that you could, that was a dielectric until you flipped a switch and then it for, you
know, however small amount of time allowed everything to pass at once, you'd get like a wave
that comes across it. Or is that beyond, do they have materials like that? I don't even know.
Do they have temporary dielectrics? I'm not sure. That's an interesting idea, though.
I don't know. I'm so out of my depth here. Because it seems like what you're saying is that
when it works, you're still getting only a few electrons that are coming across this gap. And
in order for it to be a really, really strong effect, you would want to have just a consistent
wave of them come across all at once. Yes, that's right. I'm stymied in a way because I'm a theorist.
I'm not an electrical engineer. So I've been thinking in space and in abstract
ways. And now I'm expected to cope with a lab, which is quite a challenge,
actually. And I'm I'm lacking in engineering skills, I suppose, or material science.
Seems like a great place for a collaboration, really. You need a...
Yes. Well, I have a good engineer working with me. But yeah, it's always the more the merrier.
What are you? Are you building up your lab still? Do you feel like you're ramping things up
and you're you're finding more people to bring into the fold? And what's your strategy for that?
So I'm trying to be extremely open online,
telling people what's what's happening, the good, the good and the bad. My my DARPA funding is just
about to expire. So I'm looking for follow on funding. So
The ever present academic battle. Yes, that's right.
You know, it's really interesting because I've been I actually I found your work through Twitter.
I don't know how Twitter at some point recommended your accounts to me in the early days. And I
was when we were first starting the podcast. And I'm going to tell on us a little bit. The podcast was
initially invented as a way to corner physicists to talk about a material interpretation of the
universe. And we were like, this is the only way that we're going to get people to talk about this.
And so we have to put it in a large enough vessel where we talk about enough other things that we
can find people that are asking these questions so we can we can actually get at what's happening.
And you you posted a lot about the quantized inertia stuff. And I was immediately intrigued
because it was a way that no one else was really talking about it. And you were also posting some,
you know, early results of the effects that you're seeing. But something that I've seen on Twitter is
that there's a lot of venture capital that in the last few decades has been spent on software.
Like venture the model for venture capital funding has been for somebody to invent a piece of software
that'll let you do something, you know, a social network. And something that people have been
talking about a lot lately is that venture capital should start to head towards hardware and technologies.
And so if DARPA funding is running out, I don't know, I don't have any connections necessarily for
you. But I know that like Y Combinator, which is like a big venture capital startup fund,
is trying to shift more towards funding technological applications. And what's that called?
Y Combinator. Y Combinator, yes. So it's this really, really big tech. I think that you could
call like a founder fund. They take a cohort of people every year, you know, you have to do an
application, you have to explain what you're working on. Historically, it's been like websites and
things like that. But there is really a shift that's happening right now, where I feel like the
promises of the future have not been delivered, like we don't have flying cars. And people are
starting to wonder, it's like, well, if we really do live in times that are advanced as we were
promised, perhaps we should be focusing more on funding technological development. And so I
wonder if that wouldn't be a viable avenue for you. Well, yes, thank you. I haven't heard of Y
Combinator, but I will look into it. I'm trying everything at the moment, as you can imagine,
I've tried about 40 different possible funders. And I'm just beginning really, but...
Is this... So, how far away is this from... You see this effect. The effect is relatively
inconsistent. And you said that you have an experiment in the near future that's actually
going to be taking place in low-earth orbit or where...
That's right. This American company I've been liaising with, and the two capacity engineers also,
are launching something on a SpaceX rocket on June 10th. So, I don't know exactly what
they're launching. It's a quantized inertia thruster. There was an article about it in
Universe Today that you could look at quite recently, which caused quite a lot of controversy,
because it appeared, and then it was taken down again because physicists complained that it was
impossible, and then it was put back up with a disclaimer.
That's such a weird mentality. I think that if you went back 50 years, or I guess you'd
probably have to go back farther at this point. Let's say you go back to the 19 tens, and you
try to explain the internet to somebody. Their mentality about it would be that it was absolutely
impossible, and that there's absolutely no way, and that it breaks every single technological
convention that we have. Yet, people still worked on it, and they still pursued it,
and they made it reality. It seems like we have this... There seems to be a really strong immune
system in physics, especially right now, which is that there's a strong sense of what is possible,
and through that lens, we decide what is worth pursuing. It almost seems like spreading ideas
about non-conventional physics has been labeled as a dangerous practice that should be stamped out at
all costs. That's right, and I think that's a shame because we have textbooks for all the old
theories. I think it's the duty of physicists to actually come up with something
new, and you can't do that without challenging what's in the textbooks.
I think this is very... As you say, it's very strong in physics because there's this idea that
physics is extremely difficult and extremely precise, and that the people who do it are extremely
clever and they should know best, but it's not necessarily so. I think that recently,
they've forgotten to look at new data. They're very good at reading their textbooks, but they're
not looking at the new data. I think that's my advantage that I've looked at the new data,
the galaxy rotation, with an open mind. I've heard one of the tragedies of being a really
intelligent person is that you can win any argument, even if you're wrong. It kind of
works against you. I think this is why you see so many isolated, grumpy, smart people.
You don't always want to win an argument, is the thing, just because you can.
Your ultimate goal in any conversation should be to learn something ultimately.
If you're not open to the idea that you don't know everything, just because you might be able to
worm your way out of it, for sure, but it's not necessarily a healthy mindset for a scientist.
I think that's exactly right. That was Socrates' idea, really, wasn't it? He was the first one.
The only thing I know is that I know nothing, which is a great place to start from as a scientist.
Also terribly disorienting, right? I think it's actually, we run up against this wall because
there are radical people who will insist that science is pointless because you can't actually
know anything for certain, and therefore you don't know anything, and therefore why even bother with
it. I think that that's a little misguided at the same time. Yes, that goes too far, but I think
to admit it's very difficult for humans to admit that we don't know everything. If you say that
you don't know anything, then that's a very good start. It opens you up, but it's not actually
true. We do know some things. I think it's really important work, too, which is why I think that
you'll have more success than other people because it's long occurred to me that if we're going to
actually be able to reach the stars and explore something, it's quite obvious that nothing
interesting is happening in our local neighborhood. Interesting how? There's nothing alive, nobody
to interact with. We can't really spread out into these planets in a comfortable way. They're just
not appropriate, but we look out the Kepler program. We've seen, there's lots of worlds out there,
but they're really far away. It's like if we're going to get there in any meaningful
time frame, it seems like we have to understand how to manipulate inertia itself. Just burning our
way and fighting against inertia, it just seems like a really exhausting way to move yourself
around the galaxy. Yes, exactly right. I think this is the first theory that would allow interstellar
travel in a human lifetime. It's propellant-less. You don't have to carry an asteroid of fuel
with you to get up to a quarter light speed. You can push off the quantum vacuum, which is
everywhere. You need a pretty good generator though, I suppose. There's probably still room for
fusion or something that would be, I guess even a nuclear reactor could do it.
Yeah, there is one. The SAFE 400 nuclear reactor is, I think it's about half a ton or something,
and it produces quite a few megawatts. I guess the only scary part there is
strapping some fissile material to a rocket and throwing it into space seems a little
scary to people, although they do it. I guess it's the void.
Yeah, they have done it before, so I don't see why. Why not?
Do you have any?
Yeah, I think this theory also has, there is also a way to generate electricity directly from it
that I don't want to talk about yet, but it's not too different to what we're doing already.
So it could be that we could have our own generator on board, quantum generator.
Like a rebreather, that's interesting.
I think at the beginning of the conversation, we kind of like skipped over the topic of gravity.
Do you want to, since we can't talk about your power source,
can we delve into gravity a little bit and how you think that it fits into this whole story?
Yeah, so I've got a new book coming out soon where I show that you can derive
Newtonian gravity from quantized inertia just by assuming that two
plank masses side by side damp the quantum vacuum between them, and that will tend to pull them
together. And then if all you have to do is add up the number of plank masses in a body and you
can work out the attraction, and it exactly equals Newtonian gravity.
So that's not general relativity yet. It's just a Newtonian form of gravity, but
I have an idea how to extend that to reproduce. Because I disagree with the results of general
relativity on the scale of galaxies, but GR has been well tested in the solar system,
light bending by the sun, the Shapiro delay, things like that. And I can also predict the same
bending of light with quantized inertia that general relativity does in the solar system.
And I'm trying to publish a paper on that at the moment. So
to summarize, I can derive Newtonian gravity from quantized inertia, and I think I can derive
the modifications in the solar system due to general relativity as well.
And you said it was the Shapiro delay effect?
Yes, so there are several tests of general relativity in the solar system. They look
at light bending by the sun, and also the change of light speed close to the sun,
which is the Shapiro delay. I think they looked at that using a space probe,
and they sent a message to it, and it came back and they worked out the time difference,
and it agreed with GR. And the conventional explanation of general
relativity would be the bending of space time? That's right, yes.
But I don't like the bending of space time, because I'm a very strong follower of Mack,
and he said, you should never put an abstract concept into a theory. In a sense, this is what
gets me into the most trouble, that I don't like the bending of space. But I've got another way to
predict what the bending of space produces. I think what's happening is that the quantum vacuum
is not homogeneous in space. It's a bit like a refractive index, and that causes the bending of
light. And this feeds into what we've been toying with, with the material atomic channel, is that
the presence of material and its interconnection is fundamentally what is creating the effects
that you see. And so I don't really see it as being different from general relativity,
because general relativity says that the presence of a mass bends space time.
And you can relatively easily transfer that to be like, okay, well, if it's not space time that
it's bending, and instead there's some kind of interconnection and connectome of the material
that makes up the large object, then you have something that's coming in from the outside
is going to be differentially interacting with it as it passes by. And that seems like fairly
straightforward and not perhaps controversial, but it does get rid of some of the magic because
like... By the way, I would love to get that reference for that mock quote. Is that from his
mechanics text? I would love to see that. We're working on a book right now, and that's a really...
Because I think the biggest disaster that's happened in the last 100 years is this
what you said that people have been building... They take these ideas, right? Like you said,
an idea, a relationship of some sort. An abstraction. An abstraction, and they start
moving it around and doing stuff with it. And ultimately, physics has to be about what
bodies are doing to one another, because what else is it otherwise, if it's not a science of
physical bodies, right? Things that have surfaces and can interact with one another.
Observables is what Max said. He said, you should only have observables in the theory,
and that matter by definition isn't an observable, and neither is bent space. So,
yes, I agree with you. And space too, if you really push on it, it really comes... It basically
means place, right? And when you're just talking about like the place changing, it's not really
explanatory. Like it might be highly... It might be accurate, it might be descriptive, it might be
true, but it doesn't necessarily explain anything on a physical level to me. Just the fact that the
distances between objects are changing in a predictable way. I'm like, yeah, obviously. Like,
you know, a child knows how gravity works. Like they can fall over when they're a baby and be like,
oh, there's gravity and it works this way. But they don't understand the mechanism for it. They're
not like, oh, well, the atoms are pulling on each other or whatever they think it... You know,
whatever one might theorize to be happening. So...
Yeah. Well, in my book that's coming out soon, I derive quantization by looking at
what I call... I call them fireflies, but you could call them agents. So, entities that
are just able to remember and that they exchange photons with each other. So, if you have
sort of Firefly A and B, A sends a photon to B, which returns it to A.
And so A counts one, because that's the only thing that A can perceive in the cosmos,
the arrival of a beam of light. And I make the assumption that time does not exist
for A between the time that it emitted the photon and absorbed it. And if you do that,
quantization comes out. You don't have to assume that space exists. All you have to do is assume
that these two agents exist and light. I love that. And distance has no meaning to A or B.
But if you put another part agent in there, C, and they exchange photons, then
and say C is closer to A than B, then that would be knowable by A, because the photon will come
back more quickly. So, then you start to build up an idea that there is distance.
And the distance is interval given a speed limit?
That's right, yes. And so, the more complex the system is, the better its knowledge of time
and distance is, so that when you get to larger objects like us, we know very well what time
and distance is. But it's an emergent property, I suppose, is what I'm trying to say.
100%. Yeah, we often come down to the fact that the smallest universe in which you can model any
particular phenomenon is three. You always need that third one to make sense of what the other
two are doing, essentially. You have to have a reference point, right? If you're looking at
something, you can't be of the thing that you're looking at. Because you can't really,
I mean, I think that the reason that we use triangulate in order to be able to,
as a term for explaining why we understand things, it's because we have an intuitive grasp of the
fact that you have to have three. And this makes me think we had this conversation with Julian
Barber a really long time ago about his model of the Big Bang. And at some point, he got into
this thing of how the universe had to have started from a triangle. And his fundamental premise was
the fact that three was this really important number, but he couldn't explain why. And we kind
of got into a fight with him about it, which I feel bad. But I think that I just realized why
he thought that three was so important. Because with two, you can't know. You can just experience.
But with three, then you can start to create a picture of like, okay, there's this, there's an
extra dimension of observation and interaction that allows you to create a map that you wouldn't
need. The concept of distance emerges, essentially. Well, yeah, it's like, did you ever read that
book, Flatland? No, I never did, actually, no. But I mean, the idea is that it's exploring
what can be known in a two-dimensional universe versus a three-dimensional universe. And I think
that's probably significant for understanding fundamental physics as well, which I never
thought about before. Well, yes, I agree. Three is important, because also in my derivation,
I needed three. So before I got any concept of distance. So yeah, that's interesting.
You have a book out. Is that so correct? Yes. So I've written two so far. I've written a
textbook in 2014, Physics from the Edge. And I wrote a, in 2021, I wrote a sci-fi novel to try and
explain the ideas in a more accessible way called Falling Up. Oh, cool.
And I'm just about to bring out, maybe within a month, a new book.
Covering the more hard science of what we've been talking about?
Yes. So the title is Quantize Nersha from Anomalies to New Physics. And I take about 50 anomalies.
Like galaxy rotation or wide binary orbits or capacitors. And I show how they can be predicted
by Quantize Nersha. And it's a bit about interstellar travel at the end as well.
That sounds awesome. I'm getting that book for sure.
So it'd be interesting to close on the art of writing, because we're kind of deep in that right
now and we're trying to find a frame and we're looking at what does it mean to write for an
audience and what does it mean to take these complex ideas and boil them down to something that is
digestible. And so I wonder what your process is for that.
Well, I think the important thing is just to start writing and just start writing,
even if nonsense comes out, eventually it'll start to make sense. And you can delete the beginning.
Anyway, are you very scheduled about that? Do you set aside time every day to write?
Yes, I do. So I tend to write in the evening so that I know that at this time I'm supposed to be
writing because I have my day job, of course. So I write in the evening. And I like to use,
I think, very intuitively and graphically. So I like to put a lot of diagrams in,
as well as the maths. And I like to put a lot of as much humour in as I can for my own entertainment,
as well as hopefully other peoples. So it sort of helps the medicine go down, I suppose, a bit of
humour. Do you write outlines first, or do you just kind of have a sense for where you want to go
and you just navigate your way through? I wrote an outline of chapters, chapter headings,
and mostly adhered to it, but I was quite flexible as well.
Yeah, because I mean, I think that the way that we've been writing, because what we decided to do
is that we wanted to take everything that we had encountered over the course of the last,
we're almost at 150 episodes. So we've had a lot of conversations with people that are kind of pushing
the boundaries of everything from the origin of life to the atom. And so what we're trying to do
is we're trying to condense what we've learned about these various disciplines into chapters.
And so we have the origin of life, consciousness, planetary history, solar physics, atomics,
and cosmology. And so it's enormously ambitious. And what we're trying to figure out is the level
of depth and scope for each chapter. Because I feel like when you start to write something,
you come to a point where you're like, I want to put everything here. But if you try to put
everything into a work, you end up at 2,000, 3,000, 4,000 pages. And it's like, that's not...
I think the important thing is, well, to tell a story. I think people love a story. And that's
just as applicable to science as anything else. So the book should have a story, it should develop.
So if it's just a random selection of chapters, it won't...
It'll inspire less, I think, than if you design the chapters so that they build to some overall
conclusion. And for the one that you're writing right now, quantized inertia from anomalies to
inertia from anomalies to new physics, what is the story that it builds?
I suppose it's that great advances in theory are determined by new observations, thinking about
new observations or anomalies. So that's why the title is as it is. So I talk in the beginning
about how physics developed because Galileo... There was 1,000 years of thinking and nothing
happened. And then Galileo looked at the moons of Jupiter. And he realized that, oh, if the moons go
around Jupiter, maybe it's possible that the planets are orbiting around the Sun.
And that cut out 1,000 years of thinking just as a new observation, a new anomaly,
which it was at the time because people thought that everything went around the Earth.
And if the Earth went around the Sun, then everything would simply fall behind in its orbit.
And we would all fall off the Earth and there'd be a trail of people and dogs,
you know, objects trailing behind the planet. And that changes inertia as well because then
you realize that inertia isn't the things... The idea isn't that things stay in one place.
It's that they have a constant speed and they can follow the Earth in its orbit.
So he started to think about inertia as well. And it just changed science completely,
just that single observation. So then I present 50 anomalies
and say, look, these are anomalies. And then I discuss them, analyze them,
and show how quantized inertia was inspired by them and how it predicts each one.
Yeah, I love that because it seems like the most important thing that you can give to
people that are coming into these fields, people, students, right, is understanding what's not
working about our understanding. Whereas it's so often presented that we understand everything
and you should just learn how we understand everything. But there's this... We haven't come
up with a phrase for it, but there's this art of humility in science about... And it relates
to excitement. Yeah, like excitement about, well, like this phenomenon isn't understood.
That's awesome because now there's so much work to be done. And these are the areas. So,
I mean, I definitely try to fixate on this when I'm lecturing at the university or something.
I really want to just spend my time focusing on the problems more than just... Because you can
just go to Wikipedia or whatever and read about anything otherwise. Like, there's no point in
sitting around just hammering that into people's heads if they're interested in the background on
a particular topic, go for it. But the exciting part, the thing that'll actually move the world
forward is what's not understood. So, I really appreciate that. But it's... I know you got a
run and it's been really fun to have you out here. And I'm super stoked on this work. I really want
to check out your book when it comes out. And... Yeah, thanks. It's been a great chat. I've enjoyed
it. Yeah, I'd love to meet up down the road and see if we could... Yeah, once you see how this
technology progresses and see what comes of it all and where you go. Because I feel like you're
going places. Okay, yes, we'll... Yeah, we'll see. It's great potential.
