Hey guys, it's Sasha. The world is obsessed with AI. Every company is busy telling its
shareholders that they are now not a retail company, not a software company, not a car company,
not a social media company. No, they are all now artificial intelligence companies.
And you can't blame them. Since the start of 2022, the stock market has had one of the worst
crashes in history. Stocks fell 25% in 2022 and have not recovered since then. But at the same
time, the S&P 500 is at an all-time high. And this is because in the last 18 months,
since chatGPT arrived, the small number of AI stocks have absolutely exploded in value,
which has covered up what's actually happening out there to the rest of the stock market.
The race for being the leader in AI is so hot that there is now huge pressure on companies to
release AI products, on companies to call things AI, where maybe they're not quite AI,
or not at all AI, not because they actually make things better for users if they use AI in many
cases, but because if you have a high enough density of using the word AI in your quarterly
earnings call, your share price automatically increases by 300%. And the problem is that a
lot of these big companies are now so far up their own backside, they are faking their AI,
because they need to put out something that looks like AI, that they can sell as AI, but they
haven't actually figured out how to make that AI work yet. They haven't actually made it work,
so let's pretend. So yesterday, the information published a story leaked by an Amazon insider.
In the last two years or so, Amazon have released their Just Walk Out technology in some of their
shops. The idea is that you can just walk in and Amazon developed this AI that automatically checks
what it is that you put in your basket through cameras and sensors in the shop, and you don't
have to queue up or to check out, you don't have to pay for it, you just walk out of the store
with the stuff that you've picked up, and you will get billed automatically afterwards. Now,
I tried this a few times, although the prices in these shops are so high, it doesn't make any sense,
and I only really did it for novelty value, but the weird thing is that when you go and do the
shop, you don't get an immediate notification when you come out saying, you know, hey Sasha,
thanks for shopping with Amazon, here is your itemised bill, we've charged your credit card $25,
no, it takes several hours for that to happen. And I thought that was a bit strange, because if
it's automatic, if it's driven by AI, why does it take several hours for the automatic life system
to send you the bill? Well, it now turns out that this AI was actually 1,000 people sitting in a
room somewhere in India, watching the cameras from the shops and manually adjusting your basket.
According to this whistleblower, 70% of all transactions in these shops were processed
manually via this team in India, I guess anything other than you may be picking up one item for
the novelty value, and then walking straight out becomes too complicated for this AI to actually
process. Amazon quickly tried to perform damage limitation, and Amazon spokesman came out and
said that associates may validate a small minority of shopping visits where our computer vision
technology cannot determine with complete confidence and the individual's purchases.
Amazon went and quickly deleted a bunch of pages which described this AI when they first launched
the product. According to Amazon, this story is completely untrue, and the system works great,
and their associates in India are really just there to help train the AI system, which is working
just fine, which is why two days ago, just before, immediately before that new story broke, because
Amazon knew it was coming, they announced that they are cancelling the just walkout system in their
stores, the one that's working really great, and they are replacing it with shopping trolleys.
But Amazon is not the only big company that is actively faking AI. Back in December,
Google announced Gemini, because I guess even the execs at Google realized that even though
their personal butler at home is called Bard, it is in fact actually a pretty bad name for an AI tool.
So in December, Google published this video where they showcased the capability of Gemini.
They would show Gemini things, ask Gemini things, and it would respond, except it came out sometime
after that video was published, that the entire thing was faked. The interaction was faked,
the video was faked, the responses were manually fed through to the AI engine, submitting some
hyper specific still images, not what was in the video, until the AI just happened to give
the right answer, and then they put all those right answers together, did a voiceover of the
answers to pretend that it worked seamlessly as it did in the video. It's not the first time Google
faked an AI demo. Back in 2018, Sunda Pichai demonstrated an AI system called Duplex.
By the way, what is it with a reference to the number two? Duplex, Gemini, anyway. In 2018,
Google demonstrated that this new AI assistant can do things like phone a restaurant on your
behalf to make you a reservation, so you don't have to. I'm looking for something on May 3rd,
and naturally, people asked a lot of questions, people were intrigued, and Google ignored all
those questions. The most obvious question was, was that demonstration completely faking fake?
Because it sure looked like a complete fake in the video, and well, six years later,
that assistant still doesn't exist. So you can decide for yourself whether that was another
completely fabricated bit of AI, but it doesn't stop there. You know the mysterious Google
algorithm, the almighty powerful algorithm that decides which websites get shown for which results?
Well, Google has long been saying how advanced their ranking system is, you know, how results are
automatically generated. This whole thing is being operated by extremely sophisticated AI.
There is a whole page rank system behind the scenes that automatically determines if your
content is helpful, and there is no human element to it whatsoever to prevent bias, right? Well,
it just so happens that Google employs 16,000 people called quality raters. There is a whole
giant training document for these people, here it is, it's 170 pages long, and these people spend
all day every day manually assessing the websites, you know, the websites that are ranked by this
really amazing AI. For example, they're meant to try and check if the content creator lacks adequate
experience, lacks adequate expertise, if the content creator is not an authoritative or
trustworthy source. And by the way, your website gets the lowest possible score if the website
terms of use states that some articles are generated by artificial intelligence and may have errors
or be out of date, which of course makes perfect sense because instead of showing these rubbish
websites, Google now shows you answers generated by artificial intelligence that often have errors
and the information is out of date, talking of which the most talked about AI that exists today
is chat GPT by open AI. It is like the holy grail. And of course, Bing, Microsoft search engine,
uses open AI in their results. And you know the spiel you told that these are highly sophisticated,
highly complex systems that learn on data that you feed into it. And then it becomes incredibly
intelligent. You see, learning on other people's data is not stealing. It is not copyright theft.
It is far more advanced than that. You just don't get it. It's a bit like how artists learn by looking
at other artists, they grow up. And to be honest, these AI models are just so complicated that none
of us with our small brains can possibly understand or compute how clever they are because they do
not. Do not scrape the internet and then just spit out that same content. No, no, no, no, no.
I went and asked Bing to tell me what the best road trips from Las Vegas are. And it said,
certainly, if you're in Las Vegas and looking for exciting road trips, here are some fantastic
options. One, Nelson Goes Town and El Dorado Canyon Gold Mine. Interesting choice at number one.
It's funny because there is this article here written by some guy called Sasha called 21
best road trips from Las Vegas. And you know what? It's not the best article out there.
But wouldn't you know it? And the number one spot in this article is also Nelson Goes Town
and El Dorado Canyon Gold Mine. Word for word. How strange. How far is it? Well, it's exactly 45
minutes and 45 miles from Las Vegas, which is interesting because that's a very precise number
of minutes. But you know, probably just a coincidence. So just outside Las Vegas, you'll find the
Ghost Town of Nelson. There's half rusted old cars, you know, an interesting phrase to use.
It's a very unusual way of putting that. Then there's rattlesnakes in a freezer. Hmm. According
to Google, there is literally only one results on the internet that uses this exact phrase.
And I guess rattlesnakes should be spelled as one word. I guess I made a mistake. Well, never mind.
Bing also spelt it as two words. Such a coincidence is crazy. So then there's even
crashed airplanes. Take care when exploring, though, because rattlesnakes are common. Tours
of the gold mine run at 9am, 12pm and 2pm, taking you through Nevada's richest mine that operated
for nearly 80 years. And you know what? I just checked their website and it's funny because I
actually got that last bit wrong. The mine ran from 1861 until 1942. So it was actually a bit
more than 80 years. Isn't it such a coincidence that Bing made the same exact mistake using
the same exact words? Anyway, number two on their list is the Valley of Fire State Park.
And it's 50 minutes and 49 miles from Las Vegas. Very precise. Although strangely,
if you look it up on Bing Maps, you know, the Bing map service, that says 53 miles because I
guess Bing Maps is measuring to the middle of the park. Where do they get the 49 miles from?
How strange. Anyway, you get the point. This AI is just plain stealing content from other websites.
Slightly changing some of the words and showing that instead of showing the website from which
the information was stolen. Just because this information is processed and stored in a neural
net does not somehow make it immune from general laws about theft. This AI is what is known in
the industry as an automated content spinner. You might have noticed in the last six months
that a huge number of smaller medium sized websites have stopped being shown on Google.
They're disappearing. These websites are going bankrupt because they're getting no traffic now.
Now when you search something, you get an AI answer from the search engine, which basically
has stolen the content of those small websites that they no longer show. Then you get a 15 year
old Reddit post at the top. This of course has nothing to do with Google signing a commercial
deal with Reddit to use Reddit data for their AI training. It has nothing to do with Reddit traffic
randomly growing by over 500% in the last few months for no apparent reason whatsoever
because Google is now sending them all of the traffic that they used to send to the small
websites. And it has nothing to do with the fact that Reddit just went and did an IPO. Immediately
after their traffic exploded and the owner of Reddit sold a massive boatload of shares becoming
incredibly rich after the company was valued based on the fact that their traffic is now
500% higher than it was a year ago. This of course is all a complete coincidence. The fact is
there are a lot of people making a lot of money from this AI hype wave. Not in the sense of
earning revenue and making profits because no, AI is a loss making in most cases at the moment.
But in the sense of the price of company shares, a lot of companies including the very biggest
companies in the world are now so balls deep in their commitment to AI because it's all smoke
mirrors and pretend games that they have to lie, they have to break the law and they have to create
fake AI to keep their stock price high. Making false statements as a publicly traded company
about your AI capabilities is not punished. The SEC does not seem to give a shit that these
companies are openly brazenly lying about their products to their customers, about their developments
and new releases to their investors. It's AI bro, it's the future, it's pushing the boundaries
and the result? Well, other than the stock price going up on a vertical line, the real life experience
of people in many cases is getting worse. Remember when you could actually find useful
information on Google? Well now you have an AI generated answer, followed by some shopping
results followed by four ad slots before you see the first actual result. You now often have to scroll
quite far down just to see the first result and that actual first result is going to be a Reddit
post from 15 years ago. Remember when you could actually call up a company if you had a problem
and there would be a human, a person at the other end who would actually, I don't know, help you
with your problem? Well, now that person has been fired so that the company can have less cost and
make more profits and instead you have the AI chatbot which apparently is what everybody wants
because I don't know about you but every single time I speak to one of these chatbots I immediately
get the perfect resolution to all of my problems and I do not sit there staring at the fucking screen
spitting and fuming in rage when the AI chatbot gives me yet another generic answer, sends me to the
FAQs or asks me to rephrase the question. It's indisputable that in the long run AI is going to
fundamentally improve our lives. It's here to stay, it's going to do great things. When AI can
drive your car for you, when AI can take over the boring chores and do the shit that you don't want
to do or when AI can automate the jobs that people would prefer not doing but at the moment
companies are a million miles from there, they're just using the hype for personal advantage,
they're busy faking AI and then promoting that fake AI to boost their share price because who
cares about the fact that your product is actually worse? Who cares if that AI is actually unprofitable?
Who cares that you piss off your customers and ruin your product? Remember you are a monopoly,
it doesn't matter, it's AI bro and AI means that your stock just keeps on going up to the moon.
