And capitalism isn't just there being pushed by neoliberal ideologues, it's in us as well.
I think nothing illustrates this more clearly than the real widespread failure of so-called left,
if there was any such thing anymore in parliamentary terms in Europe,
to have taken advantage of the most spectacular failure of a political project ever, probably,
which was the financial crisis and the bank bailouts of 2008.
Living in a contemporary global capitalistic world, one that has siphoned out any radical economic dissent,
the question looms, are we able to escape capitalism? Is there anything past it?
Is any such endeavor even possible? To an arguable majority, they understand the looming issues with capitalism,
even if it's something painful to admit. But this supposedly post-ideological world,
a world with the end of the Soviet Union, of an actual communist Chinese government,
is there any coherent vision past global capitalism? This is a central ethos of this book.
Can we escape capitalism? What is capitalism? And what is this capitalist realism that Mark Fisher talks about?
It should be noted before the body of the video, I have been told numerous times to read this book in its whole,
and I regret I have not done it sooner. After reading this, this is hands down one of my favorite works of theory,
and the greatest visualization of American capitalism I have ever seen.
It is bleak, it is depressing, but more than anything, it is beautifully relevant.
A relevancy from an author who fundamentally lived what he wrote, and who understood these very conditions to his core.
I want these core points to be accessible to all, if possible, for these ideas to work into the collective unconsciousness,
and to help break and understand this weird matrix that we are in.
There has been numerous videos on capitalist realism, but I want this one to be the absolutely most ambitious one.
I want it to completely encompass this book in its whole, and with an accessible form for all.
More than anything, I want to do capitalist realism justice. This video is capitalist realism just in video form.
After 1989, when capitalism loses its visible antagonists in the Soviet Empire, then capitalism doesn't have to defend itself as such.
It just becomes the horizon of the imaginable. It doesn't have to be named anymore.
It is all the more powerful because it is not named.
Right from the start, Mark Fisher comes out swinging with the phrase,
It's easier to imagine the end of the world than the end of capitalism.
A phrase widely attributed to Frederick Jameson and Slavo Gizek.
As shocking as this phrase is, it's undeniably true in almost every way that capitalism isn't a mere economic system.
It's an imposed psychological reality in condition that has permanently altered our being.
If post-mortem consciousness existed and we collectively destroyed our existence at the whims of capital,
the very idea of restricting capitalism would possibly scare more than a very real apocalyptic scenario.
In this context, capitalism is a mere system. It is us.
This is why, when the impending threat of climate change is brought up, the reasonable response is,
I just simply try not to think about it.
To end capitalism is to end our contemporary human subjectivity today.
But given the nature of this book, we must closely define what capitalism is and how it molds to us.
Mark Fisher does just that with a whole host of prior theory.
From the start, he elaborates on the traditional ethos of capitalism with a quote from Marx and Engels and the Communist Manifesto.
Capital has drowned the most heavenly exceses of religious fervor, of chivalrous enthusiasm, of Philistine sentimentalism,
and icy water of egotistical calculation.
It has resolved personal worth into an exchange value,
and in place of the numberless, indefensible, chartered freedoms has set up that single, unconscionable freedom, free trade.
In one word for exploitation, veiled by religious and political illusions,
it has substituted naked, shameless, direct, brutal exploitation.
Capitalism is the human condition that is left after culture, ritual, and symbolic elaboration is dead.
The new culture is now consumption and spectacle.
It moves into the aesthetic realm, and as aesthetics and rational ideation go, we see capitalism as the ultimate purveyor.
Humans do not merely go on military conquests like Genghis Khan.
We do not merely kill and burn down villages for fundamental power and control.
Instead, we set up camp in foreign countries and systematically set up shop and exploit human labor with the shiny facade of progress.
But only when the exploited recognize the game they are being subjected to, they revolt and fight back.
Then extreme brutality emerges, a brutality that is arguably worse than prior forms.
Brutality like we saw in King Leopold II's Free State of Congo, plantation slavery in Cuba and in the Caribbean.
Brutality doesn't cease to exist, it's simply massed, it's a more efficient and systemic endeavor.
Capitalism sucks up culture, it sucks up history, turns the very things that often made us human into museum pieces.
Everything is objectified, it's commodified.
With Fukuyama's idea that we have reached the apex with liberal capitalism after the fall of the Berlin Wall,
Mark Fisher believes that critical insight into late capitalism is often Nietzschean rather than Marxist.
Nietzsche wrote about the overflow of history into the human condition.
We have replaced human engagement in life, culture, and politics into spectatorship.
We retroactively learn what it is to be human.
We retroactively examine truth rather than engage into activities that make it so.
Fisher quotes Nietzsche's most prescient pages are those in which he describes the over-saturation of an age with history.
It leads an age into a dangerous mood of irony in regard to itself.
He wrote in untimely meditations and subsequently into the even more dangerous mood of cynicism,
in which cosmopolitan fingering, a detached spectatorialism, replaces engagement and involvement.
This is the condition of Nietzsche's last man, who has seen everything but is decadently enfeebled precisely by this excess of self-awareness.
This quote absolutely hit me to my core.
Think about what we are doing right now.
We are learning about something very abstract, theory-oriented, while simultaneously ignoring the very woes that we are learning about in reality.
This learning, this education, this self-awareness simultaneously pacifies us.
If this isn't one of the most scary insights, I have no clue what is.
Moving on, Mark Fisher visualizes this living from history with Kurt Cobain.
Kurt Cobain understood this new society of historical life.
Kurt Cobain knew, as a star of MTV, he was just a prop, a prop that will eventually collapse.
He was a spectacle, a newer mimic of stars like Jim Morrison and Hendricks.
There's nothing more embarrassing than a group of people walking up to you and shaking and clamoring and praising you like you're some kind of fucking god or something.
It's embarrassing.
Further, even understanding this phenomenon to Cobain was a cliche.
These anxieties he expressed further resulted in the nihilistic facade he portrayed.
Why does it matter if I will be replaced by something greater?
Why does it matter if I am just another spectacle, another object of desire?
It's not fundamentally me anyway.
This abundance of history creates a weird, new form of nihilism.
If we know the results of our action, how time will repeat itself, why do anything at all?
This is a nihilism that works perfectly within postmodern capitalism.
This is often not a conscious nihilism either.
The nihilism of the past, the very Nietzschean anxieties around the loss of culture, the loss of things that make us human, is child's play to this new form of nihilism today.
And in many ways, it isn't just nihilism.
It's a new, pernicious form of it, one that convinces you of the opposite.
Fisher showcases this in the film WALL-E, a movie that shows an uninhabitable world from radical human consumption,
a movie that actively decries the forms of capitalism we are subjected to and face right now.
This movie isn't just spectacle, it invites us in to interact and participate in it.
We gauge the world around us, how we are contributing to global disaster.
Because of this, there is a mass outcry from right-wing observers for, quote-unquote, attacking its own audience.
In many ways, WALL-E is a Marxian-like film, but there is one thing, there is one huge caveat at hand.
This film ironically feeds this capitalist realism.
The very film performs our anti-capitalist activism and education for us.
We can consume this film with impunity.
This corporate activism does all the work for us and perfectly pacifies us.
Pacifies the very innate threat of human destruction into an ideal that we can pervasively enjoy.
Where in other societies, propaganda is needed to cover up oppressive acts, the exact opposite is true with contemporary capitalism.
Capitalism is strengthened by its own critiques.
These corporate anti-capitalist critiques ironically act as a very reinforcement and an unconscious pacifying agent.
As reinforcement goes, Fisher brings up the mode of mental health and contemporary capitalism.
Marrying the work of Eros and Civilization by Herbert Marcuse, link right up above if you are interested.
We see that mental health is a radically individualistic and internal problem.
Psychology and mental healing are purely partitioned into an interpersonal thing.
You have a chemical imbalance, you are super stressed, etc.
Yet we recognize that external events play a role in this regardless.
You go to therapy after a family member dies, after you are having a rough time in life,
but the medical apparatus never touches work.
It never touches economics.
That is purely off limits.
It's off limits because of capitalist realism.
The idea that neoliberal contemporary capitalism is simply innately us.
Therefore, it presents a depth that even psychology hasn't even been able to systematically penetrate.
This moves us into the newer economic working conditions that affect the western subject.
We used to live in a Fordist world, a capitalist framework that mirrored Henry Ford's production model.
Line workers doing the same menial task over and over and over again.
This is where traditional Marxists derive much of their ideas around alienation and the modern state of industrialized work.
Yet today, we are living in something more pervasive and totally different.
We are now in a very post-Fordist economic world.
We see that in this post-Fordist world, flexibility, nomadism, and spontaneity are absolutely essential.
You must be flexible, willing to stretch yourself to the absolute max.
Hyper-individuality is now favorable.
You must follow unfounded rules that are constantly made up on the spot.
The main character of this film is in a constant state of useless menial task, sent from hyper-bureaucracy.
The Reagan and Thatcher promises that neoliberalism, market capitalism would eliminate the very bureaucracy
and false appearance of progress found in Stalin's Soviet Union.
A bureaucracy that was supposedly only found in the public sector is ironically worse in today's post-modern capitalism.
Today's capitalism has found itself in the same dilemma of ex-Soviet states,
the pursuit of symbols and the appearance of productivity and progress, more than the actual progress itself.
Teachers and professors are now tasked to adhering to strict curriculum where administrators will watch their lectures.
These educators are now more concerned with fulfilling the appearance of education rather than the education itself.
But this isn't a phenomenon found because education is within the public sector.
This is a new phenomenon posited by neoliberal right-wing and hyper-capitalistic governments.
A strategy that originally took place in private schools but then subsequently found its home in public schools from a neoliberal government.
Mark Fisher quotes,
This is in part a consequence of the inherent resistance of certain processes and services to marketization.
The supposed marketization of education, for instance, rests on a confused and underdeveloped analogy.
Are students the consumers of the service or its product?
An idealized market was supposed to deliver friction-free exchanges,
in which the desires of consumers would be met directly without the need for intervention or mediation by regulatory agencies.
Yet the drive to assess the performance of workers and to measure forms of labor which, by their nature, are resistant to quantification,
has inevitably required additional layers of management and bureaucracy.
What we have is not a direct comparison of workers' performance or output,
but a comparison between the audited representation of that performance and output.
Inevitably, a short circuiting occurs and work becomes geared towards the generation and massaging of representations rather than to the social goals of the work itself.
This is what capitalism is.
It's an elastic system that adapts, that consumes our former subjectivity,
that pacifies us into forms of entertainment and material idealism,
evaporating the very prior subjectivity that made us human, for better or worse.
The concept of this contemporary capitalism is one of profound ironic contradiction.
Fisher quotes the French philosopher Alain Béryou on this very late 20th century postmodern capitalistic paradox.
A brutal state of affairs, profoundly inegalitarian, where all existence is evaluated in terms of money alone, is presented to us as an ideal.
To justify their conservatism, the partisans of the established order cannot really call it ideal or wonderful,
so instead they have decided to say that all the rest is horrible.
Sure, they say we may not live in a condition of perfect goodness,
but we're lucky that we don't live in a condition of evil.
Our democracy is not perfect, but it's better than the bloody dictatorships.
Capitalism is unjust, but it's not criminal like Stalinism.
We let millions of Africans die of AIDS, but we don't make racist nationalist declarations like Milosevic.
We kill Iraqis with our airplanes, but we don't cut their throats with machetes like they do in Rwanda, etc.
What separates today's capitalism of a post-Soviet world is one of postmodern capitalism,
where universal values do not really exist.
There is a rejection of responsibility outside of the pursuit of capital,
but Fisher articulates that this realism he talks about isn't merely postmodernism.
It's more intense than that. It's a form of postmodernism beyond itself.
Fisher says capitalist realism no longer stages this kind of confrontation with modernism.
On the contrary, it takes the vanquishing of modernism for granted.
Modernism is now something that can periodically return, but only as a frozen aesthetic style.
Never as an ideal for living. This is what capitalist realism is.
It is a rejection of concepts of space and time, history, everything.
Capitalist realism rejects absolutely everything except the pursuit of capital.
And subsequently, we see a world that completely cries out for modernity,
and of the very better days of the past.
And in a very capitalist, realist society, this is what crying out for modernity looks like.
Let vote now. Make sure you, in fact, let people know you're a senator.
I'm not going to answer the question because the question is radical left.
Who is on your list, Joe?
This is so unprecedented.
We have ended this segment. We're going to move on to the second segment.
That was really a productive segment, wasn't it?
Biden represents our prior tame postmodern capitalistic world, one just with a nice modern facade.
This world still has a connection to modernity, though.
He is a representation of normalcy, a horrid neoliberal normalcy, but he is a cry for a return to better days.
Admittedly, still terrible days, yet better than the latter stages of this realism.
But while there is a connection to modernity, this normalcy is still removed from modernity itself.
With Trump, Trump is the very embodiment of elastic capitalist realism.
He is the embodiment of the ultimate form of postmodernism.
As capitalist realism really is a hyperpotent form of postmodernism.
We've covered a bit of postmodern conservatism on this channel.
Here's a link above if you are interested.
Biden acknowledges the fact of climate change, student loan debt, and the woes affecting capitalist subjects.
Yet it will still be a massive struggle for him to do anything of substance on these issues.
He will fight tooth and nail to keep capital at the forefront of importance.
Compared to Trump, Trump denies these issues altogether.
It's as simple as him claiming these massive issues don't really exist.
And like that, they quite honestly disappear from his sphere of responsibility, as his base simply follows along.
He's a reverse of the former.
He lies about the issues plaguing humanity, yet he's ironically honest about the result.
See that? Where I could stand in the middle of Fifth Avenue and shoot somebody and I wouldn't lose any voters, okay?
It's like incredible.
You see, he is cryptically honest about the political reality we are residing in.
In the very disturbing, yet true results of his action.
But these actions, these desires for a return to modernity to normalcy,
can be viewed through the psychoanalytic lens of the Lacanian reel.
In this case, Fisher uses the reel as something that any reality must suppress.
An unattainable void that can be viewed through the fractures and inconsistencies of what we perceive reality to be.
And in more Lacanian psychoanalytic terms, the appearance of reality can be seen as a symbolic order in the imaginary.
But of course, we'll have to refrain from doing a complete deep dive into Lacanian psychoanalysis.
Yet through this lens of looking at the fractures within capitalism, fractures that give us a glimpse into the reel,
the concept of the reel can be used as a tool to uncover the true reality of capitalism, capitalist realism.
And the very psychological effects it attempts to cover up.
Rather than using a more ontological or metaphysical approach to the reel,
Mark Fisher is simply using the reel as an application.
How the reel can kind of ironically be used and concepts symbolically.
So with a very symbolic approach to the reel,
Fisher gives environmental catastrophe as an example of a reel.
It's impossible for capitalism to truly assimilate climate change induced apocalypse into a potential reality.
This statement might be confusing to some, given we use the example of Wally, an ultimate critique of capitalism.
Yet, even within the most cynical examples such as Wally, we don't even concede that human annihilation is actually possible.
Within Wally, humans are still alive, with robots to do the fixing of human woes and mass consumption.
Even the most cynical critiques within mass entertainment and media does not truly contend with absolute catastrophe.
Rather, the idea of catastrophe is just ironically reinforced within the system of capitalism.
Solutions are just repackaged within the commodity, packaged into advertising and marketing campaigns.
In simpler terms, under this stage of capitalism, the solution to climate catastrophe,
driven by capitalism, is repackaged into more capitalism.
Fisher quotes, environmental catastrophe is one such reel.
At one level, to be sure, it might look as if green issues are very far from being unrepresentable voids for capitalist culture.
Climate change and the threat of resource depletion are not being repressed so much as incorporated into advertising and marketing.
What this treatment of environmental catastrophe illustrates is the fantasy structure on which capitalist realism depends.
A presupposition that resources are infinite, that the earth itself is merely a husk,
which capital can at certain point, slow like a used skin, and that any problem can be solved by the market.
In this case, the hidden reel in a capitalist system is the emergence of surface capitalist solutions to solve the very issues capitalism has created.
The privatization of stress, a new emergence of neoliberal hyperbureaucracy,
a very much worse audit-based version of bureaucracy neoliberalism promised to solve.
Fisher describes this massive issue of mental health and how capitalism privatizes it and re-establishes mental health as purely internal.
A natural occurrence. This mirrors the naturalism that neoliberalism espouses.
When you ask the majority of Americans if they want socialized medicine, government-funded healthcare, universal healthcare, and the like,
a likely majority show fear or shudder in confusion. That's because private healthcare is as natural as the trees around us.
Not only this, but the private entity of any tangible service or product.
Mark Fisher calls this existence people in the US are thrust into as a business ontology.
Mark Fisher talks about how theorists like Foucault and Badiou have described potent and successful politics as something that explodes the very appearance of the natural order.
To make their ideology, core beliefs, policies appear as something innate as nature.
Fisher points out that the sheer amount of privatizations that took place in the 80s were unimaginable in 1975.
Denationalization of utilities, railways, the existence of prisons as a profitable enterprise, these used to be things that were unimaginable.
This changed because of the emergence of neoliberalism as something natural and with our new existence being centered around profit and finance, a complete business ontology as we see.
This is why 21st century Americans still seem shocked at the idea that something isn't for sale, that something's existence isn't centered around profit, that being business and even people.
Thus a world where our existence and ontology is centered around business.
Despite a universal, a single-payer, not-for-profit healthcare system being statistically cheaper, more efficient, and an ultimate benefit to nearly everyone, many in the United States still shudder in fear or complete confusion at the prospect of it.
Despite these findings.
But this business ontology goes further than this.
It's the prospect or hope that monetization can reach absolutely everything.
It's a world and existence where commodity fetishism is at its highest point.
Chapter 6 of the book brings us back into the new hyperbureaucracy that's present in 21st century capitalism.
Fisher argues that the consequences of this new economic world is a world that melts into pure PR.
Substance and progress is gone.
Work now exists for the illusion of work.
It's an ultimate anti-production work strategy.
He sees this new phenomenon that marketizes Stalin's aesthetic approach to production.
The irony in this is beyond comprehension.
Neoliberalism has sought to become the most efficient system that would fight the Stalinist approach to the appearance of work.
Fisher uses the example of Stalin's white sea canal.
In the 1930s this canal was one of the most impressive feats in engineering.
But only on the surface.
The canal was too shallow to use for most 20th century cargo.
Thus it was a symbol of production.
And more importantly anti-production at that.
Stalin's USSR would turn this canal into PR.
People would photograph it.
Whole Soviet public relation teams would be tasked with showcasing this canal.
An empty canal that was really only pretty and useful on the outside.
This is the very symbolic anti-production neoliberal capitalism sought to destroy.
Yet neoliberal capitalism has made this PR business meta a more efficient endeavor under the use of constant auditing.
Because of managers, bosses constantly breathing down your neck,
workers are more concerned with the image of production.
Teachers are more concerned with adhering to complete guidelines and the very appearance of education rather than education itself.
This is what capitalist realism is.
It's a post-fortis system where we cannot get too attached.
We must move all the time.
Sentimentalism is turned into pure profit motive.
We are sucked into the end of history.
An end of history that turns to new nihilism.
A new nihilism that makes the old look like child's play.
So can we get past this capitalist realism?
Can we break through capitalism?
To Fisher there isn't a huge tangible prescriptive answer.
Seven eighths of the whole book is descriptive of our current capitalism.
But there are prescriptive bits and pieces he gives us.
The first is not to underestimate the system we are living in.
It's arguable the traditional Marxist approach that capitalism will kill itself is far too optimistic.
Marxist critiques of the past cannot hold a candle to the situation we are currently in.
The reality is way more grim.
Capitalism will kill itself by killing virtually all life via ecological disaster.
The second is we must constructively approach neoliberalism, postmodern capitalism as a framework that is hyper artificial.
Because it ultimately is.
It's a massive ideological construct that isn't natural whatsoever.
It's constructed for the benefit of a few oligarchs with the expense of the many.
We need to point out that our capitalist realism relies on public funding.
It relies on bailouts when it will ultimately fail every decade or so.
Capitalist realism hides that collective intervention is necessary.
We need to make this public.
The existence of purely private enterprise is the artificial reality that has been implanted onto our being.
Our approach should be new.
It should be organic.
It shouldn't be hyper fixated on ideology.
It should be humane with the approach to mental health.
The material conditions people face.
And most of all, we must create new politics that exposes the prior reality as something purely artificial.
As a world past capitalist realism is the natural order of things.
Fisher ends the book with this.
In this case, rationing of some sort is inevitable.
The issue is whether it will be collectively managed or whether it will be imposed by authoritarian means when it is already too late.
Quite what forms this collective management should take is, again, an open question.
One that can only be resolved practically and experimentally.
The long dark night of the end of history has to be grasped as an enormous opportunity.
The very oppressive pervasiveness of capitalist realism means that even glimmers of alternate political and economic possibilities can have a disproportionately great effect.
The tiniest event can tear a hole in the gray curtain of reaction which has marked the horizons of possibility under capitalist realism.
From a situation in which nothing can happen, suddenly anything is possible again.
Thank you guys so much for watching and making it to the end.
Capitalist realism in my opinion is one of the most important books written in the 21st century and hopefully I was able to do it justice.
As always guys, I have a huge request to make.
These videos are only possible Patreon and without it this channel could not survive.
So if possible, if you could pledge a couple dollars a month, this would absolutely ensure survival and would help me out immensely.
And of course using our Amazon link for any purchases you make helps us immensely as well.
Aside from that, feel free to follow me on Twitter, Instagram and come join the Discord and come hang out.
Thank you guys so much, I thoroughly hope you enjoyed and hopefully I can see you in the next.
