This is a normal festival wall, and this is what they've got at the World's Most Secure Festival.
But what happens when you build a fence that's so secure?
You can't go over it. You can't go through it.
So I'm going to go underneath it in a secret passage right below security.
Now there are rumours of this secret entrance for years, and I never believed it existed.
That was until I got sent this clip from a couple of scousers literally swimming under the fence.
So seven days until the festival's on and no ticket, this is my only hope of getting in the festival and meeting my mates.
Looks like I've got a secret passage to find.
This is river number one.
Should we get out? Have a little look around?
Go off and have a dandy.
Let's see if we can actually give it up for the festival site.
There's definitely not stewards here.
As I got closer I could hear noises from the workers assembling stages inside the festival.
I kept moving, following the river all the way until I reached the fence.
Oh my god.
The fence is there.
Nice.
It takes you underneath.
Let's see in the festival.
We are looking to be in the festival.
I need some skin.
I hear voices.
I need to go.
I need to get rid of my footprints as well.
I didn't want to ruin my chances before the festival even started, so I needed to get out fast.
But on my way out I noticed one thing that could jeopardize the whole plan, the two metal rails either side of the tunnel.
It was clear to me that closer to the festival they'd slot a nice little fence down there to block the path.
I guess I just had to find the other portal.
And with one already crossed off, the pressure to make the second one work was rising.
That leaves more problems in.
That's definitely not the one from the video either.
That's deep stagnant water.
So I reckon they got sort of sitting in places ever so often along here.
Yeah, the fence is coming up.
I'm interested to see where the stream goes.
I decided to follow the stream in search of some cleaner water for Ru to drink.
But little did I know at the time she had sniffed out more than just water.
As I looked up what looked to be a passage under the fence revealed itself.
And that's when I realized this was the Scouse portal in all its glory.
So this is going underneath.
There you go. I'm inside.
There you go. You're in.
Despite going under the fence, if the security was on top of the bridge it would be game over.
It didn't take much for the security to actually be stationed there.
And worse yet, my dad spotted something which confirmed that this wasn't going to be easy.
You look at that pillar with the hinges on it there.
Yeah.
The pillar over there with the hinges on it.
Yeah.
They get high up right here and they just slot a door in there.
Yeah, I can't say I'm much more confident after seeing the gate hinges on that fence.
However, I don't think it's impossible.
There wasn't a lot more I could do other than that.
It'd be up to fate to decide which way the cards were dealt on the day.
One month goes by and it was here.
200,000 people with tickets.
But for me, judgement day.
That's some dodgy credentials.
I found these online.
Today's Tuesday, by the way.
The festival officially starts tomorrow.
There's staff in there at the moment currently.
So I think if I get in today, I just need to lay low, camp in a bush,
and then wait for all my friends to come in tomorrow.
Let me show you my outfit.
The classic.
I'm very aware this is going to be difficult.
One of the toughest things I've ever tried to sneak into.
But today's going to be a good one.
The game plan was simple.
Go down a day before, wait until the security change shifts,
use that window of time to swim under the fence,
meet up with my friends and have the best time of my life.
Because of the train strikes already.
There's so much traffic.
And there's security control in everywhere.
When I came down before,
down there is where we went with the roof.
Oh, just doing a shit on that fence.
That's where the bridge is.
I haven't shifted it enough.
It's starting to come out.
Dry now.
Look at that.
Fucking life there.
There's security vans going everywhere.
And the spot next to the river,
which I just walked past,
and about five or six security on it.
And one guy is stationed right on the top of the bridge.
I still haven't seen whether it's got gates for it yet,
which it probably does.
I need to think of a plan as fast.
I was watching and waiting
when suddenly security had just changed their ships.
So I think it's now or never.
Oh, my God.
The thing is, if you get caught in the river,
there's no excuse for that shit.
So they put the gate down so it is fully immersed.
There's people everywhere.
What am I thinking of?
I don't see any way of,
I don't see any way of going underneath that bridge
without getting spotted.
I'm worried about getting any closer.
So you're down there.
There's too much of a gap.
I'm not even walking on the road.
I'm going to get cooled out for it.
I basically think the gap under the thing
is way too small.
They've got some drainage pump
and it's pumping out water.
Fuck.
I've got to get out of there.
It's too suspicious.
So when the security made the change over
the second group, which is now there,
they're not standing on the river.
The only trouble is perhaps that's relatively chunky.
I've got to just fucking try and work out.
Got a coat off.
I'm getting wet.
I'm getting in the drink.
It's not whatever.
It's just people everywhere.
These shoes are getting slightly undetected.
I knew I had to act quickly.
I was surrounded by festival workers on both sides,
but I needed to get closer to figure out a plan.
This would be the first time seeing the portal
with the gate on.
I needed to make sure I was as quiet as possible
to not raise suspicion.
I couldn't see an obvious route through.
I needed to get out of the river before someone spotted me.
I made it.
Mmm.
It was a kissing distance.
Oh my god.
It was a kissing distance.
It was a kissing distance.
It was a kissing distance.
It was a kissing distance.
Oh god, my legs are stung.
I was right there on the precipice.
There's a little gap at the top,
but I'd have to be in level with the gate
in order to even get down into it.
We've put scaffolding poles at the bottom,
which is where everyone needs to go under.
I'm just going to sit by the gate.
It's not over till it's over.
Sit by the gate.
Sort of take a bit of time
and watch the movements of the skirings.
I'm just going to sit here on the edge.
I'm looking at that gap.
It's actually about a hole there.
What I want to do is use the iPhone
to measure up to see how big the gap is.
Brilliant. 23.
This is what I'm worried about.
Is that 24 centimetres?
That looks more like 35 to me.
27.
That's not that bad.
I look probably squeezing a bit.
So taking confidence from my new game plan,
relying on the squishiness of my ass,
the new plan was hatched.
I'd sneak my way down the stream
in the cover of darkness
and approach the fence.
Once at the spot,
it would be a simple waiting game
for security to become distracted enough
to make my move up the fence
and slip away from the fence.
So I'm going to take a bit of time
to make my move up the fence
and slot my 27 centimetre ass into the gap.
It was just a waiting game.
I had my game plan,
but I had to wait until security were distracted.
Once slip in the entire plan would be ruined.
With every passing minute,
I lost a chunk of my sanity
and was just waiting to be asked
while I was hanging around on the bridge for so long.
That is how close security you are to me right now.
I'm just waiting.
It's about a half-tenant right now.
I've worked out.
I've got about 30 seconds to a minute
to max.
The fuss also not counting
any cars coming this way
and also any
people walking past and saying
what are you doing?
This is near impossible.
But I want to do it so bad.
I've been sitting there for probably
25 minutes.
There's not that much going on anymore.
But you never know when a truck's just
round the corner.
There's just so many people out for you.
Look.
Every angle.
Plan to fuck it is in operation.
I don't know if you can even see it.
It's not one of them.
I managed to reach the gate
without being spotted.
But again, I was surrounded.
It's a security shot.
It's right there.
It's going up.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Right now,
I've just got a memory.
I'm going to throw my paddle
so I don't have to.
I'm in.
I'm actually in.
I'm literally walking underneath the fence.
I can't believe I'm in.
I say another word.
It's from a Marvin Yes theory.
He says from the back of the fence
that you have to go and get it.
I don't know exactly what's happened.
I don't know what to do with it.
Oh my god.
I was like, you have a fucking belief, man.
I don't know how to fucking word.
I don't know how to fucking word.
Best festival in the world.
The most secure festival in the world.
The hardest to break into a festival in the world.
I just got here for a secret fucking portal.
So after spending six hours crawling through rivers,
I had made it into the world's most secure festival
through a secret portal.
Now, it was time to enjoy it.
Yeah, baby.
Love you, Glastonbury. Please don't mind me.
Is that it?
