Welcome back! So how smart do you think you are? Would you like to know your IQ? Let me
ask you a question. Is Australia larger than Greenland? Here's another question. What is
COPRA? COPRA. Does your ability to answer questions like these have anything at all to
do with how smart you are? Well Thomas Edison thought so. These are questions from a test
he devised in 1921 to help select job applicants. Edison called this test a brain meter. It
had 163 questions and it was widely publicized, especially after a Boston reporter asked Albert
Einstein one of the questions from Edison's test during Albert's first visit to America.
The question was, what is the speed of sound? Albert Einstein didn't know. The headline in
the next day's newspaper read, Einstein sees Boston fails Edison test. Later on Einstein
remarked that he had no need to carry information like the speed of sound in his head when he
could always just look it up. And that was before Google. By the way, Australia is about
three times larger than Greenland, even though the relative sizes are distorted by certain
kinds of maps. And COPRA is dried coconut meat. In the last lecture we discussed how definitions
of intelligence are related to how we assess intelligence. In this lecture we'll discuss
measuring intelligence in more detail. Now testing intelligence is tricky but it's absolutely
necessary for research because research depends on measurement. We'll focus on two topics.
First, we'll examine the history of IQ tests and how they work. And I'll show you the kinds
of items found on the most widely used tests. Second, we'll discuss some of the issues about
what intelligence tests actually measure. Let's start with the term psychometrics. Psychometrics
is the term used to describe measuring psychological phenomena like intelligence often with paper
and pencil tests. Most intelligence testing is based on psychometric approaches that rely
heavily on statistical methods, including the properties of the normal distribution curve
that I showed in the last lecture. Many psychologists believe that IQ tests are one of the great
achievements in all of psychology, although there is considerable controversy about them.
We'll address the key issues shortly. First, let's go a bit into the history of the IQ test.
In the early part of the 20th century, the Minister of Education in France was concerned
about identifying children with low school achievement who needed special attention.
The problem was how to distinguish children who were, quote, mentally defect from other
children who were low achievers due to behavioral or other reasons. They wanted the distinction
to be made objectively by means of testing so a teacher could not assign a child to a
special school as a punishment. In this context, Alfred Benet and his collaborator, Theodore
Simon, devised the first IQ test to identify children who mentally could not benefit from
ordinary school instruction. So you see, the IQ test was born as an objective means for
identifying low mental ability in children so they could get the special attention they
needed. The test, constructed by Benet and Simon, consisted of several subtests that were
that sampled different mental abilities with an emphasis on tests of judgment because Benet
felt that judgment was a key aspect of intelligence. He gave each test to many children and developed
average scores for each age and sex. He then was able to say at what age level any individual
child scored. This was called the child's mental age. A German psychologist named William
Stern took the concept of mental age another step. He divided mental age by actual chronological
age. This resulted in an IQ score that was the ratio of a child's mental age averaged
across all the subtests divided by the child's chronological age, multiplying this ratio
by a hundred avoided fractions. So for example, if a child was reading at the level of a nine
year old, the child's mental age was nine. If this child actually had a chronological
age of nine, the IQ would be nine divided by nine equals one times a hundred or an IQ
of one hundred. If a child had a mental age of ten, but was only nine years old, the IQ
would be ten divided by nine, which would equal one point one one. Multiplying that
times a hundred, you come up with an IQ score of one hundred and eleven. A nine year old
with a mental age of eight would have an IQ of eight divided by nine. That equals point
eight nine times a hundred would come to an IQ of eighty nine. The point of these early
tests was to find children who were not doing so well in school relative to their peers
and get them special attention. And the Bene Simon test actually worked reasonably well
for this purpose. However, one problem with the concept of mental age is that it's hard
to assess mental age after about age sixteen. Can we really see a mental age difference
between a nineteen year old and a twenty one year old? And don't be distracted thinking
about your own kids. We're not talking about maturity here. The mental age of a thirty
year old really isn't much different than a forty year old, so the Bene Simon test was
not really useful or intended for adults. Note that the IQ score is a measure of a child
relative to his peers. Even today newer IQ tests based on a different calculation show
how an individual scores relative to his or her peers. Here's a critical point and we'll
come back to it again several times in this course. IQ scores are not absolute measures
of a quantity like pints of water or degrees of temperature. IQ scores are meaningful only
relative to other people. And IQ point is not always the same in terms of a quantity
of intelligence. For example, the difference between IQs in seventy five and eighty can
be the difference between learning to drive a car or not. The difference between IQs of
a hundred and twenty five and a hundred and thirty really isn't so dramatic. Nevertheless,
the Bene Simon test was an important advance for assessing the abilities of children in
an objective way. The Bene Simon test was translated to English and redone at Stanford
University in the nineteen twenties by Professor Lewis Terman. And the test is now known as
the Stanford Bene test. We'll hear more about Professor Terman in a later lecture. Today
the Stanford Bene test has been revised and updated many times. One key change is the
way IQ is calculated. Mental age is no longer used. IQ is now based on deviation scores
and I'll explain what that is shortly. First, however, I want to mention the Wexler Adult
Intelligence Scale, or the WACE, W-A-I-S. As its name states, it was designed for adults
and it is the most widely used intelligence test today. The current version consists of
a battery of ten core subtests and another five supplemental subtests. Together they
sample a broad range of mental abilities. The WACE uses deviation scores to calculate
an overall IQ score. Here's how deviation scores work. Let's go back to the normal distribution
we introduced in the last lecture. Recall that IQ scores are normally distributed in
large populations and so are subtest scores. The tests were developed so this would be
true. It's no accident because items that prove not to be normally distributed were
basically eliminated from the test. Each subtest has been taken by a large number of males
and females of different ages. These are the norm groups. Each norm has an average score
called the mean and the spread of scores around the mean is measured by a statistic called
the standard deviation. Let's say a subtest has a perfect possible score of 20 points.
Each norm group may have a different average score on this test depending say on age. Younger
test takers might average eight points if they are ten years old and older people taking
the same test say at age 12 might average a score of 14 points. This is why it's important
to have norm groups for each age. If a new 12 year old takes the subtest and scores 14
he is scoring at the average for his age. If he scores above or below 14 the deviation
from the norm average can be calculated and his score can be expressed by how much it deviates
from the normative mean. The average deviation across all the subtests is used to calculate
the deviation IQ for the full battery. A score of one standard deviation above the mean ranks
the person higher than 84% of the norm group. One standard deviation below the mean ranks
the person at about the 16th percentile. You can see that IQ scores and their meaning
depend on having good norms. This is one reason that new norms are generated periodically for
these tests. There's also a separate version of this intelligence test for children. It's
called the WISC or the Wexler Intelligence Scale for Children. One further point the
waste can be divided into specific factors other than full scale IQ. The structure of
the waste looks just like the pyramid structure of mental abilities from the last lecture.
So in this illustration let's start at the bottom where we see individual subtests. They're
grouped at the next highest level into factors of verbal comprehension, working memory, perceptual
organization and processing speed. These four specific factors are grouped into more general
factors, higher up a verbal IQ and performance IQ. And these two broad factors have a common
general factor defined by the total IQ score called full scale IQ. Full scale IQ as you're
probably thinking is a good estimate of the G factor. To recap so far in modern IQ tests
the IQ score is computed relative to other people the same age and sex. Test performance
is calculated by how far from the norm group, average and individual scores. IQ scores are
based on performance across the battery of tests that sample a range of different mental
abilities. That's why an IQ score is regarded as a good estimate of the general intelligence
factor, the G factor as we discussed in the last lecture. Although some critics of intelligence
testing have argued that G is merely a statistical artifact there's actually very little evidence
to support the artifact view. Most intelligence researchers accept a concept of G but there
are different ideas about what this pyramid may look like for example just how many specific
factors are there. These issues get a bit technical and I'm saving more details for
a later lecture on alternative theories of intelligence. Now that we've got the basics
of IQ tests I want to give you examples of the kinds of test items used. These examples
are not real items but they are illustrative. Intelligence tests fall into two broad categories.
The first is based on individual testing where one tester administers the test to one person
at a time. This usually takes a couple of hours and can take all day depending on how
many tests are given and it can be quite expensive. The other category is based on group testing.
One tester can give test directions to a group and then let each person work simultaneously
without interaction with the test administrator. Depending on the group tests used this can
take less than an hour or all day. Group testing is more efficient and typically costs less.
So what are the items like on these tests? The waste is an individually administered test.
One of its subtests is called general information. Example questions would be what is the capital
of Italy? What is the approximate population of India plus or minus 200 million? Who were
the Goths? Who is pictured on the $100 dollar bill? What symbol is on the Canadian national
flag? Edison's test was essentially a general information test. Now you can see that doing
well on general information questions may depend on your education or your nationality.
When the test is given in other countries some items may be changed to avoid bias. You
can also see that during test development items that are biased do not show a normal
distribution and can be eliminated. You may not have learned about the Goths in school
but if you have wide interests, a characteristic related to intelligence, you might have learned
something about the Goths from other sources. The idea behind general information is that
more intelligent people will have more general information whether they learn it in school
or not. And we'll talk more about bias in a few minutes.
Another waste subtest is called digit span. The test administrator reads a series of digits
and when finished you repeat the digits back in order. This test has two parts. In the first
part you repeat the digits back in order as you heard them. In the second part you repeat
the digits back but in backwards order, in reverse order. So in the first part of the
test if I say 8, 2, 9, 4, you say 8, 2, 9, 4. If I say 6, 1, 3, 8, 9, 2, 7, then you
say, I'm waiting, 6, 1, 3, 8, 9, 2, 7. Now let's try it backwards. If I say 7, 2, 9,
you say 9, 2, 7. If I say 1, 8, 4, 5, 9, 3, 2, 7, you repeat those backwards.
7, 2, 3, 9, 5, 4, 8, 1. This test does not seem as vulnerable to bias as general information
might. Now vocabulary is another subtest. For example, what does ice mean? What does
globe mean? What does mediate mean? What does pixel mean? It certainly seems that bias is
possible based on education, but again we'll discuss this in a bit. Now another subtest
is called picture completion. So what's missing from this picture? The answer is one hand.
And what's missing from this picture? The answer is the statue on the very top of the
dome. Now here's a key point. Answering or not answering any one item or doing poorly
on any one subtest does not mean you are not smart. It's the total of all items that matter
for general intelligence. And not all subtests are equally good indicators of G. The term
G loading refers to the amount of G represented in a test. So for example, for example, what
the general information subtest and the picture completion subtest have relatively low G
loadings. Vocabulary subtest and the digit span subtest have high G loadings. That's
why vocabulary tests are good estimators of IQ. Unless of course the person tested is
not a competent speaker of the testing language. More on such issues shortly. Recall that the
waste really is a battery of separate tests where the combined scores into one IQ number
estimates G. There are many other tests that also estimate G. I'm going to briefly describe
three of these tests. The first one will be the Ravens Progressive Matrices. And by the
way the test is called the Ravens because that's the name of the person who developed
it. Secondly I'm going to talk about analogy tests. And third I'm going to talk about the
SATs. Now the Ravens test can be given in group format and it takes less than an hour.
It's usually given as a timed with a time limit. It's one of the best tests to estimate
G. It's nonverbal test of abstract reasoning. This is the test I used in the 1988 study
I mentioned in the first lecture for the first brain imaging study of intelligence. Remember
this example? If you're having trouble with this example I'm sorry to tell you that the
actual test items get progressively more and more difficult. The underlying pattern or
rule can be quite hard to infer. But because of its simple administration this test has
been used in many research studies. Scores on this test can be converted to approximate
waste IQ scores. Performance on a test like this seems fairly independent of education
or even culture. Now analogy tests are also good estimators of G. So let's switch to talk
about analogy tests. An analogy for example is something like wing is to bird as window
is to blank. Wing is to bird as window is to blank. Well let's say a wing is part of
a bird and a window is part of a building or house. Or here's another one. Helium is
to balloon as yeast is to blank. Helium is to balloon as yeast is to blank. Well let's
see Helium makes a balloon rise. Yeast makes dough rise. The answer would be dough. How
about this one? Monet is to art as Mozart is to, the answer is music. So that's analogies.
Good estimators of G. What about the SATs? Why are they used for college admission? Are
they achievement tests or aptitude tests or are they intelligence tests? Interestingly
the SAT originally was called the scholastic aptitude test. Then it was renamed the scholastic
achievement test and now it's called the scholastic assessment test. Achievement tests measure
what you have learned. Aptitude tests measure what you might learn especially in a specific
area for example music or foreign language. And the SATs provide an interesting example.
It turns out that the SATs especially the overall total score are also a good estimator
of the G factor. Because the SAT problems require reasoning. Actually the older version
of the SAT verbal test actually included a section on analogies but it was regarded as
kind of hard and it was dropped. Now like IQ scores the meaning of SAT scores is based
on percentiles. Both IQ scores and SAT scores are normally distributed. You can see in this
illustration that 68% of students score in the middle between SAT scores of 400 and 600.
The same as people with IQ scores between 85 and 115. Over 700 on the SATs is the top
2%. Just like an IQ over 130 is the top 2%. Now part of the confusion between SAT scores
and IQ scores is that achievement scores and aptitude scores and intelligence scores
are all related to each other. They are not really independent. Remember the G factor
is common to all tests of mental ability and the G factor is related to learning ability
as we have seen. So your performance on achievement test is related to the general factor just
like IQ scores and aptitude test scores are related to G. It's also confusing because
we all know examples of bright students who are underachievers and students who are not
so bright who are overachievers. However such examples are really the exception. We're
talking about the generalities here. Now in reality there are some valid distinctions
among achievement, aptitude and intelligence testing. Each kind of test is useful but they
also are all related and the common factor is G. So let's talk about our second topic
now in this lecture. Some issues and problems regarding IQ tests and scores themselves.
The main problem with the IQ score is that it is not a real ratio scale. This means there
is no true zero. This is unlike height and weight. For example a person who weighs 200
pounds is literally twice the weight of a person who weighs 100 pounds because a pound
is a standard unit. This is not the case for IQ scores. IQ scores rank a person relative
to other people. So a person with an IQ score of 140 is not literally twice as smart as a
person with a score of 70. For IQ it's the percentile that counts. Someone with an IQ
of 140 is in the top 1% and someone with an IQ score of 70 is in the bottom 2%. Now here's
a key point about the limitation of all intelligence test scores. They only estimate intelligence
because we don't yet know how to measure intelligence as a quantity like we measure liquid in liters
or temperature in degrees. If you take an intelligence test when you are sick your score will be a bad
estimate of your intelligence. If you retake the test when you are well your score is a
better estimate. However just because your score goes up it does not mean your intelligence
increased in the interval between the two tests. Similarly if you take the SATs and get a score
and then you spend $1500 and take an SAT refresher course and your score goes up a bit it doesn't
mean you are smarter. It just means the second score is probably a better estimate of your
overall general intelligence. Now we are going to come back to this point later in the course
when we talk about various claims of increasing intelligence. Whatever you think about intelligence
test and IQ scores they do predict success in many aspects of everyday life. As we will
see in the next lecture IQ scores are related to brain characteristics and we will talk
about that later as well. These relationships help establish the validity of intelligence
test. Okay so now what about test bias? Are the questions fair or do the correct answers
depend on an individual's education or other factors rather than intelligence? Professor
I had in graduate school used to say that most people define a fair question as one they
can answer is a question unfair because you don't know the answer. Possibly the most
controversial topic in all of psychology is whether intelligence tests are biased against
any groups. There is a history of profound misuse of intelligence testing. One time for
example they were used to keep certain ethnic immigrants out of the United States. Sometimes
the tests were given in English to people who could hardly speak the language. We will
address group differences in IQ in some detail in a later lecture but at this early point
in the course for the time being I'm going to assert that test bias has been studied
extensively for decades and although test abuse certainly happens most researchers find
that intelligence tests themselves are not inherently biased against any one group. This
is not to say that factors like education and culture don't matter. We'll be talking
more about this later in later lectures. So finally just what do intelligence test scores
actually mean? Low test scores result for a simple reason. Low test scores result because
a person doesn't know the answers to the questions and there are many possible reasons for not
knowing the answer to a question. You were never taught it, you never learned it on your
own, you learned it but forgot it a long time ago. You know like oh I knew that back in
high school. You learned it but you just forgot it during the test. You were taught it but
you really couldn't learn it. You didn't know how to reason it out but you knew how to reason
it out you just couldn't reason it out. Now most but not all of these reasons seem related
to general intelligence in some way. High test scores on the other hand mean the person
knows the answers. Does it matter how you came to know the answer? Is knowing the answer
a matter of just good memory because you remember all the things you learned a long time ago
or good test taking skills you don't get anxious so you don't momentarily forget things that
you know or good learning? Recall that definitions of intelligence combined all these things.
Remember Edison's test. Albert Einstein didn't bother to remember facts he could look up.
Clearly Albert had other mental abilities. So in conclusion the main point of this lecture
is that measurement is required to do scientific research on intelligence. No one test may
be a perfect measure of a single definition but as research findings accumulate both definition
and measurement evolve and our understanding of the complexities increases. Estimates of
the G factor are the most used assessments in intelligence research today. In the next
lecture we're going to go into more detail about what IQ scores and the G factor predict
about everyday life. You may be quite surprised and here's a question for the next lecture
we'll consider in the context of intelligence research. It's a simple question. Can you
really be anything you want to be?
