In our opening lecture, I quoted sociologist Linda Godfreytson.
Professor Godfreytson summarizes much of her work with a simple statement.
Life is a long mental test battery.
I'm going to repeat that.
Life is a long mental test battery.
Does it seem that way to you?
If you're about my age, you might remember when the first VCR machines were available.
That's video cassette recording machines, with a videotape cassette as large as a book
that could hold an hour or two of TV shows.
If you're younger, you probably have no idea what I'm talking about.
But this was a major consumer advance.
Most of these devices had a digital clock so you could set a time to record your favorite show.
When you plugged your VCR in for the first time, the digital clock flashed 12 o'clock.
12 o'clock was the default.
And you then followed the directions in the printed manual that came in the box and set the actual time.
You remember, press this button once and enter the hour, then press this button twice and enter the minute,
and then press the button three times and so on and so on.
Now this was the earliest beginning of the digital age for most people.
And directions like this were new and unusual.
Honestly, remember back when you got your VCR?
Did you understand all the steps and actually set the time?
Or did the 12 o'clock flash on and off for years and years?
You remember visiting friends at their home and seeing the 12 o'clock flashing on and off?
And it kept flashing until the VCR was replaced with newer technology that made setting the time and date somewhat easier.
If you're younger and you don't remember flashing VCRs, do you have a new digital TV?
How many features do you actually know how to use?
Did you pay extra for someone to come to your house and set up your TV because you couldn't figure out all the connections
and you don't know HDMI from DVR, let alone how to program the remote?
And how about your smartphone?
I know you have one, 90% of adults in the United States do.
Do you know how to use all its features?
How about your digital camera?
Is it always set to auto mode?
Or do you know how to use any of the manual settings?
When you have a connecting flight, can you find your way from one terminal to the other?
Think about making connections at Dallas Fort Worth.
Should you walk or take the SkyLink train from terminal A gate 15 to terminal D gate 35?
I made the wrong choice and missed the flight to London once.
Have you figured out how to use the scanners and the self-checkout lines at the supermarket?
Or do you wait in the long, slow line for a human cashier?
Now you probably navigate things like this just fine.
But you know, many people find such things quite challenging.
And the complexities for many aspects of everyday life certainly seem to be increasing steadily.
In the first two lectures, we covered defining and measuring intelligence
and introduced the G factor as an important concept.
In this lecture, we'll review more data that show general intelligence is related to many aspects of life,
not just academics.
Some of the data may surprise you.
There are three parts to this lecture.
First, we'll look at 10 areas of everyday life and briefly illustrate the importance of intelligence in each one.
Second, we'll look at actual data about what G predicts.
And third, we'll consider whether any of the data have implications for public policy.
Please note that as I often do in this course, I'm using G and IQ to mean everyday general intelligence.
Here's a key point to keep in mind as we go through the data.
G doesn't predict everything.
But G predicts best wherever demands for general thinking skills are highest.
That is most G loaded.
Complex things, more G loaded.
G predicts complex things.
So here are 10 life areas where G really matters.
First is school success.
It's an old question as to whether some kids should get into the honors program or the advanced classes
only based on intelligence test scores.
But intelligence does matter when it comes to speed of learning, especially for advanced material.
Working hard is not necessarily enough.
Second area, income and managing money.
The most cynical statement I ever heard was if you divided all the money in the world equally
among everybody, in six months the same people would have it back again.
This could be a statement, even an extreme one, about the importance of intelligence
for understanding money management concepts.
Now, prescriptions and medical instructions are another area where intelligence can make
a difference.
Many medical directions are actually quite complex.
Should doctors assume all patients understand equally well?
Drug information from the pharmacy tends to be written at a fairly high level.
So lower IQ people may have more misunderstandings and less effective compliance.
Area four, accidents and health.
As we'll see, low IQ is associated with more accidents and shorter longevity.
Again, misunderstanding of health and safety issues is more common among low IQ people.
Using computers and other digital devices is our fifth area that requires some basic
problem-solving skills, even for Apple devices.
My 85-year-old mother-in-law, who lives on the other side of the country, recently bought
an iMac computer and an iPod Touch.
She calls whenever there's a question or problem, but she's beginning to formulate fixing strategies
on her own when she can't get something to work.
Actually, she's really doing quite well for someone who didn't have the concept of clicking
a mouse.
Area six, reading bus or train schedules.
The iconic map of the London Underground rail system shows complex information in a relatively
simple, visual way, but this is the exception.
It's not the rule.
Area seven, filling out employment forms or government forms.
Think you're so smart, try doing your own tax forms, especially without TurboTax.
Area eight, vocational choice.
Can you really be anything you want to be irrespective of your IQ?
This is a key issue about the extent to which intelligence is a limiting factor, and we'll
discuss it more shortly.
Area nine, job success, which is more important, IQ or emotional intelligence?
As jobs become more complex, IQ may be necessary but not sufficient without the ability to
get along with other people.
Area 10, basic life decisions.
If I were giving homework in this course, I'd assign you to watch three or four TV episodes
of Judge Judy.
Certainly not all the cases are people with lower intelligence, but you'll see real examples
of how poor reasoning and poor decision making create all kinds of life complexities and
problems.
Let's turn to some research findings and some actual data about what G predicts.
We'll start with the relationship between IQ and learning.
Here we show the normal distribution of IQ, and we have superimposed on it the kinds of
learning that are typical at different IQ levels.
We went over this briefly in lecture one.
Starting on the left, lower IQs around 70 usually mean that learning is slow, simple,
and requires concrete step-by-step teaching with individual instruction.
Learning complex material is often not possible.
IQs around 80 to 90 still require very explicit, structured individual instruction.
When it comes to learning by written materials, IQs of at least 100 are usually required,
and college-level learning usually works best at 115 and over.
Higher IQs over 130 usually mean more abstract, independent learning.
I'll point out that the U.S. military has a cut-off of around 90 for recruits, although
this has moved down a bit from time to time.
Most graduate programs require the GREs or the MCATs for medical school or the LSAT for
law school.
Cut-offs for these tests usually ensure that individuals with IQs over 120 are most likely
to be accepted, and the very top programs have higher cut-offs to maximize accepting
applicants in the top 1 or 2 percent of the normal distribution.
This doesn't mean that people with lower scores cannot complete these programs, but when resources
are limited, the higher-scoring students usually are more efficient and faster learners.
But let's go a step further.
The next illustration shows the kinds of jobs and careers associated with IQ levels.
Again, starting on the left, we see low IQ goes with jobs that require a minimum of
complex, independent reasoning.
The jobs tend to follow specific routines, like assembling a simple product, food service,
or a nurse's aid, and as IQ increases to around 100, we see more complex jobs like bank teller
and police officer, and as IQ increases to around 115, more complex jobs are possible,
like manager or teacher and accountant.
Professions like attorney and chemist and business executive usually require higher
IQs to finish the advanced schooling that's required to perform at a high level of complexity.
Now please understand these are general trends.
I'm sure you know exceptions, we all do.
But let's be honest, do you think a person with an IQ under 100 can successfully complete
medical school or engineering school?
Of course, it's possible, especially if the IQ score is not a good estimate of intelligence
for that person, or if that person has a very specific ability, like the ability to memorize
a large amount of information that compensates for lower average general intelligence.
This is why an IQ score by itself is not usually used to make an important decision.
An IQ is usually considered in the context of other information.
Now you can see that even having a discussion about the role of intelligence and job success
begins to be uncomfortable because it implies serious limitations on personal achievement.
And we want to believe the ideal that in this country at least a person can succeed at anything
they choose if they just work hard enough.
A reasonable caveat is that this is true, providing they have the appropriate level
of mental ability.
So this chart is an extension of the previous one.
And it's another way to show how G is related to the complexity of jobs.
On the right side, you see a list of jobs with the ones that are most complex toward
the top.
The thicker arrows indicate that G-level predicts success more in jobs shown at the top that
are more demanding in terms of complexity.
The thinner arrows show that G is a weak predictor of success at simple jobs.
In other words, the IQ matters more for success in these complex jobs than for success in
the less complex jobs at the bottom of the illustration.
Now clearly complex job performance is largely G-dependent, but of course there are other
factors including how well one deals with other people, for example.
This is the concept of emotional intelligence.
It used to be called the study of personality, it's a large separate topic that I won't
be covering in this course, but I want to acknowledge that intelligence alone is not
the whole story for predicting success, and to the extent to which emotional intelligence
has been measured by various scales, it's not completely clear whether emotional intelligence
is really completely independent of the G factor.
There's some studies indicate yes, other studies indicate no.
But nonetheless, the G factor alone is not the only story here.
Now here's another point about predicting job success.
Let me ask you this.
Where on a diagram of jobs in IQ would we place being a chess grandmaster?
Do you think that attaining such a high level of expertise in this complex activity must
be related to G?
Seems reasonable, but if you think so the data aren't really so strong on this.
Studies suggest that expertise in any area requires at least 10,000 hours of practice.
That's 1,258 hour days, or about 3.4 years.
Studies of chess grandmasters suggest the group average IQ is about 100.
This suggests that becoming a grandmaster may depend more on practice of a specific
ability like spatial memory than on general intelligence.
Computers may actually have a savant like spatial memory, but the idea of a chess grandmaster
being a giant intellect or the master of spies is not necessarily correct.
So please don't get the impression that I'm saying IQ is all that matters for success
in complex activities.
But here's some more data on other things in life that IQ does predict.
This chart compares a low IQ group, it's an IQ score between 75 and 90, to a high IQ group
where everyone scored between 110 and 125, and the comparison is on relative risk of
several life events.
For example, the odds of being a high school dropout are 133 times more likely if you're
in the low IQ group.
People in the low group are 10 times more at risk for being a chronic welfare recipient.
The risk is 7.5 times greater in the low group for incarceration and 6.2 times more for living
in poverty.
Unemployment and even divorce are a bit more likely in the low IQ group.
IQ even predicts traffic accidents as shown in this chart.
On the left we have ranges of IQ, and on the right we have the death rate per 10,000 people
for each IQ range.
In the high IQ group, the death rate from traffic accidents is 51.3.
But in the low IQ group, this almost triples to about 147.
This may be telling us that people with lower IQ on average have a poorer ability to assess
risk and may take more chances when driving or performing other activities.
Another way to look at the role of thinking skills in everyday life is based on functional
literacy data.
Functional literacy is assessed by the complexity of everyday tasks that a person can complete.
This is more than just the ability to read or the level of reading.
Functional literacy is everyday thinking.
Now the last comprehensive United States National Survey of Functional Literacy was
done in 1992.
This chart is from that survey.
On the left side we have five levels of functional literacy.
One is the lowest, five is the highest.
In the middle we have the percent of people who are in each category, and we have some
sample tasks that people in each category can complete.
So let's look at the top row.
Now if you're like me, you'll be quite surprised to see that only 4% of the white population
is in the top category and can complete tasks like using a calculator to figure out the
cost of carpeting a room.
This task requires determining the area of the room, converting the area to square yards,
and multiplying the square yards by the price.
In the next row down, 21% of people are at level four of functional literacy.
They can calculate social security benefits from a table and understand basic issues about
how employee benefits work, for example.
In the middle we have 36% in the middle category, category three.
They can calculate miles per gallon from a chart and they can write a letter explaining
a credit card error.
As we go down to category two, we find 25% of people in this category.
They can determine price differences between two tickets and they can locate an intersection
on a map.
As we go down to the lowest level of functional literacy, we find 14% of people and they can
accomplish things like filling out a bank deposit slip, but more complex tasks like
locating an intersection on a map would present some difficulty.
Now, here's a specific example of a level two task.
You are a marketing manager.
This graph shows your company sales for each season going back three years.
Can you predict the sales figure for the next spring by placing an X where it should be?
You can see the four seasons across the bottom for 1982, 1983 and 1984 and the unit sales
on the Y axis.
Note that there is a peak in sales every spring, so the prediction for next spring in 1985
would be about where the X appears.
This requires a simple inference and there is little distracting information.
The 14% of people in level one would have trouble with this problem.
And here's an example of a level four task.
Look at this bus schedule.
On Saturday afternoon, you miss the 235 bus leading Hancock and Blaine of Ventura going
to Flint Ridge and Academy.
How long will you have to wait for the next bus?
So you look at the schedule and first you need to understand you must look at the outbound
schedule, not the inbound one.
Then you need to find the right column for leaving your stop and the entry for 235.
Then you must find the next departure, which is 305, and then you subtract the times and
you conclude that you'll wait 30 minutes.
There are more elements to consider here, more inferences required, and more distracting
information.
Only the 25% of people in levels four and five can do this.
So all these examples demonstrate that intelligence helps us navigate the problems of everyday
life.
It's really not a shocking idea, but this is easy to take for granted, especially if
you're navigating reasonably well and most of the people you spend time with are like
you.
The point here is that functional literacy is a good indicator of intelligence and you
can see from the functional literacy data that many people have trouble with daily tasks
that you and I might take for granted.
Try this thought exercise.
Imagine traveling to a new city and getting to a relative's home if you were completely
on your own and had an IQ of 80.
You can get some sense of what this might be like if you ever traveled to a foreign
country where you did not speak or read the language and you had to find your way to a
place off the beaten path without any help.
Actually, if you watch The Amazing Race on TV, you probably can't help making inferences
about the IQ of the participants.
So now let's consider our third topic.
Should data like these inform or influence public policies?
In a free and capitalist society, can lower IQ individuals, let's say in the bottom 15%,
expect government help from federal, state, or local authorities that is not needed by
higher IQ individuals?
Is the half of the population with IQs under 100 a permanent drag on society?
Some people actually think this may be true.
Let's talk for a moment about a controversial book in 1994 that explored the role of intelligence
and social policy.
The Bell Curve by Richard Hermstein and Charles Murray was that book and it created quite
a controversy.
The main theme was that modern society increasingly requires and rewards people with the best reasoning
skills that is high intelligence.
Therefore, people in the bottom part of the normal distribution of IQ, the Bell Curve,
could be at serious disadvantage for succeeding in everyday life.
This theme was detailed with over 900 pages of data and statistical analyses, but the
part that aroused the most controversy was over one chapter that discussed black-white
IQ differences.
This issue haunts all intelligence research and I'll be addressing it later in the course
in some detail.
In this lecture, my point about the Bell Curve is whether public policy needs to recognize
that people with low IQ need help navigating life, irrespective of race background or even
why they might have low IQ.
This is a fundamental issue today in politics, although the role of IQ is hardly mentioned
as explicitly as it was in the Bell Curve.
Most researchers would agree that research data on intelligence can only inform policy
decisions, but the goals of the policy need to be determined through democratic means.
Now, in my view, the most practical general lesson for public policy that comes from intelligence
research is this, reduced complexity.
Would anyone argue for greater complexity?
Here are some examples for reduced complexity in everyday life.
Intelligence for medication and prescriptions, forms of every kind, think taxes, bus and
train schedules, instruction manuals, what reading level is appropriate for working
a microwave oven or a TV or a sewing machine, assembly manuals, now many are only in pictures.
There's no doubt that the data that show that G is a key factor in life's success implied
that intelligence is a limiting factor, and that you can be anything you want to be if
you have the required level of intelligence, obvious perhaps, but this goes against the
implication that the work ethic can always trump mental ability.
Finally, before concluding this lecture, I want to mention a popular alternative view
about the importance of intelligence for success.
Malcolm Gladwell's book called Outliers emphasizes the role of luck.
Here are three points about this view, whereas the bell curve documented the role of intelligence
in everyday life's success with data, Malcolm Gladwell expresses a point of view that luck
plays an even greater role than intelligence, but it's a point of view.
The second point is his examples are mostly anecdotal, it's hard to prove whether luck
or intelligence is more important for life's success.
If you think research on intelligence is hard, research on luck is even more difficult to
even conceptualize.
This is an argument that cannot be resolved by research.
And point number three, people who focus on intelligence typically do not downplay the
role of luck.
People who focus on luck don't need to downplay the role of intelligence.
So in conclusion, intelligence predicts navigation of complexity in everyday life.
Life really is one long mental test battery.
Research so far suggests that IQ represents the single most useful tool in the toolkit
of human mental abilities.
Something that people with lower IQ have the most difficulty in navigating modern life
is something to consider in all aspects of designing society.
Now, the G factor has been our focus up to now, but as I've noted, not all researchers
are fond of the G concept.
In the next lecture, I'm going to tell you about some alternative ways to think about
intelligence that don't emphasize G.
These other theories suggest intelligence is less limiting and more flexible.
They are quite popular, but surprisingly, the supporting research is not so strong or
actually absent, as we'll see.
