What if the ideas you like most about intelligence turn out to have the least research support?
In the last three lectures, we've been discussing defining and measuring intelligence with a
focus on the general factor in its role in everyday life, and we've seen the kind of
scientific approaches used to collect data about intelligence. When there's any discussion about
intelligence, many people start with a very skeptical view, partly because of misinformation
they may have heard about IQ tests, and partly because of a general sense that it's impolite
to discuss, let alone study, whether a person's intelligence limits their choices and opportunities
in life. It's certainly okay if you're still skeptical, we've barely scratched the surface.
Hopefully by the end of the course you'll see the study of intelligence in a new light.
One source of skepticism about intelligence is whether the G factor is really the key concept
as I have presented it to be. So in this lecture, we'll explore some alternative concepts that
many people find more appealing than the G concept, but I'll also tell you why I don't think they are.
First, we'll start with more details about the pyramid structure of mental abilities that I
showed you in our first lecture. Pyramid shape was determined by using a statistical method
called factor analysis to find the groups of tests that are most related to each other.
These groups form factors of specific mental abilities and factors of broad mental abilities.
There are different approaches to factor analysis and they can give different results.
The G factor always emerges, but now we'll focus on the other specific factors.
How many are there? And are there any factors more important than G?
Then, second, we'll discuss Sturmburg's theory of practical intelligence and we'll ask whether
it's different than the G factor. Third, we'll discuss Gardner's theory of multiple intelligences
and why it's so appealing. And then fourth, we'll talk about the influence of culture and
social context on concepts of intelligence.
Let's start with some more details about the factor analysis approach. Recall from the first
lecture, most theories about factors of intelligence start with the empirical observation that all
tests of mental abilities are positively correlated with each other. This is called the positive
manifold and it was first described by Charles Spearman. Spearman worked out statistical procedures
for identifying the relationships among correlations, sorry, the relationships among tests
based on their correlations with one another. The basic method is called factor analysis.
It works essentially like this. We start with the concept of correlation. Now, you probably already
know about correlation, but here's a quick review. Let's say we measure height and weight in many
people. We can graph each person by locating the height and weight as a single point with
height ranges on the x-axis and weight ranges on the y-axis. When we add points on the graph for
each person, we begin to see an association. Taller people tend to weigh more. Height actually
predicts weight, although not perfectly, so if we know a person is 6.5 feet tall, we can predict
they will weigh around 280, 300 pounds. If height and weight were perfectly related, the points would
all fall on a straight line and we could predict one from the other without any error. A perfect
correlation like the one in this diagram has a value of one. If a high value on one variable
goes with a high value on the other variable, a perfect negative correlation is where a low value
on one variable predicts a high value on the other variable as shown in this example. A perfect
negative correlation has a value of minus one. So, for example, the correlation between watching
hours of television on one hand and school grades on the other hand, that's a negative correlation.
The more hours of watching, the lower the grades tend to be,
although this is not a perfect correlation. Now, correlations between two variables are
calculated based on how much each point deviates from the perfect line and correlation values are
always between plus one and minus one. The higher the correlation, positive or negative,
the stronger the relationship between the two variables and the better one variable
predicts the other variable. Factor analysis is based on the pattern of correlations among
several variables. In our case, we're interested in the correlations among different tests of
mental abilities. So, the point of factor analysis is to identify what tests go with other tests
based not on content but rather on correlations of scores irrespective of content. The set of
tests that go with each other define a factor because they have something in common that causes
the correlation. Now, studies in this field typically apply factor analysis to data sets
where hundreds or thousands of people have completed dozens and dozens of tests.
There are many forms of factor analysis, but this is the basic concept and it's the basis
for models of the structure of mental abilities like the pyramid I showed you in previous lectures.
Here's that pyramid again, but this time the illustration shows correlations. So, you can
see how strong the associations are among the tests and the factors and the g-factor.
Note that all the correlations are positive. So, let's look at some details of this example.
Let's start on the left with the reasoning factor. You see it's related to g with the strongest
correlation on this example anywhere and this correlation is 0.97. This means there's almost
a perfect relationship between high reasoning scores on the reasoning factor and the g-factor.
The reasoning factor itself is the strongest factor related to g with a 0.97. As we move to
the right, the spatial ability factor is the second strongest correlation with g. That is 0.91.
Memory factor has a lower correlation of 0.66, processing speed is even lower at 0.6,
and vocabulary has a reasonably moderate correlation with g of 0.73. So, these factors
are all correlated to g positively, but some stronger than others. Now, let's look at the
individual 16 tests at the bottom of this chart. Test 1 to 3 are all correlated to the reasoning
factor pretty much with the same magnitude of correlations, but test 1 has the highest correlation,
it's 0.89. So, if you could use only one test to estimate g, you might choose test 1. Now,
look at test 4. It has a slightly higher correlation of 0.91 with the spatial ability factor,
but spatial ability turns out not to be as highly correlated to g as the reasoning factor.
So, test 1 is still the single test with the best estimate of g. However, if you had a battery
of tests that included test 1 and test 4 and test 8 and test 12 and test 15,
all of those tests have high correlations with their factors. If you had a battery of those tests,
you would get an even better estimate of g. Other statisticians and researchers have worked out
alternative factor analysis methods. The details of these different factor analysis methods really
don't concern us in this lecture, but different factor analysis methods of intelligence found
different numbers of these specific factors and there are some differences when you use various
methods. I'm going to give you a quick example of two different models based on factor analysis.
The first one was developed by Professor Lewis Thurstone. He proposed a model of seven
primary abilities and his research showed that these were independent of each other.
That is, they were not correlated to each other and there was no common g factor. This is completely
contrary to everything I've been telling you. Now, here are the seven abilities that Thurstone found
and they'll be familiar to you from our previous lectures. There's spatial ability as measured
by tests that require mental rotation of pictures and objects. There's perceptual speed as measured
by tests of finding small differences in pictures as fast as possible. There's number of facility
as measured by tests of computation. There's verbal comprehension as measured by tests of vocabulary.
There's word fluency as measured by tests that require generating as many words as possible
for a given category within a time limit. There's a memory ability as tested by recall for digits
and objects and finally, number seven, there's inductive reasoning as measured by tests of
analogies and logic. However, as you may have guessed, Thurstone's model was not supported by
subsequent research. It seems the original research that Thurstone did was flawed because
the samples that he used did not include individuals across the full range of possible scores.
This is a statistical problem called restricted range and it dramatically can influence the
calculation of correlations, often making them lower than they actually should be.
So, when other researchers reanalyzed Thurstone's own data but corrected this problem by extending
the range of people who took the tests, they found that the tests of Thurstone's so-called
primary abilities, in fact, are correlated to each other and that there is a g-factor.
So, Thurstone was wrong. But why include this model in this lecture? I mentioned Thurstone
because his model was the forerunner to a more modern view of multiple intelligences proposed
by Howard Gardner and I'll talk about this view shortly. Since Spearman and Thurstone,
other pioneers of factor analysis have worked on many different datasets and we now have factor
analysis studies of intelligence on hundreds of mental tests completed by tens of thousands
of people. The bottom line, there always is a g-factor. It doesn't matter what kind of analysis
you do. There always is a g-factor and here's a key point. g-factors derived from different test
batteries correlate nearly perfectly with each other as long as each battery has a sufficient
number of tests that sample a broad range of mental abilities and as long as the tests are
given to people sampled from the broad range of ability. This fact is strong evidence for g.
But what exactly are the key intelligence factors other than g? How many are there?
Here's another model based on factor analysis that gives a different answer. The first example
was Thurstone. Our second example comes from Professor Raymond Cattell and his student John Horn.
They proposed a model with two principle factors, fluid intelligence and crystallized intelligence.
This distinction is widely recognized as an important evolution in the definition of intelligence.
Both are related so they're not in conflict with the g-factor. They represent factors just below
g in the pyramid structure of mental abilities. Now fluid intelligence refers to reasoning ability,
both inductive and deductive, reasoning ability to solve novel problems, often using facts and
information you already know. If you need to hire a trouble shooter to solve a complex problem,
you want someone with high fluid intelligence. Sherlock Holmes would be an example of having
high fluid intelligence. So was Einstein. Most savants would be low in fluid intelligence.
In many studies, fluid intelligence and the g-factor are correlated almost perfectly.
Crystallized intelligence refers to what you know and the ability to learn facts and absorb
information. Many students get high grades in certain fact-based subjects because they have
high crystallized intelligence. Savants like Kim Peake may have high crystallized intelligence.
Jeopardy champions have high crystallized intelligence. Because Jeopardy clues are often
based on complex word play, fluid intelligence is also required. Remember Watson, the IBM
computer? Watson appears to have elements of both, although Watson is limited to the verbal domain,
so attributing the g-factor to Watson is still problematic. For you Sherlock Holmes fans,
you may remember that he didn't bother to maintain facts like the earth rotates around the sun because
such facts were unimportant for his work. This suggests that Sherlock might have had low crystallized
intelligence, although I'm sure devotees of Sherlock Holmes could argue this point.
I want to give you one other example of crystallized intelligence. It's very important in medical school
to have a good memory, and medical students typically have very high crystallized intelligence.
They also need fluid intelligence to use that information to solve problems and make diagnoses.
I was once giving a lecture to medical students, and I put up a slide of a very large correlation
matrix. It was like 20 by 20, and the slide had been taken out of focus, so you couldn't
possibly read all these numbers. So I was a little embarrassed at this, and I said,
I'm really sorry about this slide, so don't anyone try to memorize it. At which point,
one of the medical students in the very back row yelled down too late. This is an example that I
always remember about medical students and their memorization ability. But here's an important
finding about the distinction between fluid and crystallized intelligence.
Crystallized intelligence is fairly stable over a lifespan, but fluid intelligence decreases with
age. The likely explanation for these differences may lie in how age affects some parts of the brain
more than others. Notice that fluid intelligence peaks around age 15 and slowly declines. It's too
bad peak fluid intelligence doesn't correspond to peak maturity. You didn't know your 15-year-old
tools were so smart, did you? And notice that crystallized intelligence steadily increases
with age. These are only two examples of factor models now of intelligence, Thurstone
and Cattel. And many other models have given some critics the idea that G is merely a statistical
artifact of the factor analysis method. This criticism depends on very technical aspects
of how factors are computed. The artifact view has been examined extensively, and in my view,
it has never really held up at all. From a logical point of view, if G is a statistical
artifact and does not actually exist, why do measures of G correlate with the complexities of
everyday life, as we saw in the last lecture, and as I'll detail in subsequent lectures,
why does G correlate with brain imaging and genetic data?
So let's move on to two completely different approaches that do not focus on G.
First, let's talk about the work of Robert Sternberg. He's one of the most prolific intelligence
researchers, so all we can do here is briefly sample some of his most important ideas. Here's a
Sternberg quote that refers to G. He said, quote, almost everything you know about intelligence,
the kind of intelligence psychologists have most often written about, deals with only a tiny and
not very important part of a much broader and more complex intellectual spectrum.
Professor Sternberg has proposed a theory of practical intelligence based on three kinds of
intelligence. He calls it the triarchic model. The three kinds of intelligence are analytic.
This is reasoning skills, and most intelligence tests measure this kind of intelligence.
The second is creative intelligence. This is non-G-related ability to originate new ideas.
It's difficult to have psychometrics tests measure this.
And lastly, practical intelligence. This is the emphasis in Sternberg's model.
It's common sense. It may include emotional intelligence, that is your ability to get along
with other people. High G individuals can lack practical intelligence, and as a result,
smart people can do really dumb things. We all know examples of smart people who do
really dumb things, don't we? These three components were not derived by traditional
factor analysis. They were based on theoretical distinctions. But Sternberg has developed tests
for all three. Now, it's important to note that Sternberg recognizes that G exists. His main argument
is that these three components are more important than G, and that unlike G, they can be taught.
This, of course, is a less limiting view than that of a fixed G, and therefore it's quite
appealing to educators. Sternberg has actually instituted educational innovations
in some school settings based on his model, and he and his colleagues have published a series of
research papers testing his central ideas in a broad range of studies, and some with generally
positive results. It's an extremely ambitious and impressive program of innovation and testing.
The problem is that some independent analyses find that the predictive value
of the Sternberg's tests can in fact be explained more simply by a G factor.
All the scores on his tests tend to be correlated with each other. Now,
like many issues in psychology, the bottom line in my view is not yet clear as to whether the
Sternberg model improves on or expands the basic G concept. It's also important to keep in mind
that Sternberg's model is relatively new compared to over 100 years of research on G, so we'll
be waiting for more data. Our second alternative is an approach to intelligence proposed by
Professor Howard Gardner. Here's a quote from him. The score on an intelligence test
does predict one's ability to handle school subjects, though it foretells little of success
in later life. For Gardner, the G factor is just an unnecessary concept. Now, Gardner has proposed
a model of independent multiple intelligences. These are the basic ones, although the list has
changed from time to time. There's linguistic intelligence, reading, writing, and all language
skills. There's logical mathematical intelligence, solving math problems and logical reasoning.
There's spatial intelligence, getting places, packing a suitcase. There's musical intelligence,
this includes singing, composing, playing an instrument. Then there's body kinesthetic
intelligence, dancing, athletics. Then there's interpersonal intelligence, understanding other
people. There's intrapersonal intelligence, understanding oneself. And finally, a relatively
new one added to the list, there's naturalistic intelligence, understanding patterns in the
natural world. Even though the idea of multiple intelligences is similar to Thurston's model
of primary mental abilities, the basis of Gardner's model is not empirical. There are no factor analyses
or other quantitative approaches. Now, Gardner has not developed any tests of these intelligences.
His approach is much more like Sigmund Freud's. It's more of a literary analysis of insight.
And like Freud, Gardner's views are really quite interesting and thoughtful. But they are not
research-based in terms of empirical research, quantitative research. In fact, other researchers
have developed tests of the multiple intelligences defined by Gardner. And guess what? Tests are
correlated with each other. There's a g-factor. I once had lunch with both Professor Sternberg
and Professor Gardner. We were all at a meeting together. And I asked them what they would do
if they got a $25 million grant to do any kind of research they wanted. And of course,
Sternberg said he would use it to study his model in more school systems. And Gardner,
interestingly, said he would hire Sternberg to find evidence for multiple intelligences.
The Gardner is undeterred by the lack of quantitative evidence because his view of
intelligence is not a quantitative view. Like a good novelist, Gardner is providing
important insights into a complex human quality. Now, despite the fact that there is little
empirical research evidence to support the concept of multiple intelligences, it's still
possibly the most popular model of intelligence outside the research world, especially among
parents and educators. Now, why is this view so popular? Three key reasons. First, it appeals
to the ideal that everyone has some special ability. Second, it doesn't recognize the
limitations implied by g. And third, it's based on observations and anecdotes easy to understand
rather than on complicated statistics. Both Sternberg and Gardner have models of
intelligence with appealing ideas. Whether these models have any practical implications for
improving education, however, remains to be seen. In my view, only research can answer whether or
not schools need to adopt these ideas to improve any measure of educational success.
So, in my view, the jury is still out. So, to recap so far, we've discussed factor analysis
in more detail because it's a prominent tool used by many intelligence researchers and it provides
important evidence for the concept of g. And we've introduced two alternative models of intelligence
that are not focused on g. Our last topic today is the importance of social and cultural approaches
to intelligence. This is a huge area, but we'll focus on the work of Professor Richard Nesbitt.
He's a prominent advocate for this view and he has written on it extensively and clearly.
Here's a short summary of three key points of Professor Nesbitt's view about intelligence.
One, genes don't count for much. Two, social context determines IQ, not the other way around.
And three, schools and education make a big difference in IQ, not the other way around.
Now, we haven't yet covered the genetic data on intelligence or studies about education effects
in IQ, but from the lecture so far, you can already anticipate that these views that Professor
Nesbitt has are dramatically different from ones that I've presented. Now, a few years ago, Professor
Nesbitt and I both gave keynote addresses at a large meeting of educators. He spoke just before
I did and focused his presentation on what he called several myths about intelligence.
For example, he called it a myth that genes determined intelligence more than environment.
He called it a myth that intelligence was fixed and unchangeable.
Professor Nesbitt went on to cite various research studies to support his views. Now,
my topic was brain imaging studies of intelligence. And I spoke right after him, but I introduced my
presentation by remarking that every myth that Dr. Nesbitt had just dissected about intelligence,
I believed all these were actually true. The audience was confused. How could there be such
fundamental disagreement from the same set of research studies? Well, the truth is this happens
all the time in science. Sometimes there's cherry picking of research studies to support a particular
view about intelligence, or a straw man is created with some extreme position that nobody really
holds, and then the straw man is knocked down. Typically, the arguments among researchers on
fundamental issues are quite technical and often nuanced. Now, I've been in the field for 40 years,
so naturally I have my own biases. My goal in this course is to give you the broad outlines of the
issues, some of the latest data, and a sense of how researchers approach questions about intelligence.
I'll tell you my overall views throughout the course, but I know you recognize that my views
are not the only views. So what about the idea that social context and culture influence intelligence?
We'll be discussing this as we cover various topics throughout the course. For now, let's
consider two examples of intelligence tests from a previous lecture. Recall that vocabulary tests
are a good measure of G, and so is the Raven's test of nonverbal abstract reasoning. Vocabulary
is obviously influenced by social context and culture, but could it be also that more intelligent
individuals pick up a better vocabulary, whether they learn it in school or not?
And even though the nonverbal problems on the Raven's test may appear to be independent of
social and cultural influences, one can argue that some cultures do not foster such problem-solving
and have so little experience with such problems that the Ravens can, in fact, have a cultural
component that biases the test against some groups or individuals. Research on social and
cultural factors often show influences on test scores. We'll review some of these in a later
lecture. The controversy is really about what such influences tell us regarding how intelligence
develops, and the key question is how malleable intelligence may be if social and cultural
factors are manipulated. As we go forward, we'll also consider whether intelligence is malleable
if we manipulate the underlying neurobiology of the brain. Now, it's not completely obvious to me
whether social, cultural manipulation or neurobiological manipulation of intelligence
is a better path, more on that in later lectures. So far, as our theme in this lecture on alternative
approaches to understanding intelligence shows, the debate is not really about whether G exists.
It's virtually acknowledged by all researchers, but rather the debate is about the structure and
importance of other non-G factors. Here's the bottom line. Most research still is done on G
and other specific factors identified by factor analytic approaches because the measures are
still the most sophisticated. Sternberg and Gardner have appealing models, but the research so far on
their validity is not compelling. Cultural models are appealing to our common sense,
but don't account for many research findings as we'll see later in the course. And as we'll also
see in subsequent lectures, there are lively controversies about where G comes from and
whether it is stable or changeable. In the next lecture, we'll look at some long-term studies of
high IQ and genius, and I'll tell you how they relate to Lady Gaga. Yes, that Lady Gaga.
