So what does a nerd really like? You know the stereotype, but is the stereotype based
in any reality? There's actually quite a bit of research about nerds and why shouldn't
there be? They seem to be running the world. In this lecture we're going to look at a very
select group of individuals with test scores in the upper end of the normal distribution
and follow them from childhood into old age. We're going to look at three classic research
studies in this lecture. Each one starts with children and tests their mental abilities
and life successes at various intervals over decades. One study started in California in
the 1920s, one started in Scotland in the 1930s, but it disappeared for a while only
to be rediscovered a few years ago, and one started in Baltimore in the 1970s. Study one
began in the 1920s. Professor Lewis Terman at Stanford University initiated this project.
This is the same Lewis Terman who brought Bonaise IQ test to the United States and revised
it into the Stanford Bonaise Intelligence Test. Terman designed a straight forward study.
It started by testing many school children with the Stanford Bonaise test. Children with
very high IQs were selected and then they were studied extensively for decades. Terman's
study had two goals. First, to find the traits that characterized high IQ children, and second,
to see what kind of adults they would become. The common stereotype of intelligent adults
was not so different then as it is now. Francis Galton, for example, wrote in his 1869 book
A Redditary Genius, quote, there is a prevalent belief that men of genius are unhealthy, puny
beams, all brain, no muscle, weak-sighted, and generally of poor constitutions. Does this
sound familiar? According to Terman, the common stereotype of intelligent children was simply
this, quote, early ripe, early rot, end quote. This similarly applied to child prodigies who
were thought to be abnormal, poorly adjusted, prone to burnout, and even psychotic. These
beliefs can be viewed as a kind of social justice theory, meaning if you're really
great in your mental ability, you should be bad in all other abilities to balance things
out, and this would be just. So here's how Terman's project started. In 1920 and 1921,
1,470 children with IQs between 135 and 196, that's the top 1%, were selected from over
250,000 children in California public schools. They were retested and interviewed every seven
years. Their average IQ was about 150, and 80 children had IQs over 170. These 80 children
over 170 were actually in the top 0.1%. This group of children became known unofficially
as the termites. They completed extensive medical tests, physical measurements, achievement
tests, character and interest tests, trait ratings, and both parents and teachers supplied
additional information. A control group with average IQ scores was also tested. Now, the
results of Terman's study were published over time in five volumes. As you can imagine, the
data were quite extensive. So here's a summary of some key findings about the lives of the
termites. Overall, they completely refute the stereotypes both for children and adults.
The negative, nerdy attributes were basically unfounded. They were not odd or puny. They
actually were physically quite robust and more physically and socially mature than their
age mates. On average, the termites were happier and better adjusted than the controls over
the course of the study. This was assessed by surveys that included asking about things
like job satisfaction and marriage satisfaction, the number of divorces people had, and so
on. Although they had their share of life's problems, follow-up studies showed considerable
achievement with respect to publishing books, scientific papers, short stories and poems,
musical compositions, television and movie scripts, and patents. Just what you'd expect
from a very high IQ group. However, further follow-up indicated that high IQ alone did
not necessarily predict life's success. Motivation was also an important factor, and Terman believed
that while Jean's played an important role in high IQ, he also believed that exceptional
ability required exceptional education to maximize a student's potential. This may not
sound so radical, but even today there's a debate about whether any extra education
resources at all should be allocated to the most gifted students to help develop their
high ability. Terman's project also demonstrated the predictive validity of the IQ score.
That is, one IQ score in childhood can identify individuals who will excel in later life.
Like all studies, however, there were some major flaws. Here are two. One, Terman intervened
in the lives of these, quote, subjects, and helped them with letters of reference for
college and for employment. And two, there was a strong sex bias in education and employment
that resulted in female termites mostly becoming housewives, so good male-female comparisons
were not possible. And similarly, there are no data about minorities. So do these include
problems and validate the main findings? Not likely. Overall, the success and the achievement
of these very high IQ individuals stand on their own. But fortunately, we have more data
from a newer study that modified Terman's approach. But before we get to that study,
let's shift to our second classic longitudinal study, the Scottish Mental Survey conducted
by the Scottish government. This was truly a massive project. All the children born
in Scotland in 1921 and all the children born in 1936 completed intelligence testing at
age 11 and were retested again in old age. This study differed from the Terman study
and the next study we're going to talk about, in that it included virtually all children
in the country on a test of general intelligence rather than identifying samples of very high
scores. All children in the country, the total number of children in the study was about
160,000. This is really large. And back in the 1930s, one of the reasons the government
sponsored this study was a concern that the national IQ level was decreasing because
less intelligent people were having larger families. Actually, from the original testing,
there was a clear trend that children from larger families had lower IQ scores. Now there
are many possible explanations for this, including that higher IQ parents have fewer children
or that very large families were even poorer than smaller families, so opportunities for
education were even less. This trend itself does not identify the causes. At the time
this study began in the 1930s, there was considerable debate around the world about national intelligence
and eugenics. This clearly had very dark and evil consequences in Germany. It's one of
the reasons intelligence testing became a negative topic in academia following the Second
World War. But another reason for using intelligence tests in some countries was the desire to
open opportunities for better schooling to all social classes by using test scores as
an objective evaluation. This actually happened in the United Kingdom after the war, the Second
World War, and this motivation was important in the development and use of the SAT in the
United States. But the Scottish survey was over after the second round of testing in
1936. They finished. It only became a longitudinal follow-up study largely by accident. Today
a team of researchers directed by Professor Ian Deary at the University of Edinburgh is
using this database and follow-up evaluations to study the impact of intelligence on aging.
Actually, Professor Deary, who is an accomplished intelligence researcher, knew about the Scottish
survey data, and he asked a very simple question. Where are the records?
It turns out they were at the university in an old storage room scattered about gathering
dust for decades. They were all handwritten and many pages were damaged by water or mice
or just general neglect. Several years ago, Dr. Deary got a new grant from the Scottish
government and restored the physical records as much as possible, and then he computerized
all of them. This took a large team of people. He also identified 550 original participants
who were still living and willing to be retested. So now there is follow-up data from age 11
to age 80. Let's look at two interesting results from the longitudinal data. First,
IQ scores were fairly stable over time as demonstrated by showing scores at age 11 correlated
to scores in the same people at age 80. The intelligence test used at the beginning of
the survey and for a follow-up is called the Moray House Test. It gives an IQ score essentially
equivalent to the Stanford Bene or the Waste. Recall that fluid intelligence decreases with
age. Crystallized intelligence is more stable, and the IQ score from the test used in the
Scottish study combined both fluid and crystallized intelligence. This graph shows the IQ score
at age 11 on the x-axis and the IQ score at age 80 on the y-axis. Each point is a person
and you can see a strong correlation between the two scores some 69 years apart. Second,
individuals with higher intelligence scores at age 11 lived longer than their classmates
with lower scores. Now here the graph shows the data for women and for men. Both show
the same trends. On the x-axis we see the decades from 1930 to 2000 and on the y-axis
we see the percent of the group originally tested who are still alive in each decade.
And the data are shown separately for each quartile based on IQ. For example, let's look
at the graph of women and let's focus on the data points at the far right side of the
graph. You can see that more women are alive in the highest IQ quartile compared to the
bottom quartile. And this is true starting in the 1940s. It's the same for men but not
quite as strong a trend. But why should IQ be related to longevity? There are many possible
explanations. Here's a possible model. Before age 11 several factors both genetic and environmental
may influence IQ and then higher IQ leads to healthier environments and behaviors and
to possibly better understanding of physician instructions as we saw back in lecture two.
And these in turn influence age at death. Now since the United Kingdom was the first
country in the world to have an IQ that has universal health care, differential rates
of insurance coverage do not influence these data. Now let's go to our third study. This
is the study of mathematically and scientifically precocious youth at Johns Hopkins. This was
a project initiated by Professor Julian Stanley in 1971. Dr. Stanley repeated Termin's approach
but instead of IQ scores he used extremely high SAT math scores obtained by junior high
school students aged 11 to 13. These were special testing sessions called talent searches where
junior high school students took the SAT math. So instead of general intelligence Stanley
focused on a very specific mental ability. Now this project had two major goals. First
they wanted to identify precocious students very early and second they wanted to foster
their special talent. Now as luck would have it, I started graduate school at Hopkins in 1971
and I worked on this study in its early years and I must say that this experience was an early
influence on my interest in intelligence and Dr. Stanley was one of the most important
and interesting mentors I had at Hopkins. First of all he was an expert on statistical
methods. For example he wrote a classic paper on more than 20 different ways to compute the
reliability of a test. It was one of the first papers I read in graduate school. But more
interestingly Dr. Stanley had a near absolute belief in the predictive validity of mental
test scores. I say a near belief because he did recognize the value of motivation and hard
work but he really did take the standardized test scores quite seriously, more seriously than
anyone else I've ever known. This came out from time to time when he described previous
graduate students by enumerating from memory their scores on the GREs, the Miller analogies
tests and other scores from their graduate school applications even from 10 and 15 years
before. He remembered the scores and he noted that the student's achievement usually if not always
matched the scores. So naturally this could be rather intimidating. Fortunately Dr. Stanley
had a classic southern charm that took the edge off the fact that he really did expect you to live
up to your test scores. And I knew my test scores were not especially amazing and I got the impression
that Professor Stanley was a bit perplexed as my research career progressed after I left Hopkins.
We did stay in touch after he retired from Hopkins and as he grew older it seemed that he
softened a bit on the belief in the absolute value of test scores for predicting academic
success. And I'd like to think I may have had something to do with that. Well, for better
or for worse, this focus on test scores was the basis for Dr. Stanley's search for
precocious students, especially in math and science. In the late 1960s Dr. Stanley started
working with a really precocious student and after he gave this student a battery of psychometric
tests, Dr. Stanley helped the student get into Johns Hopkins when the student was 13 years old.
Dr. Stanley subsequently referred to this young man as the first radical accelerant and he is
identified as Joseph B. In his first year at Hopkins at age 13, Joseph took honors calculus,
sophomore physics, computer science and his grade point average was 3.69 out of a possible 4.0.
Now he lived at home during this time but he also made friends with other college students
and adjusted well to his accelerated studies. In four years Joseph received a B.A. and an
MS degree in computer science at Hopkins. He began a PhD program in computer science at Cornell
before he was 18 years old and Joseph went on to a very productive career. From the beginning,
a main goal for Dr. Stanley was to not only identify and follow such precocious students
but also to select the best individuals for education acceleration including early college admission
and so was born the idea of using the SAT math test for screening junior high school students
to find precocious individuals with talent for math and science. The Spencer Foundation
funded Dr. Stanley in 1971 and the first talent search was in 1972. For that search,
junior high school students in the Baltimore area had to be nominated by their math teachers
to participate in the Hopkins talent search. Actual SAT math tests were given in the standard way.
I was a proctor and I passed out the pencils. In that first search 396 7th and 8th graders
took the SAT math test. Now here are two results of that first talent search that we found
really quite fascinating. First, 22 of the 396 scored at least 660 on the SAT math,
higher than the average Hopkins freshman at the time. And second, all of these 22 students
who scored so high were boys. None of the 173 girls scored over 600. Now as we'll see
in a subsequent lecture on sex differences, these ratios have improved considerably over the years
but at the time this huge disparity was still shocking. And what about the 22 boys who scored
higher than Hopkins freshman? What were they like? The early data analyses confirmed
Terman's results with respect to stereotype. These mathematically precocious students
were more physically and socially mature than age peers. One of my first research projects
was to give this precocious group some standardized tests of personality. And on average,
they scored more like college students than their age peers. Now Professor Stanley believed
that enriched classes were not as productive as actual college classes. So he helped many
of these talented students go to college early, age 13, 14, right into college. Now over the years,
many of the most precocious students did get early admission, usually living at home,
and there was no evidence that they suffered any emotional or social harm from accelerated
programs like this. Like the termites, many of these kids went on to have very successful
and very productive careers. The original talent searches have evolved dramatically,
and they now include many programs for enrichment in addition to early college admission.
And the enrichment includes summer camps that emphasize math and science experiences.
And you can find out more about the details of these programs if you Google them.
Well actually, one of the students associated with the talent searches co-founded Google.
That was Sergey Brin. Now here are two more talent search kids you may recognize. How about
this guy? Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook. Now he may have been portrayed as kind of a negative
stereotype nerd in the movie The Social Network, but this seems to be highly inaccurate when
you see him interviewed on television on 60 Minutes for example. And here's one you may
not believe. It's Lady Gaga. Now whether you're a music fan or not, who knew Lady Gaga could
have been an aerospace engineer? But are these examples representative? There are now detailed
follow-up studies of thousands of the students who participated in several of the original
searches. Follow-up results show that many of these mathematically precocious children
as determined by a single test score when they were in their early teens became very
successful in terms of occupational and life success. Their names may not be as familiar
as the three I just showed you, but there are many of them. Now here's an illustration of
professional achievement that's based on a 25-year follow-up of the top 1% of the original
searches. This was 2,385 students in all. All of these students are divided into quartiles
that are labeled here Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4 based on their SAT math score at age 13. On the
x-axis we have SAT math score at age 13, and on the y-axis we have the proportion of the
quartile with an outcome like getting a PhD or a JD or an MD. Another outcome is having
any peer-reviewed publications. Another would be getting a PhD in tenure in a STEM field.
STEM stands for Science, Technology, Engineering, or Math. Patents are also another outcome listed
here, and so is high income defined as income in the 95th percentile. What we see in this chart
is that for students with age 13 SAT math scores in the 4 to 500 range, which is the top 1%
for 13-year-olds, but the lowest quartile one for this sample, about 15% of this group got a
doctorate in any field, and this percentage increases with higher scores in the top SAT math
quartile four, where the percentage of advanced degrees is about 35%. This is all shown in the
line with the green dots at the top of the chart. You see the same trend for all the other
outcomes on this chart. You'll notice the OR after each outcome stands for odds ratio, and this
compares the top quartile proportion to the bottom quartile for each outcome. For example, the
greatest disparity is 18.2 for getting a doctorate in a STEM field. This means the upper quartile
within the top 1% were 18 times more likely to get a STEM doctorate than the bottom quartile, also
within the top 1%. So, even in this rarefied group of over 2,000 kids in the top 1%, the
individuals with the highest score did better than the kids with the lowest scores in terms of these
outcomes. Remember, a single test taken at age 13 identified these individuals. Again, you can see the
predictive validity of this standardized test score is reasonably strong. Clearly individuals in the top
1% of scores are successful, and the higher their scores, even in the top 1%, the more likely these
kinds of achievements. And remember, these scores do not predict happiness or many other important life
outcomes. The longitudinal study of the original talent search participants is continuing with a 50-year
follow-up planned by researchers Professor Camilla Venbo and Professor David Lubinsky at Vanderbilt
University. Today, talent searches and enrichment programs are still going on in many states modeled after
Dr. Stanley's original program, and the ones he later sponsored at Johns Hopkins University, including the
Center for Talented Youth. Over 3 million students have been tested, and hundreds of thousands have
participated in special academic programs. In fact, this kind of search is now global with the widespread
recognition that finding and nurturing this kind of precocious mental ability is good for the students and
good for society. So, let's recap. Terman's project helped popularize the importance of IQ scores and
demolished the popular but negative stereotype of childhood genius. Stanley's project went further and
incorporated ways to foster academic achievement in the most gifted and talented students.
Dearie's analysis of the national survey data in Scotland provided new insights about the stability of IQ
scores and the importance of general intelligence for a number of social and health outcomes. So, to conclude
this lecture, these three classic studies provide compelling data that a single psychometric test score at an
early age predicts many aspects of later life, including professional success, healthy aging, and even
mortality. The bottom line? Good to be smart. To summarize the course so far, in the first five lectures, we've
looked at data that support the idea that despite varying views, general intelligence is a powerful aspect of
human behavior, and it can be defined, assessed, and studied scientifically. If you're still not convinced,
hang on. In the next lectures, we'll enter into even more controversial issues, starting with the role of early
childhood experiences on intelligence. New parents usually want to know, is there anything we can do to help my
child be a genius or at least maximize the child's intelligence? There are a number of research studies
relevant to this question, and we'll look at some surprising data next time.
