Do early childhood experiences have any impact on intelligence?
It certainly seems like this should be true, and there is definitely a widely accepted belief
that this is true, but the data has been surprisingly controversial.
This topic is part of the so-called nature-nurture issue, that is how much of intelligence differences
among individuals is due to experiences and other environmental factors, and how much
is due to genetics.
But the nature-nurture distinction is really outdated.
As we'll see in this and other lectures in this course, genes and environment influence
each other.
There are two key concepts to keep in mind.
First, the concept of epigenetics is that there are interactions between genes and environment,
but no specific interactions are yet clear for intelligence.
This is because we don't yet know the specific genes involved, so we can't yet determine
whether or how these genes are influenced by environmental factors.
We'll talk about the genetic story of intelligence in the next lecture.
For now, remember that genes act through biological mechanisms.
Second, any environmental variables that may affect intelligence must work through biological
mechanisms that affect the brain.
Now, let me repeat this because it's really important, and typically it's completely lost
when environmental factors are discussed.
Any environmental variables that may affect intelligence must work through biological
mechanisms that affect the brain.
In other words, we need to know how environmental factors work to influence intelligence.
This point logically leads me to the conclusion that intelligence, even if influenced by environmental
factors, is actually 100% biological because both genetic factors and environmental factors
work through biological mechanisms, or even more precisely, neurobiological mechanisms
because the brain is involved.
For example, think about lead poisoning.
It's clearly an environmental factor, but it affects intelligence because high levels
of lead damage neurons through a biological process.
Here's another example.
If early childhood education affects intelligence, it must do so by influencing the brain in
some way, and that influence must occur by some neurobiological mechanism.
I want to push this idea step further.
Imagine that if we understood the step-by-step details of that mechanism, we might be able
to turn it on, so to speak, with a specific biological trigger rather than the general
environmental trigger of education.
We'll talk more about this in a later lecture when we consider the possibility of enhancing
intelligence with an IQ pill.
Of course, how early childhood experience may affect intelligence is a large and complex
area, and we'll discuss aspects of it in several other lectures in this course.
In this lecture, we'll focus on research that looks at early childhood education and
on other environmental factors, including prenatal effects, family factors, and diet.
We start by going back to the 1960s and the war on poverty declared during the Johnson
administration.
Early childhood education was seen as key to overcoming the educational disadvantages
of poverty.
Children from poor communities often did not have preschool home situations that encouraged
reading or counting or other basics of learning to prepare for kindergarten.
There was no Sesame Street, no Big Bird, no count numbers, not even Elmo.
Moreover, the school systems in poor neighborhoods typically lacked basic educational resources.
They had outdated textbooks, limited libraries, overburdened teachers, and so on.
Partly a response to the civil rights movement and part of the war on poverty compensatory
education programs, including Head Start, were initiated by the federal government.
A key goal was to minimize or even eliminate any effects of poverty on cognitive development
as assessed by performance on achievement and intelligence tests.
The main assumption, especially by educators and psychologists, was that poverty factors
were responsible for most, if not all, of any cognitive disadvantages or gaps among
racial or economic groups.
In 1969, an educational psychologist from UC Berkeley named Arthur Jensen wrote a detailed
article that evaluated this assumption.
The article was published in the Harvard Educational Review and was titled, How Much Can We Boost
IQ and Scholastic Achievement?
The article began with a now famous sentence, quote, compensatory education has been tried
and it apparently has failed, end quote.
Jensen then went on with over 100 pages of detailed statistical analysis of virtually
every compensatory program that had been evaluated to that point.
Now I mention this in this lecture because this article is possibly the most infamous
and controversial article in the history of psychology and it has had a profound effect
on virtually all intelligence research to this day.
In fact, almost every negative or bad thing you may have heard about intelligence, in
my view, can be traced to the backlash reaction to this article.
In a later lecture, we'll discuss the even more incendiary part of Jensen's 1969 article
about the role genetics may play in average IQ differences among racial groups.
In this lecture, we'll review the controversial conclusion that IQ and achievement were not
increased by early childhood education and we'll see the latest somewhat more encouraging
research evidence on part of this issue.
So what did the Jensen article actually say about compensatory education?
Here are three points.
First, achievement and intelligence are not the same thing, even though tests of both
are highly correlated to each other.
Second, compensatory education can influence factors of achievement, things like motivation,
self-confidence, study habits, but there was scant evidence that it boosts intelligence.
Any early gains disappeared after a few months or a few years.
And third, genes affected intelligence more than achievement and this was why compensatory
education had such little effect.
So those were Jensen's main points.
Now whereas today there is powerful scientific evidence and wide public acceptance of the
idea that genes affect behavior and mental illness and things like personality and intelligence,
this was not the case in the late 1960s.
In those days, anything genetic was regarded as deterministic and unchangeable.
Today we know this is not correct.
Gene expression is dependent on many factors.
That's where epigenetics comes in.
Your genes are not your destiny.
We'll discuss this further in the next lecture.
But when Jensen expressed the view that intelligence was not amenable to change because improved
education did not seem to have a measurable effect, he struck at the heart of conventional
wisdom and at the political goal of leveling the educational playing field.
What did Jensen's critics argue after the publication of this article in 1969?
Here are four main criticisms.
One, he overemphasized the role of genes given the evidence at the time.
Two, he underestimated the potential of compensatory education even if the early studies failed
and even Jensen's critics acknowledged the early results were not very impressive and
that more intense compensatory efforts would be necessary.
So it was too early to conclude that compensatory education could never work.
Three, Jensen overstated the evidence that intelligence was stable over the lifespan.
And four, Jensen undermined hope for eliminating the achievement gap between white students
and minority students.
So that's what the critics said.
So was Jensen wrong in concluding that compensatory education did not increase intelligence as
was hoped by almost everybody?
We have the benefit of another four decades of empirical data.
As we saw in the last lecture, there's good evidence that intelligence is fairly stable
over a person's lifetime, although we'll see some new data that challenge this view
later in the course.
And we'll see in more detail in the next lecture, genes clearly play a role, a powerful role
in intelligence.
Jensen was correct about these two points.
Now, more recent efforts to increase achievement with compensatory education have been somewhat
more successful than the early studies Jensen reviewed.
But there is still no strong evidence of large lasting gains for intelligence due to educational
interventions.
And surprisingly, the education gap, the education achievement gap between white students and
other students also remains about the same over the last 40 years as Jensen predicted.
What are the results for more recent studies of compensatory education, which by the way
is now called early education?
Literature reviews in 1988 and more recently in 2010 looked at recent studies that attempted
to raise intelligence with early education programs for at risk children.
To summarize, here are three basic findings from these meta-analyses.
One, the programs varied in their intensity.
Two, any IQ gains tended to fade over time.
And three, more intense and expensive programs had better results that lasted longer, but
intelligence gains were still quite small.
So 40 years of new data haven't really changed the results about improving IQ.
But let's look at some details of the most intensive early education program completed
to date.
It's called the ABC Darian Project and its lead investigator is Professor Craig Ramey.
Here's an outline of the project.
This project targeted disadvantaged children from poor families in North Carolina.
About 50 children started in a group that entered a special early education program
and there were about 50 controlled children who were not in the special program.
The preschool program began on average when the child was only 4.4 months old and continued
until kindergarten at age 6 years old.
So this was really an early intervention at 4.4 months.
There was one instructor for every one to six children and the program ran all day five
days a week.
So you can see this was intense.
The children were followed and retested periodically until age 21 years old.
You can see this was quite an ambitious and expensive project.
It started as educational intervention in the first months of life and continued evaluation
until young adulthood.
There were important results for intelligence and for future achievement.
This graph shows mean IQ scores for both the special education group and the control
group starting at age 5 and continuing until age 21.
Age is on the x-axis.
On the y-axis we have the Wexler IQ score.
The top line shows the data from the group and the intervention program and the bottom
line shows the controls.
And yes, you are seeing this correctly.
IQ scores decreased over time for both groups ending in the low normal range between 85 and
90.
But the early education group maintained a five point advantage over that period of
time.
Remember that the intervention started before age 5 so it's not clear whether the five
point advantage at age 5 resulted from the intervention or whether the two groups did
not start out with equivalent mean scores.
Now it's also odd to see the decreases over time but there are two main considerations
here.
First, IQ tests for five year olds are not as reliable as those for older children and
young adults.
And second, brain maturation related to intelligence may not begin until later in
childhood as we'll see in a later lecture.
In any case, the data do not make a compelling argument that this early intense educational
intervention in disadvantaged children did much for improving IQ.
However, results for future achievement were better in this study.
The early education group showed some lasting improvements for a number of behaviors including
better study skills and better social interactions.
They had fewer behavioral problems and they had increased entry into college.
The general conclusion after more than 40 years of research is that there still is no
strong evidence of large lasting improvements in intelligence due to early education for
at risk kids.
But there are other benefits related to achievement.
Recall Jensen's conclusions were consistent with these results, essentially the same thing.
Few with any effects of early education on intelligence but some clear positive effects
on achievement.
Please note that this simple summary does not necessarily reflect the views of all researchers
in the field of early education.
It's the way I see the current state of affairs.
For most of the topics in this course, consensus is elusive.
But to recap so far, despite the common sense view that early childhood education should
influence intelligence, data for disadvantaged kids and special programs show few of any
lasting effects on improving IQ scores.
The data do show, however, that several behavioral factors related to achievement can be improved.
Now let's turn to other physical environmental factors that may affect intelligence.
These include prenatal and infant health and diet and the home environment and social
economic status, culture, family size and birth order.
We'll start by introducing three general problems that you should keep in mind when discussing
research on whether these factors influence IQ.
These are tricky problems.
Problem number one, how do researchers design studies comparing effects of two environments
when we have no comprehensive measure of environmental similarity?
For example, think about your environment where you grew up.
Can you quantify how similar it was to your best friend's environment or your cousin's environment?
Environments are really quite complex and have many possible factors and the factors change over time.
Problem two, people are not randomly assigned to environments.
To some degree, people select their environments.
Even children decide to play with other children they like or they may even prefer to play alone.
This self-selection may be partly genetic.
Personality traits like shyness or extroversion seem to have a genetic component.
This complicates identifying, quote, environmental factors.
Problem three, few environmental factors are independent of other factors.
Social economic status, for example, is related to lower income, poorer nutrition and fewer educational opportunities.
And social economic status is also related to genetics because people tend to marry within their own social class.
These related interactions are quite difficult to control in experiments.
This is a hypothetical diagram that illustrates some of the problems.
On the left, we see a hypothetical genetic disposition to the personality trait of exploring with high and low explorers.
You may have children like this.
In the middle, we see the interaction between the high and low genetic dispositions
and environments that somehow either encourage or restrict exploring personalities.
On the right side, we see that high explorers that have an encouraging environment develop high-quality cognitive skills.
But if high explorers have a restrictive environment, they develop low-quality cognitive skills.
Notice that low genetic disposition explorers in an environment that encourages exploring can develop intermediate cognitive skills.
Now, please don't take this diagram as fact.
It's just an illustration of how genetic predispositions may interact with different environments and lead to different cognitive outcomes.
The point is that defining environments and disentangling environments and genes is fundamentally complex.
We've mentioned this before.
If these general problems in mind, let's review some specific environmental factors as they may relate to intelligence.
Toxin exposure in early life can affect brain development.
Fetal alcohol syndrome, pesticides, lead poisoning all show definite relationships with lower IQ scores to varying degrees.
Breast milk. Some studies show a three-point IQ difference in favor of children who are breastfed.
Junk food.
A study published in 2012 claimed to show that children who ate the most junk food at three years old had lower IQs when they were eight years old.
The data actually showed the difference was less than two IQ points lower for the children who had the very highest junk food intakes.
Children who had the healthiest diets at age three showed about one point greater IQs when they were just over eight years old.
These apparent differences for breastfeeding and for junk food are really quite small given that IQ scores typically can vary two to three points in the same person at any point in time.
I think most of us may have expected even stronger effects of junk food, but humans may have evolved to have brains that accept calories from any source with the same neurobiological effects.
Now, there are studies of adults who as young children experienced long periods of malnutrition during the Second World War.
For example, the Dutch Hunger Winter Families study reported that as a group, the children in the study had average adult IQs that appeared unaffected by long period of malnutrition.
Now, chronic malnutrition may affect attention and memory, but these effects can be reversed when diet normalizes.
Clearly, if children are hungry when they take IQ tests, the results could be inaccurate.
Overall, it's actually hard to prove that general nutrition affects IQ very much.
Well, what about the home environment? In general, the better the home environment, the better the kids do on tests, but the effects are small and do not last beyond early childhood.
These studies tend to be confounded with parents' IQ, like the number of books in the home is a variable that depends in some way on IQ.
Interestingly, the number of words spoken at home related to language and may be related to verbal IQ will return to this in a subsequent lecture because it's really interesting.
As we noted in our hypothetical diagram, there are many potential variables most interact with each other and they're very hard to disentangle.
But let's talk specifically about two factors of general interest that I often get asked about.
The first is birth order.
This is only one study of birth order in IQ, but the results are typical of these studies and the results that are reported in general.
On the x-axis, this graph shows birth order. On the y-axis, we have IQ.
The four data points on the left show IQs for the first born child in families of only one child. That's the top point.
Then below that point, we have the first born of a two-child family and below that, we have the first born in a three-child family.
And below that, we have the first born in a four-child family.
The next column of three points to the right shows the IQs of the second born starting at the top for two-child families and moving down for three and four-child families.
Note in two-child families, there is no apparent IQ difference between the first and the second born child.
There also is no birth order difference in IQ in three-child families.
The data for four-child families in the bottom line looks more variable, but none of the differences are statistically significant.
Although birth order has no appreciable effect, note that the average child's IQ for one-child families is higher than for larger families, as we saw in the older Scottish survey data in the previous lecture.
The second variable we'll discuss is family size.
Here we see the number of children in a family on the x-axis and the average IQ percentile of the mother on the y-axis.
The mother's IQ percentile was assessed with a standardized test called the AFQT, which stands for Armed Forces Qualifications Test.
The trend is that mothers with more children have lower IQs than mothers with fewer children.
The mothers with more children on average are in the 24th percentile, whereas the mothers with only one child on average are in the 44th percentile.
What can we conclude from data like these on family size or from birth order?
This isn't clear. These examples actually show how difficult it is to identify the interplay between intelligence and environmental factors, even when we have clearly defined variables like family size and birth order.
Bottom line for this lecture, we still don't have any strong evidence that tells us that intelligence can be increased by manipulating the early education environment,
although there are things like lead poisoning that certainly can decrease intelligence.
Any causal influence of factors like birth order and family size, for example, are not really demonstrated in the data.
The lack of strong data showing intelligence increases after intensive early education for disadvantaged children is surprising and is disappointing to many researchers.
It would certainly seem that if intelligence was mostly influenced by early environmental factors, studies like the ones we've reviewed in this lecture would have more compelling results.
For other researchers, this lack of results further demonstrates that intelligence may be more fixed than changeable, and they give more weight to the role of genes.
But later in this course, we'll look at some recent research on cognitive training that is generating some excitement about improving IQ, and of course, we'll look at the controversy that goes with it.
Also, in a later lecture to come, we'll see an unfolding mystery about large, well-documented IQ increases over time, presumably due to unknown environmental factors.
To conclude, please remember what I said at the start of this lecture.
Any environmental effect on intelligence, even ones due to education, must work through biological mechanisms to affect the brain.
The same is true for all genetic effects, since genes express themselves through biology.
So, in the next lecture, we'll review why genes count for understanding intelligence, and we'll learn who in the world has the most DNA sequencing machines working 24-7 to find intelligence genes.
