In the last lecture, we began looking at brain imaging technology and how it helped shift
intelligence research from predominantly psychometric approaches to neuroscience approaches.
We started last time with positrons hitting electrons.
In this lecture, let's start with spinning protons and hydrogen molecules.
Protons naturally spin around an axis, and the spinning creates a very weak magnetic field.
Each proton axis has a different random orientation as illustrated here.
If protons enter a strong magnetic field, they snap into the same north-south alignment
as in the illustration.
If a radio wave is pulsed out and off rapidly into the magnetic field, the protons snap
out of alignment and then back in.
This pulsing can be done many times per second.
As the protons snap in and out of alignment, the shifts give off weak energy, and this
energy can be detected and mapped showing where the protons are if the magnetic field
is applied along a gradient of different intensities.
That's a long-winded way of saying that this sequence of events is called magnetic resonance
imaging, or MRI.
Carbon protons are abundant in water, and most of the body, especially the brain, is
made of water, so MRI gives beautiful images of the body and the brain.
MRI scanners look like this.
The large donut-like device contains a very powerful magnet.
When the person lies on the bed and the head or the whole body goes into the center tube-like
area, radio waves are rapidly pulsed into the magnetic field, the protons in the body
and the water in the body snap in and out of alignment.
The person has no sensation at all of this snapping of protons.
Person actually can fall asleep in the magnet, it doesn't matter.
The shifting energy patterns formed by all this snapping are detected and mathematically
turned into a picture.
The basic MRI technique is really quite versatile.
By changing various parameters of the scanning sequence, for example, like the frequency
of the radio wave pulses, different kinds of pictures can be made that emphasize different
brain characteristics.
These images are more detailed than the older CAT scans, and whereas CAT scans were made
with X-rays passing through the head or body, there is no radiation exposure at all during
MRI, and that's why every hospital has MRI machines and why many more researchers have
access to MRI than had access to PET scanners.
The three kinds of MRI that have been used to study intelligence are structural MRI,
functional MRI, and something called diffusion tensor imaging.
I'm going to show you intelligence data from each one of these MRI techniques.
So let's start with structural MRI.
Here's an example of a basic MRI that shows brain structure in great detail.
Here we have a horizontal slice, just as if I cut through my head and brain like this
and then look down on it from the top of the head down, and then we have a side view.
Even whole brain 3D images can be viewed.
These of course are mathematical slices, not actual slices.
Now like a picture printed in a newspaper, each brain image is made up of many individual
dots called pixels.
With MRI, the pixels actually have three dimensions, so they're called voxels, and they have volume
rather than just area.
There are millions of voxels in a brain image.
Each voxel has a value determined by the imaging technique, in this case the amount of energy
detected by the proton snapping in and out of alignment.
These structural images show gray matter.
That's where the neurons do their work, and the white matter fibers are also shown.
The white matter fibers link brain areas and carry information around the brain.
Gray matter and white matter tissue have different water content, so they can be distinguished
in these MRI images.
Note that structural images do not contain any functional information, so you cannot
look at a structural MRI and tell if the person is awake or asleep, solving math problems,
or you can't even tell from a structural MRI if the person is alive or dead.
But the second kind of MRI image is called functional MRI, or fMRI for short.
Like PET scans, functional MRI shows brain activity, but it's based on blood flow, not
glucose metabolism.
Functional MRI uses scanning parameters that image aspects of hemoglobin in red blood cells.
A sequence of very rapid images is made, thousands per second, and those images can be interpreted
as showing blood flow in the brain.
Those areas in the brain that are most active have greater blood flow.
Now whereas the PET scans I showed you in the last lecture showed the accumulation of
brain activity over 32 minutes, functional MRI scans show activity changes that last only
a second or two.
I'll show you some examples shortly.
The third kind of MRI is called diffusion tensor imaging, or DTI.
Here the MRI sequences are optimized to image white matter fibers, and combined with special
mathematical algorithms, the resulting images show white matter tracks in great detail, and
the DTI measures assess the integrity of the tracks, that is how well they transmit signals.
I showed you a DTI example back in the lecture on genetics.
These columns in this picture show different views and slices of white matter networks
that are highly heritable and that also are correlated to IQ scores.
I'll be showing even better DTI examples a little later in this lecture.
Before I show you more MRI data on intelligence, I want to briefly explain one main method
for analyzing MRIs.
It can be used on structural, or functional, or DTI images.
It's called voxel-based morphometry, or VBM.
You can see there are three basic steps in VBM.
First we start with an image like the MRI on the left, and then the next step, mathematical
algorithms determine the boundaries of gray and white matter tissue, and finally in the
third step, values are calculated that reflect the amount of gray or white matter tissue
in each voxel in the whole brain.
Since there are millions of voxels in the whole brain image, you get a very large dataset.
You can then correlate something like a test score, for example, to every one of these voxels
and identify where the correlations are statistically significant.
Now we've used VBM to correlate gray and white matter tissue to IQ scores in a sample
of volunteers.
Here's what we found.
The statistical results for the group of 47 people are superimposed on a rendering of
the brain.
The red and yellow areas show where high-waste IQ scores went with more gray matter tissue.
Note that the largest areas related to IQ are in the frontal lobes, but there are also
several smaller areas toward the back of the brain where more gray matter went with
higher IQ.
This was further evidence that intelligence did not depend on the frontal lobes alone.
Now this was not a surprise to us, but the next analysis of the very same dataset was
surprising.
When we reanalyzed the data separately for men and women, we found this.
In the men, the largest brain areas where more gray matter went with higher IQ were
in the back of the brain, especially in a part of the brain back here in the parietal
lobe, which is related to visual spatial processing.
But in women, almost all the areas where gray matter correlated to IQ were in the frontal
lobe, especially around a part of the brain related to language called Broca's area.
Now these results are consistent with the idea that men and women may have different
brain areas related to the G factor.
In other words, not all brains work the same.
Now before we move on, I'd like to draw your attention to Albert Einstein's brain.
Einstein's brain was removed after his death and preserved in a jar by a physician who
kept it at home, and then he kept it in his car as he moved across the country.
He was reluctant to share it with other researchers, but eventually samples were made available
to other people working on the brain.
The main finding, not without technical controversy, was that Einstein's brain showed more tissue
and more neuron support cells in the back part of the brain, pretty much the same parietal
area where the men showed correlations with IQ and the women didn't.
Now we'll be talking more about sex differences in a later lecture.
And one more thing, the gray matter areas related to IQ appear to be under genetic control.
This is illustrated in this picture based on MRIs and twins.
We see side views of the right and left hemisphere in the top row and frontal views in the bottom
row.
The red areas have the highest genetic heritability.
The purple areas are the least genetic.
Note that the Einstein area and frontal areas are among those with high heritability.
The findings I've talked about so far were based on waste IQ scores.
We also looked at the correlations between gray matter volume and scores on the individual
subtests of the waste.
Recall from our earlier lecture that the subtests have different G-loadings, that is some tests
are more related to the G-factor than other tests.
Now this picture shows the digit symbol subtest.
This symbol requires substituting a symbol for a digit according to a key that shows
the digits 1 through 9 and corresponding symbols for each one.
This is a time test, so working quickly is important.
This test has a low G-loading.
The picture completion test was illustrated back in lecture two.
It requires the identification of a part of a picture that's missing.
It has a medium G-loading.
The block design test requires copying a design that's made from a combination of blocks.
Each side of each block is half red and half white.
This is also a time test.
Block design has a very high G-loading.
Now as you can see in this picture, we found the higher the G-loading of a subtest, the
more brain areas showed correlations with gray matter.
These are the red areas.
The digit symbol subtest shown on the left is the low G-test.
Note very few red areas.
Picture completion is the medium G-test and block design is the high G-test and has the
most areas correlated with gray matter.
You can also see this result more dramatically in graphic form where more brain areas on
the Y-axis go with the rank order of higher G-loadings of eight-way subtests on the X-axis.
Eight is the highest rank.
You see the subtests in the upper right are ranked with the highest G-loadings and the
subtests in the lower left are ranked with the lowest G-loadings.
Now so far we've looked at structural MRI studies.
Here's one example of a finding from the first intelligence study using functional MRI in
1997 from a group at Stanford University.
They used several single items from the Ravens test and found blood flow increases in frontal
and parietal brain areas while volunteers solved each item from the Ravens.
This is one horizontal brain slice like this.
The white areas show increased blood flow and correspond to frontal and parietal areas
in both hemispheres.
This first image in black and white is not terribly dramatic but it is consistent with
the early PET studies and as you know by now I like to show actual data and how we are advancing.
Here's another functional MRI example from a group at Oxford University in 2005.
They imaged people doing verbal analogy problems related to fluid intelligence.
Compared to control tasks there was increased blood flow in frontal and parietal areas which
are shown here in red for side views of both hemispheres.
So are the results from these various studies starting to look familiar to you?
By 2006 there were 37 imaging studies of intelligence from different research groups around the world.
My colleague Rex Jung and I undertook to review all of them.
We looked for consistent findings despite different imaging methods and different intelligence
tests that had been used.
Some studies had small sample sizes, some had large samples.
The result of our analysis was a model of brain intelligence relationships.
We called our model the parieto frontal integration theory of intelligence or PFIT for short.
Here we see in different colors the areas we found related to intelligence.
We think these areas define a general brain network and some subnetworks that underlie
intelligence.
Most of the areas are in frontal and parietal lobes.
Some are in the left hemisphere, some in the right hemisphere, and some in both hemispheres.
At least one frontal area is deeper in the middle of the brain.
A white matter tract of fibers deep in the brain connects the frontal and parietal lobes
like a superhighway.
This is called the RQ8 fasciculus.
And we have proposed that it's an important tract for intelligence because it integrates
information flow between frontal and parietal areas.
In our view, the way information flows around these specific areas is the basis for individual
differences in intelligence.
Some people will have more efficient information flow and score higher on intelligence tests
and others will be less efficient and less good at problem solving.
Now roughly speaking, in this model, information enters the back portions of the brain through
sensory channels.
The information then flows forward to areas of the brain that integrate with memory.
And this is all passed forward to the frontal lobes that consider the integrated information,
weigh options, and decide on any action.
And this then goes to motor areas or speech areas for action if required.
The basic idea is that the intelligent brain integrates sensory information in these back
areas and then information is further integrated to higher level processing as it flows to
the frontal areas.
Some PFIT areas in the front and back of the brain are related to memory, attention, and
language suggesting that intelligence is built on these more fundamental cognitive processes.
Now the PFIT also suggests that any one person need not have all these areas engaged to be
intelligent.
Several combinations of these areas may produce the same level of general intelligence but
with different strengths and weaknesses for other cognitive factors.
For example, two people might have the same IQ but one excels in verbal reasoning and
the other in mathematical reasoning.
They may both have some PFIT areas in common but they will differ in others.
Now, what new evidence do we have to support the PFIT model?
Since our review of 37 studies was published in 2007, there are now more than a hundred
imaging studies of intelligence from research groups all over the world and overall the
emerging evidence supports the basic model.
Here's an interesting structural MRI study of over 200 patients with lesions in various
brain areas.
Low IQ scores correlated with the site of the lesions.
Using VBM, voxel based morphometry, the researchers concluded that damage to frontal and parietal
areas was strongly related to lower scores as shown here in red and orange.
Now another study published in 2010 used DTI, diffusion tensor imaging in 132 older adults.
The researchers correlated white matter in several brain areas to each other and found
that a general factor of white matter integrity was correlated to speed of information processing
which is a component of general intelligence.
Interestingly, the researchers concluded that this general white matter factor was related
to all the major white matter tracks although parts of the RQ8 vesiculus mentioned in the
PFIT model showed the strongest relationships to the general white matter factor.
We see that in this figure that illustrates a modest correlation of minus 0.24 between
the general white matter factor and a general factor of information processing speed.
We also see the correlations between the general white matter factor and white matter in each
of the eight tracks throughout the brain.
This is a negative correlation because fast processing is a smaller number than slow processing.
That's the correlation between processing speed and the general white matter factor.
Both the second and third highest correlations of positive 0.7 and positive 0.71 are in the
right and left accurate vesiculus.
The DTI method has become even more sophisticated.
These images show the white matter fibers that connect the right and left hemispheres
of the brain.
These fibers are called the corpus callosum.
In DTI we can now visualize these images in great detail.
Here we have a high IQ person on the right and on the left we have a very high IQ person.
The colors indicate where these fibers project to other brain areas.
For example, the orange fibers project to the parietal lobe and green fibers project
to the frontal lobe.
You can see these two people have different patterns of colors.
We are just beginning an analysis of a group of people we have scanned with DTI and who
also have completed a battery of intelligence tests.
We'll be able to compare whether the number of fibers in the corpus callosum, whether
they're different in the number of fibers or whether they're different on where the
fibers project to.
We can see whether or not levels of intelligence are related to the details of the fibers.
Now let's see these images rotate for a three dimensional view.
When you see the word seed appear, additional connections are shown from the seed area to
other parts of the brain.
Now these are really amazing.
I have to say I love looking at these.
Imagine what Spearman or Benay or Terman would have said about images like this.
I think they'd be quite eager to incorporate brain imaging in their research projects.
They may even think about the possibility of replacing intelligence tests with brain
images and we'll be discussing that possibility in a later lecture.
For that matter I think that if Freud were alive today he'd trade in his couch for an
MRI so he could look for the ID, the ego and the super ego.
Here's one of the newest imaging technologies of the brain.
This may have even greater potential than DTI.
It's called the Magnetoencephalogram or MEG for short.
When neurons are firing they create minute magnetic fields that fluctuate.
These magnetic fluctuations are extremely weak but MEG has over 300 super cool detectors
in a helmet like device that can pick up these weak fluctuations.
These detectors register the magnetic fluctuations of neurons every millisecond, for example
while a person solves problems.
Now in order to work MEG needs to be done in a room shielded from all surrounding magnetic
fields coming from machinery and any other source including the magnetic field of the
earth.
So MEG data shows brain activity millisecond by millisecond as neuron magnetic fields fluctuate.
So here's an example of brain activity measured by MEG while a person makes a simple choice
of whether a light flashed on the right or left side of the screen.
This image covers neural fluctuations during a one second period while the person is making
this right left decision.
This image will be slowed down to take eight seconds so you can see the patterns of brain
engagement and the speed and sequence of events during the one second time period.
So let's watch this and as you're watching this brain make a very simple decision, see
if you can spot the main brain area involved.
Now you'll be seeing activity displayed on a side view of the left hemisphere, the front
of the brain is on the left.
Well you can see that there are actually many brain areas involved during this one second.
This technology not only shows which areas are activated, it also shows the sequence
of areas that become involved as the brain works on this very simple decision.
I'm going to show this movie again in more detail in lecture 14 when we talk about alternative
ways to measure intelligence.
But for now the point is that even simple decisions involve a sequence of very rapid
events throughout the entire brain.
We're now analyzing MEG data and relating activation patterns to intelligence scores.
We want to see if high and low IQ individuals show the same sequence of activation across
brain areas and if they do is the sequence any faster in the high IQ people.
Alternatively, high IQ people may show patterns with shortcuts engaging fewer brain areas
than lower IQ people.
We're working with MEG in several ways and I think this is a cutting edge use of brain
imaging to really push research on intelligence forward in a very interesting way.
I think you'll agree these MEG movies are really pretty amazing.
Now we've certainly come a long way from measuring head circumference to estimate brain size.
But what do all these pretty pictures mean?
When brain imaging was first used to study cognition some writers compared it to phrenology.
The old and completely discredited idea that bumps on the head revealed something about
the way the brain worked.
And these bumps could predict personality and types of intellect in any individual.
It won't surprise you to learn my view that this is an unfair comparison.
These images tell us much, much more.
We're not just finding spots in the brain that light up and make a pretty picture.
We're measuring how specific brain areas communicate with each other during complex
thinking and reasoning.
We're making comparisons among people with different cognitive abilities and most importantly
we're testing hypotheses about how an intelligent brain works.
You can see we're leaving old controversies about defining intelligence and whether intelligence
tests measure anything real.
We're leaving those controversies far behind us.
That's not to say we've resolved all the issues about intelligence but it's fair to
say that there's a new emphasis on understanding the relevant brain mechanisms and whether
we can use this information for assessment or change.
For example, all these imaging studies point toward a straightforward challenge.
Can we estimate intelligence from brain images better than we can from psychometric tests?
And if we understand the neurobiology of intelligence, can we change the neurobiology to get a better
result?
We'll talk about issues like this later in the course when we consider educational implications
of this kind of research and whether intelligence can be enhanced.
And I'll show you some attempts at predicting intelligence from brain imaging data.
But before we take on that challenge, in the next lecture we'll look at brain imaging
studies of intelligence in children and ask how does brain development influence IQ and
can parents do anything to improve the process?
