Now that we've discussed imaging and what we're learning about intelligence in the adult
brain, in this lecture we're going to see some key research about intelligence in the
brains of children and adolescents.
First, I want to show you some images from adolescents from the high end of the IQ distribution
and then we'll see images from a large sample of children representative of the normal range
of IQs.
In a previous lecture we looked at PET scans of male and female college students doing
math reasoning during the imaging.
The men showed activation in the temporal lobes was correlated to math score.
Now here's a newer study of adolescent males selected for high math ability also.
They completed functional MRI while they solved problems that required three-dimensional visual
spatial problem solving, like this.
Look at the two objects in this example.
Are they identical except for their rotated position?
In this example, they're the same.
Now what about this example?
Are the two objects the same and you rotate them so they're identical?
In this example, they're different.
Now the key to this kind of ability is to mentally rotate these objects in three-dimensional
space in your head.
The test used in this study was a series of items like these and more complex ones where
same or different was determined most accurately if the test taker could mentally rotate the
objects in space.
This kind of visual spatial rotation ability is an important intelligence factor that emerges
in studies based on factor analysis and this factor is related to mathematical ability.
When mathematically gifted adolescents were solving these problems during functional MRI,
their brain activations were greater and more extensive than controls with average math
ability.
This result is shown in this picture where the high ability math group is on the bottom
and the average control group is on the top.
The red and yellow areas show activation during the rotation task and the high group has more
activation.
Like our PET study using the SAT math, more activation is apparent for this high ability
group and the increases are somewhat consistent with the parietal frontal integration network
that I showed you before although not perfectly in this study.
Let's look at one more study of adolescents.
It was done in Korean high school students.
All of the students completed the Ravens test of abstract reasoning that I showed you in
a previous lecture.
All the students also completed functional MRI while they did simple problems and again
while they did complex problems.
The researchers subtracted the brain activations during the simple problems from the activations
during the complex problems.
The difference in activation between the complex and simple problem solving is shown here in
red for the left and right hemispheres.
These areas are in frontal and parietal lobes and clearly are consistent with the PFIT model.
Now one thing I haven't mentioned about this Korean study is that half the students were
selected for high scores on the Ravens test and the other half were selected for average
scores.
In this picture we see more activation shown in purple in the parietal area for the high
scoring students and the graph that shows that the activation increases on the y-axis
are strongly correlated to Ravens score on the x-axis.
The purple dots on the graph are students in the high Ravens group.
So the point here is that individual differences in brain activity in this specific parietal
area predict individual differences in Ravens scores.
Now this relationship was not found for the frontal lobes.
This suggests that the frontal parietal network communication related to intelligence may
be driven by activity more in the parietal areas.
This is another thing to determine with more research but these two studies of adolescence
continue to add to our knowledge base about intelligence and the brain.
Now let's turn to other studies of children and look at brain development.
There's no question that brain development is rapid and complex in the first few months
and years of life.
Keep in mind that whatever affects the early environment or early education may have on
intelligence, those effects happen in the brain and brain imaging in children is beginning
to identify how brain development and intelligence are related.
There are three basic questions that we'll consider in regard to brain development.
One, what aspects of brain development are related to intelligence?
Two, are these developmental factors essentially the same for everyone?
And three, is there a critical period when these factors can be influenced?
We'll review several imaging studies that address these questions and we'll see a potent
example of a critical period in infancy for language development that may be a model for
intelligence.
Before we get to the first study, I want to note that unlike the early imaging studies
of intelligence in adults, one thing many of these studies in children have in common
is that they include large representative samples often with imaging repeated periodically.
These advantages are possible because unlike pet or cat scanning, there's no radiation
exposure with MRI, so studies in children are regarded as non-invasive.
These are quite expensive projects, but much more funding is generally available to study
brain development in children than for studying intelligence in adults.
Funding for adult research tends to be focused on diseases and adult intelligence or the
lack of intelligence is not yet recognized as a disease.
As we saw in the last lecture, in adults more gray matter is usually associated with
higher IQ, but the method of measuring gray matter tissue in individual voxels of the
MRI image has some technical issues that may introduce noise into the analysis, especially
when it's applied to the smaller brains of children.
So more recent studies have applied a newer method based on a very accurate measurement
of cortical thickness throughout the brain.
The details of this method are not critical here, but the idea is that distances among
hundreds of landmark points within the entire cortex are computed and thickness of tissue
can be computed with great accuracy.
Let's start with a large collaborative study from the National Institutes of Health.
This project is scanned a representative sample of over 300 children and young adults with
structural MRI.
Each participant completed a battery of cognitive tests, including IQ tests.
Many of the participants have been re-scanned and retested on different occasions as they
age.
Now one of the first papers from this study reported a surprising relationship between
cortical thickness and IQ.
Now in keeping with my tradition of showing you actual figures from published scientific
papers, let's look at this illustration based on groups of different ages.
In young children on the left, there's a negative correlation shown in purple and blue.
In other words, the thinner the cortex, the higher the IQ.
The top row shows the right hemisphere and the bottom row shows the left hemisphere.
But moving to the right, this negative correlation turns positive in late childhood where a thicker
cortex goes with higher IQ.
Strong positive correlations are shown in red and yellow.
In fact, the correlations between cortical thickness and IQ are even stronger in late
childhood than in early adolescence or early adulthood.
What could this mean?
Let's look at this in more detail.
These brains show the cortical thickness in the high IQ kids minus the cortical thickness
of the average IQ kids at each age.
In other words, the colored areas represent the difference in cortical thickness between
high and average IQ kids shown from age 7 years old on the left to age 16 years on the
right.
At age 7, we see purple and blue areas where the high IQ group has a thinner frontal cortex
than the average IQ group.
This starts to reverse rapidly about age 10 and by age 13 and 14, we see the maximum
difference where the high IQ group now has a thicker frontal cortex.
This difference then decreases until age 16 when the differences between the two groups
all but disappear.
The authors of this study suggest that intelligence is related to the rate of cortical thickening
rather than to just the amount of gray matter tissue and there may be a period of brain
maturation during which critical circuits for intelligence develop.
This is very intriguing finding, but like everything else, it needs replication.
We know that there are many developmental changes in the brain during early childhood
and these data tie specific brain changes to IQ.
These data suggest that if we could influence the factors that control brain development,
especially regarding the thickness of the cortex, we might increase IQ.
This is just what parents and teachers want to know.
The problem of course is that we don't know the specific developmental factors to influence
let alone how to influence them.
Moreover, as we see here, when would be the best time to influence the key factors?
More on this later in the lecture.
Now, let's look at another study from 2009 based on a different NIH sample of 216 children
aged 6 to 18 years old.
Researchers from six medical centers recruited these children from across the country to
be a representative sample of the U.S. population.
Children were not patients.
They all completed IQ testing and structural MRI.
Now, I was invited to work on the main analysis in this particular paper, so it will come
as no surprise that we use these data to test whether brain areas in the PFIT model showed
correlations between IQ and cortical thickness.
The top row shows the significant correlations for the whole sample of 216 children.
Leads and greens show the strongest correlations and blues show the weakest correlations.
All the correlations are positive.
Greater thickness goes with higher IQ.
The left hemisphere is on the left, the middle of you is looking down on the brain with the
frontal lobes toward the top of the image, and the right image shows the right hemisphere.
The middle row shows the correlations just in the sample of 108 young children, and the
bottom row shows the correlations in the 108 adolescents.
Overall, several PFIT areas showed cortical thickness IQ correlations, especially in the
adolescents and to a lesser extent in the younger children.
However, correlations were also found in brain areas not part of the PFIT model.
Clearly, we don't yet have a full understanding of the developmental sequence of brain maturation
as it relates to intelligence, but you can see we're making progress on this.
And also, you probably noticed that these analyses did not report a relationship between
thinner cortex and IQ in the youngest children as the previous study had.
This kind of inconsistency is not uncommon among studies, and that's why no single study
ever settles any issue about the brain.
A main point from these studies is that even in children, brain areas related to IQ are
distributed throughout the brain, and there seems to be a developmental sequence for which
brain areas are related to intelligence as the brain matures.
And now there's a newer study of 115 children aged 6 to 8 years from the Netherlands.
These children completed functional MRI during a resting state, and they completed nonverbal
intelligence tests.
The main analysis here is more statistical than visual, so I don't have a simple visual
representation of the results from this study.
But here's basically what they did.
They selected a target brain area and then correlated brain activity in that area to
activity in other brain areas.
For example, they correlated activity in parts of the frontal lobe to activity in parts of
the parietal lobe and determined how strong the connection was between these areas.
This is an empirical way to determine how brain areas are functionally related to each
other, and these relationships define brain networks.
This image shows a main network they found using this method.
On the left, red areas show a parietal frontal network in the left hemisphere.
The right panel shows a similar parietal frontal network in the right hemisphere.
Here's part of what they found.
Greater connectivity between frontal and parietal areas in the right hemisphere correlated
to IQ in these young children, but not so for this network in the left hemisphere.
So the researchers concluded that the PFIT model appears to characterize young children
at least in the right hemisphere.
There was also some indication that the findings were stronger in girls, but the next studies
that I'm going to tell you about specifically examined developmental differences between
boys and girls with respect to IQ.
A series of really important brain imaging studies in children have been done by Vincent
Smithhorst and his colleagues at the Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center.
These studies include hundreds of children who are not patients, and several of the studies
specifically set out to compare boys and girls.
For example, even before the Netherlands study, the Cincinnati researchers did a connectivity
analysis based on functional MRI in nearly 300 children aged 5 to 18 to find relationships
to IQ.
Now, I don't have a summary image because the findings are a bit complex, but here's
what they found.
For boys, a greater association was shown between intelligence and the functional connectivity
linking the frontal lobe areas important for language called Broca's area to auditory
processing areas in the back part of the brain, including the parietal lobe.
For girls, a greater association was shown between intelligence and the functional connectivity
linking parts of the temporal lobe to the same areas in the back of the brain.
Frontal lobe connectivity was not as important for intelligence in the girls.
So the linkage between frontal and parietal networks was apparent in the boys, but a different
network was apparent in the girls.
In a different analysis of more than 100 of the children who completed diffusion tensor
imaging, the Cincinnati group found IQ relationships to white matter tracks that connect frontal
and parietal areas, including the curate fasciculus.
White matter fibers can be more or less reliable when they transmit neural signals.
The reliability of white matter is also referred to as integrity.
But there were sex differences.
Girls had positive correlations between IQ and a measure of white matter integrity, and
boys had a negative correlation.
For now, the meaning of the opposite direction of these relationships is just a mystery.
In the last two lectures, we saw some pet evidence that male and female college students
show different activation patterns while they solve math reasoning problems.
We also saw structural MRI evidence that gray matter correlates of IQ were found in different
areas of the brain for men and women.
The Cincinnati studies also indicate that even in young children, male and female brains
have different developmental sequences for structure and function related to intelligence.
We'll look at sex differences in even more detail in a later lecture.
But let's summarize the findings so far.
The data from the NIH studies, the Netherlands study along with the Cincinnati studies and
others I haven't reviewed here, all suggest rather strongly that brain development and
intelligence are linked in different ways depending on age and sex.
All this is consistent with a large body of research that indicates that brain development
is quite dynamic in the first three years of life before most early childhood education
programs even begin.
So what are the answers to our three questions?
What aspects of brain development are related to intelligence?
Well, features of the brain related to intelligence include cortical thickness, amount of gray
matter tissue, and white matter integrity, and functional connectivity among brain areas.
Studies and children suggest these features follow developmental sequences.
Our second question are these developmental sequences essentially the same for everyone?
The data suggests that not all brains develop these characteristics the same way as related
to intelligence.
There seems to be sex differences.
Our third question is there a critical period when these factors can be influenced?
The apparent sequences of brain development related to intelligence suggest critical
periods of time when development is very sensitive to specific factors, but we don't have much
data about critical periods specifically for intelligence.
But let's talk more about critical periods.
If they exist for intelligence we need to know specific factors that are important for
optimal brain development.
One of the most interesting examples of a critical period in human development involves
language.
I'm going to tell you about research done at the University of Washington in Seattle
by Professor Patricia Kohl.
I believe these studies illustrate what may be happening in part for intelligence.
Professor Kohl has conducted a large series of experiments with infant learning language.
Here are four of the key findings.
One, hearing a language results in neuron development, especially how neurons connect
with each other to form networks, and this development optimizes the brain for perceiving
the sounds of the language.
This happens specifically in the brain's auditory areas.
Number two, these brain changes happen by age six months.
Number three, if the infant is not exposed to the sounds of a language during this time,
learning a new language almost always results in a distinctive accent.
And four, interestingly, hearing the language from a human produces more brain changes than
hearing the language from a television.
So hearing a language in the first six months of life prepares the infant brain for later
learning of the language.
Could something like this influence intelligence?
Well, hearing a language fosters network connections in the auditory cortex in parts
of the parietal lobe where some of the Cincinnati studies found relationships to intelligence.
And several PFIT areas are related to language and language ability is certainly related
to the verbal factor of intelligence.
So it's not far-fetched to think that hearing a language in the first months of life may
influence later intelligence, just hearing the language.
There's no direct evidence of this, but there is research that suggests that just the number
of words spoken in the household before age two years predicts IQ at age three.
And the number of words spoken in a household varies tremendously.
There's some research on this where they sent researchers into the homes and recorded the
number of words spoken.
For families on welfare, it was an average of 600 words spoken per hour.
For working-class families, the average was 1200 words per hour.
We're just talking about words spoken in the home.
For professional families, it was 2100 words per hour, large differences.
So do environmental social factors like this help account for the development of thinner
or thicker cortex that relates to IQ as the NIH studies we discussed earlier in this lecture
suggest?
It would be an example of an environmental effect working through a biological mechanism.
But these numbers of words spoken are confounded with the IQ of the parents, so causality is
not clear.
Genetics, for example, may provide the basic building blocks for brain development, and
some individuals may inherit more building blocks than others.
So even if the number of words spoken in a household increases dramatically, it's an
open question as to whether this would influence intelligence.
Just in another way, how many spoken words in a household would be optimal for developing
intelligence?
Is more always better beyond a certain point?
The idea that there are factors like words spoken that change the brain is often the basis
for marketing programs aimed at infants or young children to raise IQ.
We'll talk more about this in detail in a subsequent lecture about implications for
education and child rearing.
At this point, all I'll say about such programs to raise IQ in your children is be very skeptical.
I also want to mention that there's an average difference in IQ scores between Asian, Chinese,
and Caucasian Americans that favors the Chinese.
We'll be looking at group IQ differences in a later lecture, but in the context of language
development and intelligence, there's an interesting hypothesis about the Chinese language.
Mandarin is very tonally complex and based on a large number of characters that are more
visual spatial than English.
There's a hypothesis that the greater complexity exposes infants learning Mandarin to a greater
range of stimulation that affects brain development, possibly in areas related to intelligence.
Now this is not proven, but there's at least one school system in Georgia that's requiring
elementary students study Mandarin, although it's not clear that this requirement is based
on any data about increasing intelligence.
So to conclude this lecture, you can see that we're making progress at finding specific
brain development factors that may influence intelligence in children.
But there's much to learn, and we need to understand how gray matter and white matter
develop in the first months and years of life.
For example, we have seen in a previous lecture new research that indicates that gray and
white matter have genes in common with intelligence.
Do genes set a path of development that's influenced by exposure to language?
How much of a developmental path can be influenced by brain stimulation through language or through
other means?
If we want to increase or maximize a person's intelligence, what's the best time to tweak
the system?
Remember what I said back in our first lecture?
Intelligence is 100% biological, whether genes or non-genetic factors influence the biology.
Everything about intelligence works through the brain by biological means, and how the
brain develops in early life may be the key to understanding intelligence differences
among people as adults.
I expect to see comprehensive studies in the near future that combine genetic analyses
with brain imaging as children develop with different exposures to language and other
factors.
All this will increase our understanding of how intelligence develops.
Now I hope in these last lectures I convey not only interesting brain imaging findings,
but also the excitement that researchers feel when they discover unexpected results
linking the brain and intelligence.
So let's recap.
We began this course with basic issues about defining and assessing intelligence.
We reviewed the importance of intelligence in everyday life and studies that validate
test scores over the lifespan.
We've gone over research on early environment and education, genes in the brain, and now
we've learned about the latest brain imaging studies.
But there's a lot more.
In the next lectures, we'll be going to tackle controversies about intelligence differences
between men and women, and by far the most incendiary of all topics in psychology, possible
intelligence differences among races.
