This lecture is the first of two where we'll confront some controversial data.
This lecture is about sex.
The next lecture will be about race.
This lecture addresses three issues.
First, as we'll see, there are some sex differences in mental abilities and we'll look at what
they are.
Second, we'll address whether the sex differences mean anything important.
And third, we'll ask whether the sex differences in some mental abilities are related to sex
differences in the brain.
Let's start with a question.
What's wrong with this picture?
These are scientists and engineers rejoicing when the largest particle accelerator in the
world was turned on and began working and it didn't destroy the earth.
There are about 25 men here and three women.
This picture reflects the large imbalance of men to women in physics and engineering.
There's no controversy as to whether this imbalance exists, but there's plenty of controversy
about why it exists.
Without doubt, until fairly recently, women were actively discouraged from pursuing advanced
degrees in the STEM fields.
STEM is shorthand for science, technology, engineering, and math.
This discrimination was partly based on stereotypes about the proper role of women in society and
partly based on the perception that women didn't have the mental abilities required for these
fields.
The former point is powerful, but at least it's open to correction if a society chooses
to challenge stereotypes.
But what about the second point?
If the second point is actually true and women and men differ on mental abilities, what then?
It's really this latter point that's most contentious.
Lawrence Summers, the former president of Harvard University, found this out in 2005
and he gave a speech that included his observations about there being fewer women in STEM careers.
He noted three main possibilities for this.
One, for a variety of social and cultural reasons, working the 80 hours a week that high-end
STEM careers often demand is quite a challenge for women who have other demanding responsibilities.
Two, there are negative stereotypes and hiring discrimination that work against women pursuing
and succeeding in STEM careers.
And the third thing he noted, and this is the most contentious one and the one that will
focus out in the context of intelligence, and that's the possibility that relatively few
women have the aptitude, the aptitude for science and math.
Now read aptitude as a code word for innate ability, as many people do, and the controversy
really escalates.
In this case, the result of these remarks was an outraged faculty and public leading
the Harvard president to leave his job and go on to other activities.
As a side note, one result of the controversy surrounding this speech was that in 2005 the
New York Academy of Sciences sponsored a panel of researchers to discuss issues about women
in science.
Now I have no expertise in this area, but because I had just published the data showing
different brain areas related to IQ for men and women, I was invited to talk about the
same data I showed you in previous lectures.
Here they are again, just to refresh your memory.
The first picture shows PET scans of men and women doing a math test where we found that
the more active the temporal lobes, the better the men did on the math test, but this was
not the case in women, so this was a clear sex difference.
The second picture shows structural MRI results and another clear sex difference in the brain
areas where gray matter is related to IQ.
Other people on the New York panel addressed specific differences in some mental abilities
and the influences of social and cultural factors related to the STEM disparity.
The New York audience was mostly women and my perception was about half the women were
college students and about half were over the age of 50.
After the presentations there was a question and answer period.
Many of the older women took the opportunity to relate personal stories about outrageous
discrimination they had suffered in pursuing STEM careers.
They had started out only a generation ago, but the stories were really quite powerful.
For the most part, my work was not of that much interest to them.
By contrast, many of the college women asked questions about brain imaging and sex differences.
They didn't seem bothered at all by the idea that biology might have something to do with
STEM ability and they seemed to be excited about possible careers in neuroscience to explore
these issues themselves.
I actually left this meeting in New York quite optimistic about the future of research on
the possible biological basis of sex differences in some mental abilities.
My optimism was dampened a short time later when the National Academy of Sciences issued
a report about the STEM disparity between men and women.
The report asserted that since there were no appreciable average differences in mental
abilities between men and women, there was nothing for biology to explain.
The report went on to recommend new funding for research into social and cultural factors
related to the STEM disparity, but there was nothing for biological research.
One of the scientists who testified to the committee preparing the report was Professor
Diane Halpern.
She's a world expert on sex differences in mental ability and a former president of the
American Psychological Association.
She's quoted in the committee report, quote, some researchers object to the study of sex
differences because they fear it promotes false stereotypes and prejudice.
Prejudice is not intrinsic in the data.
Prejudice also exists in the absence of data.
Research is the only way to separate myth from empirically supported findings, end quote.
Unfortunately the National Academy of Science Committee was not open to applying this guidance
to possible biological factors.
The committee's view is odd.
Virtually, everyone acknowledges that biology is central to understanding Alzheimer's disease,
schizophrenia, depression, and a host of other brain-based problems.
Is it not reasonable to think that biology may also play a role in cognitive abilities
in the absence of neurological problems?
So researchers interested in the biology of cognition still face some serious headwinds,
but let's push on with looking at some data.
So are there even any sex differences in mental abilities to discuss?
When we look at measures of general intelligence, the data are clear.
There are no average intelligence differences between men and women.
Now this is partly due to the fact that in the development of the major IQ tests, individual
items that differentiated males and females were dropped from the test.
But there's also considerable research using other measures of the G factor that did not
follow this practice and the results are the same.
No difference in average IQ scores between males and females.
However, even with the same means, the actual intelligence distributions for males and for
females are a bit different.
Here's a typical male-female comparison that shows this.
This one is based on 300,000 school children in Britain, but these findings are essentially
the same across many studies.
On the x-axis, this chart divides the range of test scores into nine equal segments called
stainines, S-T-A-N-I-N-E-S, stainines.
The proportion of boys and girls in each of these segments is shown on the y-axis.
Boys are the black bars, girls are the gray bars.
Although the overall group mean is the same for boys and girls, there are slightly more
girls in the middle parts of the distribution and there are slightly more boys at each extreme
end.
In other words, boys are slightly over-represented in the low IQ end of the curve and also slightly
over-represented at the high end.
And we'll come back to the extreme part of the curve shortly.
But what about the more specific intelligence factors other than G?
There are some specific mental abilities that do show consistent average differences between
males and females, and I want to emphasize the word average.
Average is certainly an easy concept, but it's surprising how often it's misinterpreted
in the context of comparing groups on intelligence test scores.
Let's think about height.
True or false?
Men are taller than women.
Well, as asked, the answer is false, because there are many women who are taller than men.
The correct statement is, on average, men are taller than women.
Everybody understands this.
Now when we say men are better at math or science, we often leave out the word average.
Now this is obvious perhaps, but it's also the source of considerable misunderstanding.
But it's also true that because the male mean for height is shifted to the right compared
to the female mean, there are more men than women at the very high end of the distribution.
So whereas there are many men over six feet tall, there are relatively few women over
six feet tall.
Now are there examples like this for mental abilities?
Let's look at some cognitive tasks that do show average sex differences in research
studies.
This is a partial list from research compiled by Professor Halperin, who I mentioned earlier.
It's from the latest 2012 edition of her book Sex Differences in Cognitive Abilities.
So on average, women are better than men on tests of verbal fluency, tests of fine motor
skill, and writing tests.
Men on average are better than women on tests that require transformations in the visual
spatial working memory, tests that involve moving objects, tests that require aiming,
and tests of mathematical and scientific reasoning.
Let's look at some details from these lists.
Here are some typical data from high school students in seven countries.
Boys are the black bars and girls are the gray bars.
The top shows average test scores on a standard test of math problems.
In each of these countries, boys are slightly better on average than girls on the math test.
The middle shows a test of science problems.
Six of the seven countries show a slight average advantage for boys.
In Sweden, girls show the higher average score.
The bottom shows results for general problem solving.
Girls have a slight advantage in all countries except Canada.
Now do these differences matter?
They're very slight.
Let's see some more data before we address whether average differences mean anything
important.
Here's a different way of looking at the same data except now we add results from a reading
test.
The boy minus the girl differences in each country are shown here in standard units.
The black bars are the differences in the reading test.
You can see girls show a very large advantage in each country, much larger than the smaller
advantages for boys on the math test.
Most of the data on sex differences are mixed and a lot are inconsistent.
Let's look at even a more specific mental ability.
Mental rotation is the specific mental ability that shows the largest average sex difference.
Mental rotation is an important intelligence factor, especially for mathematical reasoning.
Here are the two sample items from a test of mental rotation that I showed you in the
last lecture.
Remember this?
Look at the two objects in this example.
Are they identical except for their rotated position?
In this example, they are the same.
And remember this example?
Here they're different.
Now the key to be able to answering questions like this is the ability to mentally rotate
these objects in 3D space in your head.
Now as we see in this chart, on average, men outperform women on tests of mental rotation
in 53 countries.
The men are the solid line, the women are the dotted line, and it certainly doesn't look
like there are major cultural differences, but there are many factors in studies like
this and the cause of these differences are not really clear.
However, women outperform men on average in some specific spatial tests that don't require
the 3D rotation element.
Here's a sample of an item from a test like that.
How many triangles are in this picture?
If you'd like to try this yourself, pause the lecture for a moment and count them.
Here's the answer.
We see 21 triangles.
If you see more, let us know.
Good performance on this test depends on spatial ability, but not on 3D rotation ability.
Remember any one study can be picked apart and discounted for any number of reasons.
All these examples show results that most researchers accept as representing sex differences
in these mental abilities, some favoring males, others favoring females.
Most of the average differences are really quite small.
The reasons for these differences are not clear, but do such differences have any importance
for understanding why women are underrepresented in STEM careers?
Here's some data about SAT mass scores over a 25-year period from 1986 to 2010.
Males are shown as the gray line, females as the black line.
As you see, there's an increase in average scores for both groups over this period, but
there's a 40-point gap that favors males, and that gap has remained fairly consistent.
But I also told you about the first Hopkins study in 1972 that found 13 precocious boys
for every precocious girl.
For recent talent searches based on the SAT, now find ratios more like 3 to 1.
So it's likely that the 1972 ratio of 13 to 1 was some kind of sampling error.
The 3 to 1 ratio is still large, but certainly less shocking.
Again, the causes of these differences are far from clear, but the key point for us in
this lecture is not about average scores per se.
The controversy is really about the right tail of the distribution, and whether, like
height, there's an underrepresentation of women at the highest end of the distribution
for math and science test scores.
Let's see an example of how mean differences in distributions can have an impact on the
high end.
Here we have identical male and female distributions for general intelligence superimposed on each
other.
These are idealized perfect bell curves for the sake of demonstration.
The pink area shows all the individuals who score greater than three standard deviations
above the mean.
That's about 0.13% of all people, or 1,300 people for every million.
In this example, there are an equal number of males and females.
And here are hypothetical distributions for something like spatial rotation scores.
The distributions for men and women have different means.
The men have a higher mean that shifts the curve to the right.
This shift predicts more men at the high end than women.
Note, there are women at the high end, but not as many as men.
The point is a simple one.
One small mean differences in distributions can result in larger disparities at the high
end.
This example is drawn to accentuate the right tail difference.
Now we observe such a disparity now in STEM fields, but nothing about the data we've seen
in this lecture or this example of the right shift tells us anything about the causes of
the differences.
A right shift may be the case for mathematical reasoning, and one reason there are fewer
women in STEM professions.
But there's controversy about whether the right shift really exists or whether it's
a main factor.
We know there are other factors that may be more important.
For example, surveys of women who excel at mathematics suggest that there's a tendency
among these women to prefer careers that are more people-oriented than thing-oriented.
People-oriented careers include medicine, law, and psychology.
Thing-oriented careers include physics, engineering, and STEM fields in general.
A right shift may also be an artifact of the test.
For example, another presenter at the New York meeting I described earlier was Professor
Joshua Aronson.
He's an expert on cultural influences on testing, and he has special expertise in a phenomenon
called stereotype threat.
It basically means that if a person believes they are not expected to do well on a type
of test because of the group they belong to, they won't do well.
They will perform like the stereotype suggests they should perform.
There are many experiments that show this.
Here's the basic idea.
Take two groups of girls, for example, and give them the same math test.
But tell one group that this particular test has items from the SAT, and tell the other
group the same test is based on items that show no sex differences.
The second group scores better than the first, because the girls in the first group are influenced
by the knowledge that girls don't do well on SAT math questions.
Now, there's considerable research on stereotype threat, but a key question is whether it can
explain all of any test differences among groups.
Most research shows that it may explain some, but not nearly all of a difference.
So, to recap so far, we've looked at some specific mental abilities that show average
sex differences, and we've looked at whether these differences may be related to the important
issue of underrepresentation of women in STEM fields.
Let's take up our third question.
What do we know about where these differences come from?
We've seen in previous lectures some imaging evidence of brain differences between men
and women and between boys and girls related to intelligence.
We don't know the causes of these differences, but new research that combines imaging and
genetic analyses offers some hope for answers.
We just don't have them yet.
But here's some new data on the effects of testosterone on brain development that may
provide clues about why there are some cognitive differences between men and women.
The colored areas in these images are where testosterone has different effects on cortical
thickness for boys and girls.
The small yellow and red areas are the most statistically significant, and the blue areas
are weaker statistically, but still significant.
Note some of these areas are in the frontal and parietal lobes consistent with the PFIT
model.
Sex differences are a complex story.
So what can we conclude?
Men and women do not differ on G, but they do differ on a small number of specific mental
abilities, especially mental rotation.
Brain differences may account for this, but we don't yet have a full picture of how any
brain differences may develop.
In the late 1960s and throughout the 1970s, any discussion or research on sex differences,
especially for mental abilities, was really quite controversial.
Now, in my experience, it's become less controversial, and the existence of small average differences
is widely acknowledged by the public.
Brain for more research in this area, however, is difficult.
Now, here's a broader perspective on why it's important to study sex differences.
There's a lot of pop psychology about how men and women think differently.
For example, think about how men and women generally approach shopping, shopping for
anything.
It's a clear, everyday observation that men and women have completely different thinking
about shopping.
I know you're smiling at this.
What about men not asking for directions?
Or not reading directions?
Do you know many men who have downloaded the PDF manual for an iPhone?
There are numerous other examples in the pop psychology literature.
None of them need concern us here.
But we've seen some evidence in the prior lectures that male and female brains may
be organized differently from an early age.
No matter how these differences may occur, think about implications of having different
brain organizations for things like rehabilitation after stroke or brain injury.
There may be alternative brain pathways to accomplish the same cognitive performance.
What about diagnosing and treating brain diseases like Alzheimer's disease?
If the frontal lobes are more related to intelligence in women, women may get a diagnosis of Alzheimer's
disease later because the disease progresses to the frontal lobes later than it does other
brain areas.
What about countering aging effects?
That may require different approaches in men and women.
What about educational strategies?
It may be that certain styles of learning benefit one group on average more than the other.
Understanding how any sex differences in the brain may influence these areas brings the
study of sex differences out of the pop psychology realm and into neuroscience.
The same is true when we try to understand whether there are any cognitive ability differences
between men and women that are related at least in part to brain differences.
Achievement gaps between men and women have largely disappeared in most careers and the
gap is closing in almost all areas.
As you can see in this chart based on data collected by the National Science Foundation,
various fields like engineering, education, and life sciences are shown on the x-axis
and the percent of women earning PhDs in each field is on the y-axis.
The orange bar shows data from 1980 and the purple bar shows data from 2010.
As you can see, every field has a dramatic increase.
Women are now at or over 50% in all fields except engineering and math and physics.
The role of spatial rotation ability still is not completely understood, but achievement
gaps are clearly closing.
At the beginning of this lecture, I told you about the symposium sponsored by the New York
Academy of Sciences about women in STEM careers.
I didn't mention this before, but other presenters included Joshua Aronson talking about stereotype
threat, Diane Halperin talking about male-female differences in cognitive abilities, and Linda
Gottfurtzen who raised an interesting question.
One of the other speakers who was not a researcher in this field had focused on the importance
of attaining a 50-50 male-female ratio in the STEM fields and why women should be encouraged
with incentives to enter STEM professions.
Professor Gottfurtzen was not convinced.
She presented the data showing women generally preferred people-oriented professions rather
than thing-oriented professions.
She argued that if this were true, why would you want to encourage women to go against their
personal preferences just to attain a 50-50 goal that was actually arbitrary?
As you can imagine, this generated much discussion about social policy.
So that's the story about sex differences.
Males and females actually differ on average for some mental abilities, and we're learning
more about how male and female brains may work differently even when mental test performance
is equal.
Now knowledge about such differences may prove useful for understanding how brain damage
or brain disease may affect men and women differently.
The good news is that male-female disparities in most vocations are decreasing or even eliminated.
But when it comes to discussions or research about mental ability differences among racial
and ethnic groups, however, the story is much different.
The topic is just as incendiary today as it ever was, and we'll cover it in the next
lecture.
