This is the first time I've spoken publicly about race differences in intelligence.
It's a challenging lecture because the topic is so sensitive and emotional and so thoroughly
subject to misinterpretation.
Now there's no doubt in my mind that this is the most difficult topic in psychology.
Even compared to the issues about sex differences that we just discussed in the last lecture.
So fasten your seatbelts.
It's possible that this topic may offend many of you, but I ask for your patience as I go
through the story.
I don't see how a course in intelligence can ignore this topic.
Now I've never done research in this area, but I'll do my best to explain why others
have and what the data suggest.
One suggestion before we begin.
If you're skipping ahead to this lecture, you may find it better to go back and hear
more details about defining and measuring intelligence and the validity of intelligence
concepts including the genetics and brain imaging data that we covered in previous lectures.
It'll give you a better context for this lecture.
Now here's what we'll be covering.
First we'll see data about differences among groups for average SAT scores.
I want you to know that I'll be using the terms black and white because the data are
not just from American samples and these are the terms used most widely in the research
literature.
Then we'll see similar data for IQ scores.
And then we'll look at the issues about how achievement gaps and IQ gaps may be related
and what may cause them.
So let's start with some troubling data from the SATs.
In this chart we see average SAT math scores for three groups from 1997 to 2009.
The mean average scores for Asians are higher in each year than for whites.
The difference is about 40 points and this gap is fairly constant over time although
there's a trend toward higher scores for Asians over time.
Both groups have higher average mean scores than blacks.
The black-white difference is about 100 points and it's fairly constant.
100 points on the SAT is about one full standard deviation.
In this chart we see SAT reading scores for the same period.
Whites have the highest average scores and Asians are increasing and almost equal to
the white mean.
Black average scores are fairly constant and about 95 points lower than whites.
Let's focus on the black-white differences because they're the most discussed.
This chart shows the gap between blacks and whites for both math and reading scores.
The data are troubling because of the large size of the gap and because the gap appears
to be constant with no appreciable improvement over time.
Now there are occasional reports that the gap is closing or the gap is narrowing but
overall the data don't really show much if any narrowing of the black-white gap.
There may be an exception but we'll get to that in the next lecture.
Actually there's virtually no disagreement about the existence of this gap.
It's recognized as one of the most important problems in education.
In fact a recent consensus of scientists listed this gap as the fourth biggest problem in
social science.
Actually among the top six problems these scientists listed in my view intelligence
is a common theme.
Just so you know here are the top six social science questions.
One, how can we induce people to look after their health?
That was number one.
Remember in our lectures three and five we saw that IQ predicts health and the ability
to understand medical advice and even mortality.
The second most important question, how do societies create effective and resilient institutions
such as governments?
Think about our founding fathers Washington, Jefferson, Madison, some of the best minds
of their time.
They created a government system that has proved quite effective and robust.
Many people think that smart effective governments and institutions depend in large part on
smart people although this can be surprisingly controversial.
The third most important question was how can humanity increase its collective wisdom?
There's much discussion about the relationship if any between wisdom and intelligence but
the scientific study of wisdom is not really developed sufficiently to have much research
to discuss.
How would wisdom be measured?
The fourth question they came up with was most relevant to this lecture and that's how
do we reduce the quote skill gap between black and white people in America?
What the carefully chosen word skill instead of mental ability or achievement?
Now the fifth question was how can we aggregate information possessed by individuals to make
the best decisions?
Intelligence can be related to decision making but this is not a topic we'll be covering
and finally the sixth most important question was how can we understand the human capacity
to create and articulate knowledge?
I think this means understanding intelligence.
But getting back to the SATs it's easy to assume that the gaps result from test bias.
This is a primary basis for arguing that SAT scores should not be used as a principal
factor in college admission and in fact most colleges and universities limit the role of
SAT scores in the admissions process.
The test biased argument however really isn't compelling.
SAT scores were designed to predict academic success and they do so equally well for students
of all races.
But there are many other more likely possible reasons for the gap.
These include poor quality education, poor home environment, poor test preparation, poor
motivation and so on.
Most people believe that factors like these are the main causes of the gap and there have
been really earnest attempts to rectify these disadvantages to varying degrees.
Some individual schools serving disadvantaged students for example have shown remarkable
improvements in some educational variables that offer hope even if IQ scores are not
improved.
Motivating academic interests, keeping discipline, engaging parents, teaching study skills,
improving teachers all can improve graduation rates and college admissions and these are
not small achievements but so far the overall SAT gap remains fairly constant.
Why might this be true?
It may be that the good, solid programs to overcome many educational or other disadvantages
so far have been implemented only for a tiny fraction of children that need them.
There are many very good reasons to support such efforts whether or not IQ scores or
SAT scores are raised.
We see this when graduation rates increase and more students gain college admission.
For younger children providing good nutrition is worthwhile and the right thing to do irrespective
of any direct or indirect effects on intelligence or SAT scores.
Good schooling is obviously better than bad schooling and does not need justification based
on whether intelligence test scores change.
But even when there are no improvements in elementary or high school, students who enter
college with lower average SAT scores than their classmates have a much lower chance of
academic success especially in STEM majors.
This is the so-called mismatch issue.
If any student with a math or verbal score of 500, for example, is accepted to a university
where the average score is much higher, the chances for academic success are lower than
if the student accepted admission at a less competitive university or college.
This is especially true for completing majors in math and science.
As you can imagine, this mismatch concept is the subject of much debate.
We raise it here only in the context of why the SAT gap presents many real problems.
But now here's the next set of data that's more disturbing than the SAT data.
Academic tests of intelligence consistently show average differences among racial and
ethnic groups.
On average, Asians score higher than whites, whites score higher than Hispanics, and Hispanics
score higher than blacks.
The average black-white difference is about 15 points, about one standard deviation on
the normal curve, essentially the same difference as the SAT gap.
I'm going to focus on this difference because it's been discussed the most, but everything
I say also applies to the other group differences.
In the last lecture about sex differences, we discussed the right tail of distributions
that had slightly different means.
One standard deviation is not slightly different, it's a large average difference.
It means that there are more blacks than whites at the low end of the distribution and fewer
at the high end.
But remember, this is an average difference.
It does not mean that all whites are smarter than all blacks, just like it's not the case
that all men are taller than all women.
In fact, there's considerable overlap between the distributions.
You cannot infer from an IQ score whether a person is a member of one race or another.
This is a key point because the overlap demands that each person be treated as an individual
and not stereotyped by group membership.
But what factors may cause these average differences in IQ scores?
Here are some obvious ones, and they're essentially the same as the factors thought to cause the
SAT gap, test bias, unfair questions, poor education, not the best teachers, few educational
resources and so on, poor home environment, single parent families, poor verbal communication,
poor nutrition, poor reading habits, poor preparation for school and so on, poor motivation
when families don't value education, poor test taking skills, there are a lot of them.
A common belief is that the differences must be due mostly to IQ test bias.
The racial gap itself was used as evidence of test bias, and this resulted in a ban on
using IQ tests in school for a while.
But test bias has been studied extensively for four decades, and here are some key findings
about whether group IQ differences are due to test bias.
Now if you want to take the bias argument, it might predict that the general information
subtest of the ways would show the largest group difference since poor education would
result in having less information.
Remember questions like how far is it between New York and Washington D.C.?
But in fact, the general information subtest shows hardly any black-white difference.
One of the subtests with the largest difference is digit span.
Remember that's how many digits you can repeat from memory.
But this is even more interesting because the group difference is not in the part of
the test repeating digits in order.
The largest difference is in repeating digits backwards.
The charts you're about to see are based on data collected from public school children
by Arthur Jensen in the early 1970s.
These scores are from the digit span subtest.
Now recall from lecture two that this test is scored by how many digits you can repeat
from memory.
Some people can remember longer spans than others.
This chart shows digit span forward scores for black and white children broken down into
groups based on a social class index that goes from low on the left to high on the right.
There's not much difference between blacks and whites, but notice that scores go up for
both groups as social economic status increases.
But now look at this chart.
This chart shows digit span backwards.
That is, after hearing a string of digits, you must repeat them in reverse order.
There are clear differences that are consistent for each social class category.
Not again that scores increase as the social class index increases.
Social class is a complex variable and is typically confounded with parents IQ.
More intelligent parents get more education, earn more, and provide more resources for
their children.
You expect the largest group differences would be found in tests like general information,
but actually this isn't the case.
Since the digit span backwards, that shows the biggest difference, and digit span backwards
has a high G loading.
Digit span forward and general information subtests have lower G loadings.
Overall the largest black-white differences tend to be on tests with higher G loadings.
Data like these suggest but don't prove that test bias is not the major factor in group
differences.
Not all researchers accept this interpretation.
As I've said before, any single study can be picked apart and discounted.
My job in this course is to give you a sense of where I think the weight of evidence lies.
Now another kind of test bias, however, is supported somewhat by studies of stereotype
threat.
We discussed this in the last lecture about sex differences.
Stereotype threat studies of many varieties basically show that blacks score lower when
they're told a test measures intelligence.
Stereotype threat indicates possible anxiety-related bias, but it accounts for only a small portion
of the one standard deviation difference, and it's not clear how to prevent someone
from thinking an intelligence test is not really an intelligence test.
So while these studies support a certain kind of possible test bias, most researchers doubt
that they account for the whole gap.
There are disagreements about the interpretation of much of the data regarding the gaps.
But in 1995, the American Psychological Association had a committee review all the relevant data,
and they concluded that the average IQ differences among racial groups were not easily explained
away by test bias.
Environmental disadvantages also were obvious possible explanations, but they too failed
to account fully for the gaps.
Remember from our second lecture that reasoning tests like the SAT are types of intelligence
tests.
The total SAT score from all sections is an estimate of G. So it's possible that the
SAT gap and the IQ test gap may be two sides of the same coin.
So here's the most contentious part of the story.
If there's a genetic component to intelligence, then there may be a genetic component to the
intelligence gaps among races.
Logically, this is not an unreasonable train of thought, but it implies that some groups
may have a genetic advantage over other groups for intelligence.
And this idea is about as inflammatory as it gets.
Recall in our previous lecture on early childhood education, I introduced the 1969 Jensen article
about compensatory education.
In addition to his controversial conclusion about the apparent failure of compensatory
education, Jensen was the person who explicitly tied education achievement gaps directly to
intelligence gaps in that article.
And he directly raised the possibility that a part of the school achievement gap might
be due to the genetic component of general intelligence.
Jensen's view is actually a simple one.
Whatever factors cause the difference between low and high intelligence in individuals,
whether genetic or environmental or epigenetic interactions, they are the same factors for
all groups.
He calls this the default hypothesis.
Let me repeat this.
Whatever factors cause the difference between low and high intelligence in individuals,
whether genetic or environmental or epigenetic interactions, they're the same factors for
all groups.
So therefore, Jensen and virtually all other intelligence researchers support maximizing
educational opportunities for all children, irrespective of race.
But back in 1969, when he proposed the idea that part of the achievement gap might possibly
be due to a genetic component for intelligence, all hell broke loose.
Almost everyone was appalled at this suggestion.
The vast majority of researchers at the time rejected this idea and argued that the most
likely reason for the persistent gap was inherent bias in the intelligence tests or poor educational
opportunities, or actually racism of those who thought genes may play a role.
It was actually an ugly time.
And to this day, this controversy has cast a very dark cloud over all intelligence research,
and many people still believe that IQ tests must be racially biased.
In fact, a major result of this controversy was the near end of intelligence research
for 30 years, during which time the educational achievement gap has sadly remained largely
unchanged, despite many educational reforms and early education programs.
What if we consider that whatever the genetic component of intelligence may be, it also
may be a factor for group differences?
This of course is especially controversial if you believe that anything genetic is determined
and unchangeable.
But as we've discussed in a previous lecture, genetics may not be so deterministic, especially
if we can identify specific gene environmental interactions.
Nonetheless, the idea that genes play any role at all in the average IQ group difference
is hard to accept for most people.
And many critics have argued against this view.
Some critics ask why you even study such group IQ differences, what good can come of it?
In fact, some researchers have argued that the study of group differences is inherently
racist.
Now, I disagree with this view.
You know, attacking interpretations of data is always fair in a critical part of science,
but stopping research altogether is another story.
From my view, here's the main reason for more research on these issues.
There's a large, serious school achievement gap among groups that most people would like
to eliminate.
To solve the problem, we need to understand all aspects of it, even if the data lead in
uncomfortable directions.
So as mentioned in the last lecture about sex differences and intelligence, absence
of data is also a prejudice.
There are fair criticisms to be made about the hypothesis that the IQ gaps may be due
in part to genetics.
At least one critic, Professor Richard Nisbet, who I mentioned in an earlier lecture, has
argued that the genetic data are overemphasized and that genes actually have little influence
on intelligence.
He makes some good points, but he concludes that intelligence is virtually 100% influenced
by social and cultural factors, and he argues that these factors can be changed to eliminate
racial test gaps.
Most researchers in the field regard this view as somewhat extreme in its certainty
and not supported by the weight of evidence.
But the weight of evidence is really a tricky concept.
No researchers have written point by point responses to all of Professor Nisbet's arguments.
The back and forth arguments are often technical and somewhat arcane, and these exchanges
may well leave you not knowing what to think.
Trying to form your own opinion is like being on a jury, and hearing the prosecution make
a seemingly ironclad case, only to then hear the defense make a compelling case for the
opposite view.
And honestly, there's also quite a bit of cherry picking in the studies that support
a particular point of view and ignoring studies that don't support that view.
Here's just one example.
Recent arguments that genetics has little to do with intelligence do not cite research
that combines brain imaging and genetic analyses like the White Matter study I showed you in
the brain imaging lecture.
Recall that study identified strong overlapping genetic influences on intelligence and White
Matter, and they were also able to estimate weaker influences for shared and non-shared
environmental factors.
Now, given all the various viewpoints, I think it's fair to say that the majority of researchers
in the field believe the most likely explanations for the race gaps involve several factors,
both genetic and epigenetic.
Now, of course, this is so general it may seem to be a cop-out, but the short, simple
truth is we really don't know with any certainty why these gaps exist.
This was the conclusion of the American Psychological Association Committee back in 1995, and it's
still true today.
The lack of progress on resolving some of these issues is due to the lack of funding for research
related to these very sensitive issues and to the unwillingness of most researchers to
get involved in these controversies.
Who goes out of their way to be called a racist?
Instead of funding more research now, we could just wait another generation or two or three.
We're fortunate to live in a society that is moving toward removing barriers to education,
minimizing prejudice and maximizing individual opportunity.
Over 50 years or so, most of the negative social factors that are thought to inhibit
intelligence or cause racial gaps may have been resolved and may have disappeared substantially.
As conditions improve for everyone, any differences in intelligence that remain are more likely
to reflect a genetic basis.
Equal opportunities may still result in unequal outcomes, given that at least some intelligence
differences among people are due to genetic factors.
But waiting around to see how this plays out for 50 years is not much of a commitment to
the problems of today.
I would favor more research now.
Genetic science and brain imaging technology have advanced dramatically since the 1970s.
We suspect that there may be hundreds of genes related to intelligence, each with small
effects.
We know that genes are not equally distributed in all populations.
That's why there are more blue-eyed people in Scandinavia than in Tibet.
We know from brain imaging studies of groups matched on IQ that not all brains work the
same way to achieve the same cognitive result.
However, modern genetic and imaging studies have yet to address the black-white average
IQ difference.
As I mentioned, funding is really problematic and few researchers are willing to enter this
controversial area.
Now one prevalent argument against such studies is that race has no biological meaning and
therefore race cannot be used to define meaningful groups.
It's true that there's more variability within a group than between groups.
In my view, however, race like sex still has enough meaning for research trying to understand
the SAT and IQ gaps that are essentially defined by race.
Here's the bottom line as I see it.
The causes of the black-white gap or any racial gaps in intelligence test scores are not yet
determined.
Specific environmental factors are not clear, but remember any environmental factor must
work through biology as we've discussed in previous lectures.
Likewise, specific genetic factors are not yet known for intelligence in general, let
alone any that may influence the average group differences.
Epigenetics may be the key.
Recall from a previous lecture the example of brain development and the critical importance
of the infant's exposure to language sounds.
Poor children, as we discussed in an earlier lecture, may hear thousands of fewer words
during critical periods of brain development.
This could be a factor for IQ differences if language stimulation influences the switching
on and off of genes related to brain development.
In a previous lecture we talked about a similar hypothesis about the Chinese language and IQ.
The Chinese language is more pictorial and complex than most western languages.
Young children who learn Chinese may be stimulating brain areas related to intelligence more during
development because of the nature of the language and this may be a factor in the Asian IQ distribution
shifted to the right and the higher average math scores on the SAT.
This has not been demonstrated, but it's an example of the type of environmental influence
that would work through biology.
Like interactions like these could provide important clues for unraveling the basis of
intelligence and lead to neuroscience approaches to increasing intelligence.
But there's another mystery unfolding about environmental effects that are already working
to change intelligence.
Just when you looked around and thought everyone else surely was getting dumber, it seems that
IQ scores are slowly rising all over the world and no one knows exactly why.
In the next lecture we'll explore this mystery to see if it offers reason to believe intelligence
and any average group differences can change.
