We're now far along in this course, and hopefully by this point you're convinced that intelligence
has something to do with the brain.
But we've uncovered a kind of paradox about intelligence testing.
On one hand, psychometric intelligence tests predict many aspects of real-world success
and scores are related to genetic and brain measures.
But on the other hand, intelligence test scores are only meaningful compared to other people.
Test scores estimate the G factor, but they do not measure it like temperature is measured
by degrees.
Now here's a different kind of test.
It will surely appeal to you if you think you're not a good test taker.
This is really quite a simple perceptual task.
I'll describe it, and then I'll show you a demonstration.
You will see a simple figure flash on a computer screen very quickly.
Here's the figure.
One side will always be longer than the other.
This figure will flash on a computer screen many times, each flash is called a trial.
Sometimes the long side will be on the left, sometimes the long side will be on the right.
All you do is press one button if the long side is on the right and another button if
the long side is on the left.
That's it.
No trick.
You just press the button of your choice as fast as you can each time the figure flashes.
For each trial, as soon as the figure flashes off, this other figure appears immediately
with heavy lines of equal length on both sides.
This figure is called the mask.
It's always the same, and its purpose is to mask any after image of the other figure
on your retina, so your decision, your left or right decision, is not influenced by any
trace of the image after it flashes off.
Now, you're probably thinking that this isn't much of an intelligence test.
Here's what makes this simple perceptual task a test.
The first flash lasts a fairly long time, I think a full second.
It's very hard to make a mistake about which side is longer when the figure stays on for
a second, but as the trials continue, each flash stays on for shorter and shorter times.
So when the flashes reach, say, half a second or a quarter of a second, people start making
mistakes.
The flashes continue to be briefer and briefer until the shortest period the flash stays
on is determined where a person maintains a criterion like 70% accuracy of getting right
left correct.
This shortest period of getting the side correct is called inspection time.
So inspection time is the briefest time you can perceive which line is longer.
Let's try a demonstration.
Of course, there are no buttons to press, but just say your answer out loud for each
trial.
Which side is longer, right or left?
After each trial, you'll see a plus sign to help you keep your eyes fixed on the screen.
The plus sign will appear after the mask.
So ready?
Here we go.
That was a series of 14 trials.
They got shorter and shorter until you probably were only guessing at the end because the
flashes were so fast, you could not perceive which side was longer.
So you get the idea.
And it turns out that people differ on inspection time.
Some people can perceive the lengths of the lines with very brief flashes, and other people
need longer flashes to see the lines.
It's also the case that inspection time is reliable in that the same person tested on
two different occasions shows virtually the same value.
Identical twins also have very similar inspection times.
So why are we interested in this?
Inspection time correlates to IQ scores.
People with higher IQ scores have faster inspection times.
The correlation is about 0.5, which is a moderate correlation, but it's really not strong enough
to be an actual intelligence test.
The point is that a simple perceptual task is correlated with the much more complex IQ score.
This raises the possibility of the other tests of information processing may estimate
intelligence even better than inspection time.
Why would such tests be better than the kinds of psychometric tests we've discussed in previous
lectures?
Well, they may be quick, and easy, and cheaper to administer than psychometric tests.
And inspection time may be less influenced by culture and social factors.
But here's the main reason.
Remember intelligence test scores rank people relative to each other.
They are ordinal measures.
There is no actual zero point, and the intervals between IQ points are not necessarily equal,
as I have now said many times in this course.
IQ scores are not like pints or liters of liquid.
But time in milliseconds is a true metric.
Each millisecond measures the same time interval.
For example, 100 milliseconds is exactly twice 50 milliseconds, and zero means zero.
Time is a ratio scale, and a ratio scale is like pints or liters of liquid.
So measures of the time it takes the brain to perceive and process information have the
potential to be actual measures of intelligence.
The question is whether such measures of information processing are related to intelligence,
and we see from research on inspection time, they are.
In fact, long before studies of inspection time, there is an extensive history of measuring
brain processing speed with reaction time.
There's now considerable interest in using reaction time as a possible alternative to
psychometric tests of intelligence.
Reaction time is simply the time it takes between a stimulus and a response.
For example, a light flashes on, you press a button as quickly as you can.
The time between the light coming on and your button presses is your reaction time.
The scientific study of psychology in the late 19th century actually began with studies
of reaction time, and to this day, reaction time experiments are mainstays of experimental
psychology.
But it was a problem of individual differences that really brought attention to reaction
time, and that problem occurred in the year 1795 at the Greenwich Observatory in England.
Here's how it happened.
The royal astronomer and his assistant were measuring the time it took a star to transit
the crosshairs of a telescope.
They were using the equivalent of a stopwatch.
The timing needed to be exact because measurements at the Greenwich Observatory set the time
for the world, and they had a very high standard of accuracy.
However, routinely the royal astronomer and his assistant recorded different times for
the same star transit.
The assistant routinely measured the time about a half second slower, so naturally the
royal astronomer considered his times correct, and he fired the assistant for always getting
it wrong.
Subsequent research on reaction time indicated that this was not a case of the assistant
getting it wrong.
It was a demonstration of individual differences in perception and speed of processing.
The assistant just took longer to press the button than his boss.
We now have over 150 years of reaction time experiments addressing issues about learning
and memory and attention, but most of them do not investigate individual differences.
Interested in using reaction time to measure individual differences as they may relate
to intelligence has more recent origins.
Let's begin with this box.
Certainly a simpler than a pet or an MRI scanner.
Could this little box possibly measure intelligence?
So what does this box do?
There are eight lights arranged in a semi-circle, and there's a button under each light.
There's also a home button in the bottom center of the semi-circle.
You start with your finger holding down the home button.
When one of the eight lights comes on, you move your finger as quickly as you can from
the home button to the button under the light that has come on.
The time from the light coming on to the time you press the answer button is the total reaction
time.
But this measure actually has two components.
The first component is the time from the light coming on to releasing the home button.
That is response time.
It's the amount of time it took to make the decision of which light came on.
The second component is the time from releasing the home button to pressing the button under
the correct light.
This is the movement time.
From this point forward, we'll be talking about response time.
That is the time it takes the brain to make the decision, as measured by the time between
the light coming on and releasing the home button.
Response time is related to IQ scores.
The research on movement time and intelligence is less clear.
So back to our box.
If you are instructed that only one light will come on and it will always be the same
light, this is a simple decision and your response time will be quite fast as your finger leaves
the home button.
But if you are instructed that any one of the eight lights can come on, your choice is
now a bit more complex and your response time will be a bit slower.
Now here's a different instruction.
Three lights will come on simultaneously and two of them will be close together and one
of them will be furthest apart from the other two.
Press the button under the light that is furthest apart from the other two.
This choice is more complex and your response time will be slower.
Many thousands of children and adults have done response time tests like this and there
are many other variations to study response time.
Overall it turns out that the correlation between response time for a simple choice is
correlated to intelligence test scores somewhat, but response time to more complex choices is
more strongly correlated to intelligence test scores.
In fact, if you add a battery of different response time tests to a battery of psychometric
tests and do a factor analysis, the response time tests load on the G factor.
Movement time does not.
Arthur Jensen used this simple box in the 1970s to do experiments relating response time
to intelligence.
Remember Arthur Jensen's paper on compensatory education and group differences in IQ?
Well Jensen also believed that psychometric intelligence tests could never resolve any
of the core issues there because these tests were limited to ranking individuals rather
than measuring how brains function.
Jensen was very much aware of brain imaging and its importance for intelligence research
because it could measure brain structure and function in actual units.
In fact, I had many conversations with him about imaging over the years, but he was also
interested in developing response time measures as a more sophisticated measurement as well.
And he spent much of his later career developing what he called mental chronometry.
Here are four basic ideas of mental chronometry.
First, response time is correlated to measures of intelligence.
Second, response time is regarded as a measure of information processing speed.
Third, response time to different basic cognitive tasks can be used to assess individual differences
in cognitive strengths and weaknesses.
And fourth, standardized response time measures can substitute for intelligence tests.
Now Jensen not only argued that it was time to focus research away from the traditional
psychometric intelligence tests, he wanted to redefine intelligence in terms of information
processing and assess it with response time tests.
He went even further and suggested it was time to replace the word intelligence with
something more like mental processing.
It's a bold idea that raises a number of issues.
One issue, for example, is whether faster response time is a cause or a consequence
of more intelligence.
The bottom up view is that faster brain processing results in higher intelligence.
The top down view is that higher intelligence results in faster processing.
The data do not yet resolve which view is correct, but brain researchers generally tend to prefer
bottom up explanations because they're interested in the brain.
Now another basic issue is why something as simple as response time in a fairly simple
task, even a task that requires choices, is related to the far more complex problem solving
tapped by psychometric tests.
Critics of mental chronometry, and there are always critics, because science is based
on skepticism, have proposed several possible reasons that explain away the basic correlation,
but so far none of the proposed alternative explanations have a compelling empirical basis.
As of now, there is not yet a standardized response time assessment or battery of tests
that could be the basis of a new science of mental chronometry, but there are researchers
working on it.
It's ironic for me that Professor Jensen passed away at age 89 just as I was preparing this
particular lecture using Jensen's last book called Clocking the Mind.
That book is a thorough presentation of all the complex issues involved in using response
time to measure brain information processing.
I'd like to take a minute to say a bit more about Arthur Jensen.
I'm sure you've noticed that I've mentioned his research in several lectures.
This is because he contributed many empirical studies and ideas over his career, in addition
to his 1969 article and all the subsequent controversy that went with it.
Jensen was completely open to any new data, like the Flynn effect, that challenged the
G factor.
He was a towering figure in the field, and in the context of this lecture, you may be
interested to know that his estate includes funding to develop standardized response time
measures for mental chronometry.
So now let's turn briefly to a related concept.
While cognitive psychologists have focused their research primarily on general principles
of learning, memory and attention, and basic elements of cognitive processes like memory
and elements of attention, there is an important cognitive concept that addresses issues relevant
to understanding intelligence.
It's the concept of executive function.
Executive function has an enormous research literature, but here's a basic summary.
Executive function refers to how the brain organizes all the incoming sensory information.
Memory is a key component, attention is a key component, prioritizing is another component,
and finally decision making and taking action are the results of executive function.
All the elemental cognitive processes and executive function taken together can be
thought of as intelligence, or at least a framework for understanding intelligence.
This is partly the basis for Jensen's view that it's time to consider standardizing
response times to basic cognitive processes as a way to understand intelligence.
Interestingly, as more cognitive psychologists become interested in intelligence, there are
some attempts to train people to perform basic cognitive tasks like memory better and thereby
increase IQ.
Now, we're going to talk about such efforts in some detail in a later lecture when we
talk about enhancing intelligence.
But there's another reason to think about tests of brain processing as possible measures
of intelligence.
We know that perception and processing speed depend on some of the same brain areas related
to intelligence.
Here's a figure from a study of 241 VA patients with brain injuries.
They had structural brain scans and completed a battery of mental tests.
In an earlier lecture, I showed a figure about the G factor from this study.
This figure shows where brain damage is related to a factor of perceptual speed instead of
the G factor.
Note there are frontal and parietal areas shown in red and yellow where brain damage
is related to poor performance on tests of processing speed.
These areas were also key parts of the PFIT model we discussed previously.
Remember the brain imaging technique of MEG, magnetic encephalogram?
This technique measured magnetic fluctuations as neurons fire on and off.
Back in lecture nine, I showed you a MEG movie of the sequence of brain activity as a person
makes a very simple decision about whether a light flash is on the left or right of the
screen.
We saw millisecond by millisecond changes in activity during the one second after the
light flashed.
Now I'm going to show you the same movie again so we can get a more detailed look at the
sequence of events.
I'm doing this because MEG has great potential as a tool for mental chronometry.
The activity detected by MEG is displayed on a brain showing a side view of the left hemisphere.
The frontal lobe will be on the left.
The visual areas of the occipital lobe in the back of the brain are toward the right end.
The bottom of the brain is the temporal lobe memory areas and the top back of the brain
is the parietal lobe.
Let's watch this one second of brain activity slow down to eight seconds all the way through
and then we'll replay it stopping at various points.
Slow will show the greater neural activity.
Let's watch again but this time I'll stop and show you the sequence of areas involved.
So here I've stopped at 120 milliseconds after the light flash and you can see the visual
area in the back of the brain is quite active as the flash is perceived.
Now let's go another 75 milliseconds so we're now at 195 milliseconds after the light flash
and you can see the side areas near the bottom of the brain are active.
These are memory areas in the temporal lobe being activated as the instructions for the
task are being recalled.
Now further along at 265 milliseconds after the light comes on we see the memory areas
are still active and we see an active area in the upper middle.
This is the left motor area and it's active because the right finger is now pressing the
button with the decision of right or left.
In fact the decision is made before we see any frontal lobe activation.
Now at 485 milliseconds we finally see large parts of the frontal lobe and the memory areas
activated as the decision is reviewed.
These areas are still active here at 665 milliseconds and now you see by 795 milliseconds after the
light flash we see activity is decreasing and finally by 900 milliseconds there's not
much brain response left.
So as you can see from the brain's point of view this is not such a simple task.
Many brain areas are involved in some integrated sequence.
Now when I watch this I can almost feel information flowing around the brain.
Now let's see this just one more time again without stopping and marvel with me at what
the brain is doing in the blink of an eye.
Now you're probably thinking what would this movie look like if we used a complex G loaded
task.
I hope you're thinking that.
Actually we're working on this and I'll have an example in our very last lecture.
This kind of brain data may someday be used to assess intelligence based on the sequence
and timing differences among people.
It has some of the same advantages of mental chronometry although it's more expensive and
less practical for widespread use.
But the point is that a new science of measuring intelligence is emerging and these measures
will not be bound by the limitations of interval scales like IQ tests.
And as in all scientific fields new and better measures advance understanding and allow more
sophisticated questions and theories to test.
Jensen argued that this kind of measurement has the potential to establish the G factor
as an indisputable fact of nature and help evolve the study of intelligence into a natural
science.
So in this lecture we've reviewed some alternative ways to think about measuring intelligence
based on how fast the brain processes information.
Speaking as a researcher this is really extremely exciting possibility for taking us to the
next level of intelligence research.
As we learn more and more about the brain and how it processes information we get closer
to seeing intelligence in neurophysiological terms and as we've noted in previous lectures
once we understand the neurophysiology we may be able to modify and enhance intelligence.
We'll go into that intriguing possibility in a later lecture but first in the next lecture
we'll spend some time discussing creativity and its relationship to intelligence.
As we will see creativity is also related to specific brain areas and to special brain
information processing.
There's a possibility we may learn to enhance creativity before we can enhance intelligence.
Why might this be the case?
While there are no cases to my knowledge where brain damage or the onset of dementia
resulted in a person becoming smarter but there are some very rare cases where brain
damage or the onset of dementia has apparently unleashed creative genius that the person never
had before.
Now I'm not suggesting you go out and hit your head to unleash your inner creativity
but let's see what the research shows about creativity and the brain in the next lecture.
