There's a well-known short story from 1959 called Flowers for Algernon.
The movie version was called Charlie.
You may know it.
Algernon was a mouse who was a slow learner when it came to finding a piece of cheese
in a maze.
But after a scientific experiment, Algernon learned mazes like a genius.
In the story, the experiment was repeated on a mentally retarded man, and he too became
a genius with quite interesting consequences.
Well there was a real Algernon.
Scientists added a specific gene to a mouse, and that mouse became smarter as measured
by learning a maze.
The scientists named their mouse Doogie after a TV character of a very smart boy who completes
medical school and becomes a doctor as a young teenager.
Remember I mentioned in the first lecture that one way to define intelligence is individual
differences in learning and memory.
Some people learn faster and remember more than others.
Recall also that IQ scores are related to learning ability.
Well Doogie Mouse was an example of genetic engineering that apparently increased intelligence.
According to the published report in Nature, a preeminent scientific journal, mice receiving
the gene exhibited superior ability in learning and memory on various behavioral tasks.
The gene that was inserted influences more efficient synaptic transmission among neurons
necessary for memory formation and for some kinds of learning.
The researchers concluded that the results suggested that quote, genetic enhancement
of mental and cognitive attributes such as intelligence and memory in mammals is feasible.
Wow, I mean genetic engineering to increase intelligence.
You may be surprised to know that this was reported back in 1999.
So what's happened since with genetic engineering of intelligence?
Well the Doogie Mouse paper has been cited subsequently nearly 900 times by other researchers.
Genetic methodologies have improved and there's much research.
But as far as I know nothing like this has been tried yet in humans to increase IQ.
But the door certainly has been opened.
Recall in our genetics lecture I mentioned all those DNA sequencing machines in China.
But China is hardly alone.
Many countries are doing genetic research and some research groups are combining genetics
and brain imaging.
One example is a large consortium of research groups from around the world working together
to find gene-brain relationships that underlie mental illnesses and brain diseases.
And they're also looking at intelligence.
This consortium is called Project Enigma, Enhancing Neuroimaging Through Meta-Analysis
Enigma.
They have pulled their databases and standardized their protocols.
They now have over 21,000 individuals who have completed brain imaging with at least
structural MRI and who have also contributed DNA samples.
A subgroup has completed intelligence testing.
Professor Paul Thompson at UCLA is one of the principal investigators.
He was also involved in the study of the genetics of white matter and IQ I showed you in the
genetics lecture.
One of the findings they reported in 2012 was the identification of a gene that was
related to brain size and to intelligence.
The gene is called HMGA2.
It's not the same gene used to make doogie mouse, smarter, but nonetheless it's one
of the first genes found in humans to be associated with higher intelligence test scores.
They also reported another gene related to the size of the hippocampus, an important
part of the brain related to memory.
It too showed a relationship to intelligence scores and the relationship for both genes
appeared to be stronger for nonverbal intelligence.
These genes were found in samples they had from around the world.
The enigma findings are dramatic because of the size and scope of the database and because
they were able to replicate these intelligence findings in independent samples.
The actual associations between the genes and intelligence however were not all that strong.
Most researchers now believe that there will be many genes like these identified and each
will contribute a small amount to intelligence.
Whether these particular genes are sensitive to epigenetic influences is not yet known.
But the point is that we're at the very beginning of tying specific genes to intelligence and
learning how those genes function.
This is the basis for eventual capabilities to influence the genetic mechanisms of intelligence
and it's why I think it will be possible to enhance intelligence possibly dramatically
at some point in the future when we have an understanding of how the mechanisms work.
Now this is the same sequence of scientific discovery that's the basis for finding genes
related to specific diseases, learning how those genes work through biological mechanisms
and then finding ways to influence the biological mechanisms to prevent or treat the disease.
Those ways could be by drugs or by lifestyle changes.
Are we close to finding intelligence genes and how they work depends on the definition
of close.
I've already seen dramatic progress in the last 40 years and I hope to see some answers
in my lifetime.
But are there any ways we might enhance intelligence not based on genetic mechanisms?
On one hand, we know about the failures so far to have much influence on intelligence
through compensatory or early education and we know about the weak influences of shared
environment compared to genetic influences.
But on the other hand, we also know about the Flynn effect and about fluctuations in
IQ and the brain during teenage years.
In the rest of this lecture, we'll cover two non-genetic approaches that are being researched
right now with the aim of increasing intelligence or learning ability, mostly in adults.
In the next lecture, we'll talk about children.
The first approach is based on memory training.
The second approach is based on shocking the brain with electricity.
Let's start with memory training.
In 2008, a group of cognitive psychologists at the University of Michigan were studying
aspects of memory.
They became interested in whether memory training improved general cognition and possibly intelligence.
There had been some suggestion in earlier studies that this might be the case.
Now, here's the basic outline of what they did.
They studied 70 university students, both males and females.
Half were assigned to a memory training group and half were controls with no training.
The training lasted 8 to 19 days.
It was different for different people.
All the students completed intelligence testing with test items like the ones on the ravens
of progressive matrices test.
Remember which symbol completes the pattern in a matrix?
They had a 10-minute time limit to do this test.
Each student took the test before and after the training period or for the controls before
and after the same number of days had passed.
The question was whether the group who received the memory training had higher test scores
after the training compared to the controls who received no training.
Higher scores would be calculated by subtracting the pre-training score from the post-training
score and then comparing the change to any change in the control group.
This research design certainly seems straightforward, but at this point in the course you may have
spotted a potential flaw or two in this design.
We'll come back to what the flaws may be shortly, but first let me show you the memory
training task.
The task is called the NVAC test.
I'm going to show you two versions of this memory test.
The first version is an auditory task.
You will hear a series of letters and you press a button every time you hear the same letter
a second time, but only if the second time is two letters after the first time.
So if you hear A, L, G, L, you press the button at the second L because the first L was two
letters back.
But you'll be hearing a long string of letters, so you need to keep each one in your memory
until you see if it's repeated two letters later.
Now here's a demonstration.
We've included showing the letters across the top of the screen to make this easier to
understand.
L, E, C, E, T, T, U,
D, K, P, H, P.
The task is called the NVAC test because N can be any number.
And the higher the number the more demanding and difficult the test becomes because the
memory load increases.
If you practice this NVAC test starting, say, with one letter back and then practice
with two letters back and then with three letters back and so on, how many letters back do you
think you could master?
Do you think you'd be smarter in the sense of having more G after you mastered four or
five letters back, assuming that you could?
That was the first test.
Here's the second version of the task.
This is a visual spatial version.
You will see a box somewhere on the screen.
The box will be in a different spot on each trial.
You press the button when the box appears in the same spot but two trials back.
This is pretty hard.
And here's a demonstration.
One will show the series across the top so you can see how this works.
That was pretty tough.
But again, you get better with practice.
But these researchers were not satisfied with training people to do both versions.
They also trained people to do both versions simultaneously.
This is called the dual N-back test.
You see that this is really very difficult, very difficult, but with training over several
days and weeks, people improved from doing two-back versions to doing three, four and
even five-back versions in some cases.
The more days of training, the better they did on the dual N-back task.
The key question in this study is whether the intelligence test scores increased following
this short-term memory training.
In other words, did improvement in short-term memory generalize to an increase in general
intelligence?
Here's what they found.
This chart shows the intelligence test scores pre- and post-training.
The top line shows an average increase for the training group of about three-and-a-half
points.
The bottom line shows a smaller increase of less than one point for the control group
after the same period of time.
This chart shows the increase on the intelligence test on the y-axis plotted against the number
of training days on the x-axis.
The more days of training, the greater the increase in intelligence score.
The authors of this study concluded, quote, thus, in contrast to many previous studies,
we conclude that it is possible to improve fluid intelligence without practicing the testing
tasks themselves, opening a wide range of applications.
In other words, short-term memory training could enhance the kind of intelligence associated
with reasoning and problem-solving key aspects of the G-factor.
Now I'm taking the time to discuss this study in some detail because it had an immediate
major impact in the field.
Critics of IQ and intelligence research jumped on these results as proof that IQ was not
fixed and could be enhanced with cognitive training.
Many critics took the view that this demonstration of changeable intelligence undermined the
genetic arguments just like the Flynn effect did.
The reasoning went that if cognitive training could increase IQ so dramatically, then underperforming
school children could be trained to have higher IQ and this would eliminate the achievement
gap.
And wow, I mean, the whole field of intelligence research was suddenly turned upside down with
this one finding, at least for some people.
Carl Sagan, the late astronomer, famously said, quote, extraordinary claims require
extraordinary proof, end quote.
Remember I said you might be thinking about some possible flaws in this study based on
earlier parts of this course.
For example, you may have noticed that males and females were combined so any sex effects
were not investigated.
But more importantly, the Ravens progressive matrices items require some short-term memory
during the problem-solving.
The better your short-term memory, the more items you can finish in the allotted time.
In this case, the test was only given for 10 minutes.
So training short-term memory is not completely independent of the test used to measure the
outcome.
Moreover, if fluid intelligence is increased, the G factor should be increased.
To really assess G, however, a battery of test needs to be given rather than a single
test.
Not the most critical problem with the interpretation that intelligence increased after training
is that intelligence test scores are only interval scales.
As we have noted many times before, IQ points are not like measurements of degrees of temperature
or liters of liquid.
So the meaning of an increase in test scores alone is not clearly an increase in intelligence.
Now I know this can be a confusing point, but it's critical, so let's approach it in
another way.
Recall from lecture 2 that intelligence tests estimate G. Any test on a given day can give
a good estimate or a bad estimate.
We talked about the example of a sixth student taking a test.
The score from that day would be a bad estimate of G, but when the student is well, a retest
will be a better estimate.
It would be incorrect to conclude that the student increased their intelligence between
the two tests.
Two of the principal authors of the 2008 study are cognitive psychologists, Suzanne Jagey
and Martin Buschkel.
They have subsequently published several studies replicating the findings and extending the
same training effects even when a simpler single end-back test is used instead of the
very difficult dual end-back test, and they have shown similar effects in children using
child-friendly versions of the end-back test.
Overall, these studies argue that the training-improved performance on tests that were not part of
the training, in other words, the training improvements of short-term memory generalize
to other test scores.
But the issue of whether intelligence increases really is still open.
And remember, science is always skeptical.
So I recently had the opportunity to meet Suzanne and Martin for the first time, and
we had a really terrific discussion about this work.
We discussed the limitation of intelligence tests to actually determine whether any changes
in G occurred or not, and it's fair to say we agree that it may not be possible to do
a compelling study with current intelligence tests because they are not measures like degrees
or leaders.
I mentioned this meeting because this is a course about the scientific investigation
of intelligence, and this is the way science advances.
Skeptical views, challenge assumptions, and often lead to better studies.
In my experience, most of the researchers in the intelligence field are collegial and
respectful of each other even when they hold opposing views.
I want you to know this.
In my opinion, many of the contentious public controversies about intelligence often involve
people from outside the field who argue that a particular point of view is definitely correct
and other views are definitely wrong.
Now, getting back to these N-Back training studies, my colleague, Professor Roberto Colom,
works in Madrid, Spain.
He undertook an elaborate project to test whether N-Back training increased the G factor,
so he invited Suzanne and Martin and me to work together with him on this project.
Roberto is an expert in using factor analysis to extract G scores from mental test batteries.
The Madrid study has 28 college students in a dual N-Back training group and another 28
in a control group that received no training.
All the students completed a battery of 12 tests before and after the training period
of 24 weeks.
These tests were combined into four factors, fluid intelligence, essentially a G factor,
crystallized intelligence, that's facts and knowledge, and a working memory factor and
an attention factor.
The pre and post tests use different forms of the same test.
So this study used a battery of tests to create four factors rather than a single test and
in the 24 week training period it's much longer than other studies.
The key question is whether the fluid intelligence factor score increases after training along
with the memory factor or the attention factor.
Now as I'm preparing these lectures, the results of the study are in but not yet published.
So by the time you see this, we expect they will be published.
Now here are the main results.
This chart shows the four factors along the bottom, GF is fluid intelligence, this is
actually the G factor, GC is crystallized intelligence, WM is working memory, and ATT
is attention.
Each of these factors is based on three of the 12 tests.
The Y axis shows the standardized change score in the test scores between the pre and the
post training test.
Now the blue bar, the blue bar show the control group change and the red bar show the training
group change.
Notice that for three of the four factors, both the training group in red and the control
group in blue show increases based on the change scores between the first and second
testing.
Both groups show decreases for the crystallized intelligence factor.
However if you look at the size of the changes as indicated on the Y axis, you will see the
changes are relatively small.
The key increase in the training group is even smaller when compared to the increase
in the control group.
Actually none of the increases in the training group are statistically different than the
increases in the control group.
There's a trend for the training group to show an increase in the fluid intelligence
factor that is bigger than the increase in the control group.
However this trend is due to only one of the three tests and there's a technical flaw
in that test so it's really not a compelling finding at all.
So why does the control group also show some increase?
Well we don't know, it could be many factors but this is why control groups are always
required.
The students in this study also had MRI scans but given that there were no real change scores
or no real changes after training, it's not surprising that there were no imaging results
to report.
So overall this study does not support the interpretation that intelligence is increased
after memory training in college students but it's still possible that stronger effects
may be found in children, especially those who may have cognitive deficits.
So while the original NBAC training studies excited many people, there's not yet really
any compelling evidence that any training benefits on other cognitive tasks are due
to increased intelligence.
In fact more negative studies are now being published.
Now I've spent a lot of time in this lecture on memory training because it's gotten so
much attention and because it's a good example of how research works to understand provocative
findings but the bottom line claims that memory training increases intelligence just
are not supported.
Let's switch gears and talk about shocking the brain.
Can this enhance intelligence and where does such an idea even come from?
Well this idea is an extension of a field called accelerated learning, it's exactly
what the name implies.
If it takes at least 10,000 hours to develop expertise at any skill from chess to tennis
to flying a helicopter wouldn't it be nice to find a way to cut that time dramatically?
Remember the scene in the first Matrix movie when a character had an urgent need to learn
how to fly a helicopter?
A how-to manual was uploaded directly to her brain and a few seconds later she was flying
off the roof.
At this point even less dramatic accelerated learning is more of a desire than a reality
but there is some recent progress.
The U.S. military for example would like to accelerate training for a number of special
abilities.
DARPA, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, has funded some research on using
a small 1 to 2 milliamp current to mildly shock the brain indirectly through electrodes
on the scalp.
The shocks can be delivered for example when there is a correct response during computer
simulation training sessions.
The mild shocks are thought to stimulate connections among brain areas and there is some indication
that the shocks result in better performance and faster learning.
The technique is called transcranial direct current stimulation.
This is really in very early development so do not try this at home.
Shocking the brain is not something to fool around with.
But if it actually works in research settings to increase learning it may be possible to
deliver more targeted stimulation directly to key brain areas related to intelligence
even using electrodes implanted into the brain just like pacemakers for the heart or like
implanted stimulators deep in the movement control areas of the brain now used for some
people with Parkinson's disease.
The brain areas identified in the PFIT model we discussed earlier could be targets for
this kind of electrical stimulation.
There is some early research on this concept using various methods to stimulate brain areas
during learning and problem solving but we don't know yet if this approach actually works.
As with all brain research the brain stimulation story is bound to be complicated and negative
effects could offset any positive effects.
But then again who wouldn't like to fly a helicopter in a few seconds.
And more seriously if we might find ways to fix broken brain circuits for some cases of
mental retardation or for some cases of learning disabilities I mean really wouldn't that be
something worthy of intelligence research in the 21st century.
Now whether intelligence can be enhanced for anyone is really one of the greatest questions
for neuroscience.
It's at the heart of all intelligence research directly or indirectly and we've covered
some promising approaches to this question in this lecture although we've talked about
research mostly in adults.
In the next lecture we'll talk about enhancing intelligence in children.
The ability to increase intelligence whether it's the G factor or specific factors raises
controversial questions and many ethical and policy issues concerning education, child
rearing and society in general.
It's kind of a game changer.
In other words the ability to enhance intelligence may change everything and we'll see how in
the final two lectures.
