Perhaps the most important and controversial question of all is this.
If we could raise intelligence, should we?
Before we tackle this question, let's briefly summarize the key points we've covered in
this course so far.
First, many controversies about intelligence begin by confusing mental abilities, intelligence,
IQ and the G factor.
Recall this diagram from our first lecture.
Most of the research studies we've reviewed throughout the course focus on the G factor,
but the measurement of G depends on psychometric tests like IQ tests and the statistical technique
of factor analysis.
These measures have clear limitations and we have discussed alternatives based on measuring
brain processing speed with response time or possibly with brain imaging techniques
like the MEG.
Now, since I've been doing intelligence research for nearly 40 years, this course can't help
but reflect my point of view based on my experience.
I've tried to present the controversies in a balanced way and I've emphasized details
of some key research studies so you get the feel of how intelligence research looks and
how it's progressing.
I can summarize the themes of the course with three main points.
First, intelligence is something real that can be defined, measured and studied scientifically,
especially the G factor, which correlates to many real world outcomes, brain structure
and function and it has a strong genetic basis.
Second, brain imaging research is beginning to identify specific brain characteristics
related to intelligence differences among people and genetic research is beginning to
identify specific genes related to both brain structure and to intelligence.
These advances are taking intelligence research in a more neuroscience direction.
And third, how the brain characteristics related to intelligence develop from genetic, biological
and environmental factors and their interactions is just not yet understood.
But once we have a better understanding of how these factors work in the brain, we should
be able to manipulate them to increase intelligence.
Now, each of these points is not without controversy.
We've covered some of the most contentious controversies that are still unsettled.
Here are three.
First, why are there large persistent average group differences in IQ scores based on race?
We still don't know and there appears not to be a simple answer in terms of test bias
or general environmental disadvantages.
Second, is intelligence really all that important in the face of the strong idea that you can
be anything you want to be if you just work hard enough?
Clearly intelligence is important, but many other factors also count towards success and
happiness.
Nonetheless, in a practical sense, lower average intelligence can be a limiting factor for some
important aspects of life and high intelligence really can confer some advantages.
Third, to what extent is intelligence fixed or changeable?
Both are true in some respect.
Average intelligence is slowly rising from generation to generation and we have no compelling
explanation for this increase.
For any individual, we might find ways to increase intelligence, especially in terms of the G
factor if we understand the brain mechanisms involved.
And it's this last point that brings me to focus on the implications of enhancing intelligence
for this last lecture.
Based on brain research so far, I'm optimistic that the neurobiology of intelligence can
be discovered.
It clearly is a complicated problem, but so is understanding the Big Bang at the beginning
of the universe.
Now I hope this course has helped convey that we are already on the way to a much more detailed
scientific understanding of intelligence.
Many of you have heard the term cognitive enhancement.
This refers mostly to the use of drugs or even food supplements to increase memory,
attention, and learning.
And there's already considerable controversy about the use of drugs by students of all
ages to get better test scores in higher grades.
I'm suggesting that in the future, we'll be able to go a step further and improve intelligence
especially the G factor and maybe even specific factors like spatial or mathematical ability.
If we can do this someday, the issues and controversies will be even more complicated
than those regarding drug use related to academic test taking.
Now there's not much disagreement with the goal of maximizing every person's potential
for learning, especially by improving environments, even diet.
So many people use caffeine to get a mental boost that we hardly notice that this is drug
use to increase mental performance.
But the use of stronger drugs to increase learning more dramatically is controversial.
Similarly, the goal of changing a person's intellectual potential by tinkering with environments
is fairly well accepted.
That's why early education programs are so popular.
But tinkering with neurobiology is far more controversial.
In many ways, the issue is the same as the issue of using drugs to enhance athletic ability.
This is regarded as cheating because it's against the rules.
But what if the rules are changed to allow some kind of regulated drug enhancement?
Although there are not yet really good memory enhancing drugs, here are some hypothetical
questions for consideration if such drugs were to become available and had no negative
side effects.
Is it cheating for a student to use drugs to enhance memory, especially if the enhancement
was for long term memory so that the learned material was not forgotten right after the
exam?
Is it cheating for a stockbroker to use memory enhancing drugs to keep track of many variables?
Is it cheating for an older manager to use memory enhancing drugs to compete with younger
employees?
If you think some of these circumstances are okay, how would you feel about the President
of the United States using such drugs to help remember details of many, many complex issues?
Instead of memory, what about using drugs to improve attention or learning?
The Science Journal Nature took a survey in 2008 of 1,427 scientists about drugs and
cognitive enhancement.
Here are some of the results.
20% already used drugs to improve concentration.
70% of the scientists would risk mild side effects to boost brain power.
80% defended the right to take such boosters.
And just over a third would feel pressure to give their kids brain boosters if other
kids use them.
So 70% of these scientists would like to boost their own brain power, but only 33% might
consider boosting their kids brain power.
I'm not sure what this means, but cognitive enhancement with drugs for attention and learning
is controversial.
Here are some basic issues for debate.
As I mentioned, is it cheating?
Cheating depends on the rules and the rules can't be changed.
Is it unnatural?
Most drugs used in medicine are unnatural.
It used to be natural for the human lifespan to be decades lower than it is today.
Is it drug abuse?
Any drug can be abused.
And is it a matter for government control or personal freedom?
Well, the better that these kind of drugs might work, the more likely there'll be government
involvement.
Well, is it is access to these drugs fair?
And this depends entirely on social policy.
Now, the same issues are relevant if we could expand cognitive enhancing drugs to include
intelligence, the G factor or specific intelligence factors.
And this brings us to the IQ pill.
The concept of an IQ pill is metaphorical.
It may be a drug that affects synaptic growth, or neuron efficiency, or gray matter thickness,
or white matter integrity, or it may be a way to stimulate brain function with electricity
or magnetic fields.
These are all variables we've discussed throughout the course.
Many drug companies are already working on new drugs to improve memory and learning for
patients with Alzheimer's disease.
But if these new drugs work in patients, could they also work in people without brain disease
to enhance learning and memory, two of the key components of general intelligence?
Few people would be against using such drugs if they improve cognition and Alzheimer's
disease or in stroke patients or in patients with brain damage, or even in people with
mental retardation.
So what about people with no brain problems using such drugs?
Now there are already drugs that improve attention in children with attention deficit
disorder, that's ADD, the drugs like Adderall and Ritalin.
Those of you with school age children may not be surprised to hear that many parents
want these drugs for non-ADD teenagers before they take the SATs and other exams.
These drugs are also in demand by many college students where estimates range from 7 to 25
percent of college students use these drugs before exams.
Despite their popularity, I'm unaware of research that supports these uses.
Nonetheless, the idea of cognitive enhancement seems to be not only acceptable, but there
also seems to be a strong demand from some parents as well as from some students.
So here are some questions I've been asking whenever I speak about this topic in public
lectures.
Question one, assuming no side effects and knowing what you've learned about the importance
of the G-Factor in everyday life, would you take an IQ pill if it put you in the top one
percent of people?
Now it's probably no surprise to you that I personally would be eager to take such a
pill, just like the 70 percent of scientists in the Nature Survey.
But I have to admit I'm always surprised when very few people in my public audiences seem
eager about taking such a pill.
Question two, assuming no side effects, would you give an IQ pill to your children if it
put them in the top one percent of students?
Again, I don't detect much enthusiasm, at least not publicly.
Privately, parents might be more eager.
Question three, if an IQ pill existed and you could get it and knowing that IQ is measured
relative to other people, would you want everyone else to have equal access to it?
This requires some thought and I don't get much response in my audiences to this
question.
Question four, if an IQ pill existed and it was not cheaply available to everybody, what
would you be willing to pay for it?
Now most people I talk to seem quite reluctant to pay anything.
And given what people pay for cosmetics, I'm a bit surprised at this.
Question five, if you had the pill, what would you want to do that you can't do now?
I don't know about you, but I'd be working on even harder research problems, at least
assuming we solved some of the ones we're working on now.
And now here's the last question and people seem much more enthusiastic about this.
So question six, if you had a choice between an IQ pill and a pill that would dramatically
increase your personal charisma and you could only have one or the other, which would you
choose?
My public audience's charisma always wins big.
You'll have to wait for a course in the neurobiology of personality before you can evaluate the
possibility of a charisma pill, but it looks like the market would be bigger than for an
IQ pill.
Now maybe at my age the advantage of more charisma is less obvious to me, so I'm sticking
with the IQ pill.
Now how you answer these questions of course are up to you, but I hope this course has
given you enough information to think about your answers differently now than you may have
if I had asked these questions in the first lecture.
As we end this course, I think it's okay for me to tell you a little bit more about what
I think.
Personally, I believe that more intelligence is always better than less.
In my view, if we knew how to enhance intelligence, we would have a moral obligation to do more
and to do so for everybody.
And I know that many people disagree with this point of view, but what if everyone was smarter
by a half standard deviation, about seven or eight IQ points for example?
The normal distribution would shift to the right, so there would be more very bright people
and fewer at the low end, but there would still be a normal distribution.
In some ways, this would be like accelerating the flint effect that we discussed in a previous
lecture.
Would there be anything bad about this, anything at all?
Higher IQ could go either way for any individual.
Some might use more intelligence for nefarious purposes, but we'd also have smarter police,
so for society as a whole, I think it would be a positive thing.
If only some people had access to intelligence enhancement, what would be the consequences,
especially if they could go to IQs over 150?
We already have sociological evidence that our increasingly complex society is divided
more than ever between the upper and lower groups, and intelligence differences clearly
contribute to the disparities.
I think it's possible that someday, and perhaps not that far off, the ability to enhance intelligence
will be real, and there will be many problems to discuss and work out, just like many other
social problems introduced by advances in science and medicine.
In the meantime, I've organized this course to give you a good solid background on what
we know about intelligence beyond some of the older controversies about test bias or
other psychometric issues, and we've spent several lectures talking about where intelligence
research is headed, especially using genetic and brain imaging approaches.
I also believe that more scientific information is always better than less, even when the
findings go against our common beliefs or our own personal interests.
I've always believed the key to scientific progress is to go where the data take you.
Ignorance and prejudice flourish in the absence of information.
Nature is the way it is no matter how we think it should be, but once empirical facts become
known through scientific inquiry, there's always the possibility of changing nature.
In the long run, this is how civilization progresses and how we help improve the quality
of life for everyone.
So I hope this course has challenged you.
Even if you are still skeptical about many of the topics we've covered and the views
I've expressed, I hope you at least share my enthusiasm for the data-driven scientific
progress that researchers are making to understand intelligence.
Now whether you're in the field of education or public policy or a parent or grandparent
wanting information about good brain development, or if you're just curious about intelligence,
one key thing to take away from this course is that research is always a work in progress.
No one study can answer complex questions and there are always more questions than answers.
So what are some of the research questions about brain intelligence relationships for
the near future?
Here are four basic questions that I would fund if I were in charge.
Each would require an extensive research program.
First, regarding the brain, we know gray and white matter are important.
How do they develop and change in ways related to intelligence?
Two, we know not all brains work the same.
How is information processed throughout the brain differently in high and low IQ individuals?
Three, we haven't talked about neurons, but are there properties of individual neurons
that influence intelligence?
And four, can we really increase the G-factor by stimulating the brain by any means such
as increased language exposure or by drugs or even by electrical shocks?
As we come to the conclusion of this course, I want to leave you with a demonstration of
a specific mental ability we have not yet talked about before, and one that most of
you probably have never seen.
I want to show you how one person has mastered this ability, and I want you to think about
whether you could do what I'm about to show you.
Think about what this person's brain is doing.
The ability I'm about to show you is not intelligence in the G-factor sense, but it
illustrates a level of specific mental ability that's hard to believe.
For me, it's as hard to believe as memorizing 22,514 digits of pi.
Someday I hope we understand brains like the person I'm about to show you has, and we're
able to use that knowledge to enhance specific mental skills, intelligence, IQ, and the G-factor.
The person you are about to see is playing the same version of Tetris that we saw in
the last lecture.
Recall this video of the older person's very first game.
Let's see how many rows she completes in about, let's say, 40 seconds.
Where the goal is to complete 40 rows as quickly as possible.
We just saw she took about 34 seconds to complete two rows at a very slow, deliberate pace as
she's learning the game.
The person I'm about to show you now is a Tetris Grandmaster playing the same game.
This will be in real time.
It's not doctored in any way.
So here we go.
Watch this.
You have just seen 40 rows completed in under 39 seconds.
Each shape was placed optimally at lightning speed.
You can scarcely believe that a human brain can work so fast.
Can anyone learn to do this, or does this person have some special brain characteristics?
This is more like a savant-like mental skill than the G-factor, but it illustrates another
example of extraordinary brain performance.
Seeing this really motivates me even more to continue the search for how the brain produces
intelligence and specific mental abilities.
Now, let's watch this one more time.
Here we go.
It doesn't matter how many times I see this.
It's always amazing.
Finally, I want to conclude this course with another MEG movie.
When we saw the last one, I was demonstrating how we might measure information flow around
the brain in milliseconds during a very simple task.
Now I want to show you a MEG movie of a person solving complex problems of spatial reasoning.
Here's a sample problem.
Let's look at the white rectangle.
It represents a piece of paper.
Watch as the paper is folded once across the middle.
Now a hole is punched in the folded paper.
The problem is to visualize where the holes are when the paper is unfolded.
The four circles around the rectangle show you possible answers.
You press one of the four buttons to choose the correct answer.
In this case, as a demonstration, you see the answer as the paper unfolds.
The answer is in the circle on the upper right.
This is a test of spatial ability used by the Johnson O'Connor Foundation.
They specialize in testing mental abilities for vocational counseling.
The problems become quite complex with more than one fold and diagonal folds and multiple
punches.
Now I'm going to show you a MEG movie of two people solving paper folding problems.
You'll see the right hemisphere of the brain for 500 milliseconds, half of one second,
after the problems appear.
The person on the left is not very good at solving these problems and the person on the
right is very good at solving these problems.
The movie is slowed down so it takes 30 seconds to see this half second of brain activity
as both people work to solve the problems.
I also need to tell you this movie was made with a different technique than the previous
MEG movie, so it'll look a little different.
And I need to point out that most people became quite good at this paper folding test and
solved the easier problems within a second or two.
So brain activity during this half second is important.
So let's watch and I'll stop the movie at various points so we can compare the two people.
So here we go.
Let's stop at about 120 milliseconds after the problem appears.
Notice the good performer on the right has activity in the occipital lobe here in the
back of the brain in the visual area and the other person is not yet showing any activity.
It seems like the good performer has a quicker perception of the problem.
Let's stop again at 190 milliseconds.
Now we see similar patterns of activity in both people.
Here we are at about 225 milliseconds.
The good problem solver on the right is showing lots of activity across the brain, but we
don't see this in the other person.
At about 265 milliseconds, the person on the right is reaching a peak of activity across
the brain, but the person on the left has a very quiet brain.
At about 330 milliseconds, we see the person on the left is now active in the parietal
lobe and the other person isn't active at all.
At about 490 milliseconds, we see both brains are now quiet.
Now let's play this movie one more time without stopping.
I never get tired of seeing these movies.
I mean it's really exciting for me and I hope you see the possibilities for learning
more about intelligence in the brain.
These are only two individuals I'm showing as examples.
With this kind of data, we can test whether people who are good at spatial ability use
different brain areas to solve a problem or whether they are just fast at activating
the areas.
This kind of data also may be helpful as an outcome measure to determine whether any attempt
to increase intelligence with training or drugs or other ways actually changes information
flow in the brain.
This would be an improvement over using pre and post psychometric tests given their limitations
as we've discussed.
We may also be able to define intelligence in a new way based on measuring this information
flow in milliseconds to a set of standard problems.
This is the research I'm doing now with Professor Rex Young and his really terrific team at
the University of New Mexico.
They're collecting MEG data on a very large number of people who are solving different
problems and they take a battery of intelligence and creativity tests.
We're just beginning to analyze the group data now but I wanted you to see these individual
movies because I think this kind of research takes us far beyond many of the older controversies
about intelligence that we've covered and demonstrates why I think the future is quite
bright and exciting for intelligence research.
So we're at the end of the course.
We've covered a lot of ground from savants to factor analysis, from IQ tests to geniuses,
from genetics to brain imaging, from shocking the brain to some provocative implications
of neuroscience approaches to intelligence research.
I wish we could actually discuss your thoughts about all the topics and issues we've covered
but it's been my pleasure to present this material to you.
Thank you for listening and thank you for thinking about intelligence.
