Once you reconnect with your authentic self, a lot of medical conditions can abate and even remit completely.
There's a deep need to be long, a deep need to be loyal, and a sense of betrayal when that loyalty somehow insulted.
If you didn't get the love that you needed, you'll be consumed by being liked, and then you'll be very likable and very nice.
And you might become a helpful, very helping individual, which is a coping pattern.
Now, you can be genuinely nice and genuinely supportive of others and still look out for your own needs.
That's human nature, I think.
But a lot of people are very nice and likable and helpful by suppressing their own needs.
That's a coping mechanism. Everybody says how nice they are.
I mean, they die at age 50 of cancer, everybody shows up at their funeral, and they're weak.
But how nice they were, how selfless they were, the child basically has two needs.
You have the need for attachment, which is the seeking of closeness and proximity with another human being.
And fundamentally, the attachment dynamic is the most powerful dynamic in human life.
And its basic purpose is the protection and nurturing of the young, so that infants attach to their parents,
and parents attach to infants for the purpose of, on the one hand, of being taken care of, and on the other, of taking care of.
So that's attachment, and we're wired for attachment all our lives.
It's the most important dynamic we have, and as General Petrius could tell you,
that we're wired for attachment, and sometimes when attachment needs to get sent in certain directions,
it'll trump everything else.
That's one need that we have is for attachment.
Without attachment, there's no human life. It's just impossible.
And without mating, without communities, we would not have survived as a species either.
As rugged individuals, we would not have got off the first evolutionary base,
let alone come to where we are right now.
So the whole idea of human beings as competitive and aggressive is totally nonsense.
But the other need that we have is for authenticity to be ourselves.
And that again has to do with survival.
If you're not in touch with yourself out in the wild, you don't survive.
So authenticity is being in touch with yourself and being able to act on your awareness of self
in relation to the environment. I mean, that's just authenticity.
So if I feel something, I pay attention to that.
If I don't, I'm in danger.
So we have this need for authenticity.
But if a child is confronted with a dilemma,
that if I'm authentic, express my feelings, then my attachments are threatened
because my parents can't handle it, because they're too stressed, depressed, or traumatized themselves,
then perforce the child will automatically, I should say,
will automatically but not consciously suppress their authenticity.
And so that the suppression of God's feelings and authenticity is a coping mechanism.
That means I'm no longer in touch with my needs.
I no longer pay attention to my feelings, my emotions.
I will no longer be aware of them. I won't express them.
I won't know what I need, which is all kinds of implications.
But one of them is, is that they'll be compulsively then,
I may then compulsively serve the needs of others, ignore my own, hence disease.
Or I may then develop on cause of false needs, which then really are where the addictions are all about.
So that it's that irresolvable tension between authenticity and attachment
that many children in our society are faced with that results in their self-suppression.
And that's one of the outcomes, not the only possible outcome,
but one possible outcome is then that niceness is a coping mechanism.
Almost anybody, when they're being unauthentic, has a sense of them being unauthentic.
How do we know that we're being unauthentic?
Like years before I had any of these concepts formerly worked out in my mind or had read much about it.
But I already knew when I was betraying myself and being less than myself and being other than myself.
How did I know that?
There's some inner knowledge from many of us, simply because the authentic self, not that it disappears.
And then when we're not in touch with it, there's a kind of a shame, there's a kind of a suffering that happens.
So that shame and that internal suffering, that sense of self-betrayal is our sure guide that we're not being ourselves.
On one level that happens to a lot of people.
And then we may look good in the eyes of others and yet internally we suffer shame because we know that we're not being ourselves.
When we say how do we know that for many of us there's an internal knowledge that arises.
Why? Why? Because that essential self hasn't gone away and is calling to us.
And we don't feel right when we betray it or when we are in contact with it.
No, that doesn't happen for many people. That doesn't happen for everybody.
For some people then it takes some catastrophe.
So what I'm saying is that at some point or another, if you're not in touch with that inner voice,
if you don't hear it, the body will speak to you a lot and clear.
You're going to get something happen to you.
And sometimes that'll happen in the form of illness or symptoms.
Then the body's talking to you. The body's saying no when you're not saying no.
If the voice doesn't speak to you directly or if it speaks to you and you don't listen,
your body at some point is going to kick in.
Or you're going to get depressed or anxious or something else.
Or something will happen in your personal relationships.
And at that point you can say, well I'm not with the right partner.
Screw them, it's all their fault, which many of us say.
Or for some people it becomes the opening of a door where we begin to look,
what in here wasn't authentic? What in here wasn't genuine?
How did I create this situation? How do I keep creating these situations over and over again?
Am I just a victim of bad luck? Or is there some pattern here?
In other words, something happens, some difficulty happens to shake you out of your complacent belief
that things are just fine the way they are.
And as the California-based great, great teacher, A.H. Almas,
says that the most difficult things that happen to us are also the most compassionate things.
Because basically they're ways of a part of it, how he puts it,
a part of us that loves us more than anything else, puts these roadblocks in our way,
saying that's not the way, that's not the way, that's not the way.
You better know what that is. So there's roadblocks in the way to bring us to ourselves.
And so we can look upon our difficulties as problems to get rid of,
or we can look at them as teachings to bring us back to ourselves.
Once you reconnect with your authentic self, a lot of medical conditions can abate and even remit completely.
I'm not promising that. I'm just saying I've seen it too often.
And there's too many examples also written up in the literature.
So that, yeah, healing is always possible.
But out of a hundred women with breast cancer, only seven carry the gene, 93 do not.
Out of a hundred women with the gene, not all of them will get the disease.
No, there are much higher risks, no question about it.
It just means that for the most part, Jesus don't determine illnesses.
What then does, and by the way, this is true for,
we're talking about most physical illnesses and mental illnesses.
So to talk about genetics is kind of a lazy person's way of trying to explain something.
Because scientifically, there's a very little basis to it.
So for example, all these genetically determined mental health conditions,
they say about ADHD, which is something I've written about after my own diagnosis.
In my fifties, that is the most heritable mental illness there is.
Well, as I say in this book, to say that ADHD is the most heritable mental illness,
is like saying that quartz is the most chewable crystal.
Because it's not true.
It's neither a disease nor is it genetic.
Nobody's ever found a single gene that determines any mental health condition.
Nobody's ever found a group of genes that determine any mental health condition.
Nobody has ever found a group of genes that if you don't have them,
you will not have a certain mental health condition.
There are a large group of genes that the more of them you have,
the more at risk you are for any number of mental health conditions,
but no specific ones.
Which means that the genes cannot cause the disease.
Because if they did, when they showed up, so should the disease in every case.
But it doesn't.
And you can have the same disease, or if you want to call it that,
even without the genes.
Because the fact is, scientifically speaking,
that genes are turned on and off by the environment.
So it's a question of what kind of environment is acting on certain genes
that will promote one kind of development, or less healthy kind of development.
And so that loss of authenticity, for reasons I will not go into explaining now,
but maybe you'll intuit to a significant degree and you'll certainly get that information
in this book and in my other books,
is that loss of authenticity is a significant cause of illness
and distress physical and mental.
And there's a, I love quoting Hungarian doctors for some reason, I don't know why.
And Dr. Jánor Shorháns, CELIA, S-E-L-Y-E,
who was the preeminent researcher of stress.
In fact, he coined the word stress in a way that we use it today.
And he's the one that showed in the laboratory
that he's the one that showed in the laboratory
that he's the one that showed in the laboratory
that he's the one that showed in the laboratory
that stressing animals will have physiological impacts
on their immune system, on their hormonal apparatus, on their intestines.
And CELIA was not only a brilliant physician, he was also a brilliant researcher,
he was also a humanist, and he wrote in his book on stress,
he said that most of our tensions and frustrations
come from compulsive needs to act the role of someone that we're not.
So in authenticity is our biggest source of stress, he pointed out.
But that in authenticity, he may not have realized,
it wasn't a fault, it wasn't kind of a mistake,
it wasn't a moral failure,
it was an adaptive response to our early environment.
So the question then becomes not to judge ourselves for being unauthentic,
not to judge ourselves for being disconnected from ourselves,
but to understand that actually those were normal responses
to an abnormal environment.
But if you want to become healthy, guess what?
The word health originates in a word for wholeness.
So if trauma is the disconnection from ourselves,
then health is the reconnection, which is entirely possible,
entirely available for us,
because that capacity for healing is simply in our nature as organisms.
And as a part of us that can never be destroyed,
it can be obscured, we can lose connection with it,
I certainly have for long periods of my life,
but it's always there as long as there's consciousness,
this capacity for healing, for rejoining our disconnected parts
and to become whole and to heal, that's just with us all our lives.
And so that I don't have a negative message for you.
The message I have is that healing, trauma daunting and damaging,
it can be both on a social and certainly on an individual level,
it can also be healed,
because trauma is not what happened to you,
but what happened inside you as a result,
and if you're still carrying the imprints and residues
of what happened to you, that can be healed.
If I got the message that I wasn't worthy and important,
just for existing, that I had to prove my worth to the world
and that created certain behaviors and on my part,
I can actually come to the conclusion,
it was never true,
it was never true that I wasn't worth it,
it was never true that you were not worth it,
it was never true,
it was simply a conclusion you came to as a result of what happened to you.
And if you stop trying to prove to the world
by being a hard worker or being extraordinary pleasant
or being focusing on your looks all the time
or focusing on your successes and achievements,
but just dare to show up as the vulnerable creature that we all are
and reconnected with your true vulnerable self,
which at the time, adaptively, was too painful for you to experience,
but you're no longer that helpless child,
well then that just means that healing is possible to you.
