Welcome to a class about two subjects very close to my
heart and I hope to yours mathematics and music. I'm a professor of mathematics at
the St. Mary's College of Maryland that's Maryland's public honors college and
I've been there for more than a decade but I've been playing violin for three
decades in orchestras, quartets and various groups. Now the opening music that
I was playing was Box Prelude from Partita number three. We're going to have
music throughout this course illustrating mathematics. But first I want to tell you
a little bit about how mathematics and music are connected for me. When I
interviewed for the position at St. Mary's College, Richard Stark interviewed
me. He's a short Austrian gentleman and the first thing he said to me he said I
see you plays a violin. He's very proud of his accent and playing the violin is
at the end of my resume with all the extra things. The next question he asked
was can you plays a Bach Chacon? If you don't know about the Bach Chacon, Bach
wrote six partitas and sonatas for solo violin with nobody else on stage and the
Chacon is sort of seen as the pinnacle of all of this. It's 15 minutes of
incredibly challenging music. It was actually once described by Brahms in the
following way. On one stave for a small instrument the man writes a whole world
of the deepest thoughts and most powerful feelings. So that was the piece that
Richard was referring to when he asked me about the Bach Chacon. Now this was an
interview and I didn't want to admit that I couldn't play it so I said I could
play other unaccompanied Bach and then I did admit that I could not play the
Chacon to which Richard responded well you cannot have the job. Apparently
nobody with a PhD in mathematics that year could play the Chacon and they gave
me the job at St. Mary's College. The point here is that math and music are
intimately connected for me and I hope by the end of this course they will be
for you too no matter if you're coming more from the math side or from the
music side or like myself from both. Every course of mine at St. Mary's is
structured around a single central question and this course is no different.
The central question for us is the following. How can mathematics help us
understand the musical experience? And when I say musical experience I mean the
entire musical experience from the single vibrating string or a vibrating tube
of air like a violin or a flute. Putting those notes together to get a scale or a
chord and playing putting multiple instruments together to get some
complex Bach piece, a sonata, a partita, to finally how music is delivered to us
digitally in this day and age on a CD or downloaded as an mp3. Now the
philosophy of this course is maybe a little different from the math you had
in school. In school mathematics and other topics tend to be taught in
isolation. Mathematics and music might seem to be very separate and they
certainly were in school for me. Our philosophy is different it's to show the
connections between these two beautiful subjects. When we see mathematics
we're going to illustrate the math with musical examples played on my violin or
with other recordings. When we hear music we're going to explain the underlying
mathematics to help you understand the music better. Throughout this we're going
to draw on many different connections from different disciplines. We're going to
talk about different areas of mathematics. We're going to talk a lot today about
physics. We're going to talk about music history, huge history in general. We'll
talk a little bit about music theory and we'll in fact talk a little bit about
art. If some of these are unfamiliar that's okay. The key here is the
connections among these things. So where should we start? Let's start where we
usually start with an A. Here's an A on a violin.
That's called a 440 A and we're going to talk about what that means in a bit. Now
instruments look different but they all have something in common. When an
instrument plays something is vibrating causing a wave of pressure changes that
travel through the air and finally get to your ear. The mathematicians have
studied vibrating objects extensively and their work helps us understand the
sounds produced by all of the instruments in the orchestra and eventually
that'll help us understand music. So when we hear something vibrating what are we
actually hearing? When we play a 440 A and here it is again. We might ask what
frequencies are produced. Well we call it 440 Hertz and that's after the 19th
century German physicist Heinrich Hertz. The higher the frequency the more times
the waves are vibrating per second and in particular for a 440 Hertz the waves
are coming 440 times per second. Now you might think that what's happening is the
string is just sort of going up and down 440 times per second. Surprisingly it's
a much more complicated motion than that and there are a lot of implications to
that. With help from Gordy in the audio booth I'm going to play an A and we're
going to see the spectrum and we're going to talk a little bit more about the
spectrum later. Now what you're going to see is that we have peaks and the peaks
come at different frequencies and they have different heights. So here again is
an A and what the spectrum is showing you is that the string vibrates at many
different frequencies all at the same time. Let's look at the frequencies that
are produced when you hear a particular note. If we were to play a note at 100
Hertz so something vibrating back and forth a hundred times per second the
frequencies when we looked at the spectrum would be at the following
numbers. They would be at 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 600 on and on up. The higher the
frequency the higher the pitch. Now pitch is what musicians talk about to talk
about the lowness or highness of a note and the these higher frequencies are
higher in pitch. They're more in the soprano range and less down in the bass
range. The lowest frequency produced in our in the case of this example the 100
Hertz that's typically called the fundamental and when we say a 440 A
Hertz is the lowest frequency produced. If instead of looking at frequency we
would want to look at wavelength we could do that as well and when we talk
about wavelength you should think actually of ocean waves. When we talk
about wavelength we're measuring from the peak of one through the trough to the
peak of another a full cycle of that. You could also measure from the trough back
to another trough or from some midpoint back to the midpoint. You have to take a
full cycle into consideration when you talk about the wavelength. Now sound
are actually pressure waves so nothing's going up and down. It's the pressure
that's coming placed parts of the air are compacted and parts of the air are
rarefied. A 100 Hertz note has a wavelength of about 3.4 meters and if we
measure the wavelength of the overtones and instead of the frequency we see that
those are things like 3.4 meters for the fundamental and then 1.7 meters and
then 1.13 meters and then 85 centimeters and if we take that largest one
3.4 is our measuring stick we see those are in a ratio of one, one-half, one-third,
one-fourth, one-fifth, one-sixth, on and on and on. The frequencies in wavelengths
satisfy a key equation that the frequency times the wavelength is going to be
constant and in fact the constant it's equal to is the speed of sound. Now of
course the speed of sound isn't exactly constant it changes depending on the
pressure for instance if you go up to to altitude the speed of sound will be
slightly different but in any one place the speed of sound is roughly constant.
So if we play a 440a what frequencies are produced? Well we now know that and we
can see that in the spectrum. It's 440 Hertz and then 880 Hertz, 1320 these are
all the multiples of 440. The fundamental frequency is 440 and then we
just add that again and again. Mathematically we talk about this as an
arithmetic sequence and the important thing for us is that it's additive to
get from one to the next or just adding the fundamental frequency each time. How
is it that a string vibrates in so many ways at the same time? Well we actually
have a demonstration to show you that. So imagine this vibrating string blown up
to the size of this jump rope and when we vibrate this string the mathematics
is telling us that it vibrates at many different frequencies and we can see
that on this string. Now musically this is called the fundamental and what you
want to notice is that there's a flat place in the middle. There's a place
where the string is exactly horizontal. We can actually get the string to
vibrate in a different mode and that looks like this. Mathematically we're
talking about the second harmonic. Musically we're talking about the first
overtone. They're always off by one when you describe that and you'll notice that
it has one node in the middle. There's a place where the string isn't moving at
all. It also has two flat places. These are places where the string is exactly
horizontal. We can get a third mode vibrating here. Here's the third mode.
Now there are two places where the string isn't moving. Those are the two
nodes and there are there are three places where the string is horizontal.
This is called the third harmonic or it's called the second overtone if you're
talking to musicians. I think it's quite surprising that our violin string is
doing all of these simultaneously. Listening to a single string vibrating is
like sitting in front of an orchestra of jump ropes. Each one is vibrating in
one of these particular modes. That's why we talk about it as a symphony in a
single note. A single vibrating string is actually many many different
frequencies. Let's actually hear what these sound like. Remember this is what
the mathematics is telling us is we're getting different frequencies all
vibrating at the same time and those are giving us different pitches how high and
low these different overtones are. Now you have to be careful when you talk
about pitch and frequency. Pitch is actually the perceived heinous or
lowness of the note whereas frequency is the physical thing and we'll see in
lecture three when we talk about auditory illusions that pitch and
frequency are actually different. In this case the overtones vibrate at
different frequencies. We hear a single pitch and the spectrum shows us all of
the different frequencies that are vibrating. So I want to play for you all
of the frequencies that you're hearing or at least the first eight or nine.
Here's the fundamental and here's the first overtone also called the second
harmonic. Here's the next one after that.
I want you to note that all of those notes are on the notes that you can find
on a piano except the seventh harmonic and that's an interesting fact that
we're going to come back to a little bit later. We can look at the frequencies
and the wavelengths of these and if you look at the wavelengths what you see is
exactly what we saw on the jump rope. We see that the fundamental has a wavelength
of the full string. In fact it's double that but we're going to talk about sort
of one loop of that. One loop of that is the full string and then the next mode
the next harmonic vibrates so that the loop is just half the string and the
next one is just a third of the string and then a fourth of the string, a fifth,
a sixth. Mathematicians have a name for this. If you've had calculus you would
have heard this. It's called the harmonic sequence. It's sort of ironic.
Mathematicians teach this all the time and many times without noticing that
that's where the name comes from. It comes from the harmonics that you can
play on a string. The relative frequency of each overtone is now in a ratio of
the following. It's in a ratio of 1 to 2 to 3 to 4 to 5 and if you remember back
the key equation here is that the frequency times the wavelength gives you
the speed of sound. Mathematicians write this F times lambda, the Greek letter
lambda is equal to V and V stays constant in any one place and so if you
look at the relative wavelengths versus the relative frequencies you can see
this equation in working. If you multiply the frequency by 3 you have to divide
the wavelength by 3 in order for them to multiply and get the same velocity,
the same constant, the speed of sound. What mathematics do we need in order to
understand this? Well first we need calculus. Calculus is the study of
change but we also need something called differential equations which uses
calculus actually to predict the future. That's sort of the point of
differential equations to be able to predict what's going to happen in the
future. And we need a subfield of differential equations called partial
differential equations. Partial differential equations is when you have
more than one variable going on. Now we're not going to go in depth with
this mathematics. I just want to give you an idea of what's going on when we
look at this mathematics and what the results of this mathematics tell us.
There are three steps to understanding and using any mathematical model in
order to predict the future. The first step is always to create a model, to use
variables to talk about your assumptions to figure out what's going on and to
mathematicalize the situation. The second step then is to connect the variables.
We have to figure out how these variables are related and we use equations and
sometimes we'll use physics and things like that in order to connect the
variables. And finally the third thing that we have to do is we have to solve
the system. We have to use these equations to predict what's going to happen in the
future, to get a function which represents what will happen for all time after
that. Now if we do this well then the result predicts it actually closely models
what happens when we see it in reality. If we don't do it well then our prediction
doesn't closely match reality and then we have to go back. We have to go back to
step one, change our variables, change our assumptions, make tweak the model a little
bit and go through the whole process again. So what does this look like for a
learning string if we do this process of mathematical modeling? In our case x is
going to represent the distance along the string where x equals zero right here at
the bridge and x equals, well let's just call it L here at what's called the nut
of the violin. Let's just assume that's one for now to make our calculations
easier. Now we're also going to have other variables in here. Small t we're going to
use for time and capital T we're going to use for the tension on the string because
these pegs are holding this string in with a particular tension. We also have to
talk about the weight of the string and we usually use rho for that another Greek
letter and that stands for the mass per unit length. We're going to just call it
weight. Now if we want to talk about this moving we need to give that a variable
and we talk about u of x and t being the height of the string at position x and time
t and so u of x would be some number that tells us how high the string is. One of the
assumptions that we make is that we're going to at least initially assume that our string
just vibrates up and down. That's of course not what it really does. It sort of moves
in a circle like this but that will actually be close enough for our purposes. The next
step is to connect the variables and if we want to connect the variables we need some
equations to do that and in this case we're going to use Newton's laws. One of Newton's
laws is that force equals mass times acceleration and when we translate that into this particular
situation we get that the tension times the second partial of u with respect to x is equal
to the weight times the second partial with respect to t. Mathematicians give this equation
a name. It comes up so frequently. We call this a wave equation. We actually need a little
bit more information. We need boundary conditions and the boundary conditions for this particular
problem are fairly simple. We know that the string is never going to move here. This is
the position x and so u of 0 and t is equal to u of 1 and t is always equal to 0 for all
time t. We also need another thing called initial conditions and that's the following. If we
were to deform this string into some shape, some function f and then let go, we could use this model
to predict what's going to happen and so again the initial conditions are to deform the string
and then to just let go. The next step in our process is to solve the partial differential
equation. Now we're not going to go into the details of solving a partial differential equation.
If you're interested, the reading list suggests several readings that would do exactly that.
A partial differential equations course in an undergraduate mathematics program would do this
as well. The point here is that when we solve these partial differential equations, we predict
the future. Given any initial condition f that I deform my string into, the mathematics tells
us what's going to happen for t bigger than 0 for all time in the future. The power of
differential equations is exactly this. If you can model the forces that act on a system, the
mathematics predicts what will happen in the future and that's an amazing thing that mathematics
does. So let's look at the solution that we get when we solve this particular PDE. We get u of x
and t is equal to the sum, the capital letter sigma stands for sum and what we get is that it's a sum
of sines and cosines. One of the assumptions we've made before we solved this is that the
tension, the length and the weight are all equal to 1 for now. We'll come back later and revisit this
model in the case that they're not 1. This mathematics is telling us that the string is
vibrating in a series of modes. Mathematically what we're getting is the sum of sine waves.
Musically what we're getting is a series of overtones. Now these numbers, ak that you see out
in front of these, mathematically these are the Fourier series coefficients. These are just
numbers, each ak is a single number. Musically that's telling us how much of each overtone is
produced. When I take my violin and I pluck a single string just like this, this mathematics is
telling us what we already saw in the spectrum, that we hear a symphony of different frequencies
when I just pluck this single string. So what about other instruments? The beauty of
mathematics, one of the wonderful things about mathematics is that it's universal. Once we've
developed additions so that we can add 2 apples to 3 apples and get 5 apples, we can do that same
addition with bananas or any other fruit. And once we have algebra that models a biological
situation, that same algebra can be used in economics, it can be used in lots of different
fields, it models the same thing, the algebra stays the same. Interestingly wind and brass
instruments involve vibrating air columns, but the mathematics of the situation is almost
identical. Like a string, a tube of air resonates in particular ways, modes, much like the jump
rope that we had up here earlier. What you hear is a combination of those modes, literally a sum
of all of those different modes. We can hear this in an interesting example of just a single
swinging tube, so I want you to think about this swinging tube as modeling a wind or a brass
instrument. So here's my tube, I actually bought it at the local pool store. It's just a plastic
corrugated tube, it has these bumps in it, and when we swing it at different speeds, we find the
resonant frequencies and you can hear it. First I'll play a few of these notes.
And again you get a particular sequence of vibrating modes, just like we heard on the violin. And again
they're additive. What we're hearing are maybe 400 hertz, 600 hertz, 800 hertz, 1,000 hertz. What
we see is that they're additive, they're differing by the same amount every time, it's another
arithmetic sequence. Now it turns out that we're missing the 200 hertz and that has to do with
technical physics reasons with corrugated tubes. But like strings, brass instruments and wind
instruments produce a symphony of different sounds in a single note, a symphony of different
frequencies, and those are the vibrational modes. Now one of the things that you can do on a corrugated
tube like this is you can play simple songs, in fact you can play taps.
It's actually not surprising that you can play a song like taps. You see taps is traditionally
played not on a trumpet but on a bugle. A bugle has no valves, you can't change the length of pipe that's
on a bugle. So it's just a single vibrating tube and the mathematics of that is very similar and you get
exactly these overtones. Those are exactly the things you can play on a bugle and those are exactly the notes
that we can get on this particular vibrating tube. So let's look at the spectra of other instruments.
We're going to listen to a couple of different instruments and see them played. Each instrument is
going to play an A and the spectrum is going to show us that we hear a sequence of different
frequencies, the overtones. I want you to notice a couple of things about this. All of these produce more
than just one frequency. There's a fundamental and then there's many other peaks in the spectrum.
And each instrument has essentially the same patterns of frequencies. Again it's additive, it's just
the multiples of the fundamental. How much of each overtone? That we're going to talk about in lecture two.
So let's listen to a couple of A's from different instruments. Here's an A on a clarinet.
Here's an A on a flute. Here's another. Here's a bass guitar. Here's an A on a trumpet.
Here's an A on a piano. So I hope what you saw in those is that any instrument is going to produce a sequence
of overtones and there's a pattern to those frequencies and for most instruments that's called the harmonic
sequence. When we're looking at frequencies those are just multiples of the fundamental. The ratios are
one to two to three to four to five to six to seven, just the natural numbers. If we're looking at wavelengths
we get the reciprocals over those, fractions flipped over. We get a ratios of one, one-half, one-third,
one-fourth, one-fifth, one-sixth. The mathematics that we use differential equations correctly predicts
what's going to happen, correctly predicts that we get these particular sequences of numbers.
Now I want to show you an instrument with a different set of overtones and we have one here. This is a timpani.
We have to move to get a set of different overtones. We have to move from one-dimensional objects, strings,
vibrating columns of air. These are all one-dimensional to something that's two-dimensional and so we're
essentially moving from the strings, brass, and winds in an orchestra over to the percussion. This drum
head here is two-dimensional. It's flat and when you play the drum head you get different vibrating modes
just like we do on a string. Now I can play this here and I'll play it for you here.
We can look at the spectrum and see exactly what it looks like. When you look at the spectrum of a timpani,
when you look at that spectrum you see that it doesn't have the same structure of the other instruments we've had.
There isn't one nice peak, nice fundamental, and then overtones above that. It still has some structure
but the peaks are not nearly as clear. They're much more chaotic. You simply don't have this nice one,
two, three, four, five, six pattern.
The timpani still has different modes that it can vibrate in and we can actually use this setup to see them.
Now one of the things I want you to note and we're going to explain this in a minute is that when you play a timpani
you hit it out here, somewhat close to the rim. You don't put it in the center and you can actually hear the difference.
Here's when you play out here and if I were to hit the timpani in the center it sounds much more dead.
You don't get that nice reverberation. So let's look at what the modes on a timpani look like.
What I have set up here is I have the timpani and then it's connected to this vibration mechanism
which vibrates this piston up and down, up and down in a particular way.
What this is connected to is it's connected to a frequency generator and when I turn this on
this frequency generator is going to vibrate this at exactly particular frequencies
and I allowed to change the frequencies on this setup.
So I can change the frequencies and one of the things that's interesting about this is I'm not changing the amplitude at all.
When we turn this on you're going to hear that the volume that you hear changes dramatically
and that's not because this is vibrating at greater and greater amounts,
instead that's simply because this particular drum has particular resonances.
So that's the setup we have going here. So let me turn it on for you.
Now this drumhead already has a line drawn on it on the top,
but to allow us to see these modes I'm going to sprinkle poppy seeds on the top
and what's going to happen is when the drumhead vibrates in a particular mode
say the drumhead is vibrating like this, then each half of it is going to go up and down
but there's going to be a line in the middle where the drumhead isn't moving at all
and we can actually see that because these poppy seeds will accumulate
in the places where the drumhead isn't moving. So let's see if we can see that.
The first mode we're going to see is this half and half.
So half the drumhead is moving up the other down and there's a line through the middle
where it's not moving.
The next one is quarters. So a quarter of the drumhead is moving up a quarter down.
You can see there are two lines, a big plus sign where the drumhead is not moving.
We need to add a few more poppy seeds to see these
and as we go to higher and higher frequencies you can see that the lines become more complicated.
Here's a particularly complicated one that looks like almost a sine curve coming through the middle
and two parabolas on each side.
And sometimes they're really sharp. You can see how quickly the poppy seeds move into position
along the nodal lines where the drumhead isn't moving.
Now one of the things you'll notice about this is that most of these patterns actually go through the center.
What that's telling you is that the center of this drum contains most of the nodal lines.
Now when you hit a timpani, when you play it, you play away from that point.
You see, if you play at a nodal line, that's where the drumhead is not going to move at all
and what you want to do is you actually want to hit in a place where the drumhead is moving a lot.
So you don't hit at the center where all the nodal lines are.
You hit here near the side where it's in the middle of these nodes
and that causes the drum to vibrate in exactly those modes.
Once we understand the overtone sequence of an instrument, we can then start playing an instrument
and we can vary the frequency of the fundamental.
If we couldn't do that, music would be very uninteresting.
We would have only a single note.
That's not very interesting music.
So how do we change the pitch of a single note?
That question, it turns out, is highly mathematical.
How does the frequency of the fundamental depend on things like, in the case of a violin,
the weight of the string, the tension, and the length?
Let's look at some qualitative answers first.
If the weight of the string increases, the vibrations are going to slow down.
That makes sense if you make something heavier, it goes slower.
But you can also see that my G string here is a much thicker string than my E string over here.
And the G string is a much lower note. Here's the G.
And here's the E.
We also know that if the tension increases, the speed of the vibrations has to speed up.
We can do that. We can tune something. Here's my D string.
And if I tune it up, if I increase the tension,
you hear the frequency going up.
We also know that if the length increases, the vibrations are going to slow down.
The frequency will go down.
Think about cellos and basses.
Those have long strings. Those produce low frequencies.
Differential equations gives us a more quantitative answer.
The question, again, is how does the frequency of the fundamental depend on the string weight,
the tension, and the length?
And here we actually have a formula.
The mathematics gives us this formula.
The frequency is equal to 1 over 2L times the square root of T over rho.
Again, L is the length of the string, T is the tension, and rho is the weight.
We can see this formula at work.
Again, if I increase the tension, the pitch goes up.
And that's because the tension, the T here, is in the numerator of that fraction.
When T rises, the square root also rises, and so the frequency goes up.
If we increase the weight, the pitch goes down.
And we can see that going from my E string here, which is the lightest string,
to my G string, the heaviest one.
And when we increase the weight, the weight, rho, appears in the denominator.
So when the denominator gets bigger, that fraction gets smaller,
and the frequency is going to go down.
Now, you might ask about the tension.
We actually have roughly the same tension on my G string and my E string.
If we didn't have the same tension, then over time, my violin would be pulled
to one side or the other.
And we know that instruments, especially Italian instruments, have lasted hundreds of years.
So that tells us that the tension has to be about the same.
If you do the math, it turns out that the G string is about 10 times the weight of the E string.
We can also look at length.
When you increase the length, L is going up, and L is in the denominator,
and that tells us that the frequency goes down, the pitch is going down.
Now, you can think about that in terms of larger instruments, violas, cellos, or basses.
You can also look at the strings of a harp.
If you look carefully at the strings of the harp, the lower ones are long,
and up higher, the higher ones are much shorter.
You can see this inside of a piano as well.
Where does this formula come from?
It comes from differential equations.
Remember before we assumed that the tension, the row, and the length were all equal to one.
And when we looked at that equation and we took K equals to one, we got the fundamental.
The fundamental frequency, how does that depend on T, row, and L?
Well, we could go back and run these calculations again
and do exactly what we did before, the three steps going through and making a mathematical model,
and then solving that.
And if we do that, here is the more complicated equation we get that involves now T, row, and L.
What does this equation mean?
Well, this equation is saying that, again, it vibrates in many different modes.
That's the summation. We have different overtones.
K equals one is going to give our fundamental.
And when we look just at the K equals one part, we get the sine of pi X over L
times the cosine of this complicated expression.
But you can see that that complicated expression looks a little bit familiar.
That complicated expression is exactly giving us the fundamental frequency of our vibration.
It's giving us that the frequency is equal to one over two L times the square root of T over row.
That's coming from the cosine term.
And if you're wondering about the two and the pi that aren't there,
that has to do with the fact that the natural wavelength of a cosine is two pi.
So now that we've solved these, mathematically we can create melodies in predictable ways.
And so I wanted to show you how we do that on the violin with a piece, the first piece I ever learned.
I was four when I started playing the violin.
And the first piece I ever learned was Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star.
I want you to think about how each note is made of many different frequencies, the overtones,
and how we're creating a melody by changing the frequency of the fundamental.
And the way we're doing that on a violin is by changing the length,
I'm going to put my fingers on the string and that effectively shortens the string
and makes a shorter string vibrate.
And we're also changing the weight.
And I'm doing that by switching from my E string to my A string to heavier strings.
So here's Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star.
Now that was very simple. Let's think about a more complicated piece.
Let's go back to the Bach prelude that we opened this talk with.
Think about how quickly I'm changing the length and the weight of the strings that are vibrating.
I'm creating music.
Now I want you to know that if we had a professional violinist here,
they would be even more accurate in changing the length.
They would be even more accurate within fractions of a millimeter.
They would be even more accurate within fractions of a millimeter
as to where they're putting their fingers on the string.
I haven't played professionally for as long as a professional violinist would have,
so I'm going to be a little bit less accurate.
I also want you to notice that I'm using what's called vibrato.
When my finger does one of these motions like this,
mathematically what's going on is that we're slightly changing the length of the string.
What that's doing is giving us this sort of wavering sound to the pitch.
That vibrato takes the edge off of a note,
and it gives a slightly sweeter sound to it.
Here again is the Bach prelude.
Now I want to move from changing pitches on the string
to changing pitches on a vibrating column of air.
Before we dig into the mathematics of a vibrating column of air,
I actually want to demonstrate one of the instruments that some of my students made.
They had a name for this instrument.
They actually called it the Wonderpipe 4000,
but it's a fairly simple instrument.
It just involves a PVC pipe and a bucket of water.
Now on a violin we were changing the length of the string,
and that was changing the pitch.
On the Wonderpipe what we're going to do is we're going to change the length of the column of air
that's vibrating, and that's going to change the pitch.
And what happens is as we move this pipe lower and lower,
the water level stays at the surface of the water,
and so the column of air that's vibrating is shorter and shorter.
They put lines on here to indicate where you should play at a scale.
Now an interesting thing happens with the Wonderpipe 4000
when you take it out of the water.
Here it is with just barely the end in the water,
and if I lift it out of the water,
you get a much higher frequency.
Let's go back and forth.
Here it is in the water and out of the water.
This difference actually explains a key difference between flutes and clarinets,
and we're going to talk about that in a minute.
But mathematics predicts this strangeness,
this difference between a pipe in water and a pipe out of water.
Now what I said before is true.
The mathematics of a vibrating column of air, for instance, a flute,
is very similar to the mathematics of a vibrating string.
When we're looking at a string,
U of x and t represented the height of the string at position x and time t.
When we're looking at a column of air,
U of x and t is now going to represent the pressure,
the difference from atmospheric pressure that's in this particular tube
at position x and time t.
When you put this into equations,
what you get is another version of the wave equation.
You get that c squared times the second partial of U with respect to x
is equal to the second partial of U with respect to t.
Here c is the speed of sound,
and we're getting that from fluid dynamics.
For a flute, which is open to the air at both ends,
one end that's obvious,
that the other end you'll notice that a flout is not covering the mouthpiece entirely.
The mouthpiece is open to the air, and they're blowing across that.
So for a flute, the column of air is open at both ends,
and that tells us that the boundary conditions are zero at both ends.
U of zero and t is equal to U of l and t is equal to zero for all time t.
Now there's a key difference between a violin and a flute,
and that difference is that when a violin vibrates,
there's this sort of middleman in this process.
The string vibrates, and then that vibrates the air.
In contrast, when you have a flute that's vibrating, there's no middleman.
It's the air within the instrument, within the flute that's doing the vibrating.
The length of the instrument actually determines the wavelength of the sound.
So let's look and predict what the wavelength of sound is going to be from a flute.
The wavelength of sound here, if we have a flute which has length l,
then we think about setting up a wave within that.
We're going to set up exactly what we had with the jump rope.
We're going to get something which is zero on both ends.
Those are the boundary conditions.
And then if we want to know the wavelength, we actually have to extend that.
That's just half of that. That's going up,
and now we have to go back down to get an entire wavelength.
And so if we have a length of tube here, think about a flute,
we know that the lowest possible frequency, the lowest note that we're going to have,
is going to have wavelength which is about double the length of the flute.
We can check this, the lowest note possible on a flute.
A flute is about 0.7 meters long,
and we know that the frequency times the wavelength is going to give us the speed of sound.
Well, the speed of sound is roughly 340 meters per second,
and so we can solve for the frequency.
The frequency should be the velocity divided by the wavelength,
and we should get 340 meters per second divided by two times the length,
which is 1.4 meters.
And when we do that, we see that the lowest frequency a flute should produce is about 240 hertz.
If we check and try to play a note on a flute,
the lowest note on a flute is a B below middle C.
That's what musicians call it, and it's about 247 hertz.
We're incredibly close.
Now what about clarinets?
Clarinets play much lower.
You might remember from hearing an orchestra that a clarinet has a much lower range than a flute.
If you think of, like, the quintessential clarinet solo,
it might be the opening of Gershwin's Rhapsody in Blue,
where the clarinet goes...
It's this beautiful glissando.
Now that might be a little bit weird because a clarinet and a flute are about the same size.
Why is it that a clarinet can produce sounds so much lower than a flute?
The lowest note on a clarinet is something around 160 hertz.
That's much lower than the 240 hertz that we had for a flute.
To understand this difference, we have to understand the boundary conditions.
That's the key.
A flute, remember, was open to the air at both ends.
We got atmospheric pressure at the end and at the mouthpiece.
In contrast, a clarinet is open at the bottom, the bell end of the clarinet,
but it's completely closed at the top end.
The clarinet player puts the reed entirely in his or her mouth.
Pressure can build up against the reed,
and that changes the mathematics of the situation.
Before the boundary conditions were that you had zero at both ends,
and now when we take into account the fact that it's closed at one end,
we get that it's zero at the bell end.
There is no pressure change at the bell end,
but at the closed end, we get that there's actually maximum pressure change.
We get that u sub x, the derivative in x of x and zero is always equal to zero.
That's telling us that we have no displacement.
There's nowhere for the air to go.
It can't vibrate anywhere because it's coming up against the edge of the reed.
We can actually see this if we think back to the jump rope.
The mathematics is telling us that one end of the clarinet is like one end of the jump rope.
It's held fixed.
The other end of the clarinet is different.
The other end of the clarinet has a place where the jump rope has to be flat.
It has to be horizontal.
The mouthpiece is, in other words, it's located in the middle of the loop of rope
when we think about this jump rope,
and we can use that to figure out the lowest wavelength that a clarinet can produce.
So what is that wavelength?
Well, we can think about a clarinet here,
and here this end will be the mouthpiece and this end would be the bell,
and you can follow the rope.
It has to be not moving here, but it has to have maximum motion here.
It has to have a flat point here,
and if we want to look at the wavelength,
well, here's the length of the instrument.
We would have to go up and back down here,
and that's only half the wavelength.
The wavelength has to go up and then down and then finally get to the end.
It has to do a full cycle,
and so the length of the clarinet was only one fourth of that length.
That tells us that lambda, the wavelength for a clarinet,
has to be four times the length of the clarinet,
and we can check this.
A clarinet is about 0.6 meters long,
and the frequency produced, the lowest frequency produced by the clarinet,
should be, according to this mathematical model,
the velocity, 340 meters per second,
divided by four times the length.
The length was 0.6 meters, and that gives us 2.4 meters.
When we do the calculation,
we get that the lowest frequency a clarinet should be able to produce
is about 140 hertz, and that's really not far off.
Let's compare a clarinet and a flute for a second.
So a flute and a clarinet, again, are about the same length,
but a flute can produce only notes as low as 240 hertz or so.
A clarinet can go much lower, 140 hertz.
They're about the same size, but a clarinet plays much lower.
If you want to think about how much lower,
we're going to have to study things like intervals,
and we can study those mathematically,
and we're going to do those in later lectures.
The scientists at the University of New South Wales
have done some very cool work related to acoustics
and vibrating tubes of air,
and you can see what they've done on YouTube
if you search for a flute clarinet hybrid.
What they've done is they've taken a clarinet mouthpiece
and mounted it on a flute.
If you take a clarinet mouthpiece and put it on a flute,
you now have what looks mostly like a flute,
except that it's now closed on one end,
because it's a clarinet mouthpiece,
and it turns out that can play much lower notes.
They've also taken a flute mouthpiece
and put that on a clarinet,
and what you get then is an instrument
which looks mostly like a clarinet,
except now it's open on both ends and it no longer plays low.
So let's go back to our WonderPipe 4000
now that we understand the mathematics.
And that explains why we can do this.
And now when you see a flute play,
you should realize that it's an open tube at both ends
and it cannot play very low.
And when you hear a clarinet play,
you know that it's closed on one end.
This end down here would represent the mouthpiece
where it's closed, and we get a much lower sound.
Out of the water, higher pitch.
It's a flute.
In the water, lower pitch.
It's a clarinet.
I want to talk about one of the assignments I give to students
which is to use mathematics to build instruments.
They build really interesting instruments.
One is the WonderPipe 4000 that they had here.
Some of them will build things like flutes.
One student, Ben Love,
built something much more complicated out of PVC pipe.
And I think this is just a rubber glove that he found in the kitchen.
And all of their instruments have to use mathematics
to produce sound at different frequencies.
So let's see what we've figured out today.
What we figured out today is a note played on almost any instrument
includes many different pitches, different frequencies,
called overtones or harmonics.
For most instruments, those overtones are related to a harmonic sequence.
In terms of wavelengths, that's one, one-half, one-third, one-fourth.
In terms of frequencies, those are one, two, three, four, five, six.
We make different pitches by changing the vibrations
in mathematically predictable ways.
Now I want to leave you with an interesting question to ponder,
and that's exactly this.
The mathematics of differential equations
explains some of the differences between these instruments.
Among other things, a clarinet and an oboe are...
the mathematics is not the same because they're both closed on one end,
but the hole inside of an oboe is actually a cone.
It's not a cylinder.
Inside of a clarinet, it's a cylinder.
So you get different mathematics.
Now what we said today is that flutes and violins have the same exact mathematics.
Why don't flutes and violins sound exactly the same?
The answer has to do with resonance and timbre.
That's the color of the sound, and that's the subject of lecture two.
We're going to finish this lecture the way we'll finish many of the lectures
with a sort of coda.
That's the end part of a musical piece.
We're going to end here with a piece by Vittorio Monti.
This is a piece called Chartus.
It was inspired by the gypsies of Eastern Europe,
and I want you to think about how I'm changing the attributes of a vibrating string
to produce different pitches, and we're using that to produce music.
So here's Chartus.
Thank you.
