Welcome back.
That was probably the calmest section of the Bach Chocone.
It's easier in some ways.
There aren't that many notes, but it's much harder in other ways.
If you played a little out of tune, some of those notes I played were just a little out
of tune, and when you play some of those notes out of tune, people notice.
That's because you hear dissonance, and that's what today's lecture is about, dissonance.
That sort of rough, slightly unpleasant sound, especially when things are a little out of
tune.
First, let's review.
We now understand a single note and its vibrations, and we understand a sequence of notes called
a scale.
Today we're going to talk about two or more notes played at the same time, a chord, like
some of the chords you just heard in the Chocone.
Now not all combinations of notes sound good, and today we're going to talk about the mathematics
of dissonance when they don't sound so good, and the musical implications of that.
Let's look a little closer at this opening music.
You see, not all intervals are created equal.
Musicians work really hard to get some intervals perfect, and don't have to work so hard, don't
have to care so much about others.
Let's hear a particular line in the opening music.
There's four chords in there.
That first interval is a minor third.
It's not that important to get that exactly in tune, and then we have a major sixth, and
a major seventh, also not that important, and then we hit the octave.
When I miss it a little bit, oh, it sounds horrible.
It's very important to get your octaves exactly in tune, violinists practice octaves for hours
to get them exactly in tune.
If I miss some of the other intervals, the minor third, the major seventh, you're not
going to notice, but if I miss the octave a little bit, you're going to hear the dissonance.
That's what we're going to talk about today.
So what is dissonance?
Dissonance is a discordant sound.
It's produced by two or more notes sounding displeasing or rough.
It's a sort of tonal tension.
It's the opposite of consonance.
Sometimes it's intentional.
Sometimes composers will build dissonance for a tense moment and then release it by finding
consonance.
Today, we're going to talk mostly about the dissonance of being out of tune.
Now, as we know from the last lecture, being out of tune is sort of a complicated idea,
but whatever your scale is, there is a sense of out of tune.
Now, dissonance has a physical component that we're going to talk about mostly, but it also
has a cultural component.
I want to talk really quickly about the cultural component.
What Bach considered beautiful?
Medieval composers might have called dissonant.
Here's a chord from earlier in the Chaconne.
Medieval composers might have thought of that as incredibly dissonant, but Bach wrote it
into the piece.
What Stravinsky wrote when we fast forward to 1913, when he wrote The Rite of Spring,
he asked the violins to play this chord.
Now that might have been considered very dissonant by Bach, but Stravinsky wrote it into his
piece.
What's considered dissonant changes over time.
Now mathematically, the Pythagoreans thought that consonance, nice sounding notes together,
had a ratio of frequencies with small numbers, and dissonance was anything but that.
Hermann von Helmholtz, a German mathematician and physicist, gave a mathematical description
of dissonance.
For him, it involved the overtones as well as the fundamental notes, and we'll see that
a little bit later.
His explanation was that dissonance was beats.
Beats are a phenomenon produced by two frequencies being played when the two frequencies are
very close to each other.
I want to clarify here, because beat is a word with many different meanings.
Now I don't want you to confuse the term I'm using with things like what you do on
drums, or keeping time, or what a conductor does, beating out rhythm, beating out the
time signature.
The Grove Dictionary music calls this kind of beats, an acoustical phenomenon useful
in tuning instruments, resulting from the interference of two sound waves of slightly
different frequencies.
What we mean by that is it's a throbbing sound produced when two notes are played slightly
out of tune with each other, and it's useful in tuning instruments.
So let's hear what beats sound like.
Now we heard them last time.
We heard them electronically.
We were playing sine waves.
I wanted you to hear beats on an actual instrument, and so I'm going to play two D's.
I'm going to play one on my open D string here, and I'm also going to play another one
on my G string here.
And if I play them a little bit out of tune, you should hear beats.
It's a throbbing sound, and one of the things I can do is I can change how frequently that
throbbing sound is going by getting the notes closer and closer to each other.
And what you'll notice is as the notes get closer, the beats slow down.
If the notes get further apart, the beats speed up.
And finally, if the notes are exactly the same, you get no beats at all.
You just hear one note.
You'll also note that if I play the notes very far apart, you don't hear beats at all.
You just hear two separate notes.
That's sort of clearly the ... and the other note.
Today we're going to understand the mathematics of dissonance and these beats, and we're going
to look at the implications of these for musical performance and for piano tuning.
There's a really important equation that we're going to refer to again and again today, and
we're going to call that the beat equation.
Now, this is actually just a trigonometric identity that you might have seen in a trigonometry
class back in high school, but it's this, that the sine of A plus the sine of B is equal
to 2 times the sine of the average times the cosine of half the difference.
Now when two notes are played at the same time, that's the left side of the equation,
sine A plus sine B. And the cool thing is that sometimes when two notes are played at
the same time, you hear the left side, you hear those two notes.
But actually sometimes you hear the right side of this equation, and so your mind is
going back and forth depending on which notes you're hearing.
You're sometimes hearing the left side and sometimes hearing the right.
Let's look at an example to make sure we understand this equation.
Let's let A be 5T and let's let B be 3T.
So now this equation looks like the sine of 5T plus the sine of 3T equals 2 times the
sine of the average, which is 4T, times the cosine of half the difference.
The difference is 2T and half of that is just T.
Now for the math lovers out there, we're going to actually go through a proof of this
later.
It's not too hard to get a proof of this, but for now we're going to just take that
this beat equation is actually true.
But let's look and see if we can see this in another representation.
You remember that mathematicians love to look at different representations.
So now let's look at and see if we can see this equation graphically with this example
of 5T and 3T.
We can graph the sine of 5T and it looks like this.
And now we can graph the sine of 3T and we can look at what happens when we add those.
When we're doing addition, the left side of the equation, we're actually doing pointwise
addition.
We find whatever we pick some x value and look how high the sine of 5T is and at that
same x value we'll look how high the sine of 3T is.
We add those two heights and that's what we get for the value of the sine of 5T plus
the sine of 3T.
And so that's how we get the left side of this equation graphically.
Now let's look at the right side of the equation.
The sine of 4T has a graph that looks like this.
The cosine of T has a graph that looks like this.
And now when we multiply, we're actually doing point by point multiplication.
So now at a particular value of x, we're looking for the height of the sine of 4T and the height
of the cosine of T and we're looking to multiply those.
And that's going to give us the sine of 4T times the cosine of T.
Now you should notice that if either one of these functions is zero, then when we multiply
them we're going to get zero for the product.
The last thing we have to do on the right side of this equation is multiply by 2 to
get 2 times the sine of 4T times the cosine of T and that's what this function is here.
Now let's compare that.
We can compare that to what we got on the left side of the equation that looked like this
and here's what we got on the right side of the equation that looked like this.
They look exactly the same.
Let's zoom out just to see if we're being fooled by the scale of this.
And when we zoom out, we see that even when we zoom out, those two graphs are exactly
the same.
We're confirming that it is an equation, that the left side really does equal the right
side.
So that was a graphical representation.
Let's see if we can take this to a musical example and in order to do that, let's change
A and B a little bit.
Let's take A to be 450 times 2 pi times T and B to be 440 times 2 pi times T. These
represent a 450 hertz sine wave and a 440 hertz sine wave.
If you're wondering the 2 pi comes because the natural period of sine and cosine is 2
pi.
Now the sine of 450 T 2 pi plus the sine of 440 T 2 pi should be equal to, according
to the beat equation, 2 times the sine of the average and that's going to be 445 T
times 2 pi times the cosine of half the difference.
The difference is 10 times T times 2 pi and half of that is 5 times T times 2 pi.
Now let's look both graphically and musically at this.
First let's look at the sine of 440 times T times 2 pi.
When we listen to that, here's what it sounds like.
And you can see the graph of that.
And if we look at the graph and listen to 450 hertz note, that's the sine of 450 T times
2 pi, here's what that sounds like.
Now of course the notes that we just played, those were pure sine waves.
If you were to hear it on a violin, you would hear a 440 A and its overtones.
And that's going to become important later.
For now let's see if we can add these functions and see what this sounds like when we add
these functions.
So here's a 440 hertz A and this is what it looks like.
And here's the 450 hertz A and you can notice that it's slightly sharp.
When we add them, we again do this point by point addition.
So we're adding at any particular x the value of the 440 hertz plus the value of the 450
hertz and we get this function right here.
And when we listen to it, you can hear the dissonance.
Those are the beats that we're hearing.
But when we look at it, it looks like just another sine wave.
It looks maybe just two times as tall, but it looks like just a sine wave.
But let's zoom out.
It's when we zoom out that we all of a sudden start to see what we were hearing before.
You can see the beats now in the wave form.
Those are the throbbing, waving, those are the acoustic phenomenon that we're talking
about.
That's the dissonance.
So let's find out how the math explains what it is that we're hearing.
In order to see that, let's look at the right side.
Now the right side of the equation has the sine of 445 T times 2 pi and that looks like
this.
But the cosine of 5T times 2 pi has a much longer wavelength that looks like this.
Now let's think about what happens when we multiply them.
You see when we multiply them, it's almost like the cosine becomes an envelope and the
sine wave fits into that envelope.
If you think about it, the sine wave is going back and forth between plus and minus 1.
And when it gets to plus 1 and we multiply by the cosine, we're just getting the value
of the cosine.
And when it goes to minus 1 and we multiply by the cosine, we're just getting the negative
of the value of the cosine.
And that's why this function appears to be just wavering back and forth inside the cosine
envelope.
The cosine term is the one producing the beats.
And that's telling us how fast the beats are.
So let's look closer at that.
On the right side, we have 2 times the sine of 445 times the cosine of 5.
And it's the cosine of 5 5T times 2 pi that's giving us these beats.
Let's listen to that in this particular case.
And if we look at the waveform and if we look closely at the scale, we see that in every
second there's 10 beats.
It's 10 beats per second.
Now if we change the notes a little bit, let's take a 444 hertz and a 440 hertz tone and
let's hear what those sound like.
And you could actually count it with your watch or you could look at this waveform and look
at one second of that.
And what you can see is there are 4 beats per second in that.
So once we've seen a couple of these examples, I think we're ready to make a conjecture.
That's the mathematician's term for a good, solid, educated guess.
When we had 450 and 440, we got 10 beats per second.
When we were at 444 and 440, we got 4 beats per second.
So the conjecture should be that if we have A and B, where A is a little bit bigger than
B, we should get A minus B beats per second.
Why?
Because of the B equation.
So but if we look at that B equation, the right side has the cosine of A minus B divided
by 2 times 2 pi.
So you might ask yourself, why are we hearing A minus B beats per second?
The frequency we just guessed was A minus B, but it looks from the formula like it should
be A minus B over 2.
So why the difference here?
To understand this, we have to look back at the cosine.
You see, the cosine has a frequency of A minus B over 2.
That's true.
And it goes down and back up just like this.
Every full wavelength of the cosine has to go down and back up.
But when it does that, that single wave form, that single wavelength of the cosine produces
two beats.
And so the sound is beating twice during one full cycle of the cosine.
And so that tells us that our conjecture was correct.
It's not A minus B over 2 like the cosine would indicate.
It's double that.
And so our conjecture is correct and we get a beat frequency of A minus B.
Now let's also look at what happens when A is equal to B. Let's suppose that A and B
are exactly the same and they're equal to some frequency F.
Then on the right side of the equation, we have 2 times the sine of the average, well
the average of F and F is just F, times the cosine of half the difference.
But the difference is zero.
And if you remember from your trigonometry class, the cosine of zero is just one.
Remember the cosine is the x-coordinate on the unit circle.
So if the angle is zero, the point on the unit circle is one comma zero and the x-coordinate
is one.
And so the cosine of zero is equal to one.
The cosine just disappears and what we get is 2 times the sine of Ft times 2 pi.
It's just the original sine wave doubled.
And in fact, if you look at the beat equation, that's what we get on the left side as well.
We get the sine of F plus the sine of F, we just get 2 times that.
Well, enough about this math theory and all of these theories of beats.
It's not just a mathematical exercise, it turns out these beats are really useful.
So let's see how they're used.
Now we know from last lecture, lecture five, that subtle changes in pitches have led to
big changes in composition.
In practice, how exactly do you make subtle changes in pitch?
Well, the modern way to do it is to have an electronic tuner that tells you how you're
making these small changes.
But historically, we didn't have those tuners.
How did they make these subtle changes?
The answer is using beats.
In order to see this, we have to go over to the piano and do a little bit of piano tuning.
So in order to tune a piano, we need some tools here.
Here's my tuning lever and we also need some things called mutes.
Let's see if we have some of these.
Let's see.
There's two.
I think I'm going to need two more.
So here we have four mutes and these are going to be used to dampen some of the vibrations
that we're going to see.
Now let's look at this.
Let's look at an A. Here's the 440A.
Let's look at a 220A.
That's right here.
That sounds pretty bad.
Now if you look really closely inside the piano here, there's actually three strings
that we have on a lot of these notes.
Down here, there's two strings and down here, there's one string.
But on this particular A, there's three strings and I don't want to hear all three of them.
I want to hear just two of them.
So let's hear these two.
Now those two are definitely out of tune.
And in fact, if you listen closely, you can hear that it's beating.
Those beats are pretty fast and what you do when you tune a piano is you put this lever
on the end of the string and you slowly tighten or loosen it.
If you remember back to lecture one, lecture one we talked about how the tension on the
string affects the frequency.
And so if I adjust this lever, I'm pulling it a little bit tighter and letting go.
I'm changing the tension and that's changing exactly the frequency it's vibrating at.
Now these two strings that we have here are a little bit out of tune.
And as I adjust the lever, you can actually hear the beats.
And just like on the violin, as the two frequencies get closer, the beats slow down and when I
finally get these two exactly in tune, the beats go completely away.
So again, we have three strings here and I'm only hearing the left two because I've muted
the one on the right.
And here's what it sounds like.
And now I'll try to tune this from out of tune to in tune.
If you listen closely, you can hear, wow, wow, wow, wow, wow, those are the beats.
It still has beats.
And when I finally get in tune, then the two frequencies are equal, A equals B and then
all of a sudden our equation simplifies.
You just get two copies of the sign.
That's what we're looking for when we tune a piano.
We're looking to get notes that exactly match up.
These are called tuning a unison when we have two strings that are supposed to be at exactly
the same frequency.
And that's what we're hearing.
We're hearing tuning a unison and we're using beats to do it.
And as those notes get closer and closer, the beats slow down and finally when they match
up, the beats are gone.
Let's see if we can hear this on a violin because one of the surprising things is so
far we've heard that if you play two notes that are really close in frequency, your brain
is hearing the right side of this equation.
You hear these beats.
And we've also heard that if A and B are far apart, your brain hears the left side and
hears two notes.
But actually, you can hear beats when you play an octave out of tune.
Let's hear these.
I'm going to play an octave.
G and here's a G and octave above it.
And if I play those, I'm going to play those a little bit out of tune.
Listen closely and you'll hear the beats.
And again, as I get them closer and closer to in tune, you can hear the beats slow down.
And when I get them exactly in tune, it sounds almost like it's a single note, even though
I'm playing octaves.
Let's hear these beats on a piano.
So on the piano, I'm going to play an A here at 440 and another A down here at 220.
And in order to hear this really clearly, we want to hear just one of the strings of
each of them.
So on the 440 A, I'm going to use these mutes to dampen the outside strings.
And now when I play the A, we're only hearing the middle of these three strings.
I'm going to do the same thing down here on this A. So now I've damped the outside ones
and we're only hearing the middle string here.
I'm going to move my tuning lever so that I'm turning and tightening and loosening the
middle string on the lower octave.
And now let's play the octave.
That sounds fairly good.
If we pull this out of tune, let's hear what it sounds like.
You can hear the beats.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
Let's hear it again.
And now I'm going to slowly increase the frequency by increasing the tension on the lower one.
And you're going to hear the beats slow down and finally disappear.
And if I go too far, we get beats again.
You can really hear the frequency of those, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
Let me bring that back down to in tune.
And when they're in tune, the beats disappear.
So why are we hearing beats?
Remember, we thought that when the frequencies were really close, we would hear beats.
We would hear the right side of the equation.
But when we were playing two notes that were further apart, we wouldn't hear beats.
We're playing notes that are very far apart.
In fact, they're octaves.
They're about double.
One frequency is double the other.
So why is it that we're hearing beats?
Somehow it seems like the beat equation doesn't really explain this.
You see, if we played a note that was, say, at 442 hertz and another note at 220, now
those are about an A, but the A is a little sharp.
The 440 would be the correct one.
So it's an A4, which is a little sharp, and the 220 is the correct A3.
If we play those together, the beat equation tells us that we should hear the difference
between them.
We should hear 222 beats per second if we were hearing the right side of the equation.
Now we're not hearing the right side of the equation.
We're hearing the left side of the equation.
We're hearing two notes.
So why is it that we're hearing beats?
We definitely did not count out 222 beats per second.
We counted out something much slower than that.
In order to understand this, we have to go back to the overtone series.
You see, if you're playing one note at 220 hertz, you're hearing its overtones, all the
multiples of 220, 440, 660, 880.
If you're playing the higher note, 442, you're hearing its overtones, 884, 1326, all of the
multiples of 442.
The beats aren't coming from the fundamentals, which are 200-some hertz apart.
The beats are coming from one of the harmonics of the lower A and the fundamental of the
higher A. One of the harmonics of the lower A is at 440 hertz.
The fundamental of the higher A is at 442.
You're hearing both of those frequencies, and so you are actually hearing two frequencies
that are very close together, and because of those frequencies, you're hearing beats.
How frequent are those beats?
Well, let's go back to the beat equation.
If it's 440 and 442, you should hear two beats per second.
And so if I had tuned the piano strings exactly to 220 and 442, you should hear two beats
per second.
Now this problem of beats, when you play notes far apart, it doesn't just happen with octaves.
It also happens with other intervals.
The key observation is that if two of the overtones of two notes are close, we're going
to hear beats.
Let's look at a fifth.
So a 440 hertz A, that's a correctly tuned A in the modern times, and a note at 293 hertz
is pretty close to a D. Remember, D here, the A is the fifth note on the D major scale,
and that's why that's an interval of a fifth.
Let's look at the overtones that we're going to hear, the harmonics and the overtones of
these notes.
If we play a 440, we're going to hear the fundamental at 440, we're going to hear the
second harmonic, the first overtone at 880, and then 1320 and then 1760.
For the note that's really close to a D, the 293, we're going to hear its multiples as
well.
Its second harmonic, its first overtone is going to be 586, the next one is going to
be 879, ah, the 879 is going to be very close to the 880 that we had as the first overtone
of the 440 A. So if we were to play these two notes, you would hear both of these overtones,
these harmonics, and you would produce beats from that.
We can ask a mathematical question here, what frequency should we put the D at in order to
completely eliminate these beats?
So let's see if we can solve that problem.
Suppose we put that D instead of at 293 hertz, let's put it just at x hertz, and now let's
figure out what x should be in order to get a nice consonant sound and eliminate the beats.
Now if we play something at x, we know its overtones are going to be multiples, 2x, 3x,
4x, and it's the 3x that we want to try to match up with the 880, the first overtone
of the A. That gives us an equation to work with.
It tells us that 3x should equal 880, that's an equation we could have solved a long time
ago, probably in middle school.
We divide both sides by 3, and we get that we should put x, we should put the frequency
of this D at 279 and one-third hertz.
Let's just check our work.
We remember that a fifth, a perfect fifth, should have a ratio of 3 to 2.
So if we take 440 hertz and divide by the lower frequency, which is 293 and a third,
if we do that math, we do indeed get 3 halves.
That is a perfect fifth.
Let's see if we can hear these on a violin.
As we get to these other intervals, the effect becomes much and more subtle, but it is sort
of a familiar sound.
When you hear somebody tuning up, the violin gets an A from the oboe, or maybe the piano
if it's just a violin piano piece, and gets the A and tunes that, and the next thing
a violinist will do is tune the D. Remember the A and the D, that's a fifth.
So now I'm going to play my A and my D string.
And one of the things a violinist is doing is listening for the dissonance between those
until it's gone.
Really you're listening for the beats in there until they're gone.
Now most notes on a violin can be adjusted on the fly, so it's really no problem if I'm
playing this note, I can change it.
While I'm playing it, but these open strings, these have to be tuned fixed.
And remember that tuning problems weren't just for pianos, and so violinists should
actually tune their fifths to be slightly tighter, just like they were on a piano.
Let's see what it's like tuning fifths on a piano.
Ah, good.
We have the A set at a nice 440, and now we're going to look at tuning the D. Now here's
the D, again the D has three strings, and I'm so I'm going to take mutes to dampen the
outside ones, and now the D should just be the middle string.
When I play those together, we get this, and now I'm going to tune the D, and I'm going
to tune it up and down, and let's listen for the beats that we should be getting.
You can definitely hear the dissonance in this, you might be able to hear the beats,
but let's see if we can hear this a little clearer.
When I'm doing this exercise with students, one of the things I have them do is I have
them come over and touch the piano.
When I play this, you can actually feel the beats a little bit better than you can hear
them.
Now what we just calculated is that if we want a Pythagorean or a just tuned tuning system,
if we want this fifth to be perfect, we should aim the D for 293 1 3rd Hertz, and that means
aiming it for perfect fifths, so that there are no beats at all.
Let's listen, see if we can do that.
You can hear I went too far, let's bring it back down a little bit.
That sounds pretty good.
Now that was a Pythagorean or a just tuned system, but this is a modern piano.
We don't want the fifths to be perfectly in tune.
Remember we needed the fifths to be slightly narrower, we needed the ratio to not be three
halves, but this irrational number that we came up with, two to the seven twelfths.
How should we tune this?
What we're going to do is we're going to use math to figure out the frequency for the D,
what it should be, and then we're going to use that and the beat equation to figure out
how fast the beats should be when we play that D with a 440A, and then we're going to
use that to tune the D. Let's do that.
The first step is to find the frequency for a correctly tuned equal-tempered D. That means
adjusting the fifths so that the octaves will work out when we get to the top, spreading
that Pythagorean comma completely evenly around all of the fifths.
Remember the half steps were tuned to two to the one twelfth, and the fifths, that's
seven half steps, were tuned to a ratio of two to the seven twelfths.
So if the A is tuned to 440, then the D should be tuned to some number Z, some frequency
Z, so that Z times two to the seven twelfths is exactly 440.
We can solve that equation.
We divide both sides by two to the seven twelfths, and then we can use a calculator, and what
you get is that the D should be tuned approximately to 293.66 Hertz.
So the next step is for us to figure out how fast the beats will be if we tune it exactly
that.
So if we play the 440A, we'll hear all of its overtones, including the pure 880.
If we play a note, the D, the equal-tempered D, at 293.66 Hertz, then we know its overtones
are just going to be multiples of it.
And the second overtone, the third harmonic, is going to be at approximately 880.99 Hertz.
Now we can use the beat equation to tell us how frequently the beats should be.
So the beat equation told us that the difference between those was going to give the frequency
of the beats.
And so the difference between 880.99 and the 880 first overtone of the A is going to
be about 0.99, just a hair under one beat per second.
So all of this is telling us if we want equal-tempered fifths, we should tune the fifths so that they're
not perfect, but they're narrow just enough so that we hear one beat per second.
So let's go here on the piano and see if we can tune the D in this equal-tempered way.
So here's the A at 440 Hertz.
And here's the D that we tuned perfectly at 293 and a third Hertz.
And now in order to tune this piano, this particular interval in an equal-tempered way,
we're going to have to make the D a little bit sharp.
How much sharp?
Enough so that we hear just about one beat per second.
Let's listen.
Can you hear those beats?
That's definitely faster than one beat per second.
That sounds about like one beat per second.
One of the things that piano tuners do, a really classically trained, probably an older
piano tuner, they could tune a piano with just an old-school watch and they could just
watch the second's beat and they would count beats like that.
But essentially, you now know everything you need to know in order to tune a piano.
You tune the fifths in this way.
Now you have to be careful.
It's not that every fifth has just one beat per second.
You actually have to go back and do the calculations and figure out how many beats for each one
of the fifths because it changes as you go from the bottom to the top, again, because
it's multiplicative.
But you do this process.
You can tune the fifths by calculating them, figuring out how many beats, and tuning them
exactly like that.
And then you tune the octaves perfectly.
It's a little bit more complicated because you have these multiple strings.
And once you've tuned one string, you have to remove the mutes and make sure the other
strings on that particular key are tuned exactly the same.
You have to tune what's called unisons again.
Now I have to give you some disclaimers about this.
This isn't exactly how piano tuners do this.
Among other things, they don't go on the side and figure out the math every time and then
come back and tune a fifth.
Many of them use electronic tuners.
And in fact, some of them don't tune in equal-tempered manner.
Some performers don't want their pianos tuned in an equal-tempered way if they're playing
a particular piece.
Piano tuners also have these really interesting rules of thumb.
For instance, the one that I find really funny is if they're listening for something that's
seven beats per second, instead of using a watch and counting out wah-wah-wah-wah, counting
out seven per second, some of them will use the phrase from Chicago to New York.
And if you say the phrase from Chicago to New York in a single second, then that's telling
you how fast the beat should be, because from Chicago to New York has seven syllables in
it.
A lot of piano tuners, instead of tuning the fifths, will actually have a very specific
sequence of intervals to check.
And it's not just fifths.
A lot of times they'll tune something and they'll tune it with another interval and
they'll be checking to make sure that one beats slightly faster than the other, or one beats
slightly slower.
That's another thing that piano tuners will do.
Instead of actually counting the beats per second, they'll just compare them with other
ones that they've already tuned, so that they would know that one interval should have beats
just a little bit faster or just a little bit slower than another interval.
Also, I want to admit that the mathematics we've talked about here is a little bit off,
and it's off for a very interesting reason.
See, the widths of these strings, these strings inside the piano are actually coiled, and
that changes things.
The coiling of the strings actually takes the overtones slightly sharp.
If you remember back to the mathematical models we were talking about in lecture one, when
we talked about those models, we assumed that the strings were infinitely thin, and only
under those conditions were the overtones exactly at multiples.
When you take into effect that these strings are coiled, then, for instance, if you play
a 400 hertz fundamental note, the first harmonic, the second harmonic, the first overtone, is
not at 800 hertz, it's a little bit higher than 800 hertz, and piano tuners have to take
into account this, this effect, and they do it in a really subtle way.
You see, because the overtones are a little bit high, piano tuners have to do the following,
and you can sort of think about it on the piano here.
You see, in the middle of the piano here, they're tuning things just fine, but then,
say the overtone of this note is going to be a little bit too high, higher than the
math would first predict, and so, when they get to these higher notes, they have to take
those frequencies up a little bit, and this is called the stretching, and when you go
back down the other way, you want to make sure that the frequencies that you hear when
you play a lower note exactly match up here, but the overtones of the lower note are stretched
that are a little bit too high, and so you bring the frequencies on the left side a little
bit down.
Tuning this gives you what's called the stretch of a piano, and this tells you that really
piano tuning is really an incredible art.
It's not so much of a science, although science certainly goes into it.
The really great piano tuners are tuning by ear, not by electronic tuner, and it's not
just about tuning, it actually matters when you play the music, and so, let's go and let's
listen to some music and talk about the implications of all these beats and this tuning on music.
So remember that the overtones included things like the octave, the fifth, the fourth.
Musicians call these perfect intervals.
When you play these intervals, it requires greater precision.
If you play them a little bit out of tune, you're going to hear beats.
Think back to the opening music when I was playing the slower part of the chaconne.
Some of the intervals, the tuning wasn't as crucial.
It was the octaves.
I played an octave, and it was very crucial that I get those exactly in tune.
The same is true of the other open intervals, the fourths and the fifths, and this happens
on almost all instruments.
You want to make sure that your octaves, your fourths, and your fifths are exactly in tune
because if they're not quite in tune, you're going to hear beats because the overtones
of those should exactly match up, and if they don't, you're going to hear beats.
This becomes really important in some music, so let's hear an example on brass instruments.
Aaron Copeland was an American composer.
He lived from 1900 to 1990.
He was born in Brooklyn.
His parents were Lithuanian-Polish Jews, and he wrote a lot of music evoking the American
spirit, the wide open Western landscape, and one of the ways he got that sort of open feeling
was by using open chords, these octaves, the fourths, the fifths, the perfect intervals
that we were just talking about.
A great example of this comes from 1942.
He wrote a piece called The Fanfare for the Common Man.
He wrote it for the Cincinnati Symphony, and it premiered in March of 1943.
It was inspired by Vice President Henry Wallace's speech, Century for the Common Man.
When you listen to this, you're going to hear many perfect intervals.
You're going to hear a lot of these fourths, fifths, octaves, these open chords.
We hope that the musicians who are playing this practiced for hours to get those exactly
in tune because if they're not exactly in tune, you're going to hear dissonance.
You're going to hear beats, and one of the things they're practicing to do is to avoid
play the timpani part.
So let's see what we've learned to this point in this talk.
When you play two frequencies that are very close but not equal, you hear dissonance,
you hear these beats.
These are predicted by mathematics, it's trigonometry, and we can use this phenomenon
in piano tuning, and we try to avoid this phenomenon in performance.
Now usually we're ending these talks with a musical coda.
Today we're going to end this with a mathematical coda.
Now virtually everything we've done today relies on the single equation, the beat equation.
In most lectures that we're talking about, the mathematics would take far too long to
derive.
Think about the Fourier transform.
It would take semesters.
Today is the exception.
All you need to understand this trigonometry, this trigonometric formula, is some of the
trigonometry you probably saw in high school.
Now if you were turned off by the abstractness of trigonometry back then, and you weren't
alone, now is your chance to really appreciate the meaning of trig in the context of music.
Let's take these last few minutes and prove the beat equation.
Here's the beat equation, and the things we need to remember in order to prove this are
that the sine is equal to the opposite over the hypotenuse of a right triangle.
If you happen to be on a circle of radius one called the unit circle, then the hypotenuse
is one, and then the sine is just the opposite, the length of the opposite, the y value, and
the cosine is just the length of the adjacent, the x value.
We also have to remember that cosine is an even function.
That tells us that cosine of negative x is equal to cosine of x, and sine is an odd function.
That tells us that the sine of negative x is equal to negative sine of x.
The last thing we have to remember is that the sum of the angles in a triangle is 180
degrees.
So let's see if we can do the proof of this beat formula.
Before we get to the actual proof, let's simplify the formula we're trying to prove
with a little bit of algebra.
You see, on the right side we have the average of a and b, and we also have half the difference.
Let's change variables to simplify that.
Let's let u equal a plus b over 2, the average, and let v be a minus b over 2, half the difference.
When we do this, then when we add u and v, the b over 2s cancel, and we just get a, and
when we subtract, when we take u minus v, the a over 2s cancel, and we just get b.
When we plug those into our formula, the beat formula is equivalent to, in u and v, the
sine of u plus v plus the sine of u minus v equals 2 times the sine of u times the cosine
of v.
We're actually first going to prove a formula for this left side.
We're going to prove what's called the sine of the sum formula.
The sine of u plus v is equal to sine of u cosine v plus cosine u sine v.
After we prove it, we're going to use it twice.
Let's just use it now, and we'll come back and prove it later.
We use it twice on the left side.
We have the sine of u plus v.
We can use this formula and write out what it equals.
We have the sine of u minus v.
We can use the formula and see what it equals.
And now we can use the even and odd formulas for cosine and sine to simplify the right
side.
When we do that, we see that these two terms cancel.
The other two terms are identical and just add, and so we see that we just get 2 times
the sine of u times the cosine of v, and that's what we were trying to get.
Now let's see if we can prove the sine of the sum formula.
That's the last thing.
If we prove that, we've proven the beat equation.
To do that, we need an angle u and an angle v.
So let's put the angle u on the bottom and put the angle v on top of that.
And let's measure out one unit on the top ray, and let's call that point b.
Now the sine of u plus v should be the y-coordinate of b because the hypotenuse is 1 here.
So we're really looking now to figure out how far is b away from the x-axis.
That's the y-coordinate of b.
In order to see this, we need to draw a few lines.
Let's draw the perpendicular to the middle ray from b, and we'll call that c.
And now at c, we'll draw a vertical line through c, and we'll also look at b and draw a horizontal
line through b.
That vertical and horizontal line, they intersect.
Let's call that e, and the vertical line hits the axis.
Let's call that d.
And now let's examine this picture.
Remember that what we're looking for is the y-value of b, the distance from b to the axis.
And that is just the length of ed.
You can see that ed is split into two pieces.
The bottom part is dc, and the top part is ce.
In order to figure those lengths, let's first look at the right triangle, abc.
Now the right angle here is at c, and the hypotenuse is ab.
That's just 1.
And therefore ac has length cosine of v, it's the adjacent, and bc has length sine of v.
Now let's look at triangle adc.
The angle there is u, and the sine of u is going to be the length cd, the opposite, over
the hypotenuse ac.
We figured out that ac was the cosine of v, and now we can multiply both sides by cosine
of v, and we've solved for cd, it's sine of u cosine v.
We're halfway there, we got the bottom part of the line segment, and now we have to get
the top part, ec.
To get ec, first we want to figure out what angle is at bce.
To see that, there are three angles meeting right here at c.
One of them is 90 degrees, which tells you the other two must add to 90.
We call those complementary angles.
Now we know another pair of complementary angles, it's these two.
With the right angle at d, though three of these angles have to add to 180, but the right
angle is at d, and so these two angles also have to add to 90.
Well if this pair adds to 90, and this pair also adds to 90, these two must be the same,
and that tells you that the angle right here at bce is actually equal to u.
Let's use that to get ce.
Now we know the length of bc, that's sine of v, and we know the angle right here, so
let's look at that triangle.
The cosine of u should be the adjacent ec over bc.
That's ec over the sine of v, and when we multiply both sides by sine of v, we get ec.
We get ec is the cosine of u times the sine of v, and that really completes it.
You see the sine of u plus v should be the y-coordinate of b, that's the length ed,
that's split into two pieces, and now we've solved for the lengths of both of those.
With just a few trigonometric facts and some basic geometry, we finished the beat formula,
we proved it.
Now even if you didn't follow the proof, you can see what it shows.
It implies that when two notes are just slightly out of tune, we should get this discordant
sound, we should get dissonance, we should get beats.
It tells us why musicians have to be more careful with some of the intervals than others,
like the slow part of the chacon that I played at the beginning.
It shows us how piano tuners use this dissonance, finding ways to tune pianos in an equal tempered
system, that system that solved the piano tuning problem.
Now next time, we're going to look at probably the most obvious connection between math and
music, rhythm.
Thanks for joining us.
