.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
That was a Canon by Bach.
By the end of today's lecture, I hope that you'll hear this piece completely differently
by understanding the underlying mathematical structure to it.
So far, we've been talking about the mathematics of the musical experience, and we started
understanding a single note and varying its pitch, and then we combined notes into chords
and scales, and finally we added rhythm.
That means we're finally ready to start composing music.
Today we're going to talk about parallels between transformations that are musical and
those that are mathematical, and how they bring structural beauty to actually both of
these subjects.
What is a transformation?
Well, a transformation is a process by which an expression is converted into another that
is equivalent in some important respects, but differently expressed or represented.
So something stays the same, but something has changed.
The main point today is an analogy that transformations add beautiful structure to both mathematics
and to music.
I personally think that this analogy may account for some of the psychological, some of maybe
even the neurological connections between mathematics and music.
Today we're going to go back and forth between many different strands.
We're going to talk about geometrical transformations.
We're going to talk about functional transformations.
We'll talk about musical transformations, and we'll also talk about box use of these transformations.
Along the way, the branch of mathematics that we're going to use today is called group theory,
and there's a wonderful little coda for today.
We're going to play for you a table cannon that illustrates many of these ideas incredibly
well.
Why are we looking with this analogy instead of doing what mathematics is actually used
explicitly?
Well, Gottfried Leibniz, he was a philosopher and a mathematician.
He was one of the co-inventors of calculus along with Isaac Newton.
This is what he said about math and music.
He said, music is a secret exercise in arithmetic of the soul, unaware of its active counting.
Such a great quote.
Music is a secret exercise in arithmetic of the soul, unaware of its active counting.
I think what he means is something like this, that music uses many different mathematical
structures, but those structures are hidden.
They're implicit.
They're not explicit.
Now last time, we were dealing with an explicit use of mathematics in music.
Even the words we use to describe rhythm are highly mathematical.
Today, instead of looking at explicit uses, we're going to be unpacking the implicit
mathematics that Leibniz is talking about, that he says is hiding inside the music.
We're going to talk about musical transformations and their connection to the mathematics of
group theory.
First, let's hear an example of a musical transformation.
So the first piece I ever learned was twinkle, and it sounds like this.
And let's look at a transformation of that.
This musical transformation is called an inversion, and we're going to flip that melody upside
down.
It was supposed to go up, I will now go down, and it sounds then like this.
And we're going to hear lots more of these musical inversions as we go along.
To understand these musical transformations, let's look at geometrical and functional
transformations first.
Probably the simplest transformations we could talk about would probably be geometrical.
So think about a figure in the plane.
It could be any figure.
The point is not the figure, but how we transform it.
And now let's let R sub x be the reflection over the x-axis.
That's actually very similar to the musical inversion we just played, which is flipping
it this way.
So we have two transformations here.
We could either reflect it over the x-axis, or we could do nothing.
We could leave it where it is, and we need a name for that, and let's call that zero
or the identity, or the do nothing transformation.
And we also need to talk about operations, and the operation here is going to be one
followed by the next.
You do one transformation, and then you do another transformation, and you see what the
net result is.
Interestingly in mathematics, they actually call that compositions, composition of transformations.
So let's look at this geometrical transformation.
We have two transformations.
We have the do nothing transformation, and we have the reflection transformation.
And what we're doing to do is one after another.
If we do nothing and then do nothing again, the net result is doing nothing.
If we do nothing and then reflect, then the net result is just a reflection.
If we reflect and then do nothing, we just get the reflection.
But if we do a reflection and then reflect again, the net result is just the do nothing
transformation.
The end result is the same as if we had just done the single transformation, do nothing.
So now we have two transformations.
We have a set of transformations, just two of them that do nothing, the identity, and
the reflection.
And the operation is doing one followed by the next.
We can actually write out what's called a group table.
It's an array listing all of the possible outcomes from this operation.
Now for us, we have two transformations.
We have two inputs, and two inputs, and two inputs for the other one.
That gives us outputs that form a two by two table.
Now let's look at some functional transformations that are actually really similar.
If you take a function, you might graphic, but you might just think of it as a function,
like f of x.
And the identity transformation would be to do nothing.
But we could also do a negation.
We could take f of x, and instead of just leaving it as f of x, we could look at negative
f of x.
If you're thinking about this in terms of the representation of the graph, it actually
flips the function over the x-axis.
And so now we have two transformations on functions.
We have the do nothing transformation, leave it the same, or the negation transformation,
where you put a minus sign in front of it.
Again the operation is composition, so we could do nothing and then we could take the
negation.
Or we could take the negation and then do nothing.
Now of all of the four possible pairings, only one of them is really interesting.
If we take the negation and then the negation again, we get back to the identity.
We get back to the do nothing.
Actually that would be if we flip it over the axis and then flip it again, we're back
to where we started.
Now as before, the do nothing transformation is the identity.
And as before, the negation is its own inverse.
That's the one where if you negate it and then negate it again, you get back to the
identity, the do nothing transformation.
Again, I want to be clear, the transformations here aren't the graphs, but it's how the graph
is changing.
The transformation isn't the picture, but how the picture changes.
Let's look at a numerical example now.
Let's think about addition on odd and even numbers.
Not the individual numbers, but let's think about the set of the evens and the odd.
So we just have two things in our set, all of the evens and all of the odds.
The operation we're going to work with here is addition.
And we can construct a group table for this.
If you take even numbers plus even numbers, you get even numbers.
If you take an even numbers plus odd numbers, the result of any one of those is going to
be odd number.
If you take an odd plus an even, you get odd.
And finally, if you take an odd plus an odd, you get even.
The identity here is even, because it operates on all of the other elements without changing
it.
If you take something and add an even, you get that something back again.
If we think about inverses, both evens and odds are their own inverse, because again,
we figured out that even is the identity.
And so you're asking the question, if we have an even, what should we add to it to get
an even?
The answer is an even.
If we ask that question with an odd, if we have an odd, what should we add to that to
get an even?
The answer is an odd.
Let's look at another way to write this.
Mathematicians call this group Z2, and we think of it as addition modulo 2.
What you should really think about is, if you divide by 2, what is the remainder?
Because the remainder is always either 0 or 1.
It's 0 if it's even.
It's 1 if it's odd.
And so when we write it this way, 0 stands for all of the even numbers, because you always
get a remainder 0.
And 1 stands for all of the odd numbers, because that's always the remainder when you divide
by 2.
When we construct a table for that, it looks like this.
And the only thing that looks weird in this table that's not the standard addition we
know is that 1 plus 1 is now 0.
That's because 1 plus 1 is 2, but the remainder when we divide by 2 is 0.
And that's why 1 plus 1 is 0 when you're looking in Z2.
Now in this particular group, the identity here is 0.
If you take anything and add 0, you're going to get that thing back again.
And again, each one of these elements is its own inverse.
0 plus 0 is the identity, 0.
And 1 plus 1 is also the identity, 0.
Let's turn to a musical example now.
We could have no change in a melody, and that would be the identity transformation.
Or we could do the inversion, what we heard earlier.
So here's a melody, and this is a melody we're going to talk about a lot today.
So that's a nice melody.
We invert it, here's what we get.
And we can think about this as a group, because now we have two transformations.
We have the do nothing transformation, or this inversion.
And now we can, the operation here is to do one after another.
And we can look at the structure of this group.
We can figure out what its table looks like.
Now we need to remember that we're not looking at the melody itself.
We're looking at how the transformation changes this melody.
So let's construct this table.
Now some of the outputs are obvious.
If you do nothing and then do nothing, you've done nothing.
If you do nothing and then an inversion, that's just an inversion.
A little bit trickier is if you do an inversion and then do another inversion, you get back
to the identity.
You get back to the do nothing transformation.
Now you've probably noticed that all of the group tables we've looked at, they're all
very similar.
Mathematicians would say they're all copies of Z2.
They're all what we would call isomorphic.
Before we get to more of that, let's look at how composers use musical transformations
when they're composing music.
In particular, we're going to talk a lot today about Bach and how he used these transformations.
The piece that we're going to talk about today, a lot, is Johann Sebastian Bach's Fourteen
Cannons on the Goldberg Ground.
Fourteen Cannons.
So these are 14 individual pieces.
The 14th Canon is actually what we played at the beginning of today's lecture.
The number is BWV1087 in Wolfgang Schmieder's system.
These were not found until 1974.
A copy of these 14 Cannons was found in an original copy of the Goldberg variations that
Bach owned at one point.
We know that they're actually Bach because a couple of these Cannons appeared elsewhere
before that.
These are some of the really brilliant fugues in Cannons that Bach wrote that have incredible
mathematical structure to them.
There are these 14 Cannons, and each one is compactly written using transformations.
These are simple yet beautiful.
I think the proper way to view these is that some of these, some of the early ones especially,
are sort of studies where Bach is studying this simple melody and figuring out how to
use it, how it fits with itself in different transformations.
Those are stepping stones into more complicated Cannons, and throughout the 14 Cannons, every
once in a while there's a much more complicated Canon, which is more like what we think of
as beautiful, complicated music.
But I think because of this, we actually get a lot of insight into how Bach put puzzle
pieces together and how he used transformations to do that.
And I think you'll agree once we learn about these, that this process that he uses has
a highly mathematical flavor to it.
So the 14 Cannons are all on a single sheet of music.
It's six, it's six maybe seven minutes of music, all on the single sheet.
It's written with brilliant cleverness, and the ideas underlying it are very similar to
group theory.
Now today we're going to talk about the first five Cannons, and we're also going to skip
and talk about the 14th Canon, the one you heard at the very beginning.
Now these Cannons are based on a line from an aria.
It's the aria from the Goldberg Variations, and that's where this piece gets its name.
You heard it a minute ago.
I'll play it for you again.
And now we've talked about many of the different transformations.
The one we're going to talk about now is this inversion.
And so geometrically it's flipping something over the axis.
Functionally it's multiplying by a negative sign, and musically it's flipping it up where
all the intervals before when they went down are now going up, and it sounds like this.
And now Bach puts these together, the do nothing transformation, the original melody, and the
inverted melody.
And he delays one by four beats, and then he repeats it.
So let's listen to Canon 3 and see exactly how he does this.
You see, Bach used this inversion.
He was sending a message to the musicians to play this inverted, and the way he did
that, is he wrote both parts on a single staff, but he put a second clef.
And the clue to the second clef is actually where the sharp is placed.
It's placed in an odd place, and that sharp only makes sense if it's read upside down,
if it's read inverted.
So let's listen, and what we'll hear is the melody first, and on the second time in the
melody the inversion starts, four notes after the melody starts.
Let's listen to that.
That's, let's listen to a different transformation.
Instead of inversion playing thing upside down, there's another transformation that
plays a melody backwards, and this is called retrograde.
So let's go back to twinkle, twinkle, and listen to that.
So again the melody of twinkle, twinkle is this, and the inversion that we've already
heard is the, the transformation we've already heard is the inversion.
But now let's take the original twinkle melody and play it retrograde, back to front, starting
at the end of the melody and working back forwards, and then it sounds like this.
If you remember back, when we talked about the definition of transformation, something
was the same, but something was changed.
Some aspect is the same, some aspect has changed, and I think you hear that in these transformations
of melodies, that there's some element of the original melody there, but something else
has changed.
So let's see if we can write this out in a group table.
We have two transformations here.
We have the original, and then we have retrograde.
So the original, so the, the, the trivial transformation is do nothing transformation, and then the
other transformation we're working with is the retrograde, to play something backwards.
When we fill out the group table, most of the entries are fairly straightforward, but
one of them is interesting.
The retrograde followed by the retrograde, if you play something backwards and then
play that backwards, you get back to the original.
So the retrograde composed with the retrograde is back to the original, the trivial, the
identity transformation.
The corresponding transformations in geometry are reflecting around the y-axis instead of
the x-axis.
And in terms of functions, instead of looking at negative f of x, this transformation is
looking at f of negative x.
If you think about the graph, that's also flipping it over the y-axis.
The structure of the tables related to these transformations is exactly the same as we've
seen before.
These are just more representations of Z2.
So how did Bach use this retrograde transformation?
In order to understand that, let's go back to the Goldberg theme.
So the theme again is this.
And if we play that retrograde back to front, it sounds like this.
Bach puts these together in Canon 1.
And so let's listen to that.
We're going to hear the theme twice and then the retrograde.
And then he's going to play them together.
So again, Bach is using these transformations as sort of a trick because he's writing all
of the music on a single staff, but he gives a clue to the musicians.
You see, there's a second clef at the end and it's backwards.
And that's the indication that the second player is supposed to play retrograde.
Both parts are on the same staff, but you hear it as a duet.
So let's listen to that.
Now there's another question we could ask.
Can we do both the retrograde and the inversion?
What would that table look like?
Is that a group?
Well, let's see.
We would have the trivial transformation, the do nothing transformation.
That's just the original melody.
We would have the inversion reflecting it over the x-axis and we'd have the retrograde
playing it backwards.
Maybe there's a three element group in there.
Maybe we could write out the table for that.
But when we try to, there's a problem here.
You see, if we play something retrograde and then invert it, that's not a transformation
that we have.
We can't complete the table because we don't have a name for that.
Mathematically, what we would say is that this operation is not closed.
We don't have a transformation that does that.
Now we could fix that.
We could add an element which is exactly this thing.
And that, musically, is called the retrograde inversion, backwards and upside down.
So let's go back to twinkle twinkle.
Here's twinkle twinkle again.
If we now do the retrograde inversion to that, we're playing it backwards and upside
down.
It sounds like this.
So let's look at how Bach used this new transformation, this retrograde inversion in his music.
In Canon 2, Bach puts together not the original melody but an inversion of the melody and
then he adds the retrograde inversion.
And so if we listen to this, we're going to hear the inversion played twice and then
we're going to hear the retrograde inversion played twice and then we're going to hear
them together.
After these first four canons give Bach enough information about this melody, he then uses
them in Canon 5.
So let's turn to that one.
You see these first four canons are maybe study pieces before he finally gets to writing
more complicated, more interesting music.
So Canon 5, he's using these same ideas and he also introduces a new melody and its inversion
to write some really beautiful music.
Now if you listen closely, there are two baselines to this piece.
One is the main theme and the other is the main theme's inversion.
So let's listen to Canon number 5.
Now that's starting to be real, really beautiful music.
Let's dig into some of the mathematics behind it, which is group theory.
Now we've already seen a few groups, but what's the definition of a group?
We need a set, for us that was transformations, or we saw some with numbers, but we need a
set and we also need an operation, so the operation takes two things in that set and
spits out as an output one thing in that set.
For us, the operation was composition, doing one transformation and another.
Now there are four properties we have to have in order for something to be a group.
It has to be closed, that means that the output is always in the set.
It has to have an identity, that means that one element acts like zero does in addition,
it leaves all the other elements alone when you do the composition.
We have to have inverses, there's always a way to get back to the identity.
And finally, we have to have associativity, that means the grouping doesn't matter.
To understand these, let's look at some examples where one or more of these properties fail.
So let's think about the natural numbers, that's probably the most, the easiest set
of numbers, one, two, three, four, five, six, on and on, up like that.
And let's look at addition.
Now when we write out a table, notice that it's closed, all the outputs are natural numbers,
they're all things in our set, but notice that there's no identity, there's no zero,
there's no way to solve the equation A plus something equals A.
Now we could try to fix this, we could just add zero to our set, and when we do that,
we get something that are called the whole numbers.
When we look at the table associated to the whole numbers, we've done better.
This is definitely closed, all the outputs are whole numbers.
It has an identity now, for any A, A plus zero is equal to A, and it works the other
way as well, zero plus A is equal to A.
But there's a problem with inverses, A plus something equals zero, there's no way to solve
that right now, three plus something equals zero, you need a negative three, and negative
three isn't in our set the whole numbers.
So why don't we fix this by adding all the negatives in?
When we add the negatives in, we get a set called the integers, and now we're looking
at addition on the integers, and now we have a group.
Notice that it's closed, all the outputs are integers, it has an identity, zero is the identity,
it has inverses, the inverse of negative five is five, the inverse of seven is negative
seven, you can always find something to add to a number to get back to zero, and it also
has associativity, and that's this grouping idea, A plus B plus C is the same thing as
A plus B plus C, the parentheses, where we put the parentheses doesn't matter, this
is a group.
In fact, it's a particular kind of group, if you notice, we know from grade school that
A plus B is the same thing as B plus A, the property there is called that it's commutative.
You can see this in the table, there's symmetry over the diagonal, if you take A plus B it's
the same thing as B plus A, that means that there's symmetry across this diagonal.
Mathematicians call these kinds of groups commutative.
Let's go back now to another group that we've seen repeatedly, let's go back to Z2.
We've seen lots of different copies of Z2, we've seen geometrical ones, reflections,
we've seen functions, we negating functions, we saw evens and odds, that was addition mod
two, we saw musical inversions, that was one table, we saw retrograde.
All of these tables really have the same structure, we're just changing the names of the columns
and the rows in these tables.
We call these isomorphic groups, that's what mathematicians call, they have the same sort
of structures, these are all versions of the same group Z2, we're just changing the names.
So what is Z2 itself?
I think that's actually sort of a philosophical question, here's what I mean by that, let's
go back to an easier question, what is two?
What is the number two?
Babies answer this from sort of experience, these are two eyes, two ears, two fingers,
none of those is two, when you're looking at two apples, what's there?
They're apples, they're not two.
In some sense two is what all of those sets have in common, it's a very abstract idea
and the same is true of Z2, all of those tables that we saw, all of those groups, none of
them is Z2, Z2 is what all of those examples have in common.
Both the number two and the group Z2 are very abstract mathematical concepts, they're separate
from the physical world, this is a trade of mathematics which is really interesting that
you can do a lot of mathematics without actually referring to anything in the physical world
and we're going to talk more about that in lecture 12, but let's go back to some more
complicated math and some more complicated music than just Z2.
Let's go to musical transformations, now we have inversions and we have retrograde and
now when we tried to put them together we found it was not closed and we needed another
transformation in order to make that closed so we can add the retrograde inversion to
fix this.
So now we have four transformations, the identity, the do nothing transformation, inversions,
retrograde and retrograde inversions.
Let's write out the group table for that and when we write out the group table for that
we can check, it's closed, it has an identity, the do nothing transformation, it has inverses,
in fact each one of the transformations is its own inverse and in fact it's associative.
Now what group is that because it's clearly not Z2 after all, this is a 4 by 4 chart,
it's not a 2 by 2 chart, so let's see if we can find the same group somewhere else.
Where else might we see this group, the same group, well it's a four element group so
we might guess that it would be Z4 so we're looking at numbers and the remainders when
we divide by 4 instead of Z2 was the remainders when you divided by 2 and so if we're looking
at Z4 the possible remainders when you divide by 4 are 0, 1, 2 and 3 but when we look at
that table it has a different structure.
You see the group we're looking at, the musical group, every element is its own inverse.
If you do the inversion and then the inversion you get the identity, it's a little harder
to see but if you do a retrograde inversion and then you do a retrograde inversion you
also get back to the identity.
That's not true in Z4, if you look at the element 1, if you add 1 to itself you don't
get back to the identity 0, 1 plus 1 is 2, if you look at 3 that's a little bit tricky
because 3 plus 3, we normally think of that as 6 but we're looking at remainders mod
4 and so the remainder when you divide 6 by 4 is 2 so 3 plus 3 is 2, that's also not
the identity so neither 1 nor 3 is its own inverse and that tells us that these two groups
are not isomorphic so you might ask what group is this then?
Let's go back to geometry and see another representation of this same group.
In geometry we might have the do nothing transformation, we might have the reflect about the x axis
transformation, we might have the reflection about the y axis transformation and then in
order to make a closed group we would need to do both, we would need to reflect about
the x axis and then the y axis and if you think through that that's actually the same thing
as doing a 180 degree rotation.
So now we have four elements, we have the trivial, the do nothing transformation, reflect
over x, reflect over y and reflect over both or rotate 180 degrees.
When we write out that table it has the same structure as our own group, each one of those
elements is its own inverse and I think you can think through why because there's a symmetry
here, it's really the same properties, we're just flipping things in two dimensions, we're
flipping things over the x axis or over the y axis.
Let's see if we can find a functional example of this same group.
In functions we could do nothing, that's the trivial transformation, we could take negative
f of x, that's reflecting over the x axis, we could take f of negative x, that's reflection
over the y axis or we could do both, we could look at negative f of negative x and when you
think through that that's actually a 180 degree rotation as well.
This is another representation of the same group, every element in this group is its
own inverse.
Let's see if we can find a numerical example because when we looked for a Z4 that wasn't
the right numerical example.
To see the correct numerical example we have to look at something called Z2 cross Z2.
The name of this group is actually the Klein 4 group, Klein was a 19th century German mathematician,
it's the same Klein as the Klein bottle if you've heard of that and Z2 cross Z2 is no
longer just numbers, it's actually ordered pairs of numbers so you have two coordinates,
a zero and a one in one coordinate and a zero and one in the other coordinate.
The operation now is a little bit complicated, it's coordinate wise addition, modulo 2 and
so let's do an example to see this, if we had the ordered pair zero one and we were
adding one one to it we would look at the first coordinates first.
So the first coordinate is zero and one, we add those, we get zero plus one that's one
and now the second coordinates are both one, one plus one is not two, we're working modulo
two, one plus one is zero and so when we add these two elements zero one plus one one we
get one zero.
Is it a group?
Well we have some properties to check, it has an identity, zero zero is the identity,
every element is its own inverse, you can think through that.
You can actually understand this in relation to the other groups we've talked about, you
can think about the first coordinate is telling you whether or not you're flipping over x
of the x axis, if it's a one you flip, if it's a zero you don't and you can think about
the second coordinate is flipping over the y axis, if it's a one you flip and if it's
a zero you don't and so it is indeed exactly the same chart that we've seen before, the
same group table.
Now it's an interesting mathematical fact, there are only two groups with four elements
and we've seen both of them now, one is z4 that was remainder when you divide by four
and now this other one is this group of transformations that we've seen several times that we now
have a name for, the Klein-4 group or z2 cross z2.
So let's go back to musical transformations, here's a new transformation for us to do,
a transposition and our transposition is moving up or down in pitch, you could think
of it as modulation, it's a version of that.
Let's hear an example of this transposition and I'll play it for you on my violin.
Let's go back to twinkle twinkle, the idea of a transposition is normally we start on
the key A, instead of that we could start on D, that would be transposing up a fourth
because D is the fourth note on the A major scale and that would sound like this.
When you do that it's easily recognizable as the same tune, it's just a little bit higher.
So there's corresponding mathematical transformations, if we're thinking about geometry you could
think about just taking a figure and translating it up, for functions you could think about
taking f of x and adding c to it, it's just a vertical translation when you're looking
at the graph.
When you look at these transformations and you look at their group structures it gets
really interesting, you see if you have, you can find the inverse, if you transpose up
you just transpose back down, but it has infinitely many elements, in theory you could just keep
transposing up as many intervals as you wanted and at any point if you wanted to get back
down there's an inverse transformation to do.
So you could transpose infinitely many steps, the table for this group is infinitely large
and that's a little bit strange.
Now one way to keep it from being infinitely large is to work by note names, to work what's
called modulo octaves, that is to treat every A on the piano as if it's the same thing and
every C sharp is the same, whether it's a C sharp down here or a C sharp way up there.
So let's think about this, let's think about transposing not up a fourth but up one half
step, go one key at a time.
If you transpose up a half step and then up a half step and then up a half step and
you keep doing that, if you transpose 12 times in terms of note names you get back to where
you started, you might start on A and go up 12 times you would end at A. It's actually
just like adding one to itself but then somehow getting back to the beginning again.
We actually see something mostly every day that does exactly this and it's a clock, one,
two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine.
You can think of 12 as the zero, you can think of it as zero and so you get back to the beginning
again and then start over.
That group is called Z12 and sometimes Z12 is simply called clock arithmetic because
of that.
If you think about it in Z12, if you take 10 plus 3 that would be like taking 10 o'clock
and then going three more hours and you don't get 13 o'clock, you get one o'clock, right?
And so it's just like Z12.
Transposition by half steps is exactly the same thing.
You go up 12 half steps and you're back to the beginning.
You can think about it as a circle, up one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight,
nine and then when you finally have done 12 you're back to the start.
Let's see another transpositional group.
Let's look at transposing not up a half step but up a major third.
Now a major third is four half steps so maybe we'll call it M4 for modulating up four half
steps.
Let's think about the group that you would generate if you did this.
Well you have the trivial transformation do nothing and then you could go up four half
steps and if you did up four half steps followed by up four half steps that would take you
up eight half steps, that's a minor six and if you did up eight half steps followed by
up four half steps you would be going up 12 half steps but if you go up 12 half steps
and you're working modulo octaves, 12 half steps gets you back to the same note names
you had before and so that is the identity.
Going up 12 half steps is really the same thing as leaving it where it is.
It's the trivial transformation.
So now we can write out the chart.
We have three transformations here.
Do nothing, up four half steps, up eight half steps and that's it and when we write out
the table we see that it actually has the same structure as Z3, it's addition modulo
three.
We're looking at remainders when dividing by three and of course those remainders are
always either 0, 1 or 2 and so this transpositional group that we've come up with that started
with transposing up four half steps is really another copy of Z3.
What happens if we combine that with inversion then we get something that's really interesting
because this group is not commutative.
So again we're going to do two transformations here.
We're going to do inversions and we're going to look at up a major third for half steps.
So let's take those in turn.
Suppose we take a melody and we invert and then we go up a major third.
That's different from going up a major third and then inverting over where we originally
started.
This transformation puts the melody much too low.
It's telling us that this group is not commutative.
The M4 transformation followed by the inversion is not the same thing as the inversion followed
by the M4 transformation.
That's a little bit weird.
I wonder if we can find sort of a geometrical representation of that.
What would that look like?
It turns out that you can find a geometrical representation but it's not quite as simple
as the other things we've done.
You need to look at symmetries on an equilateral triangle.
So there are rotational symmetries.
You could think of rotating 120 degrees.
We'll call that rho, rotation of 120 degrees.
If you do that twice, you get a rotation of 240 degrees.
If you do that three times, you get back to the identity.
On the other hand, an equilateral triangle also has a reflexional symmetry.
Let's look at the vertical one.
You can reflect over that vertical line and there's two diagonal reflections that also
work.
Let's call those R2 and R3.
Reflectioned over one diagonal and the other diagonal.
You can take these transformations and write out a group table and if you do, it's actually
isomorphic to the musical group that's generated by going up four half steps, M4, and the inversion.
Let's see why that's true.
You see, going up four half steps plays the same role as rotating 120 degrees.
The reason is if you go up four half steps, do it again and do it again, you get back
to the same note name you started at.
You get an octave higher, but we're working modular octaves.
With the rotations, if you rotate 120 degrees and then another 120 degrees and then again,
you're back to where you started with because a full rotation is 360 degrees.
In both cases, you do it three times and you get back to the identity.
The reflection works the same.
If you reflect and then do it again, you get back to the identity.
The inversion, the musical transformation, the inversion does exactly the same thing.
If you invert and then do it again, you get back to the identity.
You can generalize on the dihedral groups.
Instead of using an equilateral triangle, you could use an n-gon, like a regular square
or a regular pentagon or higher order things like that.
We could also ask some interesting questions about these.
If we can generate these groups, we could ask, are there musical versions of these and what
do the musical versions sound like?
Much of these mathematical groups that we construct can be realized as a musical group.
This is actually the subject of current really interesting research that some of my friends
are doing.
Let's go back and let's go and look at symmetry.
Let's look at examples of symmetry because after all, group theory is properly seen as
the language of symmetry within mathematics.
Mathematicians categorize objects by their symmetry group.
If you take the outline of a violin, there's only one symmetry it has.
You can reflect it over the x-axis and you get the same thing, but there's no other way
to transform that picture and get back to the same picture.
On the other hand, if you had the outline of a barbell, it actually has three symmetries.
You can reflect it over the x-axis, you could reflect it over the y-axis, or you could do
a 180-degree rotation.
That means the symmetry group for that barbell is a copy of z2 cross z2.
Mathematicians categorize objects by their symmetry group and one of the interesting
objects you can categorize are what's called freeze patterns, strips of patterns that repeat.
If you do the mathematics, there are seven different symmetries on freeze patterns and
no more.
We could extend this, instead of looking at freeze patterns, we could look at entire wallpaper
symbols.
If you look at wallpaper symbols, you actually find out that there are exactly 17 different
symmetry groups on wallpaper.
If you look closely at the Alhambra in Spain, all 17 of those groups appear in the Alhambra.
There are no more than 17.
17 is the right number, and that's how many symmetry groups there are for a wallpaper pattern.
Group theory is the language of symmetry.
It's actually useful in a lot of different places.
In chemistry, they use group theory to classify crystal structures.
In physics, it's used to study subatomic particles.
There are lots of really interesting uses for group theory, but let's go back to music
and let's hear one last type of transformation that has this sort of group structure.
The transformation we need to talk about is called augmentation and diminution, stretching
and shrinking by a factor of two.
Let's go back to Twinkle.
Here's the original melody.
Its augmentation is twice as slow, whereas if we go back to the original melody and take
its diminution, it's twice as fast, like that.
So that's augmentation and diminution, and you can think about the group structure involved
in these transformations.
If we augment, its inverse is taking the diminution.
We could also augment and then augment again and then augment again.
We could stretch these notes as long as we wanted, each time taking them twice as long,
and so this group is definitely going to be infinite.
If you think about it, it actually has the same structure as the integers.
You can add one to itself as many times as you want.
That's why that group is infinite.
What does this group sound like?
Let's go back to Bach, because the opening music we heard was the Canon 14.
Canon 14, the name of Canon 14, it says four parts with augmentation and diminution.
It's a canon in four parts.
So we need to hear exactly what those sound like.
So let's go back.
Remember all of these canons are based on a single line of music, so let's hear that
line of music and let's hear it with diminution and with augmentation.
The original theme that Bach is working on in all of these canons is the theme from the
aria from the Goldberg Variations.
If we do the augmentation of that, it's twice as slow.
On the other hand, if we do the diminution of that, it's twice as fast.
And those are the transformations Bach's working with in his 14th Canon.
Bach wrote this 14th Canon in a single line, and the only instructions are the title, that
it's a four-part Canon with augmentation and diminution.
Let's hear just the single line without the four parts, but just one part.
Let's listen to that.
That's the one line of music.
By itself, it's beautiful, it's a little tricky in places, but it hides the puzzle that people
quickly figured out.
The solution to Bach's Canon is that it's actually in four parts.
So let's look at the solution.
If we look at the solution, there are four parts to that.
There are four parts.
The top voice is supposed to play the music as written, like I just played it.
The next voice is supposed to play it augmented, twice as slow, but also inverted and transposed,
some of these transformations we've been talking about.
The next voice is supposed to play it augmented again, now four times the length of the original,
and transposed again, and the bottom voice is supposed to play it augmented yet again.
It's now eight times as slow as the original, and also inverted and transposed.
Amazingly, the bottom voice is just the original melody from the Goldberg Variations.
So while you listen to this, I want you to listen for all of the parts.
All of the parts are the same in some sense, but they're different in some other sense.
They're transformed from the original melody.
Let's listen to this.
Let's actually listen to that one more time.
It's such a great piece.
Let's listen to it.
Let's see.
I want to make sure we understand what's going on.
Each part is read from the same music, but each part is using a different transformation.
Each part is derived in some sense from the Goldberg Ground, just those eight notes.
And when I say derived, I mean using these transformations, these transformations that
have a very mathematical structure, these transformations that decades later would be
called group theory.
Group theory wasn't around in Bach's time.
Later it would be called group theory.
So let's listen one more time to the 14th Canon.
Finally, today we have a musical coda, and I think it's going to be a whole lot of fun.
We're going to play a table canon for you.
Now this is a duet.
It's written for two violins.
And the idea is you take this duet, and you take the music, and you place it on a table
between the two players.
You see, one person is supposed to play this music right side up, starting here.
The other person is supposed to play it upside down, starting here.
Mathematically speaking, in terms of these transformations, one person is playing the
original music, the identity, and the other person is playing it upside down and backwards,
the retrograde inversion.
Now this piece is attributed to Mozart.
It's probably unlikely that it's actually Mozart.
But as you listen, I want you to think about how the composer had to write a part that
fit well with its own retrograde inversion.
Think about the mathematics going on in this.
This is one of the many transformations that link music to mathematics, and in particular
the mathematics of group theory.
To help me play this, I want to welcome my good friend, Dr. David Kung, from St. Mary's
College of Maryland, probably the ideal person to play this with.
Welcome.
Thanks, Dave.
It's my pleasure to be here, and I think we should play the table cannon here.
One, two, three.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight.
One, two, three.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight.
Thanks for watching.
Thanks for joining us.
Next lecture, we're going to talk about, appropriately, self-reference.
