I lead our education program at the CIS, which is a great privilege and a great privilege
to be with you all tonight and also to have Konstantin here with us.
Konstantin, I'm very mindful about your safety and the safety of everybody.
So with that in mind, I do want to respect your preferred pronouns.
I understand that.
You do identify as a Bay-Them politically non-binary.
What does that mean?
I think it's very important to think for yourself on everything.
And my experience is that whenever you buy into a political ideology wholesale,
you inevitably end up in positions where you're having to think stupid things
because other people think them.
I don't see that as a healthy way to run your brain, first and foremost.
Now, of course, when your ideas begin to translate into political decisions,
you have a binary choice quite frequently at an election,
although I now understand in this country you have a non-binary system for voting to some extent.
So my primary interest is in trying to understand the world
and get as close to the truth as I possibly can,
which of course all of us are inevitably unsuccessful in.
And therefore, to buy a prepackaged set of ideas just seems to me a little bit naive.
I think left, right, up, down, liberal, conservative, whatever,
they all have flaws in their thinking.
And I'm interested in finding the distinctions and trying to understand,
well, I think, for example, the inequality in our society is a massive problem.
Intergenerational inequality is a massive problem.
And to the extent that the left used to care about that, I agree with the left.
There are also issues that I agree with, you know, conservatives and classical liberals on as well.
So mainly it's about insisting on the ability to think for myself.
And so at the moment, you flag the sort of left, right binary
and the way that you're straddling that, I suppose.
Why is it the left and right labels?
Why do they not mean what they used to mean?
Well, they're both breaking down because what I used to think of as the left,
which I used to be on, due to a combination of ignorance and cowardice,
mostly cowardice, to be honest, have allowed themselves to be derailed
by the people who call themselves progressive.
And my good friend in the UK, Morris Glassman, who's a member of the House of Lords,
he always says this, you know, if you go to the doctor and they say to you, it's progressive.
It's not good news, usually.
So the left has allowed itself to be derailed from its core purpose by the people who are.
And I mean, I mean, absolutely no bones about saying this.
The people who we talk about when we mean the woke left, these are these, you know,
race Marxist or cultural Marxist, these people are the enemy of Western civilization.
There's no discussion. There's no debate.
It's not these people want to destroy the foundations of Western civilization.
That's what they want.
And so if you are the sensible left, which is the majority of people on the left,
and you allow these people to be the tail that wags your dog,
well, then the whole meaning of these words starts to break down.
And by the way, you give ammunition to people on the right who are going to say,
oh, the left are all like this.
Well, if you don't speak up, then that's all happened.
Or if you do speak up as as I found out and many other people find out,
then you become right wing.
So there we go.
So it's well trodden that the the flaws of the left,
when it comes to the aversion around Western civilization,
but the left are on the loan in some of those criticisms.
So just as the left might complain that, you know, big corporations,
for instance, have destroyed society or hollowed it out and so on.
It's also true, is it not that the right have also got this tinge about complaining
about society increasingly?
It's the issues of, I guess, an elite of sorts as well,
that particularly around bureaucracy and so on,
that undermines the true society itself.
But does the right have as much to blame in the current debate?
I see it as a little bit of cause and effect.
I think that many of the policies that progressives have pursued
have created a society.
You're fortunate in this country that you don't have this,
but you only need to travel around major American cities
or come to London to see, I mean, it looks like a zombie apocalypse,
to be honest.
You know, you go to LA, you go to New York, you go to, I mean,
Nashville, anywhere, and there's literally people lying face down on the ground
with most of their clothes off.
And that's because, you know, for all sorts of different reasons,
but primarily because of the policies that governments have pursued.
So as the level of street crime and violent crime increases,
as people see disorder around them,
it's natural for them to get very frustrated about what is happening.
And I agree with you.
I think there is a section of the right, particularly in the United States,
that is so fed up of the inability to vote your way out of this growing nightmare,
frankly, you know, that instead of helping the police to do a better job,
we have these slogans like defund the police.
All of this stuff is causing people to get frustrated.
And then they say, well, look, democracy isn't working.
So maybe Vladimir Putin is brilliant, you know.
Here in Australia, there's been, there's a poll that's done annually,
which asks Australians about their attitudes towards society,
system of government and so on.
And what that's typically shown us is that an increasing number of people,
especially young people, and it's around one in three,
who say that they're unsatisfied with democracy around one in five,
say that they'd prefer an alternative to democracy.
And these numbers, of course, are much higher for young people, especially.
And one of the main reasons that people say that they're not satisfied with democracy
is that they feel that the system no longer works for the majority,
but works for a minority.
Are we all doing democracy wrong?
Well, it's shocking numbers, isn't it, that they're that low?
Well, it is.
I mean, look, the fact is that Western elites,
and I use this phrase advisedly,
have had their heads up their asses for a very long time now,
and they are insistent on maintaining them there,
no matter how many wake-up calls they get.
Look, I voted Remain in the Brexit referendum,
and frankly, if you'd asked me on the morning after why half of my fellow citizens voted from Brexit,
I would have had no idea, right?
But what I took away from that is that I am the ignorant one,
and it's my job to educate myself, right?
What the elites took from that is they need to suppress that movement as quickly as possible.
This was the same with Donald Trump.
Donald Trump gets elected.
What do they do?
Do they say, oh, my God, I can't believe this guy is so obnoxious.
How badly, how desperate must these people be to vote for Donald Trump?
No.
What they do is they go, oh, it's Russia collusions.
The Russians, they said the same with Brexit.
The Russians did Brexit, and I kept saying to these people,
if the Russians didn't vote Brexit, it would be over by now, you know?
We would have taken the chunk of France with us.
So there is this, there is a tyranny of the mind that is happening among people who are comfortable
and who are so attached to the reins of power.
This is why they keep talking, oh, you know, this is a danger to our democracy.
That's why they say our, because it's their democracy, not democracy for anyone else,
because the moment anyone votes in a way they don't like,
they try and overturn it one way or another.
And this makes me sound like some great defender of orange man bad.
I'm not.
I'm just objective.
And objectively, they spent the entire four years trying to undermine the outcome of the election,
lied about him endlessly.
They claimed, and people should go and look at this.
And many people even in our circles still believe this, the idea that he said, for example,
that there are fine people on both sides.
This isn't true.
You can go and watch the video in which he condemns those people.
He says they should be condemned absolutely.
All they did is they quoted him out of context and then they presented it.
And they did this over and over and over and over again.
Why did they do it?
Because they're not willing to accept that somebody might disagree with them.
And if they keep doing this, we are going to get to a very dangerous place very quickly.
So in a free marketplace of ideas, one would expect that we would be able to say,
here's video, Trump says this thing, here's another version of it.
And that free exchange should, in theory, bring the truth to the surface.
That's at least a textbook case that so much was familiar with.
You know, there's a famous basketball baseball player in America,
Yogi Berra, who was known for his witticisms.
And he said, in theory, there's no difference between theory and practice.
In practice, there is.
And that's kind of, I think that answers your question.
In practice, we have a mainstream media which is dying.
It's dying for a reason.
And the reason is that they have discredited themselves over a long period of time
by spreading things that later turn out not to be true and driving these narratives.
There's a, I wrote a thread on Twitter that went viral on the subject
that I later made as a video and it's a chapter in my book as well.
It was called Why Don't They Believe Us?
And the reason people are increasingly not believing the mainstream media
is the arrogance with which they have purported these lies
on the publics of the Western countries.
I think what is required is a little bit more humility and admitting wrong.
And I always say this to someone who increasingly has interactions
with people in the mainstream media, giving interviews, et cetera.
No personal, you know, no faith in the mainstream media,
so vice-first contact with the mainstream media.
You know, and an example of this, and I'm not bitter,
but an example of this is after my Oxford speech,
a journalist from the New Statesman came and interviewed me
and he asked me how many views the video of my speech had got.
And I said, it's very difficult to measure because, you know,
it goes into people's telegram groups and WhatsApp groups
and people posting a way that you're not able to track.
So you can't really say.
And he wrote that I'd said that the number of views on the speech
is beyond measure.
LAUGHTER
So the mainstream media have done a very bad job
of maintaining their credibility.
Oh, I mean, it is approaching beyond measure at the moment.
That's...
So, look, the mainstream media, you point out, is dying.
You run a platform like several others
that we broadly define in a family of new media.
And what strikes me is really powerful about new media
is it doesn't have the same opportunity to cancel, if you like,
that mainstream media has. It doesn't have the same conventions.
It provides that free access to masses to be able to access
diverse opinions, diverse perspectives,
and be able to, in many cases, share and disseminate freely.
In some respects, it seems to me this is a set of platforms
that protect against cancellation for those reasons.
And so many more people, when we look at these numbers,
consume new media than consume old media.
Does that mean old media will just die itself out?
We'll see. And by the way, I wouldn't want people to take away
from our conversation that I want the mainstream media to die.
I really, really don't. I want them to be better.
Because one of the problems with new media is
you increasingly see the fragmentation of our reality.
And so I often meet people who have not only alternative opinions,
but alternative facts.
And we no longer can agree on what the facts are.
This is not a healthy place to be. I'd much rather we had
a sort of coherence about what we believe,
but I don't know that we're going to get there.
I think the mainstream media will take some time.
It's kind of bleeding out, but it's still standing.
And that's because there's a lot of people who've grown up
reading and listening and watching the mainstream media.
That will continue. They'll continue to be influential.
And by the way, I keep saying to this,
I am the Turkey that would vote for Christmas.
I really would.
I never had the intention to create a media platform online.
It's a responsibility I've never saw.
And increasingly, I'm kind of scared of personally.
I'd quite like to interview comedians about their career
and sports stars, about their mental attitude
and people who've been through traumatic events about resilience
and all sorts of things of that nature.
I don't want to necessarily be raising things that keep getting ignored.
But if the mainstream media will refuse to talk about certain things,
well, someone needs to say something.
And that's the only reason I've ever got into any of this.
So for me, that's a sad state of...
I always keep saying the tragedy of my career
is I keep saying things everybody knows
and everyone goes, oh, my God, it's amazing.
You know.
Yeah, men are men and women are women. Wow.
You know.
A spoiler warning.
Yeah, exactly. Trigger warning is all we need for that one.
Yeah.
Well, related to trigger warnings, I suppose,
one of the first opportunities maybe made in this audience
would have become familiar with your work
was related to a set of trigger warnings, I suppose,
or avoiding those back in 2018,
when you were asked to complete what's sort of described
as a behavioral agreement of some kind
for a university comedy gig.
Tell us about the requirements for that.
Yes. So I was performing in a club in London.
Some students saw me and they invited me
to help them raise money for UNICEF at the university.
And when I agreed, they sent me a two-page behavioral agreement contract
which said that they have a zero tolerance policy on racism,
sexism, classism, ageism, ableism, homophobia,
biphobia, transphobia, xenophobia, Islamophobia,
anti-religion, anti-Atheism,
and it also said that all jokes must be respectful and kind.
And it was interesting because it was the first time
I really realized that I wasn't the only one that was concerned
about the direction of travel of our society
because that story became the second biggest story
on the BBC News website, and I mean the second most read story
on the BBC News website, on the day that the then Prime Minister,
Theresa May, was nearly removed from office by her own party.
So first story, Prime Minister nearly removed.
And you're not shocked because in Australia,
you backstab your Prime Ministers every day.
But in England, it's quite a big deal, right?
And so the first story was Prime Minister nearly removed
from office by her own party.
Second story, no-name comedian turns down unpaid charity
from two big collars.
And that's when I was like, oh, okay,
I'm not the only one that actually thinks this is a problem.
And of course I got thousands of emails
and I kind of understood that many people feel
like they're living their life having signed a contract like that.
So yes, that was an interesting moment.
I think there is, certainly people always ask me,
have we reached peak woke, are we, you know,
and I think it really fundamentally depends where you are.
I think in the United States,
certainly when it comes to comedy, I mean comedians
who are challenging the orthodoxy are absolutely crushing it.
Rogan, Bill Burr, Shane Gillis, lots of different people.
Yeah, Dave Chappelle, of course.
In the UK, much more rigid and much more difficult.
I don't know what the situation is in Australia.
On the cultural stuff, again, it's very difficult to judge.
I do think you guys at the moment in a better position
and people sometimes disagree with me
because what they hear when I say that is,
you don't have a problem.
That's not what I'm saying.
I'm saying you are sliding down the toilet,
you're just not as far down.
All right.
However, given that you see us making the mistakes,
you still have the opportunity to not repeat our mistakes.
And I really very much would encourage you not to.
I mean, missing off the behavioral agreement, by the way,
there were plenty of other phobias and isms
that were missed there and fat phobia was missing.
So be mindful of that one, the bigots at the fundraiser.
Here in Australia, one of the issues that I think
really taps at our identity is the question
that comes around every year for our national day,
Australia Day.
This is increasingly viewed as not only not a day
for celebration, but a day of regret.
Humiliation or even viewed as by many particularly
on the left as being ultimately an invasion day.
And this self-criticism that we see about the nation,
why is it that in Western civilization
we have so much trouble with nationhood?
You've spent 60 years teaching your children
to hate your own civilization.
Why are you surprised that they hate your civilization?
Sorry, but that's what's happened.
That's worked and absolutely.
And by the way, it's not just hate.
It's hard to teach people to hate.
What's much easier is to lie to them about history.
So in the UK, for example, in England,
there's this, the Church of England,
I think it's just approved the billion pounds
worth of reparations because we talk endlessly
about slavery and the narrative on slavery
in seems to me to be, there was no slavery
and then the British Empire came along
and invented slavery and then woke people,
came along and ended slavery.
When, of course, we all know what actually happened,
which is slavery is slaves were probably the first good
that human beings ever traded.
Never had anything to do with racism, by the way.
It just, it was a fact of life that conquered peoples
would be subjugated by others and used as labor
and would be traded.
Native Americans kept slaves
and so did everybody else throughout history.
The British Empire practiced slavery just like everybody else
because of their superior technological advantage,
they were able to move slaves across oceans
in the way that others weren't.
And then the British ended slavery,
not only within the borders of their own realm,
but also spent a tremendous amount of blood and treasure
to force the Trans-Saharan slave trade,
which was much worse, lasted longer,
had a higher death rate, the men were all castrated,
the women were taken as sex slaves.
They forced that slave trade to end,
a tremendous diplomatic military and monetary cost.
And so this idea that we must eternally apologize
for the sins of the past seems to me absolutely ridiculous.
Now, does that mean we shouldn't recognize
that those things were bad?
Yes, of course we should and we should acknowledge
and learn from them, but it seems to me very odd.
Again, I made this point in the book,
I have a whole chapter on slavery in it,
which is, imagine if you have to,
that 50 years from now we're all gonna be vegan
because they get their way,
because eating animals is this terrible crime.
Would we then say that the people who ended that practice
were the most evil in history?
That wouldn't make any sense at all.
I think we would say, well, this is the first empire
in the history of the world that ended this practice,
we now consider a moral.
Good on them.
And by the way, did so for moral reasons.
I mean, the abolitionists in England were people
who were motivated by a different morality
that was developing, which said something
about the value of the individual.
So the idea that we would denigrate our history
in this way to me seems absurd.
And every civilization in history,
every great empire in history is built on conquest.
This is how the world is, this is human nature
and to pretend otherwise I think is very unwise.
It seems that at the moment Western civilization
has never been safer, richer than ever.
We should ultimately be ever more self-confident
in ourselves, yet we are ever more self-critical
about ourselves.
Is it just because we've had it too good?
Is that what allows us to have that luxury?
Well, it seems that way.
Something I've been thinking about a lot is
people are always very suspicious and wary of families
that are able to preserve wealth over many generations.
The Rothschilds, the Rockefellers, the whoever's.
And I think that's because it's very difficult.
The first generation break through
and build something special.
The second manager and the third was wasted basically
is how it tends to go.
So to be able to maintain generation upon generation
of people who truly value what they have,
even though they're growing up in increasing luxury
is very, very difficult.
And this is where education comes in.
And if we had people who were being educated
about the history of their civilization and their society
in an accurate way, I think we'd be in a far better place.
But what has been happening on Western college campuses
and in Western schools for the last many decades
is the reason we are where we are.
One of the reasons why Western civilization has been successful
is obviously its capacity to self-criticize, evolve,
and improve.
Everything you've been talking about tonight
doesn't really sound like self-criticism anymore.
It's something more malign.
Does this mean that we can't grow from this, the experience,
the challenges that Western civilization is currently facing?
Well, again, let's translate all of this conceptual stuff
into simple language.
If you talked about your spouse in the way
that people talk about their country,
people would call you an abuser.
That's what they'd say.
They'd say, why are you talking about your wife in this way?
That's rude, that's wrong, that's immoral,
that they would be suspicious of you.
But the way that people talk about their own country
is perfectly acceptable to do so.
So self-criticism, as I mentioned about freedom of expression,
is the bedrock of our progress.
The ability to say, no, no, we shouldn't be continuing to do this.
Actually, we should be thinking about how to do this better.
But it seems to me that we're in the grips of,
you know, as Christianity has pulled back,
we are now in the grips of a new religion
that offers no absolution of any kind whatsoever.
You cannot do anything to absolve yourself
of your straight, white, male privilege.
There's no way, you must just feel forever guilty.
And this isn't self-criticism, this is self-denigration,
and it's designed for self-destruction.
These people, as I say again, are the enemies.
So some sort of fracturing elements that we see in society.
Now, Australia does pride itself as being arguably
the most successful multicultural nation here on Earth.
And we've sustained and have been great recipients
of a high level of immigration for many years.
But recently, the Prime Minister described the social license
for our immigration system, which is historically very high,
as fracturing.
Now, this is not uncommon that a lot of the Western world
are facing issues related to migration.
And we've got several questions that have come through,
and thanks for those who have submitted those,
that have asked, how do we successfully maintain
multiculturalism and high levels of immigration
that have enriched our societies in today's high volumes
and challenging times?
You can't.
You can't.
It's like saying, look, I love ice cream, right?
But if I had ice cream for breakfast, lunch, and dinner
every day, and then you said to me,
how do you keep the weight off?
I'd say, I'm fat, right?
There are immigration.
How many of you are immigrants or descendants of immigrants
here, right?
Pretty much all of you, right?
Yeah, some of you were involuntary.
I'm a first generation immigrant to the West.
I think immigration is conducive to a healthy society.
If you bring young people, and not just young people,
but driven, talented, smart people who
are willing to become part of your nation, who
are willing to subscribe to national values,
who are willing to say, look, I was born blah, blah, blah.
I'm British.
I'm Australian.
I'm American.
I'm here to be part of you.
And if those people who are coming in are carefully chosen,
because they're conducive to the society to which they come,
if the numbers are manageable, and you
are able to integrate those people into your society,
then you see what you've seen in Australia today,
which is all my travels that people come up to.
Oh, my mother's from Croatia.
Oh, I'm from here.
Oh, I'm from Hungary.
And these people all sound Australian to me, right?
Because they are.
But if you have levels of immigration
that become too difficult to manage,
and particularly if you do what we are doing in the UK
and what we have there doing in America, which
is letting people come in illegally,
I can't understand this, because I've lived in Britain
long enough to know that there's no greater offense than jumping
the queue.
And that is what these people are doing, right?
And we don't know who they are.
We don't know what their values are.
We don't know how compatible they are with Western civilization.
And the reason they are coming illegally
is that we wouldn't let them in otherwise.
That's why they're coming illegally, right?
So if you want to maintain a successful multi-ethnic
society, you have to make sure that you have immigration
levels that are appropriate to the size of your country.
You welcome people in.
You digest.
They become part of your society.
They have kids who grew up here.
They become Australian.
You can let more people in.
And you can manage your system in a democratic way.
One of the biggest problems with all of this, of course,
is that in the UK, the government was elected,
the current conservative government was elected in 2010,
on the promise to reduce legal immigration
to the tens of thousands.
It's now running over half a million,
significantly over half a million a year.
And the legal immigration is in the tens of thousands.
So my view is that, look, you could
think that this country should have zero immigration.
And I could think that this country as open borders
should have open borders.
At the end of the day, the people
need to be able to vote for what they want
and then have that reflected in the actions of their government.
And there is no mandate for what is happening in Western Europe
and America.
There's a few followers in the audience of British politics.
So Andrew asks, what do we take in the British context?
Some of the developments we've seen recently, obviously
a bit of a circus for the current government,
but in particular, the election of someone like George Galloway.
What is this signal for the health of democracy
is, I guess, the future of politics?
George Galloway has been in parliament for a long time
in the UK.
He's a very charismatic speaker.
I've had him on my show.
I thought his opposition to the war in Iraq
was extremely important and principled.
And I don't necessarily think that George is somehow
a terrible guy, but his election on a purely sectarian ticket
effectively demonstrates what people need to stop pretending
isn't true, which is that we live in a country where increasingly
people are going to take on the identity politics that
has been shoved down their throat for God knows how long
and vote along ethnic and religious lines.
And that's what's happening.
Gabby also points out the challenge faced here in Sydney
and in many parts of the world.
And that's the plight of Jewish children in schools
and feeling deeply unsafe in Western societies as well.
She asks, how do we combat the kind of hate that is being seen
sometimes for the first time in Western civilizations now?
You can't.
If you import people who hate Jews,
you're going to have people who hate Jews.
Am I wrong?
So if that's what you're doing, then that's what will happen.
You can't fight it.
People keep saying, oh, there's no rise in antisemitism.
There's no rise in antisemitism.
You just found out that you had lots of antisemitic people
in your society who've been antisemitic this entire time.
There's no rise.
So I don't understand what people are talking about when they say,
oh, we're going to fight antisemitism.
The only way to fight antisemitism
is to destroy identity politics and the progressive project.
And the reason is very simple.
And this is something that my friend Eric Weinstein explained
very well when we had him on our show with Sam Harris.
The reason for left-wing antisemitism, which
is I think what we're probably talking about to some extent
outside the kind of more religious-driven element
of this, is very simple.
Once you say that there are some groups that are underrepresented
and there are some groups that are overrepresented,
and the reason the only possible explanation of why a group might
be overrepresented or underrepresented
is privilege and power, then you immediately
get to what Adolf would have called the Jewish question.
Because as it happens, Jews for cultural and historical reasons
and because of what they teach their children,
on average, are much more likely to be overrepresented,
particularly in certain industries, in the media, in banking,
and so on, it's a fact.
They are overrepresented in the same way
that many middle-men minorities will tend
to be overrepresented in success and money and so on
in different countries.
Armenians were overrepresented in the Ottoman Empire
and were persecuted as a result.
Foreign-born Chinese are overrepresented all over Asia
and are persecuted as a result.
East Asians were middle-men minorities in Africa
and were pursued by people prosecuted and persecuted
by people like Idi Amin, because they are overrepresented.
Once you create this ideology, it will inevitably hone in
on minorities that are successful.
And the Jews are bearing the brunt of that.
If you want to stop anti-Semitism, stop talking about anti-Semitism
and start talking about identity politics
and how the woke project is destroying Western civilization
from the inside.
APPLAUSE
So help us out.
We've talked about the woke project, wokeism.
What is it that we actually mean specifically?
I guess wokeism is the sort of thing we know when we see it.
But how do we define it?
Well, I was speaking to the lady over there,
if you don't mind me bringing you up,
92 years old from Hungary, and she says,
oh, it's like my childhood.
And what she means by that is what we had in the Warsaw Pact,
which it would have been in the Soviet Union more specifically,
is Marxism.
And Marxism is the ideology that says there are oppressors
and there are oppressed.
We just talked about it with overrepresented groups,
underrepresented groups.
And the woke project is essentially a product of the realization
that the class-based Marxism that we had in the Soviet Union,
we have the bourgeois and the capitalist who are the oppressors
and the workers and the peasants who are the oppressed.
And of course, the solution to this is to flip the pyramid
and put the bourgeois and the capitalist in the ground, ideally,
at the bottom.
And you create this, what was the phrase,
tyranny of the work, tyranny of the proletariat.
That's right.
Yeah.
Dictatorship of the proletariat.
That's right.
Thank you.
Dictatorship of the proletariat.
And then they came to the Western Marxists,
realized that this was never going to work in the West,
because Western workers didn't want a revolution.
They just wanted better wages and more rights at work and so on.
And so the Marxists realized that the way to divide people
that runs much deeper with most people is race, ethnicity, tribe, sex.
And that's why they've spent the last 60 years attempting to do things
that I thought, frankly, would be impossible.
The idea that men and women, the relationship between men and women
is best understood as some kind of power struggle,
is the most idiotic, cretinous idea that's ever been invented.
These two groups of people who have had to struggle and work together
and pull together for the entirety of human history
just to be able to survive,
that these two groups are somehow engaged in some sort of battle of the sexes,
of the sex insanity.
But this is what they're teaching young people, particularly young girls.
And when it comes to race, people are tribal.
People are pre-wired for all these sorts of things.
People are pre-wired for tribalism.
And the beauty of the Western project is we have been able to ameliorate
some of the ugliness of that approach to society
as best as we could, better than anyone else in history.
But they want to divide us along those lines.
And so to me, wokeness is race Marxism.
Some people call it cultural Marxism.
I think it's probably a more accurate term, but less easy to understand.
That's why I'd say race Marxism is dividing people along racial and sexual lines
in order to persuade some people that they are being oppressed
instead of encouraging them to see themselves as part of a society
in which they have an unparalleled opportunity to thrive and succeed.
And it seems to me that the main kind of weapon here is language.
We take words that have a particular established meaning,
things like social justice, things like safety even, diversity, inclusion.
We're familiar with the way that some of that language is co-opted.
Why choose language as a weapon?
And does this explain why the Western project is particularly vulnerable to it?
Well, look, language is a very powerful weapon
because once you call something a good name, it's very difficult to oppose.
You know, if you created an organization that was about discriminating against black people
and called it puppy's lives matter or something,
a lot of people would still agree with it, right, just because it has a good name.
You know, diversity essentially, I don't know the cultural context here,
but in many Western countries diversity just means no white people.
That's what it means, but it's kind of hard to argue against
because it's diversity and it's inclusion.
What does inclusion mean?
It means that anyone who disagrees is excluded.
So it's a very powerful tool for concealing what you're doing.
I call it slide of mouth.
It's a very, very good tool for persuading people.
And of course, by the way, if you change the meanings of words
and the word safety is the kind of focal point of this,
you can change legislation without having to legislate.
If you say that, you know, if you accept safety as the absence of violence,
which is what we always used to understand it to mean,
then laws around violence are very clear or laws around safety are very clear.
But once you smuggle in the idea that, you know, safety is no one has my feelings,
then you're in a very different position.
And ultimately, there's no chance of a free society
because if we can't exchange ideas because safety is a barrier,
it's just protectionism, right?
It's protectionism in a market of ideas
in the same way that economic protectionism creates problems.
And this is why I keep repeating this idea that these people are enemies
because the more I talk to them, the more I realize that
my friend Michael Malice, who we had on the show some time ago,
he said, Constantine, you've got to understand
these people are not using language to communicate.
They're using language to manipulate.
And once you get that, it all suddenly makes sense.
Why are they saying all these ridiculous things?
It's because they want to manipulate you.
They have no intention of engaging in some kind of battle of ideas.
You know, as I said, Tom and I did a podcast earlier
in which we had a pretty strong argument about Ukraine.
That was the battle of ideas from two people
who were interested in challenging each other
and trying to communicate what they believed to be true.
I have found myself very often in TV studios
talking to people who clearly have absolutely no idea
of discussing anything.
And that's why they use labels and smears as much as they do
because they're not trying to win the argument.
They're trying to destroy you.
Someone that many people in this room probably follow
and may well be excited about is Douglas Murray,
as soon to be here in Australia.
You're in for a treat.
Well, unless the campaign to cancel his appearance
at the Edmore Theatre is successful.
Now, for those who are not familiar,
this campaign is based on these grounds,
that Douglas Murray ferments anti-immigration,
Islamophobia, anti-black,
European civilizational moral panics.
And on this basis, he should not be allowed to appear
and give a talk in conversation here in Sydney.
Where are my protesters?
What about me?
I do that as well.
In fairness, you did talk at Sydney University a few days ago.
There were protesters there.
They were there for Tony Abbott in fairness.
I'm jealous of him as well.
They all had onions.
Delicious, I heard.
This is cancel culture.
They tried to break down one of the doors.
These are very sturdy.
It was in the Sydney Uni Great Hall.
They had one of these massive wooden doors.
I felt like I was in Game of Thrones.
But they couldn't break it down.
I saw it die, I will do that.
No one's been known to ram down doors effectively
in a siege on a soy diet.
I don't know what happened.
I did the joke first, then he repeated it.
And got my laugh.
This cancel culture,
we're familiar with what this looks like,
particularly, I guess, the left's approach on this.
But in some respects, cancel culture is not new.
Since the beginning of civilization,
societies have had some form of sanctioning of ideas,
potentially even moderating ideas, if you like.
Is it not the case then that a degree of cancelling
or a sanctioning system is entirely appropriate
if it comes from members of a community
as opposed to the state,
and maybe those of us that think of ourselves
as being maybe small government oriented
might come to that conclusion.
If that was the case, would that not create
the right sanctions and safeguards for free speech, hate speech
in these challenging areas,
that's broken down in the current climate?
I think it really depends on what you mean by cancelling.
And I completely agree with you that I'm not someone
who's ever uttered the word, you know,
cancel culture has never been worse.
500 years ago, Douglas and I would have been burned at the stake.
And I'm not joking, that's what would have happened.
So do I support burning people in the stake
if it's done by the community rather than the government?
No.
But, and we could go down the list.
Obviously, in the US particularly,
and to a lesser extent in the UK,
we had the Me Too movement.
I thought that there were elements of the Me Too movement
that were entirely understandable and frankly quite justified.
I don't know anyone who disagrees with what happened to Harvey Weinstein,
for example, right?
But on the other hand, there were lots of other people, you know,
who went on a day and things didn't quite go the way
that someone wanted and suddenly they're an abuser, right?
So I think it's a matter of degrees quite often.
And it is, you know, I have no problem
with people coming and protesting outside an event.
I have no problem with people coming in and asking pointed questions
or challenging and I would in fact would have loved for them to come in.
But shouting people down, trying to get people to lose jobs
because they said something you don't agree with,
that is to me not a way of conducting these conversations.
If you do not agree with Douglas Murray,
the best thing you can possibly do is make a better argument than Douglas Murray.
That's what you do.
And if you do that, by the way, in our society now,
you're going to be rewarded with a huge platform
and lots of money and lots of attention.
The problem is no one seems to be able to do that.
And it tells you something about the strength of their argument.
So to me, come along, if you don't agree with me, come along,
explain to me why I'm wrong and my wife does it all the time.
To societies that have not done this very well.
In Russia, of course, a few weeks ago,
many of us received the news that Alexei Navalny
had passed away, possibly murdered in Russian prison.
What does that mean for the future of,
in your view, that debate, discourse in Russia
and its struggles with democracy?
I don't remember the last time Russia struggled with democracy.
It's been a long time.
Look, I mean, seriously, Russia never had a democracy, ever,
in 12 centuries.
In 1991, we had a brief window,
and even then, there was not a single democratic transition of power.
Boris Yeltsin handed power over to Vladimir Putin.
Vladimir Putin has been in power for 25 years.
I don't understand why people in the West keep talking about democracy in Russia.
There is no democracy in Russia.
I'm not sure the Russian people would want democracy if it was offered to them.
Maybe they would, maybe they wouldn't.
That wouldn't be my experience.
I don't think looking at history, that's what you'd conclude.
And the sad death of Alexei Navalny,
who, you know, agree or disagree with some things he said,
but he was a brave man and a principled man.
I don't think it says anything very much about the future of Russia,
other than the fact that Vladimir Putin is now even more firmly in control of the country.
He obviously Navalny represented the sort of liberal opposition,
but, you know, we all, I think, followed the fate of Yevgeny Prugoshin,
who challenged Putin by having his troops march on Moscow.
He decided to withdraw and miraculously Paris in an accident two days later.
Igor Girkin Strelkov, he was one of the people who orchestrated the uprising in the east of Ukraine in 2014.
He is now in prison for criticizing Vladimir Putin from a more nationalistic perspective,
saying Putin's too weak on Ukraine.
And so Vladimir Putin has consolidated power.
And I imagine he's going to hold on to it until he can't any longer.
Very wise, quite cleverly, succinctly described the current moment as being
sense-making institutions have gone mad.
And I think we should agree with basically everything you've said tonight.
Alex from our audience asks, how do we make institutions more trustworthy again?
Well, I can't because I'm not institutions, but what institutions can do is be more trustworthy.
And then people will trust them more.
It's pretty simple.
It sounds glib, I'm not being glib, but that's the answer, right?
We talked about the media.
If the mainstream media were more trustworthy and didn't jump on every bandwagon and didn't lie and didn't misrepresent
and didn't suppress information they didn't like during COVID.
I mean, look, I still don't know where COVID comes from. Do you?
We hosted a fantastic event about it a few years ago with Sari Markson, though, right?
My point is there was a time when if you'd said that there are some scientists,
I mean, this is a fact, right?
You can agree or disagree about the reality.
Some scientists believe that it came from a lab in Wuhan, okay?
You would be censored on YouTube and you would have the potential to lose, in my case, is now my living, right?
Now, do you think that improves trust in the institutions?
No.
So what the institutions have to do is stop doing stupid things like that.
And then there will be more trust in the institution.
So I wish I had more, but I don't.
Here at CIS, we've spoken a lot about the issues impacting young people, especially,
and we view the intergenerational inequality that we're observing as being a critical function of our role in the public debate as well.
One of the key areas there is the issue around housing and the concern that many young people are locked out of housing.
And yet there is the same paradox that young people should then say, if they're rational voters, should say, build more houses so they can be affordable.
But young people say, don't build more houses.
No more development.
Developers are evil.
Protect the environment.
Lower emissions.
All of this.
Don't clear land.
Why is this irrationality?
Why this paradox in the way young people are approaching issues impacting their lives?
Well, that's easy.
Young people are stupid.
I don't mean that this cohort is any more stupid than we were when we were young.
I just mean all young people are stupid, including us, when we were young.
So I don't expect them to necessarily be entirely consistent.
But what I also think is important to say is that young people are right to be upset about the lack of housing and the housing crisis.
And I don't think it's them that's preventing the houses that are being built, frankly.
The people who are preventing the houses from being built are older people who don't want houses to be built in their backyard.
And the corrupt construction and land planning situation where people who hold on to land have an incentive to do so because it drives up the price.
So it's basically a set of corrupt incentives within government combined with the fact that these governments increasingly rely on the silver vote of older people who don't seem to be thinking about their grandchildren in a way that they absolutely should be.
What we are doing to our young people is outrageous.
And not only on housing, I know you're in a better position than we are on this issue, but debt to GDP in the UK and in the US is running at over 100%.
So this means we're indebting our grandchildren, many of whom are not yet alive.
This is not how responsible society behaves.
It just isn't. And housing is just one manifestation of the way that the intergenerational bond is breaking down.
We have to be willing to do what parents and grandparents have done throughout the ages, which is sacrifice for the next generation.
We've got to give something up so that they have a better life, not least because if you don't, they're going to burn the whole thing down.
Seven young people applauding.
One of the other issues I suppose it mobilizes young people in politics is the challenge of carbon transition, climate emergency, however you like, like to define this challenge.
But again, the solutions to this seem to be from innovating our way through to smart solutions, becoming richer and more capable and more able of solving this problem.
But young people, again, seem to vote in a different direction.
Glenn, again, sorry, look, it's easy for me to make jokes about how stupid young people are, because as I say, they always are.
But we've got to stop pretending it's their fault. Who taught them this crap? Who taught them there's a climate apocalypse coming?
Who was it? It wasn't 20-year-olds, I promise you.
So the fact that they're all terrified is the reason is because they've been terrified by adults who need to step up and take some responsibility.
So look, the solution to that issue is technology and innovation.
As I said in my Oxford speech, you're not going to get poor people around the world to reduce their consumption levels and you're certainly not going to get rich people around the world to do that either.
So we've got to innovate our way out of the problem as we've always done, right?
And we should encourage young people who care about that issue to go into climate science and science in general and learn things.
And they might realize that things are not as bad and the solution isn't throwing soup on paintings or shouting or protesting.
Solution is actually doing things in the real world, which there are many young people who are doing that.
So look, the answer to this is not to sneer at young people.
The answer to this is take responsibility, understand what's happening in our education system.
And look, as a satirist, a comedian, of course I'm going to make fun of saying Greta of climate change.
But at the end of the day, we have to recognize that these issues are important to people for a reason.
We have to address the reasons both real and mythical and made up.
And that's the solution to this problem. Just mocking people isn't going to solve it.
How do you?
Just a couple more questions for us before we need to conclude.
But Brendan asks what lessons Australians can take from the rest of the world in combating these issues?
Vaccinate, and I use this word advisedly, vaccinate your children against this ideology.
When I was a young boy in the Soviet Union, probably would have gone to school at six or seven.
So this was right towards the end of the Soviet Union.
My parents said to me, two things. First of all, do not discuss anything we discussed in the house outside the house.
And second, you're going to go to school. They're going to teach you a bunch of crap.
Here's why it's all wrong. And if you have any questions, come and talk to us.
That's what you have to do. Look, that's what you have to do.
You are in that position now. So if you have young children, vaccinate them against this ideology.
And that's a big part of the solution. It starts with you individually.
And then, ultimately, whatever business, institution, organization you're in, you have to realize this is a civilizational moment.
You're not going to sit this one out. You're not going to sit this one out. This is real, right?
The crisis of meaning and the crisis of confidence in the West, Israel, if we continue slipping down this path, we will not survive.
Not in the way that we think of our civilization.
Now, look, Greece still exists, but it's not exactly the same as ancient Greece, you know, begging Germany for bailouts.
Italy still exists, but it's not exactly the Roman Empire.
This is the logical conclusion of what we're doing.
So wake up if there's any influence you have, and you probably have some influence, whether it's in your local community, whether it's in some kind of organization,
whether it's on the board of your school, if you have them, whether it's in your business, and start to actually change the world through small steps.
That's how it works. People doing whatever they can because they realize the moment is here.
And the moment is here. You're not going to sit this one out.
That's why I...
You know, like, there's literally no reason that I should be sitting here talking to any of you.
I'm not in any way different to you.
I was a comedian playing to 80 people in the rooms above a pub in London, and then I was going home one day,
and I remember I got into an altercation with some guys who told me to go back where I came from or something like that.
And then I came home, and I had an email from a comedy promoter which said,
I'm sorry, we've canceled your spot on the bill tomorrow because we have too many straight white men.
And I went, this is weird.
And so Francis and I, my co-host on Trigonometry, went, you know, this is going in the wrong direction.
Let's do something.
And we started a podcast in a room above a comedy club with zero money, zero connections, zero social media, zero followers, zero talent, many people would say.
And now we have a million subscribers. If you look at our YouTube and podcast,
and I'm sitting here on the other side of the world talking to you, that's how you do it.
So largely to that point, we are just about out of time, but James asks, comments and then asks,
many people lack the courage to be able to stand up to absurdities, excesses of ideologies.
What advice do you give them?
Almost to do the same thing that you're doing. What advice do you give them?
Well, first of all, you don't want everyone doing what I'm doing.
I don't want the competition.
Look, everyone's different. Everyone's got a different role to play.
I, people often say, well, should more people be like you?
No, we've got enough contrarian assholes like me.
You know, genuinely, right? Everybody, the role you've got to play in this is different for everybody and everyone's got to work it out for themselves.
There is no one size fits all. You know what the right thing to do is and just do it.
You encounter situations in your life daily where you could do something that would take the conversation or the business or whatever in a different direction.
And most of you probably don't because most of us don't, right?
So that is your opportunity to do something.
And by the way, you know, I think Jordan is absolutely right about this.
I don't do what I do because I have people say, oh, you're so brave. I'm not brave.
I just see where we're going and I think it's bad.
And that's the only reason I'm doing what I'm doing.
The moment I am the turkey that would vote for Christmas, I do not want to be here.
I don't. I genuinely don't.
There's plenty of other things I could do.
I am here because I genuinely think we're in a bad place and we're heading in the wrong direction.
And if you agree with me, you have a duty to do something.
That's it.
You may not want to be here, but we are very glad that you're here.
We are just about out of time.
Everyone, please thank Constantine Kissen.
Thank you very much.
Now, for decades, CIS has been a fiercely independent voice,
working tirelessly to deliver evidence-based public policy,
especially in the critical area of education.
To be notified of our future videos,
make sure you subscribe to our channel and click the notification bell.
CIS relies solely on the generosity of people like you to help us advance our cause.
Check out the links on screen now to see how you can get involved.
