human anatomy, lecture six, spinal cord, and brain.
In this lecture, I'm gonna be discussing
the components of the central nervous system.
The central nervous system is defined
as masses of nervous tissue
that are contained within the cranium of the skull
and also contained within the neural canal
located along the length of the vertebral column.
Now, there are other parts of the nervous system
that are distinct from the central nervous system.
There's the peripheral nervous system.
What do I mean by peripheral nervous system?
The peripheral nervous system
are the long bundles of nerve fibers, axons,
that are contained within the nerves
that innervate the legs and the arms
and other structures in the body.
Since they're outside of this bony armor
within the vertebral canal or within the brain,
this portion of the nervous system is designated
as the peripheral nervous system.
It not only looks a little different from the CNS,
but in addition, it has functional differences.
And we're gonna talk about those functional differences
in a little bit.
Well, the CNS begins life
as basically a long hollow tube of tissue.
And portions of the tube remain relatively simple
and this portion of the neural tube forms a spinal cord.
But the more cranial portions of the neural tube
become much larger and develop bulges
and constrictions and folds
and gradually becomes complicated
to a much more complex structure,
which is gonna be the brain.
Let's start out talking about the CNS
by focusing our attention on the spinal cord itself.
The spinal cord is a cylindrical mass of nervous tissue
that occupies the neural canal
all the way from the base of the head,
the base of the skull,
down to about the level of the second lumbar vertebra,
or L2.
This mass of cells contains millions of nerve cells
and long, thin processes that are extending
from the nerve cells
that are gathered together to form nerves.
At intervals along the spinal cord,
we have bundles of nerve fibers
that are emitted from the spinal cord.
And these penetrate between holes
that are interposed between adjacent vertebrae.
So these masses of nerve fibers are called spinal nerves
and they penetrate between C2 and C1,
C3 and C2, C4 and C3, et cetera,
all the way down the length of the spinal cord.
In many regions of the spinal cord,
these peripheral spinal nerves are fairly small.
For example, the spinal nerves
that innervate the thorax of the body
are relatively modest.
They may be about the diameter of a piece of piano wire
or a thin piece of lead pencil.
And they follow the course of each rib.
Along this passageway, they innervate various structures
like muscles and portions of the skin.
So in large parts of the body,
these spinal nerves are relatively modest.
But in some portions of the body,
the spinal nerves have lots and lots of work to do
because they have to innervate many, many structures.
And the regions I'm talking about
are particularly to the neck and upper thoracic region
and the region and the lumbar area of the spinal cord.
In these regions of the spinal cord,
the nerves have to be much larger
because they have to pass down into the arms and legs
and provide innervation for all the muscles
of the arms and legs.
And as well, they have to receive sensations
from very sensitive structures like the hands and feet.
So in these regions of the peripheral nervous system,
these peripheral nerves have to be extremely large
and they penetrate into the spinal cord
as a big mass or network of fibers.
In the cervical and thoracic regions of the spinal cord,
the spinal nerves that originate from the spinal cord
blend together into a big network.
And these networks are called plexuses.
The plexus that supplies nerves to the arms and hands
are called the brachial plexuses.
And they're present on either side of the body,
located primarily in the armpit.
The collections of nerves that weave together
and then branch again,
distribute nerves to various portions of the arms.
In the armpit, the brachial plexus is formed
by thick branches or rimae from spinal nerves C5 through T1.
And what I mean by that,
these are the nerves that originate
in the vicinity of cervical vertebra 5
through thoracic vertebra 1.
They form many branches that go down the arm
and innervate lots of different structures.
The major branches are quite easily identified.
And if you dissect the cadaver or look
underneath the skin of a human being,
you can find three major branches of the brachial plexus
that run down the arm.
These three major branches are called the radial nerve,
the ulnar nerve, and the median nerve.
They run on the ventral surface of the arm
and the respective portions of the arm.
The ulnar nerve, as I said in a previous lecture,
curls around the medial surface of the arm for a little while
and it runs in a little groove
between the alecronon process of the ulnar
and the medial epicondyle.
And once again, that ulnar nerve can be compressed
and cause a sensation of pain in your arm
when you so-called hit your funny bone.
If you happen to hit your funny bone by accident,
and don't do this deliberately because it's painful,
but if you hit it by accident the next time this happens,
pay attention to where the burning sensation is in your arm.
You'll notice that the burning sensation will be confined
to the little finger and one half of the third finger.
And this regions of these two fingers
represents the territories that are
innervated by the ulnar nerve.
So you don't have to be a physician
to distinguish where the ulnar nerve goes.
You just have to hit your arm by accident.
The remaining portion of the hand is mainly
innervated by the median nerve, which
innervates the index finger and the second finger.
And then finally, a portion of the thumb
receives innervation from the radial nerve.
So each one of these large nerves
has its own particular territory to innervate.
And it provides motor innervation
to the muscles of the hand and sensory innervation
for the sensory structures that are located
in the skin of the hand.
All of these peripheral nerves are fairly robust
when you dissect the cadaver and look at the nerves
in the forearm.
The median nerve can be, oh, perhaps, a half
the diameter of a pencil.
So it's a fairly substantial structure.
It may be bigger than a lot of people might think.
There's one additional branch of the brachial plexus.
It's also rather substantial.
It's called the axillary nerve.
It goes to the posterior portion of the arm
or the dorsal portion of it and provides innervation
to muscles like the deltoid muscle.
Now when you proceed down the spinal cord
and look at additional spinal nerves,
you'll run into another plexus of nerves
at the lumbar portion, a lumbosacral portion
of the spinal cord.
At this area, the spinal nerves fuse
into another large branching plexus or network of nerves.
And this network of nerves is called the lumbosacral plexus.
Nerves that emerge from the lumbosacral plexus
innervate the leg.
Now once again, this lumbosacral plexus
has many, many divisions.
But there's two major divisions that are quite obvious
to people that specialize in neuroscience or neurology.
The major nerve that innervates the front of the leg
is called the femoral nerve.
And it's a branch of the lumbosacral plexus
that extends down the anterior part of the thigh.
The femoral nerve branches into lots of little tiny branches.
It kind of fans out from the front of the leg.
And it provides motor innervation
to the muscles that extend the leg.
And you may remember that muscle
as the quadriceps muscle, okay?
Occasionally the femoral nerve can be subject to damage.
For example, let's say you're getting onto a bus
and you catch your foot in an obstacle or something
so you really pull on your leg by accident.
This can cause torsion or tension on the femoral nerve
and can cause it to be temporarily damaged.
When the femoral nerve is damaged in this way,
it can cause temporary paralysis of the front of the leg
and an inability to feel things.
But fortunately, the femoral nerve belongs
to the division of the nervous system
called the peripheral nervous system.
And in the peripheral nervous system,
if a nerve fiber is crushed or pulled on or tugged on
and it gets temporarily damaged,
it has the ability to actually recover.
If a axon is crushed or a nerve fiber is crushed
in the peripheral nervous system,
part of the axon will tend to die off.
But the remainder of the axon that's connected back
up to the spinal cord has the ability to sprout
and grow back down into the nerve that innervates the leg.
So even if you damage the femoral nerve to the leg,
it has the ability to gradually grow back and recover
and provide you with a renewed ability
to move the leg and to have sensations.
This is a very fortunate characteristic
of the peripheral nervous system.
And unfortunately, it's not shared by nerve fibers
in the central nervous system.
So if you damage nerve fibers that are progressing
along inside the spinal cord or inside the brain,
they will tend to try to grow back after the damage,
but usually their ability to grow back is stopped
by the accumulations of scar tissue
in the central nervous system.
So unlike the peripheral nervous system,
it's very difficult to cause nerve regeneration
in the central nervous system.
And that's why damage to the spinal cord
or portions of the brain are so debilitating
because they're very difficult to recover from.
The nerves will not grow back.
Another portion of the lumbosacral plexus
innervates the posterior portion of the leg.
This is a very large nerve called the sciatic nerve,
which emerges from the opening in the posterior part
of the pelvis.
The sciatic nerve travels along the back of the leg
and innervates the dorsal muscles of the leg
that cause it to undergo flexion.
Once again, this sciatic nerve can also be damaged
by excessive tension or pulling on it.
And if it becomes inflamed,
this can cause a symptom called sciatica
in which you experience jolts of pain
that travel down the lower leg.
Once again, because the sciatic nerve is a peripheral nerve,
it often can recover from this kind of a situation.
All of these spinal nerves in the lumbosacral plexus
come out of holes in the sacral part of the plexus,
innervate the leg.
But you may remember that the spinal cord
does not project past the second lumbar vertebra.
So where do these nerves come from?
Even though the mass of neural tissue
in the spinal cord does not extend below L2,
it nevertheless gives off lots of long nerve fibers
that project past the end of the spinal cord
and down into the lower regions of the vertebral canal.
This accumulation of nerve fibers below the spinal cord
is called the cauda icina,
which translates from the Latin as tail of the horse.
These bushy-like mass of nerve fibers
kind of resembles the hairs that are seen
in the tail of a horse.
So this arrangement allows the spinal cord
to innervate things that are way below
the level of the second lumbar vertebra.
And also, this anatomical arrangement
is very helpful for physicians.
The spinal canal is filled with fluid
called cerebral spinal fluid.
And this mass of nerves that's extending
from the end of the spinal cord is surrounded by this fluid
and float around in this fluid.
This makes it possible for a physician
to insert a needle between the L4 and L5 vertebra.
And because the needle is not piercing
the spinal cord itself,
it merely pushes through this bundle of nerve fibers
and moves past them without hurting them.
That makes it possible to extract
a small amount of cerebral spinal fluid
from the lower spinal canal
and examine this sample of spinal fluid
for signs of infection, like, for example, meningitis,
bacteria that cause inflammations
of the coverings of the nervous system.
Another use for this ability
to access the cerebral spinal fluid of the spinal canal
is it gives the physician potential
to introduce anesthetics into the lower vertebral canal.
And so, if you are a person that's going through childbirth
and you're experiencing lots of pain,
it's possible to administer anesthetics
in this part of the spinal canal
and relieve pain that's associated with childbirth.
So this particular anatomical arrangement
of the spinal cord is very helpful for medical treatments.
One final thing is that the spinal cord
can kind of move a little bit when you flex your back.
If you bend over quite radically,
this causes the spinal cord to creep upwards a little bit.
And so, when someone's trying to perform a spinal tap
or retrieves cerebral spinal fluid from the canal,
it's very frequent for them to ask you
to lie on your side and bend forward.
And that'll pull the spinal cord a little higher up
and make it certain that you're not gonna intersect
the cord with a needle.
Well, this is the fundamental description
of the spinal cord that I wanna give today.
The only final note I wanna mention about the spinal cord
is it's divided into two regions.
The more dorsal region is more or less devoted
to reception of sensory information.
So all the sensory structures of the body
feed information into a structure called
a dorsal root ganglion and the dorsal portion
of the spinal cord.
On the other hand, the ventral portion
of the spinal cord is mainly devoted to motor neurons,
the nerve cells that provide excitatory impulses
that cause muscles and glands to function.
So the spinal cord is divided into two functional compartments,
a dorsal sensory compartment and a ventral motor compartment.
Now let's turn our attention to the other part
of this central nervous system or the brain.
The brain is mainly contained within the cranial cavity
of the skull and it's divisible into seven major regions.
As you move upward from the spinal cord,
the spinal cord expands into a structure
called the medulla oblongata,
which is at the very base of the brain.
The next division of the brain is the pons,
which is a kind of a ventral bulge
on the bottom of the brain.
And the pons is connected intimately
with another structure located dorsally
to the medulla called the cerebellum.
The cerebellum is a name for a structure
which is called the miniature brain of the brain.
It's very highly folded and it's intimately connected
with the pons.
So the pons and cerebellum kind of function together
as a particular unit, a functional unit.
Now just above the cerebellum,
we have another division of the brain called the midbrain.
Above the midbrain, we have a structure
called the hypothalamus.
Above the hypothalamus,
we have another structure called the thalamus.
And finally, the crowning glory of the brain
is a big, highly folded mass layer of tissue
called the cortex.
Now all of these parts of the brain have many subdivisions.
Nerve cells are organized into clusters
in these parts of the brain.
And these clusters are called neuronal nuclei,
which is kind of a confusing term.
Neuronal nucleus can contain thousands
or thousands of individual nerve cells.
And each one of these neuronal nuclei
has their own individual function.
And there are dozens and dozens of nuclei
scattered throughout these different regions of the brain.
We don't want to go into the anatomy
of every single one of these nuclei.
But nevertheless, it's possible to make some generalizations
about the functions of each one of these brain regions
so that we can understand a little bit more detail
how the brain functions.
The medulla of the brain basically provides
for a lot of the very simple, repetitive functions
that are regulated by brain tissue.
For example, there's a collection of neurons
in the medulla oblongata,
which is called the pre-Botzinger complex.
And in the 1990s, it was discovered
that this complex of nerve cells continuously fires
every couple of seconds to generate
a burst of electrical impulses.
These electrical impulses are carried down
to nerves that innervate the diaphragm and other muscles
and they're responsible for the generation
of the regular muscle movements
that are necessary to control respiration.
So the pre-Botzinger complex of the medulla
is the impulse-generating center
that causes us to breathe regularly all the time.
And one of the remarkable things about this center
is that you can take a slice of the medulla
out of the brain of an experimental animal
and then you can put it in addition,
attach electrodes to it,
and you'll see that this massive tissue
constantly generates regular impulses
just as if it were in the body.
So it's a little clock
that runs the respiratory mechanisms of the body.
There are other similar collections
of nerve cells in the medulla
that also are responsible for other regular events.
For example, the control of heart rate
and the control of blood pressure.
And a lot of these similar rather simple functions
are regulated by the medulla oblongata.
The pons in cerebellum
have quite different functions to carry out.
These two areas of the brain seem to be fundamentally
acting to control the movement of the limbs.
The pons in cerebellum
are constantly getting feedback from the limbs
about where they're located in three-dimensional space.
And so when we initiate a movement,
we first depend upon the pons in cerebellum
to tell us where our limbs are in space.
And then later on, when we've moved,
we can adjust the movement of our arms
by knowing where they're located precisely.
So cerebellum and pons are really important
for the control of limb movement.
And you can demonstrate this, unfortunately,
when you have patients come into a physician's office
that might have had damage to the cerebellum
or some of the nerve fibers that leave the cerebellum.
Cerebellum damage causes a condition called
intention tremor.
And what I mean by this is that a patient
with a damage to the cerebellum
has no really good precise information
about where his hand is in space.
So if that person closes their eyes,
they really don't know where their hand is.
That means when a person turns to reach for something
like if he wants to reach for a glass on a table,
someone with cerebellum damage may knock the glass over
because he doesn't really know where his hand is
in relation to the glass.
So generally, in this condition,
when you're sitting quietly in a chair,
your hands will be quite still
and you can control them relatively well.
But when you try to move them,
then they develop a tremor called an intention tremor
that will interfere with your ability
to accurately position your hands.
Fortunately, cerebellum damage is not terribly common.
When we move up into the rest of the brain,
we run into the midbrain.
And the midbrain contains a specialized collection
of nerve cells that also regulate movement.
These nerve cells utilize a particular chemical
called dopamine.
And this dopamine is sent by these nerve cells
to other nerve cells as a means of communicating
with the rest of the brain.
As these cells use this dopamine,
some of it is transformed into a brown pigment.
And this brown pigment is called neuromellinin.
Accordingly, these dopaminergic neurons
in this part of the brain
tend to accumulate this dark staining substance.
And therefore, these collection of neurons
is called the substantia nigra.
Substantia nigra is the Latin term for black substance.
So if you take a cross-section of the midbrain,
you'll see a mass of these nerve cells
that looks quite brown.
Well, it's known that these nerve cells
are important for regulating movement.
And unfortunately, there's a disease
that affects the function of these nerve cells.
In a fraction of people that are aged 50
or years of age or greater,
these particular types of neurons, for some reason,
start to die.
And if too many of these nerve cells die,
if about 70 to 80% of them die,
then this results in abnormalities in movement.
And this condition is called Parkinson's disease.
The symptoms of Parkinson's disease
are opposite to those that you see in cerebellar damage.
Now remember I said in the cerebellar damage,
you get an intention tremor.
That means that when you try to pick up something,
your hands will move past it.
But in Parkinson's disease,
you have something called a rest tremor.
That means your hands at rest
are constantly shaking all the time
because you don't have a good control of your movements.
Parkinson's disease is unfortunately relatively common.
It seems to affect about 500,000 different Americans.
Why these particular nerve cells
tend to die off in this disease is not clear.
And there's been many approaches in medical practice
to try to control this unfortunate disease.
One of the therapies that's been used
is to try to inject chemicals
that restore the levels of dopamine
in the substantia nigra.
And this can have a dramatic effect
upon the symptoms of Parkinson's disease.
It can help people with this disease quite a lot.
But unfortunately, if you give too much of this chemical,
the dopamine levels in the brain get too elevated
and then you have other abnormalities
in movement that occur.
So this is a very difficult disease to treat.
Recently, there's been some new work
by a group of scientists at Northwestern University
that may give us a clue
as to why some of these nerve cells die.
It appears that these neurons of the substantia nigra
have a particular type of channel in their cell membrane
that allows calcium into the cell.
And these particular channels seem to become abnormal
in these cells and cause these cells to die
from calcium overloads.
If it were possible to give a drug
that would change the nature of these calcium channels,
it may become possible to successfully treat Parkinson's disease
without use of stem cells or surgery or anything else.
So that would be one of the hopes of people
with this disease.
The midbrain, pons, and medulla
constitutes a portion of the brain called the brain stem,
which is a kind of a narrow stem-like structure
upon which the rest of the brain sits.
Now, in addition to the functions I've already talked about,
the brain stem is the site of nerves
that also sprout out from the brain.
Now, you remember that at intervals along the spinal cord,
we had nerves that originate from the spinal cord
called spinal nerves.
Well, the same type of thing happens with the brain,
but here we call these nerves cranial nerves.
And the cranial nerves are extending from the brain
at regular intervals to innervate structures in the head.
As it turns out, there's 12 cranial nerves,
and they're numbered one through 12,
and each one of them is given a special name.
Now, I can rattle off the names of these nerves quite easily,
and here's what the names are.
Number one is olfactory, number two is optic,
number three is acutomotor,
number four is called the trochlear nerve,
number five is called the trigeminal nerve,
six is abducens, seven is facial,
eight is auditory, nine is glossopharyngeal,
10 is vagus, and 11 is spinal accessory,
and 12 is hypoglossal.
Quite a long list.
I'm not gonna ask you to remember
or even really understand where all these nerves go to.
I will tell you how to memorize the order of them, though.
Here's what it is.
When I was a student, as a graduate student,
I learned a little jingle.
On old Olympus towering top,
a Finn and German viewed some hops.
Now, that sentence doesn't mean anything, does it?
But it's a very good way to memorize the cranial nerves
because each word stands for a cranial nerve.
On old Olympus corresponds to olfactory, optic,
and ocular motor.
Towering top stands for trochlear and trigeminal,
and so on down the list.
So this is a simple way of remembering
what the cranial nerves are.
But what do the cranial nerves do?
Well, two of them are quite obvious.
The olfactory nerve and the optic nerve
innervate sensory structures that provide us
with sensations of olfaction and vision,
and they're sprouting up from the anterior part of the brain.
Some of the other cranial nerves
are important for the control of the eye muscles,
and that's cranial nerves three, four, and six.
They control some of the muscles around the eyeball.
The trigeminal nerve provides sensory information
to most of the face.
The facial nerve provides motor innervation
through most of the face.
The auditory nerve innervates the ear,
and the glossopharyngeal, vagus, accessory,
and hypoglossal nerves provide sensory and motor innervation
to parts of the head and neck.
Most of these nerves are confined to the head and neck area,
except for the vagus.
The vagus is named after the same Latin word
that gives us the word vagabond,
and vagus is a traveling, wandering nerve
that leaves the brain and travels all the way down the neck
to provide innervation to the respiratory
and gastrointestinal systems.
So all of these nerves originate
from specific parts of the brain stem,
and they originate in clusters of nerves called nuclei,
and in this case, they're called cranial nerve nuclei.
Occasionally, some of these cranial nerves
become subject to problems,
and one of these common problems
is something called Bell's palsy.
Some of you may know somebody with Bell's palsy
because it's fairly common.
It can affect one out of about 80 people
over some time in their life.
So what is Bell's palsy?
The symptoms of Bell's palsy are easily detected.
They're usually manifested as a partial paralysis
of some of the muscles on one half of the face,
so that, for example, someone with Bell's palsy
may have a drooping eyelid,
or may have a drooping corner of their mouth
when they smile, they only smile with one half of their mouth,
and the other part is paralyzed.
What is Bell's palsy?
Well, Bell's palsy seems to result
from a compression of the facial nerve.
The facial nerve exits the skull
at a little opening of foramen
in the immediate vicinity of the ear,
and when it does this,
it sometimes can become compressed or inflamed
due to some sort of an infection,
and therefore, the function of the facial nerve
will be compromised.
That'll cause a temporary paralysis of some muscles.
Fortunately, Bell's palsy usually self-corrects,
in most cases, and after about two to three months
of a peculiar appearance and a weeping or drooling
from one side of the face,
the facial nerve will grow back
and re-intervate these structures
and normal function will resume.
Well, in addition to giving off cranial nerves,
the brainstem and other regions of the brain
have a lot of other functions to fulfill.
One of the things that I'm particularly interested in
is a structure in the brain called the hypothalamus.
I've been studying the hypothalamus in my research
for the last 25 years,
and I'm still learning things about it every day.
It has lots of different functions,
and some of these functions are particularly interesting.
Some of the nerve cells in this part of the brain
regulate body temperature.
When these nerve cells detect chemicals
that accompany bacterial infections,
they're stimulated to raise body temperature.
So when you put a thermometer in your mouth
and you measure a body temperature of 101 degrees,
that means that some nerve cells in your hypothalamus
are becoming overactive
and causing your body temperature to go up.
This has a beneficial effect upon recovering
from infections because a higher body temperature
tends to activate the immune system
and apparently seems to be able,
enable us to kill bacteria more easily.
Other portions of the hypothalamus
have other functions to fulfill.
Some portions of the hypothalamus regulate
the secretion of hormones from the pituitary gland,
so they have an important effect upon the endocrine system.
There's another small mass of nerve cells
in the hypothalamus,
which is somewhat larger in males than in females.
This mass of cells is sensitive to sex steroids
or sex hormones,
and when you expose a growing embryo to sex steroids,
this particular mass of cells in the brain enlarges.
Some studies in animals like sheep and hamsters
suggest that this particular cluster of nerve cells
is important for the manifestation of male sexual behavior,
and so sexual behavior is one of the functions
that's regulated by the hypothalamus.
Finally, there's two other behaviors that are also important
and are regulated by the hypothalamus.
Food intake and appetite is very much affected
by cells in the hypothalamus,
and if you damage some of these cells in the hypothalamus,
you can provoke a rat to become very much a glutton
and start eating and eating all the time
until it gets monstrously obese.
And finally, there's one other cluster of cells
in the hypothalamus that regulate sleep and arousal.
These cells contain a particular chemical called orexin,
and for some reason, in a few individuals,
these particular hypothalamic nerve cells die.
When they die, they no longer make this chemical
called orexin, and this causes affected people
to have a deficit and arousal.
They're sleepy all the time,
and this causes a condition called narcolepsy.
So it's clear that the hypothalamus has an important influence
on lots of fairly simple behaviors
that is nevertheless important for life.
Now, above the hypothalamus is a structure called a thalamus.
The thalamus is kind of a way station
that processes information that's passing
from the spinal cord up into the cortex.
So initial sensory information
usually passes through the thalamus
and is analyzed and made more sophisticated
until it's conveyed up to the higher levels of the brain.
The uppermost regions of the brain constitute
a highly folded layer called the cortex.
In human beings, the cortex is highly folded.
It's divided into grooves called sulky
and ridges called gyrie.
In other animals, the cortex is relatively smooth,
and it fits quite nicely inside the skull,
for example, a rat.
But in human beings, the cortex has to be
so much larger than in other animals
that it has to be thrown into folds
so it can be accommodated within the skull.
You can divide the cortex into a number of regions,
and each one of these regions tend to have
their own specific functions associated with them.
For example, the region of the cortex
beneath the occipital bone is called the occipital cortex,
and it's specialized for processing visual information.
The frontal part of the cortex is designed
for the planning of movements.
There's a particular region of the cortex
that's organized around a large fold in the brain,
and this fold is called the central sulcus.
The precentral gyrus, just anterior to the central sulcus,
is specialized for the actual production
of movement by the body.
So if you stimulate this portion of the cortex,
you can cause jerking movements of the hands or feet.
Just posterior to the central sulcus
is the post-central gyrus,
and this part of the cortex is specialized
for the direct sensation of sensory information.
So if you stimulate this part of the cortex,
you can cause sensations of burning or cold
or other things in an awake individual.
Each portion of the cortex is specialized
for different functions.
The complexity of the cortex is almost too much
to go into in this particular lecture,
but there are a number of disorders of the cortex
that are worthwhile talking about at this particular time.
One dysfunction of the cortex
appears to be a disorder called schizophrenia.
And schizophrenia is thought that the frontal portions
of the cortex are functioning abnormally,
and when they do that,
they provoke a number of very serious symptoms.
A person with schizophrenia seems to experience
auditory or even visual hallucinations
so that someone with schizophrenia can hear voices
that other people can't hear,
and they can't distinguish whether or not they're real
or not real.
Occasionally, people with schizophrenia will feel
that other people are talking about them
or saying derogatory things about them,
even though this isn't true.
And of course, if you or I were to walk around
and constantly hear nasty or negative comments
about ourselves, we'd get quite anxious and nervous,
and we label this as paranoia,
even though people with schizophrenia may feel
that this is a real condition.
We do not know what causes schizophrenia.
It's a serious neurological disorder
and may affect as many as 1% of the total population.
So if we could determine what causes it,
it would be a great benefit to society.
Recent research has focused a lot of attention
on what causes schizophrenia,
and there's been some hope in the last couple of years
that we may be getting close
to understanding what causes it.
This hope arose out of a study of a family in Scotland
that have an unusual large incidence of schizophrenia.
Something like half of the people in this particular family
have inherited either schizophrenia
or a bipolar disorder, depression.
From these kind of genetic studies
of this particular family,
there's been one gene identified recently
called Disrupted in Schizophrenia I, or DISC I.
It's now known that this gene produces a protein
in the brain that's responsible for lots
of the developmental processes that take place
during development of the brain.
And perhaps this gene will help us understand
what the causes of this serious mental disorder are.
One additional neurological disease
is of particular interest to lots of people
is something called Alzheimer's disease.
In Alzheimer's disease, a specific collection of nerves
in a specific part of the cortex,
which is called the temporal lobe,
suddenly start to die off.
Since this portion of the brain is particularly important
for the generation of memories,
in Alzheimer's disease, affected people have great difficulty
in recalling past events,
and they have even more difficulty in forming new memories.
Eventually, this leads to a condition
called Alzheimer's dementia.
It may be affecting at now, at this particular time,
as many as five million Americans.
It's an age-related disorder, so that as you get older,
your chances of getting Alzheimer's disease increase.
Approximately one out of 10 people over the ages of 71
will get Alzheimer's disease,
and as you achieve ages between 80 and 90,
one out of four people may acquire this disorder.
Obviously, this is having catastrophic effects
upon older Americans and to the society as a whole.
So it would be very useful if we could determine
what causes this disorder.
Neurosinists have been able to identify
a number of proteins that are involved
in the creation of Alzheimer's disease,
and these proteins include a protein called
amyloid precursor protein,
and another one called apolipoprotein E.
And it turns out that if you inherited
a particular form of apolipoprotein E,
your chances of getting Alzheimer's disease
are greatly increased.
Problem with all these findings about Alzheimer's disease
is that none of them so far have really led
to the identification of a cure for this disorder.
Hopefully, as neuroscience continues its progress,
some way of treating Alzheimer's disease
and removing the accumulation of amyloid in the brain
may be achieved, and this is something we can all hope for,
particularly as we get older.
So this concludes our brief tour
through the central nervous system.
Obviously, there's lots of information about the CNS
that I could continue to talk about,
but it's such a complex area of the brain
that an overview of this is probably
the best introduction to it
that I could want to do at this point.
Now in succeeding lectures,
we're going to identify some of the structures
that impact upon brain function,
particularly we'd like to talk about sensory organs
like the eye and the ear that help feed information
to the central nervous system
and help us make sense about the things
that are going on in our environment.
This ends lecture six.
If you borrowed this course from a public library
and would like your own copy of the course guide
for future reference,
call recorded books at 1-800-636-3399,
and we'll send you a free copy.
A shipping charge will apply.
