Human Anatomy, Lecture 9, Lower Digestive System.
In this lecture I'm going to be discussing the
continued passage of food into the remainder of the digestive system
and the lower portions of the digestive system include the small intestine and
the large intestine. Well, after food leaves the stomach it
passes through a valve-like structure called the pylorus
and this pylorus regulates the passage of food into the small intestine
and only allows the small amounts of food at a time
so that the intestine has a proper interval to digest what's admitted into it.
When food leaves the stomach it passes into a
initial portion of the small intestine called the duodenum.
The duodenum is a relatively short muscular tube.
It extends from the right side of the body toward the left side of the body.
It's only about a foot long and it encloses a large structure that's
also important for the digestion of food which is the pancreas.
The pancreas is a gland that's suspended in connective tissue
that hangs onto the lower portion of the stomach and also attaches to the duodenum.
So the stomach and the duodenum more or less encircle the pancreas.
The pancreas is a short tube that's firmly attached to the posterior wall
of the abdominal cavity by large amounts of connective tissue.
And the duodenum is the place where most of the food molecules are
begun to be absorbed into the circulation.
Now in order to start the digestive food the duodenum has to overcome a
serious problem and that problem is that the food
that leaves the stomach is highly acidified. As you may remember the
stomach produces large amounts of hydrochloric acid
and the hydrochloric acid is ideal for digestion of large proteins into small
molecules like amino acids and this is very
important for the initial stages of food digestion.
But if this highly acid fluid reaches the duodenum without being modified
the acid would also tend to destroy proteins like enzymes that are necessary
to digest the remainder of food. So how does the duodenum overcome this
problem of this incredibly acid content that's entering it?
Well there's two solutions to this problem.
One of the solutions is that the pancreas produces copious amounts of
fluid and the fluid that it's produced is dumped into a small
duct that delivers the fluid into the lumen of the duodenum.
This fluid is deliberately designed to be very alkaline
so the basic or alkaline pH of this fluid
helps neutralize the acid that's coming in from the stomach.
Also there are specialized glands in the duodenum called burners glands
and these glands also secrete an alkaline fluid and together these two
basic or alkaline fluids help neutralize all the stomach acid
and make it possible for the initial stages of digestion of food.
There are other specialized structures within the lumen of the small
intestine that facilitate the digestion and absorption of food molecules.
One of the things that's special about the small intestine is that
the inside of the small intestine is decorated by millions of tiny little
finger shaped processes. These tiny finger shaped processes are
not really visible to the naked eye but they're very important because they
greatly increase the surface area that's accessible to the food
within the interior of the small intestine.
These finger shaped processes are called villi and they decorate the entire
lining of the small intestine from the beginning to the end.
As food continues on its journey through the small intestine and enters other
regions of the small intestine, the next region of the small
intestine is called the jejunum and this is a
massive musketer tubing that's approximately six feet long.
The terminal part of the small intestine is another segment called the
ilium and the ilium adds another eight feet to the total
length of the small intestine. Now one of the differences between the
duodenum and the remaining portions of the small intestine
is that the jejunum and ilium are not tightly attached to the posterior
abdominal wall. If they did they just simply wouldn't fit
in place because they're quite long and they have to be highly coiled.
So instead of being attached to the posterior abdominal wall
they're suspended from the wall by sheets of connective tissue
called mesenteries. So these portions of the small intestine
are more or less hanging from these sheets of tissue that anchor them to the
back of the wall but don't plaster them down very firmly
and this loose arrangement of the jejunum and ilium allows them to
contract and expand and move around as food passes down the
intestine and that anatomical arrangement makes the function of the
small intestine much more easy.
Now in order to absorb all the food and deliver it into the rest of the body
the intestines have to be richly supplied with blood.
So blood vessels are percolating through the walls of the small intestine
and they absorb the nutrient molecules that are digested within the lumen.
The blood vessels that deliver blood to the intestines and take it away are
kind of unusual. Now let's describe them in a little bit
of detail. There are three main blood vessels that
supply blood to the gastrointestinal system and these large blood vessels
are directly sprouting off the descending aorta so they contain lots of blood
under high amounts of pressure. The first blood vessel that supplies
blood to the GI tract is called the celiac trunk
and it comes off of the aorta not far from where the aorta passes
underneath the diaphragm to enter the the abdominal cavity.
The celiac trunk provides blood to the stomach and also to the spleen
incidentally. The next larger blood vessel that
supplies blood to the GI tract is a blood vessel called the superior
mesentery artery and this supplies all of the blood to the small
intestine. Finally there's a third large blood
vessel that branches off the descending aorta called the
inferior mesentery artery. It penetrates into the mesentaries that
support the large intestine and provides blood to most of the large
intestine. Well these are relatively routine arteries
there's nothing terribly special about them but there is something special
about the veins that return blood from the intestines.
The veins that return blood from the intestines are filled full of nutrient
molecules that have been absorbed from the intestines and instead of going
directly to the back to the heart and being distributed directly to the body
the blood from the intestines is collected into a series of veins that
converge to form something called the portal vein and the portal vein
represents part of a very unusual type of circulation.
You may recall that in a normal circulation the artery supply blood to an
organ, the blood breaks up into a capillary bed and then the blood from
the capillaries is collected into a vein that goes back to the heart.
Well in the gastrointestinal system the capillaries of the
intestines deliver blood to the portal vein and then the portal vein goes
instead of back to the heart it goes to the liver.
The blood entering the liver from the portal brain
portal vein then breaks up into a second bed of sinusoidal capillaries
and that allows the liver to absorb lots of the nutrients that are coming in
from the the gut and also allows the liver to
modulate the blood that's passing through it and then the blood that leaves
the liver collects into a second vein called the hepatic vein that
eventually goes back to the heart by entering into the inferior vena kiva.
So here we have a very peculiar type of situation in which we have two capillary
beds that are interposed between arteries and veins rather
than a single capillary bed. This unusual type of circulation is
referred to as a portal system and it's only present in a very few
organs in the body. We'll talk about the functional implications of this
unusual circulation and a little bit later in this lecture when we talk more
about the liver.
Now one of the interesting things once again about this portal vein
is that it continually trans transmits nutrients to the liver
and that actually happens even during development in utero.
Now in utero and embryonic life a growing baby
cannot derive any nutrients from the GI tract but of course
a baby is not eating anything in utero. So the intestines in the
and the stomach really have very little to do during development because
there's no food to be processed. So where do the nutrients that nourish
the baby come from? Well the nutrients that nourish a baby
of course have to be coming from the maternal circulation
and are transferred from the maternal circulation to the placenta.
The placenta absorbs the nutrients from the mother and then
delivers them into the baby by an umbilical vein that goes up the
umbilical cord. Now the umbilical vein during development
directly connects to the portal vein and therefore it delivers nutrients to the
liver just as it will eventually in later life in the adult
condition. So nutrients are entering the body in the
same way as during embryogenesis that they will eventually in the adult life.
Now when the baby is born this umbilical vein is clamped off
when the umbilical cord is cut. All the blood pressure in it
disappears and gradually this connection to the portal vein
is lost and absorbed. So the portal vein then reverts its
delivery of nutrients away from the umbilical vein
and it receives nutrients instead from the gastrointestinal tract.
Well after a lot of the nutrients and a lot of the water has been absorbed from
the food then the food enters the large intestine.
Another word for the large intestine is a colon and the colon can be divided into
three separate regions. On the right side of the body we have
a a straight portion called the ascending colon
which goes up the right side of the body to the right of the
intestines, the small intestines. Then the colon
moves across the body which is called and that portion is called the transverse
colon and then the colon descends again on the
left-hand side of the body and that portion is the descending colon
which eventually terminates in the rectum and delivers
fecal material to be removed from the body.
Now in human beings the main task of the colon is to mainly absorb
any of the amounts of remaining water that still are present in the food and
fecal material and that is actually a fairly
substantial job. Something like nine liters of fluid
enter the gut every day partly derived from
pancreatic secretions and partly from the fluid that we've ingested when we eat
food. If we were to lose nine liters of fluid a
day in fecal material we'd be dehydrated almost instantly
so most of this fluid has to be reabsorbed by the the large intestine
and approximately only about a hundred ml of fluid eventually leaves the body.
To do this the large intestine depends on cells that rapidly absorb water from
the fluid from the fecal material and as the material in the
large intestine gets more and more condensed and drier
it exerts more friction on the interior of the intestine
so the intestine has to protect itself by secreting lots of slippery fluid
called mucus that lubricates the passage of material
in the large intestine and allows it to leave the body without damaging the
these hollow structures. Now the structure of the GI tract is
fairly standard in human beings but in lots of other animals the structure of
the GI tract varies considerably depending on what kind of a diet they
eat. Now in some animals there's not very much
of a need for the processes that take place in the large intestine.
Some animals like shrews and moles eat only insects or animals like whales eat
lots and lots of crustaceans and this type of a diet doesn't require very
much food processing in the large intestine
so these animals don't have any large intestine at all.
On the other hand some other animals require the large intestine for other
purposes and these animals include creatures like rabbits and horses
they're continually munching on grass or leaves and once again
this type of a diet contains lots and lots of cellulose
and for most organisms the cellulose is very difficult to digest so
what happens in rabbits and horses is that they develop very large large
intestines and the large intestines become filled with
lots of different bacteria and these bacteria have the ability to
digest these cellulose and turn it into nutrients that these
animals can use. So rabbits and horses have large
intestines that are somewhat similar to the and function to the function of
the stomachs and cows. In animals that eat lots of leaves
and grass this digestive process produces something
like 70% of all the calories needed by these animals.
In humans there's still a fair amount of chemical
processing that goes on in the large intestine but the intestinal bacteria
and human beings probably produce something like only 10% of our needed
calorie caloric intake so we rely a little bit on chemical
processing in the large intestine but not nearly as much as some other animals.
Nevertheless the large intestine contains a colossal amount of bacteria
some estimates suggest that there's something like 100 trillion bacterial
cells in the human gut and they're all necessary for our
maintenance of our health because they do break down lots of nutrients that
help us survive. One other feature of the large intestine
is a small worm-shaped organ that's located near the junction of the small
intestine with a large intestine. This little worm-shaped organ is called
the appendix and many of you have heard about the appendix
only because occasionally it becomes abnormal.
In the normal condition the appendix contains lots and lots of lymphocytes
and seems to have some immune function that it monitors the
intestinal fauna and regulates how many bacteria are
growing in the intestine but occasionally the lymphocytes of the
appendix become overly active or the appendix, the lumen of the appendix
becomes occluded and as this happens the appendix
begins to fill with mucus and swells up and that constricts the blood vessels
going to it and the appendix becomes inflamed and
infected and at that point there's an emergency going on called appendicitis.
If anyone that's listening to me has ever experienced appendicitis
it's easily recognized as this is a very painful and unpleasant situation
and the only real cure for appendicitis is that a surgeon has to
make an incision in the lower abdomen and remove it
before it bursts and the burst appendix can be a serious problem because it
can contaminate the interior of the abdominal cavity
with lots of bacteria and that can lead to infection of the abdominal cavity
called peritonitis which we all want to avoid.
So the easiest and most routine treatment for appendicitis is
simple surgical removal of this infected organ.
Well the large and small intestines are the major components of the
lower digestive tract but they wouldn't function well without
accessory glands that that help them perform their function
and one of the accessory glands I want to talk about right now is the
liver. The liver is actually one of the largest organs in the body
it's an enormous gland that fills the upper right hand side of the abdominal
cavity. Not only is it one of the largest organs
of the body but it's also extremely well vascularized and it
actually receives something like one quarter of all the blood that's
leaving the heart at any given time. The main function of the liver is to
act rather like a filter that's interposed between the gut
and the rest of the body. All the fluid and molecules that are absorbed from the
outside of the body that are passing through the gut
first have to pass through the liver before they get to the rest of the body
because of that portal system of circulation that I mentioned before.
Now this is very important because the liver can make decisions as to how
much how many nutrient molecules should be emitted into
the rest of the body. For example if you go to a
cafeteria and eat a big milkshake that contains lots and lots of sugars
something like 65 of the glucose that we absorb from this
meal will immediately be converted to a storage form called glycogen in the
liver. So the liver will extract a lot of the
glucose from the bloodstream and store it for later use.
So something like only a third of the glucose that passes through the liver
actually gets to the rest of the body and most of it is stored for later use.
The same thing is true of other types of molecules that are ingested and absorbed
by the gut. For example if you go out to a restaurant
and eat a big juicy steak a lot of the protein will be digested into
amino acids and released toward the liver but the body as a whole doesn't
really use all those amino acids at one particular time is too much more than
we need. So a portion of these amino acids are
absorbed by the liver and converted into other types of molecules and burned.
Only a small fraction of these amino acids will actually reach the rest of the
body.
Now one of the problems that the liver experiences is that when it
disposes of these excessive amounts of amino acids
the first stage in metabolizing the amino acids is to clip off
something called an amino group from the amino acids.
And the amino group is a molecule formed from
nitrogen and hydrogen it's an NH2 group and when the NH2 groups are released
from the amino acids they can be immediately converted into a very
toxic compound and this toxic compound is ammonia.
Anyone that's used window cleaners or bathroom cleaners and taken a whiff of
these cleaners know what ammonia smells like and it's a very toxic molecule.
So this poses a serious problem for the liver. If the liver were to
metabolize these amino acids and release ammonia into the bloodstream it would
kill us dead. So the liver has reached a solution for
this. Instead of releasing this lethal ammonia
into the bloodstream it combines two ammonia molecules into a less toxic
molecule and that toxic less toxic molecule is called urea.
The liver releases the urea into the bloodstream
and that'll circulate for a little while and eventually will be extracted from
the blood by the kidneys and secreted in the urine.
So the liver has lots and lots of important functions to do in modifying
the material that comes into our bodies. Some of the material that we
ingest into the intestines are actually potential toxins
and one of these types of toxins is alcohol. Many of us
enjoy the use of alcohol with a meal. Alcohol is first metabolized in the
liver by a large family of enzymes that break it
down into smaller molecules. Also when people are administered
medicines like phenobarbital or other compounds that
have different effects on the nervous system a lot of these medicines
can be detoxified and broken down in the liver by this same family of
enzymes. So the liver is very rich in these enzymes
that modify molecules and one of the most
prominent and important types of enzymes that the liver contains
is a family of 57 types of related proteins called cytochrome p450 enzymes
and these enzymes are responsible for protecting the body by breaking down
potentially toxic molecules before they can get to the rest of the body.
So basically the liver represents a gateway to the rest of the body
and it protects us from any potentially damaging things that we might
eat. Now of course alcohol is one of the
potentially damaging molecules that are ingested by human beings
and if it's taken in moderation it can have positive effects on the health
but too much alcohol can also be damaging.
When alcohol is metabolized by the liver and if there's too much of it
it can be metabolized into a potentially damaging molecule called
acetaldehyde and acetaldehyde can cause liver damage.
So if you're in the habit of drinking too much every day
you're putting yourself in the position of potentially damaging your liver.
It's been estimated that people that drink more than three or four mixed drinks
a day or people that drink more than a six pack
a beer a day are running an increased risk of damaging the liver and this is
potentially quite a serious health problem.
If the liver is exposed to alcohol for a very long period of time
this can cause specialized cells in the liver to produce lots of collagen
and the collagen accumulates in the liver and makes it harder and harder
so that instead of being a nice soft pliable organ the liver can
turn into kind of like a very spongy and hard structure.
When enough of this process happens the the accumulation of collagen in the
liver can impede the flow of blood into and out of the liver and as a result
if the blood can't get through the liver it tends to back up in the veins that
are going into the liver and one of these veins
which is normally designed to drain blood out of the stomach
becomes expanded and this is something called the left gastric vein
that connects with veins that also drain the esophagus.
Now as a consequence of alcoholic cirrhosis
and hardening of the liver these veins can expand into varicose veins
and in severe alcoholism the veins that drain the esophagus
become so filled full of blood that they burst
and this may cause serious bleeding into the esophagus that can lead to death.
So many of us may enjoy an occasional drink once in a while but we should
remember that excessive indulgence in alcohol can
can lead to serious effects upon the liver.
One final thing that's useful to note is that if
people are used to drinking large amounts of alcohol every day
this increases the metabolic enzymes that are found in the liver
and some of these enzymes can create a certain amount of mischief.
For example some of these enzymes can metabolize a pain killing drug
called acetaminophen which is a very common component of many
pain killing drugs and if you're a chronic alcoholic you should avoid any
use of this type of pain killer because a liver that's been
exposed to alcohol will transform this into a very damaging compound
and can cause serious liver damage.
Well the liver is a very interesting organ and I could go on for a
considerable time talking about all its functions
but one of the things I want to mention right now is that
a kind of unusual property of the liver. The liver
is constantly exposed to potentially toxic material
and even if the liver is very efficient at detoxifying these materials
sometimes it can come to damage and become
injured but fortunately for us when the liver is damaged it has an unusually
strong ability to recover and regenerate
and you can actually demonstrate this experimentally in rats.
You can do surgery on the rat open up the abdominal cavity
and take out half of the liver from a rat and sew them back up again
and within a month the liver has the ability to grow completely back
and fill up the places that were formerly empty.
So the liver has a remarkable ability to regenerate.
When I first read about this property I thought gee this is really neat and then
it struck me that not only must it regenerate but it also has to know when
to stop. So a very strong regenerative
capacity also has to be very carefully
inhibited so that the liver just doesn't keep growing and growing and growing.
Now recently some scientists have identified components of this
mechanism that regulates the overall size of an organ.
It turns out that many organs have a DNA binding protein which was called YAP
or Yas Associated Protein is what it's called
and this generally prevents the overgrowth of an organ
so that when a liver regenerates it stops growing and when it reaches the
right size. The importance of this newly discovered
organ regulating protein has been demonstrated in an experiment in which
this protein was inactivated and when this protein is inactivated
the liver can grow up to five times the normal size.
So these recent discoveries have shed some light over these signals
that regulate the overall size of organs and if we can understand these
signals a little better we might have the potential of regulating
regeneration of organs like the liver and also it has a potential for
affecting the induction of cancer and other diseases of
overgrowth of organs.
Well in addition to acting as a filter between the
gut and the rest of the body the liver also secretes lots of molecules into
the blood so it acts as an endocrine organ. The liver secretes
proteins that regulate the clotting of blood and regulate the movement of
cholesterol into the body and finally the liver also manufactures
a fluid called bile and it secretes this fluid
by a duct into a storage organ called the gallbladder
and the once the bile is stored in the gallbladder it eventually can be
released into another duct that allows the bile to enter the duodenum.
Bile has two fundamental functions one function of bile is to
delivers molecules called bile salts into the lumen of the duodenum
and bile salts function relatively like detergents
when they enter the duodenum they mix up with
fats and lipids that have been ingested in a meal
and they break the fats up into tiny little droplets and these tiny little
droplets are much more easily absorbed and digested than big
blobs of fat that are present in some of our diet.
Another function of bile secretion is to deliver waste products into the duodenum
for excretion and one of the important waste products that's
found in bile is a molecule called bilirubin.
Bilirubin is a molecule that's derived from the breakdown of red blood cells
and it's a highly colored chemical and that's the reason that bile has kind of
a yellow-green appearance because of the colors of bilirubin
and this is more or less a waste product that's
delivered into the lumen of the duodenum for elimination from the body.
Now occasionally in liver disease such as liver cirrhosis
the liver doesn't do this very well and so instead of secreting the bilirubin
into the bile it can be accumulating in the blood
stream and this condition can cause the
the color of the sclera of the eye the eternal yellowish tangent give you a
yellowish pigment in the rest of your skin and this condition of liver
disease is called jaundice.
There's one more fact i want to mention about the liver and that's because it's
involved in the very most common hereditary disease that exists
even though this is the most common genetic disorder in the human population
a lot of people have never heard of this disorder.
This disorder is called hereditary hemochromatosis
and what does this long word stand for? Well in hereditary hemochromatosis
there's a defect in the transport of iron in the body
and so normally the most of the organs of the body
accumulate relatively small amounts of iron molecules
but in this disorder which affects about one out of 400 people
the iron is transported in excessive amounts into a number of organs like the
liver the pancreas and even the brain. Iron overload can cause a great
amount of iron to accumulate in cells on the liver and can damage the liver
so this is potentially a relatively serious disorder.
Fortunately for us though there's a relatively simple cure for hereditary
hemochromatosis and that cure is basically involves
opening a vein and allowing lots of blood to drip out of the body.
By bleeding somebody you can remove lots of iron from the body because the
red blood cells of the bloodstream contain lots of iron in the form of hemoglobin.
So this simple cure can actually reverse the symptoms of this
potentially damaging disease and it makes you wonder a little bit whether the
practices of physicians during medieval times
might have actually had some benefits. You may remember that
in the 16th and 17th centuries a common treatment that a physician would
prescribe is bleeding. Leaches were applied to people when they
were ill and very frequently this caused people to get worse
but it might have been possible that a certain fraction of people might have
benefited from this because this disease of iron overload can
affect lots and lots of people and it can be cured by bleeding.
So maybe there's old physicians of bygone days weren't quite as ignorant as we
might think they were now.
One final accessory organ that we can find associated with the GI tract is a
small storage organ called a gallbladder. This organ is attached to the bile duct
that leaves a liver and has the ability to store bile
and concentrate it to make it five-fold more concentrated than it
initially was when it left the liver. The gallbladder is stimulated to
contract by hormones that are released from the intestines when we start
digesting food. So it stores bile and periodically squirts
it into the lumen of the small intestine to help us digest fats.
Now there is one medical problem that consistently affects the gallbladder
and that situation is a condition called gallstones.
Not infrequently the molecules that are present in the bile will
precipitate in the bile and they'll form stones that get larger and
larger. Most of the molecules that are found
in gallstones includes different forms of cholesterol
and it turns out that the presence of gallstones in the gallbladder
is a fairly common situation. By about age 60 it's been estimated
that something like 15 to 20 percent of the total
population will have experienced gallstones at one time or another.
Now if the gallstones are fairly small they don't really cause too much problems
but as they enlarge they can potentially block the bile duct
and that causes jaundice and infections of the gallbladder and
very very painful symptoms and the fundamental treatment for gallstones
is surgical removal of the gallbladder. So a surgeon goes in makes an incision
and snips the gallbladder out and that generally solves the problem.
Fortunately for us we can do relatively well without a gallbladder
because this surgical procedure leaves the bile duct intact
and that allows the liver to directly dump bile directly into the duodenum
without storing it in the gallbladder. The only complication for this from
this surgery is that usually people with such a surgical procedure
have to avoid eating meals that are very rich in fats
because they don't have enough bile salts from the liver to
digest these fats very easily. One other aspect of the abdominal cavity
that we want to talk about is that all of these gastrointestinal organs have to
be enclosed by muscles and there are a number of muscles
that form the anterior abdominal wall. The muscles that run across the lateral
portions of the abdominal wall are called the external oblique and the
internal oblique muscles that form two layers that
enclose the abdominal cavity. In addition in the midline of the abdominal
cavity there's a long stripe of muscle that extends from the sternum down to
the pubic bone and this long stripe of muscle in the
midline is called a rectus abdominis. In most people that I
know at least it's a not very prominent patch of muscle
but if you go to the trouble of doing lots of sit-ups all day long and
work out you can develop so-called six-pack abs and what that refers to
is the enlarged muscles of the rectus abdominis.
The rectus abdominis instead of forming a straight line between the
sternum and the pubic bone actually is divided into segments
by small tenderness masses of tissue and so this
accounts for the six-pack ab appearance of this muscle right here.
Well this concludes our discussion of the gastrointestinal system
and in the next series of lectures we're going to be talking about additional
glands in the body that provide for the functions of another
series of organs and then we'll turn our attention to other organ systems
such as the respiratory and urinary system that also
adjust our metabolic processes.
This ends lecture nine.
