Try to picture this. You get out of bed tomorrow morning feeling relaxed, happy, optimistic
for no specific reason. Then you go to work with a smile on your face, a spring in your
step and a cheeriness in your attitude that leaves your colleagues wondering what you've
taken but you know it's just a real you. Being true to yourself and it feels good.
Let me ask you, would you need stress management? Of course not, but then how often do you really
wake up in the morning feeling like this? Stress has become such a common word within
the national lexicon that it's hard to believe it was only first uttered in the 1950s when
Hungarian doctor Hans Selle introduced the term after pioneering studies in this field.
When you consider that according to the American Psychological Association around 75% of Americans
experience stress symptoms every month and around a third report feeling they are living
with extreme stress then it's no surprise it's such a well used term.
If I now tell you that stress causes over half of us to argue with those close to us
and workplace stress costs around $300 billion each year in healthcare, I think you'll have
to agree that anything we can do to prevent it has got to be worth investing a little
time and effort in. The aim of this workshop is to open the lid on stress in order to help
you to understand the many possible root causes and to alert you to the tapestry of symptoms
that can arise. More importantly, we will look at the role that carefully prescribed
exercise can play in reducing your risk of suffering stress and we'll investigate a number
of specific self-help tactics you can try yourself that are guaranteed to help put the
smile back on your face. So a logical starting point would be to define stress. What is stress?
The American Institute of Stress suggests that it's difficult to define it precisely
as it affects us all in so many different ways and so it can elicit varying symptoms.
The basis of understanding stress is the fact that it's a primitive reflex. The part of
your brain that processes a response to any circumstance that causes anxiety is not wholly
under your control. Also, it cannot tell the difference between emotional anger and physical
danger and always reacts as if you just caught sight of a pack of hungry wolves. So the reflex
takes the form of a set of changes in body chemistry which make you ready to fight or
to run away and this is why nervousness and anxiety often show in a fast pulse rapid breathing
and sweating. Of course, the extent of the reaction will vary according to whether the
wolves are a smudge on the horizon or running slavering into the mouth of your cave. It's
fair to say the vagaries of life in the 21st century imply that many of us lead lives in
which stress is inherent in far too much of our normal daily routine and our bodies are
constantly in this state of heightened activity. Now if this goes on for an extended period
of time it can lead to a number of unpleasant consequences from feelings of anxiety and
depression through various aches and pains to serious illnesses. Some of the first indicators
of stress getting the better of you can include headaches, neck pain, digestive problems,
frequent colds and an irregular heartbeat. You could also develop irrational behaviour
patterns such as eating or drinking too much, gambling, making impulse purchases. Your
moods may fluctuate from moments of absolute joy to angry outbursts or even periods of
withdrawal. Unfortunately, stress can manifest itself in one particularly visible symptom
due to the influence of cortisol or hormone that is produced in the adrenal glands and
is released into the body during exercise, fasting and of course stress. The role of
cortisol is to regulate energy supply by selecting the most appropriate fuel that could be carbohydrate,
fat or protein to meet the requirements of your body. The problem is that cortisol relies
upon an enzyme found in adipose or fat tissue in order to do its work. So more stress then
requires more active cortisol and so greater fat stores are laid down specifically in the
abdominal area. There's no doubt therefore that high stress levels can directly affect
your waistline. One of the best defences we have against stress, benefiting on minds as
well as our waistlines of course then is exercise. So I asked Robert Sapolsky, Professor of
Biological Sciences at Stanford University and Professor of Neurology and Neurosurgery
at Stanford School of Medicine to describe what goes on in the brain to make us feel
better when we exercise. Exercise, we all know exercise is good for stress or good for reducing
stress hopefully and scientists actually know a ton about how that works. Certain level is
duh insofar as exercise is cleaning out your blood vessels of all sorts of crud and making
you more sensitive to your insulin. It's going to help your health and that obviously reduces
stress but there's some much more specific mechanisms as well. One of the areas you would
love to have plaques and stuff cleaned out by exercise is blood vessels in your brain and
exercise is good for that. Also another surprising thing is when you exercise you're actually
delivering more oxygen and glucose to your brain and not just to areas that make sense in terms of
all sorts of neurons there that have to make you breathe at the right rate to match your energy
demands with the exercising but your entire brain including parts of your brain that have to do
with pleasure, with relaxation, with anti-stress effects. Totally amazing thing is there's a
class of brain chemicals called neurotrophins. They're growth factors, they make neurons grow
new perky connections between each other and get a whole lot better at communicating and faster
and turns out that exercise causes your brain cells to make more of these things. Finally in
terms of the nuts and bolts physiology thing we all know turns out to be absolutely true which
is get the right amount of exercise and your brain gets marinated and endorphins and it really does
feel good and there's a hardcore biology explaining why it feels good. Exercise reduces stress
definitely. In most circumstances at home, work or even play stress carries a negative
connotation. However a totally stress free existence may also have drawbacks. We could lose
the ability to react to the different challenges that life throws at us. As counterintuitive as
it sounds then a degree of stress is essential for optimal health but we need to be able to
control it. We need to be able to switch it off when necessary. To supplement the physical
exercise programs more and more people are turning to the world of relaxation and meditation
techniques for help. Certainly practicing relaxation techniques can bring many benefits although
like stress it's very personal hence the experience varies between individuals. Despite this
variance the medical fraternity recognized relaxation as a treatment for a number of
stress related ailments such as hypertension, insomnia, asthma, chronic pain, cardiac arrhythmia
and phobic anxiety. Now the physiological effects include a lower heart rate, lower blood
pressure, lower blood courtes own levels. All of these changes are consistent with a
generalized decrease in activity of the sympathetic nervous system and they're distinctly different
from the physiological changes observed when sleeping. We might think of watching television
or reading a book as relaxing but true relaxation needs to be learned in order to effectively
release tension from the muscles and to slow the breathing rate. Techniques include using
words such as heavy and warm. There's progressive muscle relaxation, focusing your attention
on various parts of the body to consciously release tension and breathing techniques that
help to instill calm. Now for people who regularly practice relaxation techniques it can also
provide a heightened sense of self-awareness, clarity of the mind, anger control, very useful,
and also help to strengthen the immune system. Now relaxation differs from meditation and
that it's primarily aimed at and also benefits the body whereas meditation is actually a
form of mental exercise based on the belief that the mind determines our quality of life.
The two are linked as relaxation is often the route to accessing meditation and could
be a secondary effect of meditative practice. Much has been said and written about meditation
and it can take years to understand its exact nature but the essence of meditation is in
paying attention. It can be described as being a deep form of rest, relaxation but still
with a neurological awareness and it's characterized by moments of stillness that balance a life
of activity. It allows us to practice detachment, being able to take ourselves outside our everyday
thoughts and it also gives an insight into the nature of subjective thought. Now meditation
is not exclusively eastern, esoteric, mystical or a religious exercise but it's actually
like physical exercise, it's a means to an end. Meditation can be included as an essential
part of a fitness routine and even sitting for just one minute at the end of a workout
can make a difference. As we exercise a little of something is better than a lot of nothing.
Now the aim of meditation is to focus inward and to a large extent to forget about the
body and allow the limbs and the physical body to become totally relaxed. While fully
concentrated in meditation it's possible to lose awareness of any pain or discomfort
in the body or to notice it and not even care. The more time spent in meditation the more
time the body remains relaxed. Some people find that meditating even reduces their need
for sleep. It may sound counterintuitive again but setting aside time for meditation can
be even more important as our schedules seem to get busier by the day. Although there are
different types of meditation techniques there are two main categories of meditation, concentration
and contemplation. So first let's look at a concentrated technique. In order to aid
concentration it's possible to choose perhaps an object for our attention. For example observing
or counting breaths using a repetitive sound such as chanting a mantra or an image maybe
a candle flame. When you notice your attention beginning to wander simply try to bring your
attention back. This is the object of meditation without judging yourself or worrying about
it but bring yourself back to what it is you're focusing on. The second technique the contemplative
technique or mindfulness is based on the underlying principle that most meditative
techniques provide an individual with a means to gain first hand insight into the way our
mind works. Contemplative meditation normally builds upon the concentrated technique. Once
the mind is calm the object of concentration is put aside and the flow of mental images
and sensations is observed as they just naturally arise. So as alluded to earlier in the area
of relaxation and meditation it's important to note that one size definitely doesn't fit
all. Techniques that work for one person may well just leave another person confused or
uncomfortable so you should treat the practice as a journey of self-discovery. Ideally then
you should endeavor to evolve in this area by exposing yourself to learning a broad spectrum
of practices and here are a few you can try at your leisure. The stress-fighting endorphins
released during exercise can also be unleashed by laughter and surprisingly your body can't
distinguish whether the laughter is real or fake. So laughter therapy is a recognized
technique that works in both group and individual situations and starts with a warm-up usually
a little bit of mobilizing of the upper body followed by a range of activities designed
to get you giggling. Based on solid studies blood samples taken from two groups revealed
that cortisol in the subjects who watched a comedy show decrease more rapidly than in
a control group. Research also revealed that the concentration of natural killer cells
a type of immune cell that attacks virus and tumor is increased through laughter. These cells are
suppressed if the body suffers consistent and long-term stress. Now you'll no doubt already
know that listening to music can be relaxing. Experts suggested it's specifically the rhythm
of the music that produces the calming effect as it thought it's thought that there's a link
back to our when we were in the mother's womb and we were influenced by the heartbeat. So listening
to soothing music therefore we associated with that very early safe relaxing protective environment
provided by our mother. Now there's no single music genre that's good for everyone and surprisingly
studies have revealed that some relaxation type CDs actually produce adverse reactions in certain
people. So personal preference is key ideally you want to sit or lie in a comfortable position
preferably headphones to avoid any distractions and the feeling is let the music wash over you
allow it to rinse away the stresses of your day let your breathing slow and listen for
repeating patterns in the music or maybe spaces between notes try to observe what's going on there.
Now juggling work pressures family commitments and money is something we're all familiar with but
did you know that learning to juggle real objects can actually help you to better cope with those
common stresses by improving concentration skills providing a link between the left and right brain
improving mental agility and problem-solving functions. We find that we can take our conscious
and subconscious mind away from issues that cause mental malaise it's a useful distraction
and juggling is a perfect vehicle for this surprisingly it's easier than you think to master
the basic three ball cascade. If your learning approach is step by step now from there the fun
really starts because once you get the hang of that basic three ball cascade you can start to get
creative and develop a few tricks. So to start with let's take just one ball yeah just going to
start with one ball and the skill here is to get a consistent throw so our first level starting
your dominant hand is to practice sweeping the hand across to the tummy button and then letting
the ball go yeah so try to avoid throwing it from hand to hand yeah just simply sweep the hand across
and let go so you've got this kind of cupping movement like so and what will happen then is
the ball will go straight up in the middle like so now what we're aiming for here is a consistent
throw so ideally it's always going to about head height maybe slightly higher always to the same
height every time in a rhythm so that is your first level so how about you press pause and get a little
practice okay so moving on to the second level that seems easy but it's important to get the
throw consistent so the second level we're going to start again throwing with the dominant hand
and all I'm going to ask you to do and this is where it becomes a real mind body exercise
you need to talk to yourself yeah I want you to say throw and catch yeah actually say that the time
you do it what's going to happen is I'm going to throw and catch but in order to allow me to
catch I'm going to drop this ball so this is what happens throw catch that's all you need to do
simply drop the ball yeah should we try that again starting your dominant hand we throw and catch
now really to make this work to really get that mind body link you need to talk to yourself
okay so I'm going to let you practice that a few times say to yourself throw catch just drop that
of the ball moving on to the next level it's pretty much the same only this time I'm still
saying to myself throw and catch but instead of dropping the second ball I'm just going to throw
it I'm not really fussed about where it goes so again starting your dominant hand say throw catch
throw catch but you see now I've thrown that other ball yeah so you're still doing the same thing
saying throw and catch but now I'm throwing that second ball throw catch yeah okay so have a little
practice at that now you probably guess what's happening next what I'm going to do now is to move
on to the next level that second ball I want to catch it so the way to do this is to say to yourself
throw throw catch catch okay throw throw catch catch throw throw catch catch now let's be honest the
first few times it's going to go all over the place and this will apply to every stage once that
happens put one of the balls away and just take a little brain break go back to here practice this
because if we don't have consistent throws from both hands it's going to go completely awry so
this is the level throw throw catch catch speak to yourself while you're doing it throw throw
catch catch throw throw catch catch start in your dominant hand avoid throwing the ball from one
hand to the other just sweeping across so that it goes up in the middle throw throw catch catch
throw throw catch catch I'll give you a moment to practice that level
we're getting closer now let's take the third ball okay
if you've not got these balls oranges work just I actually learned to juggle with oranges I would
as a tip make sure you use something that doesn't break and also move everything out of the way
while you're practicing so this is what we're going to do we're going to start with two balls
in your dominant hand and the secret here is to have one held near the heel of the palm and the
other held towards the end of the fingers okay so this is what we're going to do exactly the same
thing as you've just done throw throw catch catch but in order to allow me to catch the second ball
I'm going to drop the third ball so it'll look like this throw throw catch catch yeah so I'm ending
up exactly where I was before but now I've dropped that third ball yeah the beauty of juggling balls
is they don't bounce and roll away so if you've got tennis balls or golf balls they could be all over
the place the beauty of these things is and they call thuds because that's the noise they make when
they hit the floor so throw throw catch catch and just drop that ball yeah so it's still the same
level as before but we need to drop the ball throw throw catch catch have a little practice
okay we're getting really close now we're getting really close so this time still the same throw
catch catch but in case you hadn't guessed we're going to throw the third ball so throw throw
catch catch just throw that third ball let it go wherever it goes so we're still doing throw throw
catch catch but we're throwing the third ball yeah so throw throw catch catch yeah don't worry about
where that third ball goes so we're just moving one level further than before should we try that
again start with the two balls in your dominant hand throw throw catch catch throw that other ball
away okay have a little practice remember if it all goes completely belly up take a brain break
practice that single arm throw because it's all about having a consistent throw have a go
okay I think this is what they call the moment of truth so the secret now and again it's so
important to talk because it's a mind-body link the secret now is to say to yourself throw throw
throw throw throw yeah that's all you've got to do what should happen is throw throw throw throw
throw yeah you've just got to say to yourself throw throw throw throw throw now let's be
honest what's probably going to happen is we'll get a couple of the ways through and then the ball
will go all over the place you may find yourself walking forwards while you're doing it yeah so
have a couple of goes and then go back whether you've got it or not to just a single ball it's
important to keep going back to this stage you know if it completely goes to pieces let's go back
to the stage before yeah we can always drop back to the stage before but trust me the secret here
is the mind-body link if you say to yourself throw throw throw throw throw throw low and behold
you should be juggling and that's when the fun really starts because then we can start to do
all sorts of little tricks with it so that's your three ball cascade yeah only one way to do it
practice now don't worry if you don't get it right even just tossing a single ball back and
forth will help to reduce stress now if writing comes naturally to you then take a blank piece of
paper write down your thoughts and feelings it's just this alone can really help you to clear your
mind this can be particularly useful before going to sleep or when you first wake up seeing things
written down on paper can generally give you a fresh perspective now the following techniques you
can try so perhaps you can try them right now you can press pause and I'll give you a moment to
to have a go at them I'm going to start with a physical technique as stretching the muscles
can release tension so a couple of exercises you can do firstly a little stretch for the neck
shoulders and back so if you're sitting in a chair you'll need to sit up comfortably I'm going to
show you how to do this and you're going to hold these stretches for around 15 seconds if you take
one hand and press it down to the side and take the ear to the shoulder will start to feel a stretch
through the neck you're going to do that on both sides and hold for about 15 seconds it really
begins to release the tension through the neck what we then do is take the hands up to about
chest level clasp them together in front and just simply press forwards and we feel the shoulder
blades spread apart the elbows are slightly bent that's a really good way of reducing the the tension
through the upper back and the opposite of that is to take both hands behind you place them in the
lower back just above the buttocks and keeping the tummy pulled in squeezing the elbows towards
each other and holding that position what that's going to do is release the tension through the chest
and through the shoulders at the front so that's a very physical way of reducing tension through
the muscles next let's try a basic breathing exercise if you place the palms on the ribcage at the
side right to right and left to left the fingers are spread and just as you take those deep breaths
in and out feel the ribcage expanding yeah now what i'm going to ask you to do is to apply a
little bit of pressure with the hands as you inhale you have to work that a little bit harder now
through the respiratory muscles to expand the ribcage and then relax so try that a few times
that'll help you to relax through the whole upper body but also it starts to calm the mind and
yoga classes are a great way to learn more breathing techniques now another great technique and this
is effectively a concentrated meditation technique it's a technique developed by Dr. Herbert Benson
a Harvard Medical School professor and a pioneer in the field of alternative medicine
in order to aid concentration choose an object for your attention for example um think of a word
a word that helps you to relax so it might be peace or calm whatever it is each time you
take a breath in think of the word say it to yourself slowly and make it last the length of
the out breath okay breathe in as you exhale say the word make it last the length of the breath
now you may notice your attention begins to wander don't try to block out these incoming
thoughts let them come but then let them go and go back to focusing on your word yeah now if you
find difficulty choosing a word that works for you you can do this with a candle as we mentioned
earlier you can even do this when you're on the move counting how many strides you walk with
each in and out breath it's a great technique for helping to to reduce tension so lastly we'll
try a method attributed to Laura Mitchell a renowned London physiotherapist who discovered
that relaxation in the muscles could be initiated by certain mindful movements now this follows a
specific set of instructions and you'll need to practice them to become familiar now you'll notice
that each movement command is followed by a stop which is important is it ensures you
cease moving that body part and prepare for the next joint action so get yourself ready for this
because you're actually going to do this one with me now so it is best done lying down and you only
need to hear me so you could do that but if not you can still do it in a seated position so let's
get ready to try Mitchell's relaxation technique this technique is best done lying down but it can
be adapted to a sitting position just make sure you're in a comfortable chair and you're sinking
back into the chair so we'll begin firstly pull your shoulders towards your feet and stop
now feel that the shoulders are further away from your ears your neck feels longer
and we've released the tension through the muscles in the neck and shoulders
roll your elbows out and open
and stop be aware of feeling the upper arms moved away from the ribcage
and the weight of both arms should now be resting on the support
gently extend your fingers and thumbs
and stop be aware of feeling the fingers slightly stretched separated and just gently touching the
support turn your hips out and stop
feel the thighs have rolled and the kneecaps are now facing slightly out
just gently bend and extend and bend and extend the knees just gently to find a comfortable position
and stop be aware of that comfort through the knees
push your toes away from you and stop release that and feel the heaviness of the feet
begin to push your torso into the floor or the chair and stop
be aware of your contact and the support of your body
now push your head into the support
and stop
feel the contact in the head and also the support
pull the jaw down and stop
feel the teeth of separated the jaw feels a little heavy and the lips are just touching
now press the tongue downwards in the mouth and stop
feel how that now releases the tension through the throat and the tongue should feel loose
close your eyes screw the eyes up tightly and stop
now just let the eyelids gently rest over the eyes
take a moment to enjoy the darkness
now beginning at the eyebrows want you to imagine don't move just imagine you are
smoothing your fingertips up the forehead into the hairline
over the hair and down the back of the neck nice and slow
and stop
take a few moments to focus on your breath
try to be aware of taking deeper slower breaths
and when you're ready just open the eyes
and get used to the amount of light in the room
and slowly begin to return your mind to the present
and in your own time when you're ready not in a rush you'll sit yourself up
and carry on about your day if trying these techniques has triggered an
interesting meditation for you then remember the great courses offers another course
mindfulness with professor moosey and you might want to try that out
so as i said relaxation is a particularly individual domain so the techniques we've
just tried may or may not have worked for you the fun is in finding out so i hope you'll
continue the journey we've just started as it's essential to protect yourself from the
debilitating effects of stress that we talked about earlier the old maxim prevention is better
than cure should not merely be the reason behind sticking religiously to your oral hygiene
but also applies just as readily to your relationship with the ogre that is stress
now the good news is you don't have to fly to a deserted island you don't have to chance
under waterfalls or do yourself a mischief trying to fold your legs into the lotus position to
release stress once you get started with these exercises that are designed to fit in around
your working day you'll soon be able to come up with a few more of you iron all you need to do
is find a quiet space and take a little meaningful me time
