Prepare yourself for a bombshell.
The key to achieving your weight loss and fitness goals might not actually be your workouts
at all, but rather what you do between them.
Exercise are based on some very simple maxims, probably the most important being that the
more effort you put into your workouts, the better the results you'll see.
This introduces therefore a performance element to exercise, it implies it's not sufficient
to simply go through the motions if you truly wish to attain your goals.
Just as an elite athlete will ensure he or she arrives at the start line in peak condition,
it's worth considering what you can do between your workouts so that you're good to go each
and every time you visit the gym, take to the pool, stride out for a brisk walk or tackle
whatever challenges your personal fitness plan incorporates.
Adequate recovery will not only enable you to derive optimum benefit from your exercise
regime but will also reduce your risk of injury and promote a general feeling of well-being
that will help to keep you in a positive mindset as you progress along your fitness journey.
It's worth pointing out at this juncture that the whole area of exercise recovery is, unfortunately,
somewhat imprecise science for just as we all respond differently to the various demands
exercise places upon the body, similarly recovery will vary between individuals in physical,
mental and even emotional dimensions.
But what do we actually mean by the label recovery?
In its most basic definition, it's the ability to meet the demands of future activity but
in physiological terms it's a multifaceted concept that includes lowering of the blood
pressure and return to normal of the cardiac cycle, replenishment of blood glucose and
muscle glycogen energy stores and replacement of key cellular enzymes that govern the use
of fuel sources.
Recovery actually begins during exercise itself as proven by research published in the Journal
of Strength and Conditioning Research in 2008.
This study looked at racing walkers and showed that one leg actually begins to recuperate
while the other leg is planted on the floor.
So mid-stride, as it were, you're already beginning to heal and this is known as immediate
recovery.
There are actually two other major types of recovery as well.
One recovery is the recovery that occurs between sets of exercises or between intervals
in a session.
Whereas training recovery is the recovery that occurs between workouts, races or matches,
whatever the case may be.
Failure to recover properly will clearly lead to fatigue and we can define fatigue as an
exercise-induced reduction in the ability to generate force or maintain an exercise intensity.
Now fatigue can take two forms.
Central fatigue refers to the effect of messages in motor pathways from the brain and the spinal
cord to the muscles that lead to a reduction in effort or complete cessation of activity.
This response is thought to be a self-protective reaction to the possibility of injury from
excessive physical exertion.
Peripheral fatigue describes the point whereby the protein filaments in the muscle fibres
that are responsible for contraction cease to respond to neural stimulation.
This is then combined with the depletion of glycogen stores in the muscle so no fuel is
available to prolong the exercise efforts.
And fatigue can manifest itself in a number of different ways, as follows, a drop in performance,
loss of appetite, perhaps interrupted sleep patterns, even gastrointestinal issues, certainly
muscle soreness, increased risk of infections and all of these will adversely affect your
exercise program and slow your progress towards your weight loss, fitness or sporting goals.
So you should never ignore these things, especially if they occur in combination.
So what are the vital down time factors that affect your recovery and what tactics can
you employ that will significantly contribute to accelerating your results?
Well let's firstly consider the most obvious remedial measure you can take to help you
to recuperate and that's rest.
As the general, not to mention logical rule of thumb, the more stressful your workouts,
the more muscle groups will be recruited, the greater the damage to the muscle fibres
will be and so the longer you should rest between workouts.
A 2003 study in medicine and science and sports and exercise recommended rest periods of just
one day for regular exercises and two days for beginners.
To be clear, that's resting the specific muscle groups worked.
So you could work, for instance, arms and backs on one day and legs on another day,
you can vary the muscle groups in between those sessions.
That's the most important aspect of recovery, namely refuelling.
Exercise will not only deplete your energy stores but also cause your muscles to break
down at a cellular level.
So you need a double headed strategy here consuming both carbohydrates and protein.
Your body stores energy in the form of glycogen in both the muscles and the liver and this
is being provided by the carbohydrates in your diet.
You should begin replacing fuels within 30 minutes after exercise and studies show that
you need to consume high glychemic index carbohydrate foods such as pretzels or rice cakes or energy
drinks this soon after a workout to quickly replace the glycogen as it's essential to
build adequate glycogen stores for your next workout and studies show that this works reasonably
well.
But a 2010 study published in the Journal of Applied Psychology looked at the quantity
of carbohydrate you take in when replacing fuel post workout.
The study suggests that a lower carbohydrate meal enhanced insulin sensitivity more than
a high carbohydrate meal.
Now this is important because increased insulin sensitivity improves the body's ability to
take sugar from the bloodstream and store it in the muscles for fuel.
In this study all the meal types made a difference to insulin sensitivity balanced meal a high
carb meal and a low carb meal but the most successful included less than half the carbohydrates
of a normal balanced meal.
So you may need to experiment a bit with this to get the balance right for yourself.
Now all the successful meals in this study contain protein as protein is necessary to
repair and rebuild muscle tissue that is damaged during your intense workouts.
It also increases the absorption of water improving muscle hydration and can even boost
your immune system helping you to fight off viruses.
Easily digestible proteins should also be taken within 30 minutes after your workout.
Examples are egg whites or protein shakes both of which are easily digested.
Your refuelling efforts should continue with a meal around two hours later consisting of
low glychemic index carbohydrates in this case wholemeal pasta vegetables and combined
with lean proteins such as turkey or chicken and ideally some fatty acids as well such
as omega 3 which you'll find in oily fish and nerves.
Cobbohydrate requirements for moderate activity levels are around 5 to 7 grams per kilogram
of your body weight per day.
Protein intake however should be in the region of 1.2 to 1.4 grams per kilogram of your body
weight per day.
Now dehydration during or just after exercise can cause your blood pressure to drop making
you feel unwell and possibly increasing the chance of developing exercise related health
conditions.
Losing just 2% of your total body weight in the form of sweat can significantly impair
your performance.
It's vital then to take on board fluids before, during and particularly after exercise as
replacing lost fluids promotes the removal of toxins and waste products from your muscles
and so begins to speed up the recovery.
So let's look at the different options for taking fluid on board.
The American College of Sports Medicine recommends that you drink 2 to 3 cups or 0.5 to 0.7 litres
of water 2 to 3 hours before your workout.
Recent studies have shown that beginning the workout properly hydrated improves performance
and recovery.
During your workout drink a half to one cup or 0.12 to 0.23 litres about every 15 to 20
minutes during your workout or more if you sweat excessively.
After your workout drink around 2 to 3 cups again or 0.5 to 0.7 litres for every pound
or half kilogram of weight you lost during the workout but is water enough?
After long workouts or endurance events sports drinks can speed recovery more effectively
than water alone.
Sports drinks can be classified under three headings due to their varying concentrations
of carbohydrates and electrolytes.
Firstly isotonic drinks.
They're of a similar concentration to your body fluids and so they're quickly absorbed
and useful for tackling thirst during a workout or sports participation.
Hypotonic drinks contain a higher percentage of carbohydrates so useful for recovery after
a long workout or an endurance event.
Hypotonic drinks have a low carbohydrate concentration so these are useful for sports participants
to rehydrate when lots of energy is not required to be replaced i.e. perhaps activities will
involve more skill than physical endeavour.
Milk will rehydrate but it also serves other purposes as well.
Some studies have shown that milk helps build lean muscle as well as speeds up recovery.
One study looked at the impact of chocolate milk versus a well-known sports drink on performance
during an endurance cycle test.
In this test participants who drank chocolate milk cycled longer than those who drank the
sports drink although the beverages had very similar calorie contents.
It's not certain what accounts for this difference however perhaps the difference is in fat content,
the level of calcium or the different types of carbohydrates are the answer and more studies
of greater size are clearly required here.
The need to take additional nutritional supplements depends upon the intensity of your exercise
program in addition to the quality of your diet.
Supplements can be categorised as performance enhancing or ergogenic such as caffeine and
creatine although there is some debate about both so check with your doctor before using
them for this.
Or supplements might be used simply for general health such as omega-3 fish oils.
In the case of exercise recovery however recommended choices would be L-carnitine and magnesium.
Some antioxidants such as vitamin C and E are reported to help reduce muscle damage
and therefore enhance the speed of recovery.
They do not however eliminate muscle trauma from exercise but they may help to minimise
the symptoms such as say inflammation.
In the right conditions then supplements can be of benefit although they should never be
relied upon as a substitute for good nutrition and should always be used under a physician's
guidance.
Taking a plunge in an ice bath is now common practice amongst elite athletes in a wide
number of sporting disciplines to help them to recover faster and reduce muscle soreness
following intense training or competition.
It serves to reduce the swelling and also the degree of tissue breakdown.
A bonus of this technique is that when you get out of the ice bath and your core body
temperature begins to increase again this leads to an increased blood flow which assists
the healing process.
The recommended temperature is 12 to 15 degrees centigrade or 54 to 59 degrees Fahrenheit
and immersion time should be between 5 and 10 minutes.
Remember this approach should really only be used after very intense exercise efforts
and by that I mean workouts that are really to complete momentary fatigue.
Now if icy cold water isn't your thing and it doesn't sound too appealing to me, another
approach involves alternating between bathing in hot and cold water to speed up the recovery
process.
Again this works by alternately constricting and dilating the blood vessels which helps
to flush away the toxic waste products in the tissues such as lactic acid.
It is also found that this contrast water therapy as it's known can help to reduce the muscle
soreness that is usually felt in the 24 to 48 hour period following an intense workout.
Whilst elite sports performers will have specific facilities for this purpose you can also try
this for yourself at home with little fuss and no expense.
While showering after exercise set the temperature gauge as hot as is comfortable for two minutes
and then immediately follow this with 30 seconds of cold water and repeat 4 to 5 cycles.
I talked with Professor Heller about muscle recovery and I wanted to share with you some
of his research on the role of heat in exercise recovery.
Well temperature has a huge effect on muscle performance and therefore human physical performance.
Large muscles produce a lot of heat when they are active.
That heat normally comes out of the muscle in the blood, goes back to the heart and then
it's carried from the heart in the arterial blood out to the periphery where it's dissipated
to the environment.
But that's a slow process so if you have a very very big muscle such as in a football
player heat accumulates while the individual is active and what we found out is that muscle
fatigue is largely a factor of the rise and temperature of the muscle.
So we've developed a technology which makes it possible to get heat out of the body very
efficiently very effectively and when we do that we extend the work capacity of the muscle.
Now if you do this in a conditioning regime where you have someone repeating a particular
activity over a period of time the words that are used are sets or reps of a particular
performance like pull-ups or bench press. We can greatly extend the capacity of an individual
during a particular work session.
Professor Heller has developed a system that lowers the body temperature during the workout
itself and the results he's getting are increasing capacity by two to three times the amount.
What he's doing is effectively speeding up the process of cooling down and therefore
also speeding up the process of recovery itself. It stands to reason that therapies
such as contrast water therapy help in a similar way.
Now adequate good quality sleep is essential for the regular exercise as this is the time
your body produces growth hormone which plays a significant role in tissue growth and repair.
Studies have shown that sleep can be split into one and a half hour cycles and you'll
feel more refreshed if you wake at the end of a cycle rather than midway through. So
if you wake at six hours or seven and a half or nine so this might explain why sometimes
you feel like you've had a long night's sleep but don't feel particularly refreshed in
the morning if you wake up at the wrong time in that cycle. That's the reason.
There's also a body of evidence to suggest that a 20 to 30 minute nap during the day
can bring positive benefits. Without doubt lack of enough sleep has been proven to impair
human function so your workouts will suffer if you don't get enough time under the duvet.
Remember reduced performance in your workouts can only lead to one thing and that's reduced
likelihood of seeing the results you desire.
Let's talk now about the role of stretching in preventing injury and recovery.
It shows that it's better to warm up before a workout and to do your active stretching
after your workout. Why is this?
Static stretching risks damaging your muscles and connective tissues if your body isn't
yet warm. On the other hand stretching after exercise should definitely form part of your
recovery strategy as it can help to minimize muscle soreness and may even help to prevent
future soft tissue injuries. Therefore before your workout it's best to carry out a few
dynamic mobilizing movements that begin with small movements around each of your major joints
and then gradually become larger as your body temperature increases. Just like this.
Now the warm-up is absolutely vital and you'll notice that on any of our workouts in this
series we'll point out that you must have that little 3 to 5 minute warm-up beforehand
So I'm going to give you that little warm-up right now. We're actually going to work through
it. So I'm going to start real easy. The importance of the warm-up we're trying to start with small
movements move to big. We're trying to get synovial fluid into the joints to get that
lubrication and we're trying to get your heart rate up, your body temperature up. So first
of all we're going to start very easy. I'm going to tilt the head to the side and bring
it back up and if you join in with us that'll be fabulous. You don't have to be in time
as long as we're doing that movement. You're working through your range of movement. Remember
we're starting small and then we'll start to build up. We'll hold that there and we'll
twist. Just working through the muscles in the neck. A lot of tension there so it's worth
doing that. Don't let any of the movements become jerky. Make sure it's nice and smooth.
Fabulous and hold it there. Let's take some of the shoulder circles. Should we go backwards
first? Just roll them back. Working through a comfortable range of motion. Start easy.
And then take it up a little bit as you go. So what we'll do with that is we'll start
to take it up to the elbows. See how we're increasing the range of motion now. And then
what we'll do is take that up to full arm. Let's get those circles. Keep your abs in
tight. Nice and comfortable. Work at your own pace. You don't have to be with our rhythm.
But don't go too quickly. The idea is that we're going to build the intensity up a little
as we go. And hold that there. Let's go forwards. The opposite. Get that real roll through your
shoulders. Shoulders up to the ears. Fabulous. Take it up to the elbows. Let's make it a
little bit bigger. Good. How are you doing at home? And should we take that up to the
full arm? Just to get a little circle in there. Fabulous. Working through the shoulders. And
beautiful. Let's just relax it there. Let's work through the trunk. All we're going to
do is a little twist and lift the foot onto the toe so that you can get that little twist
without any torque through the knee. Good. Let the arms go loose. Let them round. So you'll
start to get that little rotation through your lower spine there. Good. We're getting
to warm up through the trunk. How are you doing? Good. Should be beginning to feel your
body temperature rising a little bit now. I'm going to hold that there. Another good
one for your lower back. We're going to drop down. What I'm going to ask you to do here
is to just lift and lower and lift. So you're hunching here, curving the spine, and then
relaxing it down. Don't press down to the floor. A little hunch and hollow. Just working
through those joints through the lower spine. And down. Beautiful. Good. And hold it there.
We're going to take it down for some small squats. So just nice and easy. Not too low.
Small squats. Pressing into your heels. That'll be important for later. Abs are in tight. Just
working through the knee joint, through the hip joint, getting a little bit of work into
the glutes, into the muscles in the front and the back of the thigh as well. Fabulous.
Now I'm going to change that slightly and take the feet a little bit wider. Point the
knees and toes out slightly. And I'm going to shift my weight side to side with a little
dip in the middle. Down and dip. Beautiful. You don't have to be going in time with me.
If you are, that's okay. Just keep moving. Make sure you're getting that little bend
in the middle, that little swing. Let your arms go in. Good. Now you see how the movements
are getting a little bit bigger as we go along. So what that's starting to do is to raise
the heart rate a little bit as we start to move the blood around. Get you prepared for
what we're about to do. Good. Should be beginning to feel a bit warmer. We'll take the arm across
the chest, but let it just flow. The warm-up should be nice and smooth. Good. And what you'll
find with these warm-ups after you've done this a few times, you'll get the hang of it
and be able to do it yourself over the top any time you like. But then also you'll be
able to make up these movements as you go. Nothing too difficult. Just working through
your range of motion. Should we add both arms just to make that a bit bigger? Good. So it's
getting a little more intense as we go along, building up that gradual curve. Should be
beginning to get your breathing rate up just a little bit. Not too much. Fabulous. I'm
going to change that slightly. Hands are down and heels. Heels. Heels. Getting into the
hamstrings. Yeah. Curling that heel up to your backside. See how that's going? Up, up, up.
Beautiful. And then the opposite of that. Let's lift the knees. Up, up. Good. So we're
working through that hip flexion. But what we're also doing here is working through that
knee flexion, lifting up. We're also now moving larger muscle groups. So beginning to get
a little bit more work. Now, the hip. Can we circle, circle, circle. Good. Remember we
can get that. It's a ball and socket joint the hip. So we can get that round movement.
Up and back. Now this is going to feel a little bit awkward. Just bear with me. But when we
do the opposite of that and bring it in, it feels a bit strange. But the hip is designed
to move like that. So we'll circle it in. Circle it in. Just feel odd. But it's a good exercise.
And in. Okay. We'll start to march. Using your arms. A little bit of a pump. Lift the
feet up. Good. Any chance we could take that to just a little bit of a jog? So as you can
see what we're beginning to do now. Take up the intensity. We're beginning to get your
heart rate up a little bit. And hopefully you're beginning to feel a little bit warmer now.
Shall we change that to a little bit of shadow boxing? A little bit of side to side. Beautiful.
What about put one foot forwards? You can look out for this when we come to the combat
workout. Change it over. Beautiful. Can I get some very small jacks? Fabulous. And then
from there can I get some little scissors? Forwards and back. Bring it back down to your
gentle jog on the spot. Bring it back down to your march. And I reckon you should be
feeling a little bit warmer and ready for your workout. Conversely, after exercise, you
should perform static stretches to allow the muscles to relax and return to their resting
length. Breathe out as you ease into each stretch to the point where you feel mild tension
in the target muscle. And then hold this position for around 30 seconds and then gently release.
Surprisingly, individual testimonials form a swathe of anecdotal evidence to suggest
that women need more time than men to recover from exercise. It's thought that this discrepancy
is due to how sex-specific hormones regulate the growth and repair of muscle tissue. So
if you're a woman who regularly exercises with a male partner or friend, try not to
force yourself to strictly adhere to his training schedule. Now, on the flip side of this coin,
however, whilst men recover quicker between exercise sessions, a 2008 study revealed that
fit women have a much greater resistance to fatigue than men during continuous exercise
at low intensities. So leading on from that last point then, it's absolutely vital to
listen to your body. Your body operates most efficiently when it's many systems off functioning
in harmony referred to as homeostasis. We can define optimal recovery, therefore, as
the point where the body has returned to the same state as before exercise. So if you find
that by the time your next planned workout comes along and you're still feeling somewhat
tired or sore, it's logical to assume you might need a little more recovery time. Intuitively,
you will know what your body needs and when it needs it. The skill is in being able to
identify the signs as many of us either misinterpret or simply dismiss them. So don't think you
have to push yourself hard just because your last workout was a little under par or that
you'll be thought of as not committed just because you need two days rest rather than
one. Of course, if you're feeling strong the day after a hard workout, this works both
ways. So you don't have to force yourself to take it easy. You could do another hard
workout. In our lecture on muscles, we discovered that muscles are surrounded by a soft layer
of connective tissue and just like the muscles themselves, this fascia can become tight perhaps
due to lack of stretching or if not regularly moved through its full range of motion. This
can lead to it becoming stuck to the muscles in cases forming little adhesions often described
as feeling like a knot in your muscles that may reduce the movement and sometimes cause
soreness. Using a foam roller can help to relieve the tension in the fascia, a technique
referred to as myofascial release. This technique involves applying gentle pressure to the soft
tissues whilst at the same time generating traction to stretch it. As a result, the fascia
softens and lengthens which helps to break down those adhesions. The good news is that
a foam roller is relatively inexpensive to purchase and easy to use. You simply place
the foam roller on the floor, place the body part you wish to target on top and then slowly
roll backwards and forwards along the length of the muscle for about a minute or so. If
you find a knot or a particularly stiff area, hold on that position and apply a little extra
pressure, rocking just very slightly forwards and backwards until it begins to ease. So
here are a few examples of how to target various body parts with a foam roller that you can
try. Iliotibial band, gluteals, lower back, quadriceps.
Hamstrings, calves, latissimus dorsi. Although post-exercise massage reduces the intensity
of muscle soreness, there is no conclusive evidence to prove that it has a positive effect
on improving weakness or decreasing the fatigue that usually results from intense training.
However, manual pressure increases blood flow and leads to an increase in muscle temperature
so increase in flexibility. For a lot of people however, simply reducing the muscle pain and
stiffness enhances the sense of relaxation and wellbeing which can only be a good thing
and give you a reason to enjoy regular massage after exercise to aid recovery. One school
of thought is that due to the mind-body connection it is likely that the psychological benefits
of massage can actually help to boost your physical functioning and therefore speeding
up your recovery. Just the point is worth checking that your massage therapist is appropriately
qualified and works to the utmost professional standards. Ideally, take a recommendation
from a friend or colleague you can trust. If you don't have easy access to regular massage
however, using your own two hands and a do-it-yourself approach can still effectively reduce muscle
soreness, relieve tension and significantly hasten your recovery. In lecture 22, interestingly
enough, I'll walk you through a number of techniques and you can try them with me.
In this course, we discovered that in order to achieve optimal health, regular exercise
is a vital prerequisite. What is now also abundantly clear is that it's important to
take a proactive approach to planning your recovery and including this in your training
program. Although there's no proven consensus on a one size fits all strategy for recovery,
monitoring your exercise performance and adjusting your workouts accordingly is an
essential ingredient. You now know the importance of recovery and you're armed with a range
of interventions that will empower you to take control of it and ensure your journey
to a fitter, slimmer, faster, stronger and ultimately healthier you is a successful one.
