Often, it's not until something goes wrong that we realise just how much a particular
joint is involved in everyday activities.
In this presentation, we'll look at the incredible system of levers that form our joints.
We'll investigate the different structures and functions of the joints, plus explore
the movement capabilities of the human skeleton itself.
The goal is to help you to understand all the major joints of the body and why exercise
is so important for their health and longevity.
We'll also consider the most significant joint problems and what we can do to overcome
them.
So, let's start with the skeleton itself, or rather the amazing interlink structure
of bones, joints and cartilage that we refer to as the skeletal system.
You will remember from our lecture on bones that without this frame we will be unable
to perform exercises such as squats, push-ups, but also everyday movements such as walking
or just simply picking things up.
As a reminder, the skeleton performs the following functions.
It allows for movement by providing a series of independent levers that can be moved by
shortening the muscles.
The skeleton gives shape to the body.
It provides a framework that supports the soft tissues and provides attachment sites
for the muscles.
It also protects our vital organs and this is essential for survival.
Think about the cranium shield in the brain or the rib cage housing the heart and lungs
and the vertebra, of course, surrounding the vital spinal cord.
Minerals such as calcium and phosphorus are stored in bone tissue to be released into
the bloodstream when they're required.
In addition, as we age, some of the red bone marrow changes to become yellow bone marrow
containing more adipose or fat cells that can be converted to red marrow to increase
the production of red blood cells in the case of severe injury.
Red bone marrow is the source of production of new blood cells and also platelets.
These are the clotting cells that stem blood flow in the cases of injuries such as little
cuts to the skin.
Now surprisingly, male and female skeletons differ only very slightly.
Generally male bones tend to be heavier than the corresponding bones of the female, but
the female pelvis is flatter, more rounded and proportionately larger to allow for childbirth.
Women have narrower rib cages and a greater carrying angle at the elbow joint.
Men tend to have longer and thicker limbs and phalanges or digits.
Now as you may know, joints occur where bones meet and are split into three categories.
As follows, we have immovable joints that can be found where bones are joined either
by cartilage or dovetailed edges to the bones.
For example, the sutures of the skull where adjacent bones of the skull meet.
Then we have slightly movable joints and these are described as those with ligament or fibrous
cartilage between the bony surfaces.
For example, the vertebral column.
And then finally, freely movable joints and these feature ends of bones that are covered
in cartilage and are connected by a fibrous capsule with the inner layer of this known
as the synovial membrane.
This type of joint is also called a synovial joint with examples being the hip, the shoulder
joint and others.
Now since my focus is on exercise and how it affects the joints, it's this last category
that I'll focus on.
Synovial joints are encased by a capsule that encloses the joint cavity and is attached
to the periosteum which is the connective tissue layer that surrounds the bones.
The joint capsule provides support to the joint.
The inner layer of this synovial membrane secretes synovial fluid which is a vital lubricant
to help reduce friction at the joint but also provides nourishment for the articular cartilage
that covers the end of the bone.
The purpose of this articular cartilage is also to help with the shock absorption and
to reduce friction and then the ligaments which help to provide stability.
This now explains why a warm-up is prior to exercise is such an important concept as
a vital result of moving the joints through their range of motion will be to stimulate
the synovial membrane to produce lubrication in the form of synovial fluid.
This will then reduce friction and enhance the shock absorption by the articular cartilage
so directly affecting the smooth performance of joint movement and therefore diminishing
the risk of injury.
Now this can be achieved by doing some rhythmic movements such as shoulder rolls, elbow bends,
knee bends, neck twists, arm, hip, wrist, ankle circles, all those types of movements
will serve to get the synovial fluid moving in the joints.
There exist six different types of synovial joint.
There's a gliding joint which is where movement is over flat surfaces for example the carpals
in the wrist.
Hinges allow for movement in one plane only for example the elbow.
A pivot is purely to provide rotation for example the atlas in the neck that enables
you to turn your head.
A condyloid joint allows movement to occur in two planes for example in the wrist between
the ulnar, radius and carpals.
A saddle joint is similar to a condyloid joint but here the bone surfaces are concave
and convex for example at the base of the thumb.
Ball and socket joints are highly movable affording three planar capability for example
the shoulder joint.
Now the clever thing about the way the skeleton is structured is that the joints are positioned
to be able to perform a wide array of different movements.
Joint movements are labelled from a position of standing erect with the feet and palms
facing forwards known as the anatomical position.
To explore this range of movements why don't you join me, stand up.
As I demonstrate them we can try these movements together ourselves.
Extension describes a reduction in the angle at a joint in other words bending so for
example bending the leg at the knee and we start to reduce that angle.
Extension is the opposite of flexion we increase in the angle of the joint or straightening
the limb for example straightening the arm at the elbow increases the angle.
Hyper extension refers to the continuation of extension beyond the anatomical position
for example standing up straight is extension but if I continue moving the spine beyond
the normal position this would then be hyper extension.
Adduction describes bringing a limb towards or across the centre line of the body so an
example would be crossing your legs.
Abduction unsurprisingly is the opposite of adduction so it defines movement of a limb
away from the midline of the body for example lifting your arm to the side.
Elevation refers to raising a joint as in shrugging your shoulders and depression is
the counter movement to elevation i.e. pulling a joint down as in dropping your shoulders.
Lateral flexion defines sideways bending for example tilting your head and lateral extension
is the return from the sideways position for example if we've bent to the side through
the trunk straightening back up will be lateral extension.
Horizontal flexion describes a forward movement in a horizontal plane for example if your
arms are already out to the side and then bringing them into the centre.
Horizontal extension is the return or backward movement in a horizontal plane swinging the
arms behind you.
One can be inward or outward and it could be of the hip joint also and circumduction
is unique to the shoulder joint in that we can actually perform a full circle here.
Pronation is the inward turning of the palms.
Now when we apply this to the ankle it's actually referred to as being flat footed that slight
pronation that slight twist.
Portraction is turning your palms upwards.
Plant a flexion pointing the toes the opposite of that movement is dorsiflexion pulling the
toes back up.
Protraction refers to extending a body part forwards as in sticking out your chin not
a pretty side and retraction is the pulling back the opposite of that so for example
when you pull your shoulders back to stretch your chest.
Now not surprisingly since as a species we're referred to as a vertebrate the key part of
the skeleton is the vertebral column or backbone made up of the joints of 33 bones in total.
These divide into seven cervical vertebrae within the neck the top one being the atlas
that supports the skull and then links to the axis or the second vertebra by a highly
flexible pivot joint allowing for the many necessary movements of the head.
Next we have 12 thoracic vertebrae which form joints with the ribs creating the rib cage
which protects the many vital organs found in the trunk area.
Moving down the five lumbar vertebrae the largest bones of the spine and also the strongest
as they're required to support the rest of the column and to accommodate the force generated
by the loads we carry.
The five bones that make up the sacrum and the four bones that form the coccyx are two
sets of fused bones i.e. they don't allow for any movement.
The joints between the 24 movable vertebrae form a flexible column that supports the head
and trunk but also in cases and so protects the spinal cord.
Switching neatly between each of the bones of the spine is a fibrous cartilage mass known
as the intervertebral disc which acts like a shock absorber.
Now a point to note here is rather than sitting directly one on top of each other the bones
of the spine actually form four gentle curves the cervical curve then the thoracic curve
then the lumbar curve and then the sacral curve.
Now the cervical and lumbar curves are actually forwards or concave whereas thoracic and sacral
curves actually curve backwards or convex.
Now this beautiful design centres their head on top of the body and also reduces impact
forces travelling along the spine so helping to protect the skull and the pelvis at either
end together with their valuable soft tissue contents.
The curves also make it easier for us to stay upright when we're walking.
Now there are a number of conditions that can affect these curves and so present problems
such as pain, stiffness and fatigue in addition to poor posture which can lead to reduced
functional performance of the limbs.
Firstly kyphosis this is an exaggerated rounding of the thoracic spine this sort of hunched
position sometimes known as dowager's hump it's a deformity that can result from growing
issues during adolescence degenerative disease such as arthritis, compression fractures and
prolapse discs.
Worse still it can be caused simply by lazy posture but more about that in our presentation
that looks specifically at the risks associated with prolonged sitting lecture 32.
Your dosis is a curvature of the lumbar spine that makes the backside stick out it's an
exaggerated curve.
Again can be caused by poor posture when lifting and carrying items or maybe development problems
as a result of pregnancy issues perhaps.
And then we have scoliosis described as a side to side curvature in the spinal column
leading to an S or a C shape rather than a straight line we expect to see when viewing
from the rear.
Some of the bones of the spine may have also rotated slightly making the pelvis or shoulders
appear uneven and one leg might also appear to be longer than the other.
Now scoliosis is a spinal deformity that is usually due to a congenital defect but can
also be caused by incorrect posture unfortunately it's tougher than the previous two conditions
to correct so whereas kyphosis and lordosis can be self-treated with actually some fairly
basic exercises this malady requires probably more specialist therapy.
There are many factors that can lead to poor posture and therefore to curvature problems
and these include regularly wearing high heels which I personally try to avoid and poor ergonomic
design of desks and chairs at work or in school excessive driving repeatedly carrying
weighty items but to be clear scoliosis doesn't come from carrying heavy things but other
back problems can.
Emotional stress and low self-esteem can affect posture and some sports such as tennis, golf,
cycling, rowing, throwing events that require you to hold a particular position repeatedly
or for a length of time and then hereditary conditions such as spina bifida and finally
recurrent injuries to the soft tissues such as strains and sprains can be an issue.
Growth spurts during puberty, osteoporosis these again are other factors that may impact
upon our posture.
Now one of the most common pathologies that results from curvature problems is a prolapsed
intervertebral disc or better known as a slip disc although this term is somewhat misleading
since nothing actually slips.
Constant uneven loading on the disc perhaps caused by one or a combination of those previous
points I've just mentioned in that list can lead to weakness in the fibrous outer layers
of the roughly circular discs that sit between the vertebra.
Mild pressure can then result in the more fluid nucleus pulposis leaking from the centre
into the outer fibres and even then causing it to bulge and possibly to come into contact
with the sciatic nerve that branches out from the spinal cord.
Now since this nerve runs down through the buttocks and down through the back of the
legs pain due to sciatica is usually an ache or even a sharp stabbing pain in this area.
The most important treatment you ready for this is to remain active avoiding pain but
accepting a mild level of discomfort as this will help to speed the regression of the nucleus
pulpors back into the centre.
Gentle exercise will also avoid the problem of lower back muscle stiffness that results
from simply resting.
Rest can actually compound the symptoms.
As with any persistent or elevated pain however you really should see a doctor.
Now for more on the route to a healthy back don't forget that we also investigate the
value of core strength in our spine lecture.
We look at that in a little bit more detail.
We introduce exercises to enhance the core and plus we highlight the inherent postural
problems and tactics to tackle such in the presentation on risk of prolonged sitting
which again is lecture 32.
Now we earlier define the anatomical terminology for movement but let's now look in a little
bit more detail at precisely what movements are possible at which joints.
Again you can join me doing these movements if you wish.
The shoulder complex is made up by the union of three bones namely the clavicle, the scapula
and the humerus.
The shoulder joint refers to the ball and socket meeting of the head of the humerus
articulating with the front face of the scapula and this is called the glenoid cavity.
So this allows for flexion, extension, hyperextension going back past the midline.
We've got horizontal flexion, horizontal extension.
The shoulder joint can abduct, it can adduct, it can rotate and we also have that circumduction
the full circle.
Now that's the shoulder joint, the shoulder girdle however is a selection of gliding joints
for example where the scapula creates a roof by extending up and around the shoulder joint
this is called the acromioclavicular joint and also around the front of the shoulder
joint this is the sternoclavicular joint.
The movements possible here are elevation, depression, protraction and retraction.
Since there's a very loose arrangement here as supported by the unfortunately high incidence
of shoulder dislocations in a number of competitive sports there are a few key muscles that play
a role in stabilizing the joint.
These being the long head of the biceps and the rotator cuff muscles absolutely vital
and we talk about those in our workout section so look out for that.
The elbow joint is a hinge joint allowing for flexion and extension.
Now while it appears that you can pronate and supinate the forearm around the elbow
actually those movements are really down to the radio ulnar joint.
The wrist joint is a condyloid joint with possible movements being flexion, extension
and there's a limited amount of abduction adduction when we wave.
Now whilst the wrists appear to rotate this is really achieved through the combined joints
of the hand and the wrist so it's not really rotating.
The spine as we discussed earlier is a collection of gliding joints that provide a good degree
of movement with the most mobile being at the top and the lower joints being not quite
so flexible.
The cervical vertebrae allow for flexion, for extension, for a bit of hyperextension.
We've got lateral flexion, lateral extension and we've got rotation.
The thoracic vertebrae moving down slightly allow for flexion, extension, hyperextension.
There's a little bit of lateral flexion, there's a little bit of lateral extension and there's
a little bit of rotation.
As we move lower down to the lumbar vertebrae that just allows for a little bit of flexion
and extension.
Now the hip joint is a ball and socket joint so this provides the ability for us at the
hip to be able to flex, to extend, to hyperextend.
We can also abduct, we can adduct and we can rotate and you're broken to a dance there.
The knee joint is a hinge as we found out earlier that only allows two possible movements
and those are flexion and extension.
The ankle joint is another hinge joint with the possible movements being plantar flexion
pointing and dorsiflexion pulling it back up.
As with the wrist although the ankle appears to rotate this is again due to a combination
of the joints in the foot and not the ankle.
Now unfortunately our joints do sometimes malfunction as supported by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention claim that arthritis is the most common cause of disability
in the US affecting around 50 million adults and usually manifesting itself as pain, stiffness,
loss of function and in worse cases loss of independence.
Around 21 million people report that arthritis restricts their functional capabilities in
some way.
Arthritis is actually an umbrella term for a huge number of rheumatic diseases that
affect the joints and the soft tissues around them including conditions such as childhood,
arthritis, fibromyalgia and lupus that affect both sexes all ages and in fact every ethnic
group.
The most common ailments are osteoarthritis where a joint degenerates through years of
wear and tear whereas rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammatory disease affecting multiple
joints.
Arthritis is the most common form of arthritis and is caused by degeneration of the haline
cartilage that we discovered earlier as the key shock absorber on the end when bones articulate
with one another.
This can then result in the unprotected bone ends rubbing against each other which leads
to pain, stiffness and reduced physical capability.
Since it's associated with wear and tear clearly there could be some age related influence
here.
Osteoarthritis is commonly seen in the hands, knees and hips of the elderly although it
actually results from repeated stresses on joints that are beyond their ability to withstand
such hence exercise being a key component in reducing the effects of the condition but
I'll talk more about that later.
Certainly muscle weakness is an important issue.
For example those suffering osteoarthritis of the knee usually show reduced muscle mass
in the quadriceps at the front of the thigh and the hamstrings at the rear however it's
not always easy to ascertain whether weak muscles cause the condition or vice versa.
Rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammation of the lining of the joint capsule that spreads
to cause erosion of the cartilage and bone leading to pain and stiffness often in multiple
joints and commonly leading to visible deformity of the joint.
Again the likelihood of suffering increases with age and women seem to be more likely
to be afflicted than men.
In worse cases rheumatoid arthritis can affect the blood vessels and lead to issues in a
number of organs including the heart and lungs with associated respiratory problems.
It appears there are a number of misconceptions about arthritis so let's address a few of
these myths I'll call them right now.
Here's a myth, arthritis only affects the elderly.
Well how is it then that around 60% of sufferers are under 65 including as I mentioned a little
earlier children suffering from juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.
Myth number two, arthritis leads to an inevitable decline in quality of life.
Now this definitely isn't the case as medication, surgery and exercise have proven to be effective
treatments in limiting the effects of the condition.
Myth number three, rest is the best option.
See that's not so when researchers made it clear that carefully prescribed types of exercise
can restore functional ability and at the same time reduce pain.
And another myth, once arthritis sets in there's no way to improve it.
Now some sufferers believe that their arthritis is too far advanced to respond to treatment
but patients of all ages and different degrees of disability have made significant improvements.
Now established what's true and what's not we can take a positive action to reduce the
effects of arthritis on our joints.
So let's investigate more specifically how we can do this.
Excess weight gain has been shown to increase pain and sufferers.
Easy to appreciate when you consider your knee has to accommodate around five times your
body weight when you're walking up and down the stairs.
One notable study suggested that a weight loss of just 11 pounds resulted in a decrease
in pain of an incredible 50%, 50%.
So weight management programs, usually the combination of sensible healthy diets and
regular varied exercise are vital.
As a result of inactivity arthritis sufferers are at greater risk of lifestyle disease than
the general population.
So both cardiovascular and strength training are strongly recommended for the many measurable
benefits they have on a wide range of health components.
Fear of activity making the condition worse was proven unfounded in a 2003 study that
revealed a mixed session of cycling, circuit training and sport performed two times per
week for two years led to improvements in functional capability and improved mood status
with no measured negative side effects.
Now that same year research was conducted to establish whether resistance training could
improve the strength of rheumatoid arthritis patients just as it does for non-sufferers.
Again two times per week for two years was the dosage and improvements in strength range
from 19 to an amazing 59%, clearly proving the efficacy of strength training as a positive
treatment option.
Inactivity due to arthritis can lead to increased weight which we know ramps up the risk of
high blood pressure, osteoporosis, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases and some cancers.
The American College of Sports Medicine confirms that loss of flexibility, muscle wastage and
depression all associated with arthritis can all be positively influenced by exercise
even at just a moderate to low intensity.
This now explains why there has been a C-shift in the attitudes within the medical community.
Where it was at one time to rigour to advise arthritis patients to rest and to avoid physical
activity we now find ourselves at a point where Dr Ronan Rubinoff, a professor at Tufts
University in a renowned researcher in the field of musculoskeletal diseases states that
any form of exercise will help to reverse the negative effects of inflammatory disease
on muscle, will help to improve functioning daily activities and will significantly decrease
the risk of disability.
Now before you launch yourself into an exercise planned to combat arthritis however there
are a few points worthy of prior consideration.
A programme should focus on improving cardiovascular fitness, enhancing strength and increasing
flexibility as these will lead to greater joint mobility and also afford a protective
factor to the joints.
Those affected by arthritis should generally less fit than their unaffected counterparts
so programmes should begin very gently.
Existing symptoms such as stiffness and biomechanical inefficiencies imply that exercise will feel
harder so take a sensible approach to combining work and rest periods.
Modern exercise modes need to accommodate the reduced range of motion due to swelling
and bone changes in addition variety is recommended rather than lots of repetitive movement.
As we established that improvements in cardiovascular strength and flexibility components will be
of immense benefit let's look at the appropriate prescription for each.
When considering cardiovascular exercise the type of activity is crucial ideally choosing
methods of exercise that are predominantly non-weight bearing and also that require engagements
of large muscle groups via big whole body movements.
As mentioned earlier variety is also a key both to maintain interest and to work your
whole body.
High impact exercises are clearly not recommended with suitable options including swimming,
aqua exercise, dance and brisk walking.
Cycling is also possible but for some arthritis sufferers the repetitive movement in the legs
might be an issue but certainly we're going to avoid jogging and stair climbing for instance.
As with any exercise session a careful warm up that incrementally increases in intensity
and raises both the heart rate and the core body temperature is essential.
In addition a sensible tactic is to choose supportive cushioning footwear for weight bearing
activities because they provide shock absorption.
The guidelines for the important parameters to guarantee improved cardiovascular fitness
namely intensity, frequency and duration are as follows.
We're looking at about 60 to 80% of your maximum working heart rate which is calculated by
subtracting your age from 220 achieved via incorporating smooth, rhythmical movements
involving large muscle groups.
Target is three to five times per week, five minutes per session progressing to 30 minutes
duration per session.
Now strength training will enable the muscles, tendons and ligaments to better help to stabilize
the joints.
They'll offer better shock absorbing benefits and reduce the stress that wears down the
articulate cartilage that covers the end of the bones.
The actual exercises performed will be selected via a degree of trial and error.
The golden rule is simply to work within your comfortable range of movement.
If it hurts don't do it.
It's important to allow recovery time for the muscles to refuel and repair allowing
for the miraculous adaptive process that then leads to them becoming stronger so strength
training on consecutive days is a definite no-no.
So let's look at our guidelines for strength training.
Always begin with a gentle warm up that smoothly works through the range of motion about the
manger joints.
Avoid exercise that causes particular discomfort at certain joints and our target now for strength
work is two to three days per week.
Ideally you're aiming to perform 12 repetitions of each exercise but you may need to sort
of work up to this threshold.
Avoid high numbers of repetition and heavy loads as these can cause a greater force
impact on the affected joints.
Unrecommended resistance tools are using body weight, weight machines, resistance
bands, hydraulic or air machines if you've seen them and remember this series also includes
a look at aqua exercise that should be a benefit to arthritis sufferers and a number
of workouts are included from which a range of exercises can be selected for you to use.
Finally let's look at flexibility training.
As we've seen from our flexibility lecture in this series this brings a number of positive
benefits but clearly it's of extra importance for the arthritis sufferer who faces reduced
mobility if no action is taken.
So our guidelines you must be warm so either practice your stretching after a hot bath
or perform a gentle warm up beforehand.
Unlike strength training stretching can be practiced every day.
Pay special attention to the key problem areas that affect many of us particularly
as we age these being the lower back, the hamstrings at the back of the thigh and the
front of the shoulders.
Remember you have a 30 minute stretch workout included in this series so you could always
start there, you could always start today.
To avoid overstretching unstable joints ease into each stretch position just to the point
of mild tension and hold that for around 30 seconds.
Don't worry if you notice differences from one side of the body to the other this will
happen but always avoid any bouncing or jerking movements.
In conclusion then I hope that you'll now feel encouraged that you've learned not only
is it okay for arthritis sufferers to exercise but it's actually a highly beneficial and
obviously cost effective treatment option.
There are a number of different routes to achieving the necessary gains in cardiovascular
fitness strength and flexibility including joining me for the workouts that come within
this series.
Only the plyometrics workout can't be easily adjusted for someone with joint pain the rest
are simple to adjust to your level.
Whatever you choose to do just remember that when it comes to the long term effects of
joint problems so long as you're moving you'll be improving.
