If you've been following this series, by now you'll be aware that improvements in your
fitness are brought about by adaptive physiological changes that follow a workout. A principle
the sports scientists refer to as supercompensation. Muscle tissue repairs itself and learns to
absorb a little more protein, so enabling you to generate more power in the future.
In order to keep moving closer to the results you desire, however, another principle needs
to be strictly adhered to, namely progressive overloads. Now, what is this? Or simply put,
you need to keep increasing the workload as your cardio system improves and your muscles
strengthen. So, by definition then, to keep improving you have to keep raising the bar
in every sense for those of you who are weight training. Of course, constantly pushing your
body to the limits can carry the risk of a number of injuries, so to keep your machine
fully functional you need preparation, you need precautions, you need prehabilitation,
which is my term for treating injuries before they even occur.
The aim of this presentation is to establish the greatest injury risks for recreational
exercises and introduce treatment tactics, but then more importantly, to arm you with
the knowledge to avoid them in the first place. Most exercise-related injuries are termed
overuse, i.e. they're due to repetitive stress on the musculoskeletal system. The most commonly
affected areas are the knee or the lower leg, although it can be difficult to precisely
diagnose and treat. Simple measures such as good flexibility, balanced muscle development,
good choice of footwear and gradual progression of intensity have all been proven to reduce
this risk. What do I mean, though, by progressive intensity? Initial pain, such as a mild ache
in the affected area that seems to dissipate with the warm-up but returns post-workout,
is often ignored, but it shouldn't be. Unfortunately, over time this pain begins to last longer,
both during workouts and after exercise, eventually rendering exercise unpalatable,
maybe even affecting performance of normal everyday activities. Importantly, the earlier
help is sought from a medical advisor, the easier it is to treat almost all categories
of injuries. So this really is a crucial tip. Let's now look at where things can go wrong
and lead to disruption in this smooth running of your beautiful human machine. Firstly,
the muscles. Although the muscles are elastic, when a muscle is powerfully contracted or
stretched beyond its comfortable range, a strain or tear can occur. Next, the tendons,
muscles are attached to the bones with these fibrous connective tissues, but they can become
inflamed with overuse. The ligaments are thick cords that connect bones together and give
the joint stability, but they can become damaged, causing a sprain if alignment is incorrect
and the joint moves in a manner it was not designed to. Next, the bursa. Now, since bone
moves against bone at the joints, there's a need for some cushioning and that's the
job of these bursa, but these fluid filled sacs can sometimes become irritated if you
attempt to do too much too soon. And finally, the spine. The key area is not actually the
bones of the spine, but the intervertebral discs that act as shock absorbers as these
can become damaged over time, particularly as a result of twisting and bending moves
when holding weights. And these mechanical breakdowns explain the pathology of a number
of common activity related injuries. Basketball players, for instance, may well be familiar
with Achilles tendonitis, saunas and stiffness at the back of the ankle. This is also common
in runners who land the foot strike on the ball rather than the heel of the foot. This
constant pounding puts stress on the Achilles tendon, causing microscopic tears, usually
in the mid portion, about an inch or so above the heel. The solution is to stretch the
soleus muscle by performing a normal calf stretch with one leg in front of the other
and the rear leg stretched out, but bent. So rather than your normal calf stretch like
so, what we'll actually do is bend the rear knee. Okay, it's also important to ensure
that footwear has good lateral motion control to prevent rotational or twisting forces being
transferred to the tendon, which is really only designed to move in the up and down
plane. If these interventions are combined with a reduction in workload and localised
massage, full recovery can be expected. When possible, strength training should be introduced
to counter possible degeneration of the tendon, because that can lead to a partial or even
a complete rupture. For tennis players, common problem is piriformis strain, and this piriformis
muscle is deep in the buttock and reaches from the pelvis or the sacrum to the femur,
or the upper part of the thigh bone. Now this muscle can go into spasm, causing an entrapment
to the sciatic nerve, leading to a sore hip, and maybe referred pain down the back of the
thigh. The problem occurs due to the constant lateral motion that requires repeated quick
changes of weight from one foot to the other. A targeted stretch is useful here, achieved
by lying down, lifting your knees up to your chest, and then dropping them to the opposite
side from the injured hip and holding for around 30 seconds. Also, adding some lateral
plane drills to workouts will help to strengthen the hip complex. To specifically strengthen
the piriformis, you can lie face down with knees bent so that the soles of the shoes
are pointing up to the ceiling and squeeze a soft medicine ball between the calves. If
you're doing this at home and perhaps don't have a medicine ball, a pillow will work nearly
as well. Moving on to cyclists. Cyclists are often plagued with what's called patellar
tendonitis, an inflammation just below the kneecap, although this can also be a problem
for adolescents in a number of sporting disciplines. And it's characterized by pain, usually noticed
when walking down the stairs. Now, usually the problem is the patellar and not riding
correctly in its groove, combined with a repeated over-stretching of the knee via excessive
flexion. It's an excessive bending. Treatment involves building up strength in the vastus
medialis, which is the quadricep muscle nearer the centre, as this muscle will help to pull
the kneecap back in line. And this can be achieved by focusing on the last 15 degrees
of the knee movement on the leg extension machine at the gym, or perhaps performing,
if you're at home, quarter squats. So just that last part of the movement there is what
does the job. Also worth considering are raising your bike seat slightly and lowering the gears,
or if you're spinning, lightening the load, and instead keeping the intensity up by increasing
your cadence. Swimmers, unsurprisingly, shoulder soreness is a problem, and this can be caused
by rotator cuff impingement. Now, we've talked about these in other lectures, the rotator
cuff is that small group of muscles around the shoulder girdle that connect the upper
arm to the shoulder blade. Repeated stress on the tendons of these small muscles that
surround and stabilize the shoulder blade when the arm is moving can cause rotator cuff
impingement. Unfortunately, there's not much room here, it's a very tight structure, so
even minor inflammation will cause tissue to be pinched between articulating surfaces.
To help prevent this, bring the arm on the affected side across the chest, use the other
hand to stretch it by pulling it across, and you'll feel a stretch through the shoulder
and the shoulder girdle. Oh, that's nice. Also what we can do is take a resistance band
holding it in both hands, stretch a piece of elastic, and then simply pull the hands
out but keeping the elbows glued to the ribs. Great exercise for that shoulder girdle. Now
let's move on to jogging. Jogging can sometimes lead to plantar fasciitis, which is a strain
of the connective band that maintains the longitude and large on the base of the foot,
which is stretched basically every time the foot bears weight. This is often caused by
running on hard surfaces and manifests itself as a dull ache usually when you wake up in
the morning. Sadly, it will be necessary to reduce your weekly mileage in addition to
which taking sessions into the shallow end of the pool will pay dividends. It's always
wise to choose running shoes with good arch support and even consider using orthotics.
Competitive runners rather than joggers need to watch out for the iliotibial band syndrome,
which refers to a friction problem between the thick band of fascia that runs down the
outside of the knee and the lateral femoral condyle or the bottom end of the thigh bone.
You may notice a clicking and feel sharp pain on the outside of your knee. If the band is tight,
it is more likely to rub, so stretching is essential both in terms of prevention and
cure. And for this, you can try lying on your side with a foam roller under the affected area
and gently roll up and down so the roller massages the area and stretches the connective
tissue. And you can easily improvise with just a cylindrical piece of styrofoam. Ideally,
4 to 6 inches diameter. You'll need to reduce your training load and it may be necessary to take
anti-inflammatory medication, perhaps even a steroid injection to reduce swelling. And while
we're talking injuries, even gardeners and power walkers need to take care. As blisters may
sound like a minor problem, but if they cause you to lose active days, they can prevent you from
reaching your goals. They're caused by friction and usually affect your heels, soles of your feet
and palms of your hands when the top layer of skin separates from the layer below, resulting in
a little bubble. Invest in some decent socks that will not cause your feet to sweat and duly,
opt for gloves in the garden and take the time to visit a good outdoor activity shop to be fitted
for your walking shoes. Surprisingly, there's actually a gender influence on injury, specifically
the knee, due to the difference in structure of male and female skeletons. As females have
relatively wider hips for childbirth purposes, the angle the thigh bone makes with the shin bone
is greater than in males. Now this cue angle, as it's known, is around 10 degrees in men,
but nearer to 13 degrees for women. And it's thought to be the reason more females record
injury to the anterior cruciate ligament, which is one of the two connective bands that cross
over in the knee and give it extra stability. Another contributor is the fact that females
usually display a greater degree of anterior tilt of the pelvis, so strengthening the gluteal
muscles and stretching the hip flexors then should help to realign the pelvis, while strengthening
the quadriceps will lend the knee joint more stability. So some ideal exercises will be as
follows. So we're trying to counter this feeling of an anterior tilt in the pelvis. So that anterior
tilt in the pelvis is like so. So what we're trying to do here is to get some strengthening for the
gluteals and the stretching for the hip flexors at the front. Okay, so a great exercise here is a
rear lunge with body rotation. By taking my leg back and lunging, I'm starting to get some work
for the gluteals, but also a bit of a stretch at the front into the hip flexors. If I also now add
some rotation to that, I get even more work here. So the exercise there that's useful is a rear
lunge with upper body rotation. Moving on, another exercise is a front lunge with an overhead lift.
Again, strengthening the gluteals and stretching into the hip flexors at the front. So by that,
I'm taking a step forwards. I'm lunging and I'm lifting the hands up above the head. Now the
beauty of this exercise is that I also now remember I said we needed to look at the stability in
the knee. I'm also now beginning to work through the quadriceps, working on the stability in this
knee. So I'm getting my lunge there. I'm getting my stretch here and I'm getting some stability
work here. And another exercise specifically really targeting into those gluteals and into the
quadriceps which will help with that knee stability is the side lunge with a low reach. So all I'm
doing there is literally stepping out to the side, lunging down and reaching the hands down.
Obviously in my fitness kit, I go a little lower than that. That side lunge and low reach really
works into this quadricep, controlling that knee stability and works through the gluteals as well.
So those exercises, particularly for girls who may have issues with that cue angle related problem
around the knee. Now let's investigate the actual stages that describe how an injury heals as these
can be clearly defined. Firstly, there's the inflammatory stage lasting anything from one to
four days whereby cells form a clot to seal the affected area. So stopping the bleeding which may
be external or internal as in a contusional or bruise. Cells known as sphagisites are attracted
to the area to absorb the damaged cells that can no longer perform their functions. In addition,
chemicals are released by the damaged cells that attract white blood cells which assist in
sealing the area so helping to boost oxygenation and bring vital nutrients to aid the healing
process. Once the damaged cells have been cleared, the clot that's formed by the platelets is then
broken down by other cells known as fibroblasts then allowing scar tissue to be laid down. Next is
the proliferative stage usually between seven and 14 days after the injury describing the laying
down of the scar tissue made up of collagen fibres. Now unfortunately the process is not very
well ordered so the fibres can be disorganized in their arrangement. As a result the site may be
weak hence the increased likelihood of a repeat injury as any regular sports bot will no doubt
tell you. At this time the original blood clot dissipates cells known as myofibroblasts work to
glue together the torn structures. Remodeling occurs anywhere between 14 and 90 days at which
time the scar tissue begins to adopt the function of the surrounding tissues. This stage is influenced
by external stress placed upon the area hence the need for rehabilitation if one is to fully recover
from an injury. More collagen is usually added here to increase tensile strength although
unfortunately the scar tissue very rarely achieves the full strength and mobility capabilities that
you had previously. Now without wishing to state the obvious injuries generally give rise to pain
the body's distress call which is caused by over-excitement of the nerve endings and it can
be classified in three ways. First we have visceral pain and this refers to cramping a deep ache or
a dull throbbing it could be constant it could be intermittent it's often referred pain and so it
can be difficult to pinpoint. Somatic pain however is easier to identify because the injured party
can usually point to the exact location and it's gnawing it can hurt to touch. Examples of causes
are bone fractures arthritis muscle spasms that often can feel worse at the beginning or end of
the day and then finally naturopathic pain relates to damage to the peripheral nerves or even the
central nervous system and manifests itself in contrasting ways it could be sharp or it could
be numbing and this could be associated with diabetes, AIDS or perhaps other diseases. So now
we've established what pain actually is our logical next step is to investigate the multi-
various methods by which we can treat it. So this is an area of medicine that's moved a long way
forward since the days of take an aspirin and live with it. A significant development and pain
management was the realization that preemptive analgesia can block pain before it bites with
a class of painkillers called cox2 inhibitors. These offer arthritis sufferers the benefit of
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs without the associated negative side effects to the
gastrointestinal system and the kidneys. Here are a few other perhaps more avant-garde pain
management techniques. A pump implanted at a convenient point within the body can deliver
small doses of anesthetic every few hours that can inhibit pain without the side effects that
higher dosages might elicit. A TENS unit which stands for transdermal or also transcutaneous
electronic nerve stimulation is a device that applies electrical pulses to relieve neurological
pain. Research has shown that it can reduce pain by as much as 50%. Simple tactics such as massage
and the application of heat and cold are highly effective. Massage reduces tension around the
joint and so frees up the joint space that is often the source of pain. Cold applied for 15 to
25 minutes at a time can reduce bruising, swelling and muscle spasms. Heat applied for 20 to 30
minutes when an injury is past the initial swelling stage can relieve muscle aches and pains and
relieve stiffness and sore joints. Acupuncture is thought to interrupt the flow of pain messages
and induces an endorphin release that promotes a healing response. Chiropractic focuses on
realigning the vertebra in the spine to remove pain caused by pinched nerves, for example sciatica,
and can also involve retraining posture to assist everyday movements. Trigger point therapy
describes the practice of injecting anesthetic into the muscle interfering with the pain signal
normally transmitted to the brain. Prolotherapy refers to injections of vitamin A, C or B12 or
perhaps even glucose as these are thought to promote growth of collagen fibres of great
value at joints where there may have been deterioration. Some of you may be familiar with
St John's Whart, it's a herb often taken to counter depression and also used to relief or to help
the relief of pain but research into its effects not necessarily proven its merits and as with any
drug it could be harmful to certain individuals so always consult your GP before consuming.
Now, encouragingly, any activity that stimulates the body to release the natural opiates i.e. endorphins
can help pain management so simply watching a funny television show or a DVD has its value.
So should the worst happen and you find you're suffering from an acute injury resulting from
an instantaneous traumatic incident or perhaps a chronic injury resulting from a minor irritation
that builds up over time but don't have easy access to the various treatment protocols I've
just mentioned, remember the rice regime. First of all rests as there are no awards for trying
to die like a hero during your sporting pursuits or your workouts so listen to your body and take
a day off if it's telling you to that's a point I mentioned in a few of the other lectures. Ice
helps to counter the inflammation caused by injury as we discovered earlier so used for around 15
minutes every hour but ensure it's wrapped because that'll avoid it damaging your skin on contact.
Compression will counter the inevitable swelling that follows an injury but this is remember part
of the healing process. An elastic bandage can help to contain it preventing it becoming excessive
which is when we then lose function. An elevation will assist your circulatory system as it gradually
removes the excess fluid around an injured site so you can speed things up by resting
and supporting the affected limb in a lifted position. Let's now explore the psychology
of injuries it's clear this can be as important a factor as the physiological implications
although it's perhaps not so easy to appreciate. The physical implications such as pain,
restricted function and the rigor of treatment are clearly identifiable but there are also
emotional, social and self-perception dimensions as follows. Emotionally trauma can accompany
injury and there may also be feelings of loss. There will be the stress of taking on treatment
and rehabilitation which can be magnified if there are also doubts about future ability to perform
at previous physical capability levels. Socially there might be concerns regarding separation
from family, friends and teammates that could be compounded by the loss of a key role for example
being the group leader who organizes swim sessions for friends or perhaps the golf club
captain. Building relationships with treatment providers can be challenging as will be the
necessity to depend upon others for support either temporarily or in worst-case scenarios
permanently and then self-perception. This will be affected by the loss of control possibly
having to deal with altered physical status and perhaps also the necessity to make critical
decisions regarding treatment options. The requirement to adjust life goals could also
present a difficult phase. So it's vital to understand that psychological state has a direct
impact on recovery from injury hence it being estimated that around eight percent of injured
athletes are given counseling to help them to avoid the negative behaviors that could impede
the rehabilitation process. Thought patterns can be irrational and lead to what is known as cognitive
distortion and this can be categorized as follows. Firstly catastrophizing and this refers to the
exaggeration of the severity of an injury so it's important to ascertain all the facts
and keep a realistic perspective on the recovery process. Overgeneralization extends the impact
of an injury to areas that are actually unaffected so it's important to focus on all the things you
can do rather than the small number you can't. Personalizing relates to the mindset of assuming
responsibility for the injury why is it always me who ends up injured. Keep a foothold on reality
by reminding yourself that friends and teammates have also been injured. Selective abstraction
describes the concept of taking a specific aspect of injury and blowing it out of proportion for
example assuming that just because someone you know had a similar injury and never fully recovered
then neither will you. Instead focus on the number of people you know who did fully recover
and ask the medical staff attending you as they will cite cases of others who did the same.
Absolute thinking is the idea that your injury is an all or nothing situation leaving you assuming
you are no longer of use to your family or your team. Take time to consider all the things you
can do to contribute to making things better for those around you. You'd be surprised how much you
can give even in an injured state. At the top of this presentation I mentioned preventive measures
coining the phrase prehabilitation describing the hypothetical concept of treating injuries
before they occur so removing the need for rehabilitation. Surprisingly despite a lack
of formal research studies there's now a growing weight of anecdotal evidence to suggest that
nutrition can have an impact on injury risk although clearly your diet cannot directly
prevent injuries. It's equally as obvious that a well conditioned sportsman or sportswoman
is less likely to suffer both the physical and mental fatigue that is known to increase
injury incidents so we can extrapolate this to the general population. Carbohydrate is the primary
fuel for the muscles and brain. Good stores enable in prolonged exercise effort before fatigue kicks
in importantly allowing maintenance of good posture and correct technique that will reduce
risk of an incident. However nutrition plays a more significant role in the recovery from injury as
follows. Protein plays a major role in repairing muscle tissue in addition to contributing to
fibroplasia a key stage in the wound healing process including lean meat, fish and pulses in
your diet will associate your protein requirements. Vitamin C activates the enzymes that lead to
formation of new collagen fibers the essential connective tissue that gives strength and support
to the joints so fresh fruit and vegetables are ideal sources with smoothies providing a
convenient way to consume such. Zinc is linked to the performance of the immune system but because
the body cannot store this mineral a regular supply is crucial nuts, dairy, pulses, seeds these are all
good sources. Calcium is a vital contributor to the repair of bones so dairy products preferably
of the low fat variety should feature in everyone's daily intake. Vitamin D aids calcium absorption and
can be found in oily fish and eggs. Now we reach really the most important point in this presentation
these are my tips to help you to avoid injury in the first place. Unsurprising I'm going to
start with warm-up always gently increase your core body temperature ideally through rhythmic
movements of the whole body that starts small and then gradually go through your full comfortable
range of motion around each joint. By doing this you'll not only heat the muscles and therefore
render them more malleable and less likely to tear under stretch but you'll also pump more
synovial fluid into your joints so leading to less friction as you move. Another benefit is that
blood viscosity reduces so you're able to transport oxygen to your working muscles more swiftly not
just injury prevention then and adequate warm-up will significantly improve your workout performance.
Next technique the most common gym injuries are actually related to poor technique be aware of
your alignment ensuring your movement patterns feel natural and follow the biomechanics of your body.
Now a good example of this would be a squat when quite often the knees drop in on a squat now the
knee is a hinge joint as we discovered earlier it only bends in one direction and the danger is that
when we squat the knees drop in and we get this sideways movement causing stress on the connective
tissues so a tip here is use the mirrors to check your posture always keeping your shoulders back
and down and your tummy pulled in. Focus now elite sportsmen sportswomen if for many years
espouse the significant impact upon performance of having a positive frame of mind you've heard the
phrase being in the moment and this will allow you to observe your mental checklist before
enduring every exercise within your workout ensuring you're engaging the right muscles at the right
time should your mind begin to wonder you'll almost certainly fall foul of the above point and so
you'll be inviting injury over training by not giving your body enough time to sufficiently
recover you might head into your next workout before your stores of adenosine triphosphate and
glycogen have been replenished now without an adequate supply of these essential fuels your
regular workouts be they resistance pace distance will be much more stressful to ensure you have
rest days built into your regime in addition don't overdo it in the gym or in the saddle or
pounding the pavements whatever it is you do instead try to think of exercise as medication too
little can be bad for your health but if you exceed the appropriate dose the negative side effects
can also result think about tempo and less specifically training for power
where you'll need to actually move quite quickly in maybe a chosen sport resistance exercises
should be performed slowly to allow you to control momentum and therefore the range of motion
letting a dumbbell fall under the influence of gravity on say the downward phase of a bicep curl
for example can put at risk the tendons and ligaments around the elbow joint in addition
one of the best ways to improve the toning effects of your exercise is to observe the
tut principle whereby the longer the time the muscle is under tension and the better the results
will be and you'll see an example of that in our dumbbell workout core stability improving the strength
of your deeper posterior muscles this is a theme that keeps coming up in a lot of lectures in this
series will lend greater support to your spine during movement especially under load so reducing the
risk of the multi-directional forces causing trauma to the spinal structure a strong center
will also enable you to generate more power through your arms and legs try progressing
through the various levels of the plank together with kettlebell viper exercises and also balance
exercises using a balanced board again look out for those in the workout section at the end of this
series so to conclude remember that serious injuries need professional attention so as the
former chair of the british olympic association advises seek medical assistance if you feel
nauseated if you're breathing shallow your pulse is up and your skin is clammy sort of signs of
shock or if you experience severe pain and swelling possibly the greatest self-help advice
is to never ignore an injury particularly persistent minor niggles as these can often
turn from chronic to acute cases without the appropriate attention treatment programs vary
depending upon the nature and extent of the injury but it's important to follow medical advice to
the letter and not simply dive back into your play when you think you feel it's time and you're okay
it's important to understand that it takes both time and effort to regain the flexibility
and functional strength of recovering tendons ligaments muscles and bones so patience and
hard work are the key ingredients if injury does strike remember my tips to counter the
psychological impact by using the associated downtime to work on other areas of your health
and fitness for example sports participants should try to view an arm injury as time to
work on improving the strength in their legs while someone who usually walks to stay healthy
could use a leg injury as the catalyst to spend some time in the swimming pool maybe even learning
a new stroke after all it was the father of medicine himself hypocrite's who once declared
healing is a matter of time but it's sometimes also a matter of opportunity
