Now, I guess you're probably sitting down at the moment, feeling quite relaxed, maybe
even with your feet up and your hands folded in your lap, so without wishing to be annoying,
let's induce a little bit of activity. I want you to do this with me. You don't need to
do too much, don't worry. What I'm going to ask you to do is raise your arms straight
ahead in front of you, up above your head, and now open and close your hands five times,
that'll do, and then lower them down by your side. Pretty simple moves, yeah? But believe
it or not, you've just moved 54 bones in your arms and hands. You've engaged your deltoids,
your trapezius, there's a little bit of bicep triceps and work in the forearms. Opening
and closing your hands required a little bit of work, so your heart rate may have gone
up slightly, maybe you're even breathing a little bit more heavily now. Now, to do
all of that, your body needed energy, and although you performed what felt like a very
basic movement, the marvel that is your body performed many steps, and a number of quite
complex processes had to take place in order for you to achieve the simple goal of raising
your arms and moving your hands. So how much do you really know about human energy, and
particularly its rolling helping you to lose weight or to maximise your fitness? Over the
course of the next 30 minutes, I'm going to help you to understand where energy comes
from, the amazing ways in which your body can use it, and how you can optimise its
use in exercise, whether your goal is to shift unwanted body fat, simply enjoy playing sport
with the kids, or even to compete at the next Olympic Games. Although hurry, it's not far
away now. Let's start right at the beginning by considering the three essential compounds
that we desire from the foods we eat and place into our body's furnace to provide the energy
for movement. Cobbohydrate, or starch, found in pasta, bread, potatoes, it's an ideal source
of energy because it can be easily converted into glucose, the form of sugar that's transported
and used by your body for energy. It's stored in both your muscles and the liver. Fat unfortunately
has a bad reputation, and you may think fat is bad, but this isn't necessarily the case
because fat can exist in your body in two forms. It's vital for your body to function
normally and is found in various places, including some you might not immediately think of, such
as the bones, heart, lungs and kidneys. You can't reduce this fat in fact, and you really
don't want to as your organs wouldn't survive without it. But it's also stored beneath the
skin in what is known as the adipose tissue, where it serves not only as a fuel source
but also as insulation, it prevents heat loss. And the bad news is that this is the one you
can see, but the good news is it's the one you can do something about and you can shed
if you wish to. And then thirdly protein, it's vital for growth and repair of your body tissues,
but unlike carbohydrate and fat, it's not stored in your body unless there's an excess
when leftover protein is converted to fat and then it's stored. So on that note, be
aware particularly any guys who are trying to improve their muscle mass. If you're supplementing
your diet with protein shakes, if you're taking too much protein, you'll actually end up putting
on extra fat, so defeating the whole point of taking it in the first place. Now protein
can be broken down to provide energy, but this only occurs really during prolonged periods
of exertion as in endurance events, for example, a triathlon. So remember, carbohydrate, fat
and protein, they're your three fuels. Now let's go deeper inside the body. Try to understand
the root source of energy. A denizing triphosphate, which in order to save my own energy, I'll
refer to as ATP from here on, is the chemical in your muscles that breaks down to produce
energy and this in turn relies on the breakdown of those three fuels we mentioned earlier,
namely the carbohydrate, the fat and the protein. Every biological process such as digestion,
production of hormones, transmission of nerve impulses and repair of your tissues, they
all demand energy and this can only be in the form of ATP. This means that even when
you're sleeping, your body is constantly demanding and utilizing its energy source. Now ATP is
the name suggests, it's made up of adenosine and three phosphate groups and importantly,
strong bonds exist between these phosphate groups. So breaking one of them results in
the release of energy. In a muscle cell, the breakdown of ATP results in mechanical work,
i.e. a muscular contraction and also heat. So now you know why you begin to feel warmer
when you exercise. Now when ATP loses one of its phosphate bonds, energy is produced,
then becomes another substance, namely adenosine diphosphate or ADP. Once this has occurred,
ADP is re-synthesized back into ATP and this is what's known as the ATP cycle and it's
important for the constant generation of energy within your body. If this cycle were to stop,
then so would you. So how does ATP play a role in exercise? Well, when you first begin
to exercise, the demand for energy increases quite quickly and so your body's store of
ATP is usually within a couple of seconds. Almost immediately then, more fuel is needed
to produce more ATP. Fortunately, ATP can be re-synthesized in three different ways
and these are referred to as your body's energy systems. The first two systems are labeled
as anaerobic and the third is aerobic. Now you may have heard these terms before but
not be sure what they mean. Simply put, anaerobic means without oxygen and aerobic implies oxygen
is present when ATP is being regenerated to keep you on the move. So anaerobic, no oxygen,
aerobic with oxygen and ATP regeneration. So let's look at the first of these three
systems. This is known as the phosphocreatin system. The term phosphocreatin is derived
from the phosphorous bonds that we know from earlier are required to be broken to produce
energy and also produce creatine that's a vital ingredient you're about to discover.
When you begin exercising, you use your store of ATP in your muscles within just about one
to two seconds. That's right, in just the time it took me to say that sentence, your
stores of ATP would be depleted. Glucose breakdown has begun but it'll take several
more seconds before ATP generation occurs at any appreciable rate. Fat can't yet be
utilized as there's insufficient blood getting through to your muscles to bring oxygen and
it may take anything from 30 seconds to several minutes for this to occur. But wait a minute,
what about the 100 meter race? The sprinter there needs to generate large amounts of ATP
in a very short space of time. So why don't we answer this together? I'm going to ask
you to get out of your seats and we're going to sprint on the spot for 10 seconds, OK?
So what I'm also going to ask you to do while you're doing this is to hold your breath. So
up you get and you're going to need to trust me on this. You can hold your breath while
you do this. Now I'd love to join you but somebody's got to run the clock so I'll keep
an eye on the clock and you get ready to sprint and go. And stop and take a seat. Now you'll
have noticed that it's possible to do that. We can sprint without breathing. Your body
didn't suddenly shut down after a couple of seconds and this is because although there's
no further store of ATP in your muscles, there is a small amount of creatine phosphate.
Although this can't be used directly to bring about muscle contractions and therefore movement.
It can donate a phosphate molecule to ADP, making it ATP in one step. Remember that cycle
we talked of earlier. Now there's not a great deal of creatine phosphate inside the muscle
only around 10 seconds worth. But this is enough to get you started until more time-consuming
processes begin to kick in. You'll also have noticed it was possible to run the 10 seconds
as I said without having to breathe in again. So proving that this is truly an anaerobic
process, i.e. no oxygen is needed. Now by the time ATP is generated by other pathways,
creatine phosphate may not be needed again for the rest of the workout. On the other
hand, if you're doing a sport that involves short bursts of maximal effort interspersed
with bouts of say much lower intensity, so if you're doing interval training perhaps,
which we mentioned earlier in the series, then again the creatine phosphate system
would come into play as it's the only pathway capable of generating ATP quickly in the absence
of oxygen. Although we can get creatine from the meat we eat, we don't have to as it can
be synthesized in our liver which is lucky for vegetarian sportsmen and sportswomen.
Your liver puts the creatine into your bloodstream and then your muscles remove it from the blood
according to your needs. Blood levels are kept constant so the more creatine your muscle
removes the more creatine your liver will make and the good news is the more you use
your creatine phosphate system the more creatine phosphate you will be able to store inside
your muscles, so making the job easier for your liver. It's not easy to exhaust the capacity
of your liver to provide you with adequate amounts of creatine but there is some evidence
that the process of creatine synthesis in your liver and uptake by your muscles may become
the deciding factors if you're exercising at very high intensity for repeated bouts.
In these circumstances creatine supplementation may be helpful in maintaining creatine levels
inside your muscles. This implies you may be able to perform more intense bouts in a
specific amount of time but be aware that creatine supplementation isn't effective as
a performance enhancer under other circumstances it really only works if you're competing
or training at that level. Sadly ingesting extra creatine is now commonplace amongst
recreational sportsmen and sportswomen even though they're not exercising at this high
intensity where it would be helpful. So this is the first of our three systems the phospho
creatine system. Now let's move on to the second energy system again as we said it's
also anaerobic and this is known as the lactic acid system. In the initial stages of an exercise
session when there's still sufficient insufficient oxygen reaching the muscles glucose is the
only fuel source that can be called upon for ATP synthesis. Lack of oxygen also occurs
whenever you work so hard during your exercise session that you outpace the capacity of your
cardiovascular system to deliver to your working muscles all the blood you require. The point
when this occurs and you fatigue is dependent upon your fitness level and it's called the
anaerobic threshold. Now for very fit people this will happen at high exercise intensity
but for unfit people whose hearts are not used to working very hard the anaerobic threshold
will occur at a much lower exercise intensity. Think of it as a continuum the fitter you
are the further along that line you'll be. Now the breakdown of glucose molecules is
very efficient and generates a significant amount of ATP but ideally this metabolism
of glucose needs oxygen it also needs time as a large number of steps are involved in
the process. Fortunately though glucose can go some way down this pathway without oxygen
and produce a little of the ATP we need and this process is called glycolysis. However
this process can deplete your glucose stores quite rapidly so you can only perform this
for a short while unless another energy source kicks in you'll start to fatigue and you'll
have to reduce the intensity of what you're doing. Another problem is that glycolysis
results in production of a compound called lactic acid. Now although it's believed that
lactic acid causes the burning sensation in muscles it's actually the hydrogen ions which
together with pyruvate from the lactic acid are responsible for this. Now your body being
the design miracle that it is is made up of different types of muscle fibres that is designed
for different tasks. Your fast twitch muscle fibres in particular are well adapted to carrying
out fast rates of glycolysis. Despite this they can't tolerate the high levels of lactic
acid so when lactic acid builds up it prevents further ATP synthesis and therefore further
muscular contraction so it leads to fatigue. In these circumstances you have to either
decrease the intensity of the workout a little so that the blood can get to the muscles and
that way you can bring that much needed oxygen. So it might seem odd that your muscle will
produce something while working that slows its capacity for more work but this is your
body protecting itself by triggering a natural defense mechanism. In essence the lactic acid
prevents permanent damage during extreme exertion since it slows the key systems required to
maintain those muscle contractions. Accumulated lactic acid is then washed out of your muscle
cells and taken to other cells that can deal with it e.g. the slow twitch muscle cells
which can use it for aerobic ATP generation and the liver that converts it back to glycogen
for storage. This is an extremely useful energy system as it allows you to increase your fitness
levels by working at a higher rate of intensity so there you have it that's the lactic acid
system. Now the last of our three energy systems uses oxygen so it's known as the aerobic system.
Once the blood flows increase to bring sufficient oxygen to your working muscles aerobic production
of ATP predominantly generates carbon dioxide that you breathe out and also water so now
you know why you sweat when you work out. In the presence of oxygen fat can also be used
as a fuel to make ATP as its breakdown shares the same pathway that the aerobic phase of
glucose breakdown. This means that limited glucose stores will be conserved for when
you really need them i.e. the harder phases of your workout. Remember though fat can't
be used for ATP generation alone even when there's plenty of oxygen there must always
be a mixture of fat and glucose. This is because glucose breakdown provides an important compound
that is essential for fat metabolism. Without glucose this compound becomes depleted. So
this aerobic phase of ATP generation takes place inside small cells called mitochondria.
Now we've talked about mitochondria in the lecture on mental fitness where we learned
that a study of mice exercising showed an increase in the growth of these mitochondria. Well
mitochondria are particularly abundant within your slow twitch muscle cells and they're
the slower contracting muscles efficient at using oxygen to create energy without creating
lactic acid. Now these fibres have a considerable supply of capillaries bringing in oxygen that
is then rapidly transferred to the mitochondria. Slow twitch muscle cells therefore are great
for endurance they're ideal for marathons. Now your fast twitch muscle cells have a more
limited capacity for aerobic work although they can still do a little. They contract
quickly they're strong and explosive and think of leaping over hurdles or swimming a sprint
or doing the long jump that's what they're for. So there you have it your aerobic energy
system. So why don't we take a look now at how the energy systems interplay in delivering
as the fuel we need during exercise. So let's imagine we're having a workout.
At rest both your aerobic and anaerobic energy systems operate the relative contribution
of each would vary from individual to individual depending on a wide range of factors but more
than likely the aerobic system would predominate as your cardiovascular system at this point is
able to meet the demand for all of the cells in your body that require oxygen. As you start
exercising there'd be an immediate increased demand for energy by your muscles that may
not be fully matched by the oxygen delivery. Anaerobic metabolism would dramatically increase
even to nearly 100% depending upon the speed and scale of the rise in intensity and aerobic
metabolism would decrease. So the phosphor creatin system would be utilized at this stage.
However if you warm up carefully and gradually to this intensity it may well be that
even from the very beginning some aerobic metabolism would take place. This would gradually
increase its contribution as the warm-up proceeds. Indeed this is why all workouts should really
begin with a warm-up that gently increases in intensity. Throughout the warm-up anaerobic
metabolism decreases and aerobic metabolism increases as your heart rate rises. Until it
arrives at its maximum possible contribution and this is a point we refer to as steady state.
This may be at an intensity that feels comfortable and sustainable for some time
as it is at this stage the rate of lactic acid production exactly matches the rate of clearance
of it from the cells. Now come with me on this I want you to imagine fit fill a regular gym bod
he'll take considerably less time to arrive at this point than unfit phyllis as his cardiovascular
system will respond a little more quickly to increasing demands than hers. The proportion
of aerobic compared with anaerobic metabolism and therefore fat burning compared to carbohydrate
burning at steady state is variable and dependent on fitness levels so this means that fit fill will
begin to mobilize fats as an energy source sooner than unfit phyllis. So unfit phyllis may be burning
50 fat and 50 carbohydrate at this steady state point but fit fill could be burning a whopping
70 fat and only 30 carbohydrate. Now as the intensity rises beyond the anaerobic threshold
and carries on rising it doesn't mean there's a sudden switch to 100% anaerobic production
of ATP but rather there'd be an increasing shift in the ratio of aerobic to anaerobic metabolism.
For each little change in heart rate over this point there'd be a dramatic fall in aerobic
metabolism and a rapid rise in anaerobic metabolism until the latter gets to that 100%
point. So your body doesn't suddenly switch off one system and switch on the other and a great
example of this would be a soccer player who can constantly shift almost seamlessly from
gently jogging up to the opposition's box for an offensive corner and then sprinting back
to defend a counter attack. Now for fit fill as the intensity of exercise increases he may very
well be close to his maximum working heart rate but phyllis would still be at a lower percentage
of a maximum working heart rate. By now the lactic acid we talked of earlier will be building up
rapidly to the point where it would stop energy production. The only option here is to decrease
exercise intensity for a minute or so. Once the lactic acid has been cleared and your heart rate
has dropped below the threshold again a higher workout intensity can then be continued. Now
the majority of the workout may be spent either maintaining a heart rate that would keep you
in steady state teaching aerobics class or alternating between spurts of high intensity
activity and then periods of recovery at lower intensity so for example a spinning indoor cycling
class. You may have thought that lactic acid suddenly appears and causes you to stop exercising or
at least cut down intensity but it's actually generated throughout the whole workout and
leste anaerobic threshold is exceeded though it'll be cleared by the blood flow at a similar rate
to which it's produced and will be unlikely to cause you problems. So now you know how your energy
systems play their part in a typical workout what we really need to know is how do we train these
different energy systems to get the results we're after be that fat loss or maximum performance on
the sports field. Firstly the phosphor creatinine system as mentioned earlier your capacity to store
and utilize creatinine phosphate increases as a result of doing the sort of training that
constantly uses this system. So pushing your body in workouts with short sharp burst of
high intensity exercise will result in an increase in your ability to perform such at even greater
workloads. So this brings us back to the interval training I've talked about so let's go to the
workout studio and see what this looks like.
Next the lactic acid system which since it's also an anaerobic process requires the same kind of
training as for the previous system i.e. intense bursts. Ideally the exercises should be explosive
as this will result in your body working those fast switch muscle fibers and as hopefully you'll
remember we said this is where the glucose is mostly stored. When you regularly recruit these
fibers and deplete your glucose stores by doing large amounts of high intensity training
your muscle cells obviously have to stock up their glucose again during the rest phases
ready for the next session and this can only happen if your dietary intake of carbohydrate
is adequate. However training will result in you being able to increase these stores and this explains
why the principle of carbohydrate loading works and what that is is leading up to an endurance
event. If you're trained to exhaustion and then taking extra amounts of carbohydrate you can
fill up your stores and resulting an increased supply that you can call upon when you need it. So
think of the fuel tank on your car we're making it bigger and then we're going to fill it. So let's
let's see this in action.
Adaptations to training your aerobic energy system are actually far more complex.
Appropriate training here has two main outcomes on this energy system. We want to be able to
sustain steady state at progressively higher intensity levels and also progressively increase
the proportion of fat compared with carbohydrate that we burn at steady state which is what we're
really after. Now the mechanisms by which these adaptations occur involve a number of different
components but it's all related to how good your cardiovascular system is at pumping oxygenated blood
to your working muscles and how efficient your muscles are at removing that oxygen from the blood
and using it to generate energy. An untrained unfit individual would exceed their steady state
as we said at a relatively low intensity level. At a certain point past their threshold
lactic acid will build up inside the muscles to a point where it would inhibit further production
of ATP. So as we said muscle contraction will stop and so will movement. The net result of all
these changes is that the balance between aerobic and anaerobic ATP production alters in favour
of the aerobic system and the anaerobic threshold is raised. Because less lactic acid is produced
throughout a bigger range of exercise intensities higher work rates can be sustained for longer
and this will lead to more calories being burned for each workout of which
a greater percentage of them fortunately will be fat. Now none of these adaptations we're talking
about can happen unless anaerobic threshold is regularly exceeded to the point where lactate
stops muscular contraction. Steady state workouts may burn calories but they will not improve your
future capacity to work harder at which point you'd burn more fat. Sportsmen and sportswomen in
endurance pursuits must do regular training at high intensities and build up lactic acid to
improve their capacity for working at higher intensities without lactate build up during
competition. In other words you need to overload your present capabilities to improve your future
capacity so don't take it too easy. So let's now use our knowledge of the energy systems to
consider the best way to achieve the common goal for most of us. If we're exercising for a lot of
us we're after fat loss. Now a big word of warning here weight management programs that set out to
prioritise fat burning often advise working out at a steady state i.e. below your anaerobic threshold.
Now cardiovascular equipment in gyms will usually have a fat burning zone a program that alters
effort level automatically if you exceed your working heart rate of around 55 to 65 percent of
maximum. Now this is justified because the equipment manufacturers will tell you that
steady state will have been reached and maximal ratios of fat burning to glucose burning will be
in place. In addition they argue that effort level at this relatively low intensity point is
sustainable for some time maximising the total fat burned in the workout. Now at first consideration
this seems sensible but we now know that steady state may well prevail up to much higher exercise
intensities than this. At higher intensities a greater number of total calories will be burned
for the same workout duration and therefore more fat as a percentage of this total. So the argument
for not working at these higher states is that you know there's a danger of exceeding the anaerobic
threshold and therefore decreasing the percentage of fat. These intensities are not sustainable
for a long duration therefore again decreasing the total fat burning potential. Now these
considerations are valid but it must be realised that in order to maximise fat burning you need
to burn as many total calories as you can during the workout whilst trying to maintain steady state.
The bottom line is that working at higher intensities maximises calorie burning therefore
higher workloads should be tackled during the workout.
Now even if these higher workloads can only be sustained for 30 to 60 seconds before returning
to lower rates it will still increase the total number of calories consumed and these are the
intervals I spoke of earlier. Exceeding the anaerobic threshold does not stop fat from burning. Fat
will simply make a lower contribution to the energy generation at these higher levels but if fat
losses your goal work as hard as you can for as long as you can and intersperse that with recovery
work at lower intervals. So please don't be taken in by the latest fad workout or the latest piece
of equipment that promises phenomenal results in very little time and with minimal effort
because you now know the science behind successful weight loss so you can be confident
about achieving the results you desire. You're in control so the next time you go to a fitness
class and the instructor yells at you remember it's not just for effect it's in your interest to keep
up the pace. If you're truly looking for thin aspiration remember you hold the power when it
comes to exercise the more you put in the more you'll get out.
