Osteoporosis is defined by the World Health Organization as a skeletal disease characterized
by low bone mass and microscopic deterioration leading to increased susceptibility to fractures.
The aim of this lecture is to equip you with the knowledge to reduce the risk of you becoming
another one of those statistics. We'll look precisely how bone is constructed, learn a
few surprising facts about its role and investigate where things can go wrong. Most importantly,
however, we'll uncover how exercise affects bone health and establish an activity blueprint
that will help you to remain strong to the bone for life. Firstly, let's look at a few
statistics. According to the National Osteoporosis Foundation in Washington D.C., to enable us
to assess the scale of this problem, 10 million Americans currently have the disease with
another 34 million showing low bone density, a condition known as osteopenia, placing them
at a considerable risk. Now approximately one in two women and one in four men over the age of 50
will suffer an osteoporosis related fracture. Fractures due to osteoporosis are known to lead
to lower quality of life. 20% of walking patients need long-term care after a hip fracture and 24%
of hip fracture patients aged over 50 will die within one year after their injury. Clearly then,
understanding bone health is an important issue when considering the quality of our later lives.
So let's begin, first of all, by looking at the skeleton. Our 206 bones enable us to carry out
a wide range of everyday tasks that we may take for granted, including one of the most basic but
essential functions, movement, from simply pointing a finger to standing from a chair,
from walking to sprinting, and from pushing open a door to carrying a child. We're only
capable of doing so because of the skeleton's incredible architecture. Now this may surprise
you, but contrary to common belief, the skeleton's not merely a clothes hanger, but actually it's a
living and ever-changing structure that needs care and attention. It's a dynamic tissue that,
in addition to enabling movement, is also responsible for support, for protection,
for storage, and for production. So let's look at these in a little bit more detail.
Firstly, support. The skeleton provides a framework that supports the soft tissues
and provides attachment sites for the muscles. In terms of protection, our vital organs, it's
essential they're protected for survival. So think about the cranium shield in the brain,
the rib cage housing the heart and lungs, and the vertebra surrounding the spinal cord.
Storage is very important because minerals such as calcium, phosphorus, they're stored in bone tissue
to be released into the bloodstream when they're required. And in addition, as we age,
some of the red bone marrow changes to become yellow bone marrow containing more adipose or
fat cells that we can actually use as energy. The bone also plays a role in production. Red bone
marrow is the source of production of new blood cells and also platelets, the clotting cells that
stem blood flow in cases of injury such as cuts to the skin. Now lesser important functions of
bone includes conducting sound to the inner ear through the bones of the skull. By the way,
that's why your voice sounds a little different to you than it does to others, because your skull
conducts sound at lower frequencies than air does. Bone conduction also allows us to hear
underwater. Oddly underwater, we can hear at much higher frequencies than through air up to
200,000 Hertz, which is 10 times, 10 times more than you can hear on land.
Now the makeup of bones is somewhat more complex than first sight might suggest. Rather than
a solid structure, bone comprises two quite distinct sections. Firstly, we have the cortical
bone, also known as compact bone, that forms the exterior. The cortical bone is clearly dense,
strong, and it gives the smooth pale appearance, accounting for around 80% of the bone mass in
adults. Then we have the trabecular bone, the cancerous bone inside that's quite spongy,
and this is a honeycomb structure and appearance. And this is where we find the red bone marrow
that produces the blood cells. Coating the outer surface of the bone is the periosteum.
It's a fibrous membrane that has a rich supply of blood vessels providing nutrients for the growth
phase and also for the repair after injury. In addition, the ends of most bones are covered
in a haline cartilage that acts to both assist shock absorption and reduce friction between
articulating bones. Bone has a good compressive strength, hence its resistance to direct pushing
forces, but has much lower tensile strength, so it's prone to injury from pulling or shearing forces.
Now the bones of the skeleton are divided into different categories based upon their size,
their shape, and their location, and we can do this as follows. Firstly, we have long bones
consisting of a length of central shaft that's slightly curved for extra strength, and then two
wider ends. These tend to be made up more of cortical bone, with examples being the femur,
which is the thigh bone, which is the longest bone in the body. Then the tibia, the fibula,
the humerus, the radius. They're all examples of long bones. Now short bones usually are almost
as wide as they are long, and these are found in key fulcrums of the wrist, of the ankle,
and only have a thin outer cortical bone being mostly made up of the spongy,
trabecular bone that we find in the middle. Then we have flat bones. Comparatively quite thin,
they're made up of two aspects of cortical bone separated by a layer of trabecular and often
much needed protection in addition to hosting muscle attachments, and examples are these,
the cranium, the sternum, and of course the scapula, the shoulder blades. And then irregular bones have
much more complex shapes such as the hip, the vertebra, and perhaps the bones within the structure
of the face. And sesame bones house within the tendon at points of high physical stress and
tension. And the most obvious one would be the patella in the kneecap, which is actually in between
the muscle fibres, and perhaps also the the PC form in the wrist. Now bone growth begins
very early in the fetal stage, and it can be formed either from a collection of collagen fibres,
as in the skull, jaw, and collar bone, or following the formation of cartilage first,
as will occur in the long bones. In both cases, development results from the buildup of calcium
and magnesium salts being deposited at that location. A process referred to as ossification
from the Latin word os, unsurprisingly, translating to mean bone. A process of remodelling continues
throughout life with osteoblast cells depositing mineral salts to promote new bone growth,
and old bone being broken down and absorbed by osteoclast cells, allowing calcium,
potassium, and phosphate compounds to be released from the bone into the bloodstream.
In addition to maintaining calcium levels, remodelling also affects any necessary
repairs to bone tissue. So as a child then, formation outpaces reabsorption and results in
increased length and width of the bones. They grow, but surprising the reverse is true in later
years. So we achieve a peak bone mass somewhere around 25 years of age, although there's some
individual variance here. Now, calciterial governs the flow of calcium into and out of the bone tissue,
and this calciterial is formed in the kidneys with vitamin D, which we absorb from the sunlight,
being a key ingredient. The parathyroid gland controls the kidney secretions,
so that if calcium levels in the blood fall below a certain point, more will automatically
be released, and this balancing act is assisted by the presence of estrogen.
So clearly then, it's the drop in estrogen levels associated with menopause therefore,
that result in greater bone reabsorption, and so the loss of bone density in women.
Now similarly in men, testosterone interacts with hormonal receptors to control bone maintenance,
so low levels of testosterone will also increase the risk of osteoporosis.
Now there are actually two classifications of osteoporosis. Primary or type one occurs in women
soon after menopause due to the marked drop in that estrogen level as mentioned earlier.
Secondary or type two osteoporosis is age related, and this actually affects both sexes.
However, it's usually more pronounced in women due to their smaller bone mass and their tendency
to live longer than men. Unfortunately, the condition can creep up on you,
and there are no obvious outward signs as to your bone health, so the first you may know of it is
when you suffer a fracture, following maybe even just a relatively minor trauma. The most common
fracture sites are the wrist, the hip, and the vertebra. It's possible to predict the risk of
fracture by measuring bone density in the following ways. We can measure by a single
energy x-ray absorbed geometry, and although this scan only allows for measurement of the
peripheral bones, such as the bones in the forearm and perhaps in the heel, it's still a useful
measuring tool. Another method is quantitative computed tomography, and this has the advantage
of enabling measurement of the vertebra, the lumbar spine, but it's not wholly accurate.
Dual energy x-ray absorbed geometry, as opposed to the single, is the blue ribbon method of scanning,
as it can be applied to many different sites on the body, requires less exposure to radiation,
and is faster than the other techniques. Now, since these are not readily available,
it's perhaps a wise first step to consider the many risk factors that may have proven to be of
concern, and then consulting your doctor if you have any concerns. These risk factors can be split
into two distinct categories, namely intrinsic factors that can't be manipulated and account for
somewhere in the region of 70 to 85% of the difference in bone mass density, and then extrinsic
ones that we can affect responsible for that remaining 15 to 30%. Let's consider these two
groups in a little bit more detail. Intrinsic factors, these include family history,
there appears to be a statistically significant hereditary influence here, with studies revealing
that daughters of mothers who suffer the disease are likely to display a lower bone density.
Gender, a major consideration as women's decreasing estrogen levels post-minipore impact,
is that the healthy bone density levels tend to be lower than male counterparts, simply due to smaller
size. In addition, the age at which girls first menstruate plays a role later actually being an
increased risk. And then ethnicity plays a role, as European and Asian ancestry carries a greater
risk than Afro-Caribbean and Hispanic descendants, that could simply be due to generally being smaller,
but it's also suggested that the former two groups are less physically active on the whole.
And then of course there's age. Bone mineral density we know generally decreases with increasing
years due to that decline in osteoblast activity, resulting in a decrease of around 5% every 5
years after age 65. And then medical history can affect. Sufferers of rheumatoid arthritis,
hypothyroidism, Crohn's disease, Choleac disease, these all have the effect of increasing the risk
of osteoporosis. But let's look now at the extrinsic factors, the things that we know we
can manipulate, because this is a little more important for me. Diet, foods that are rich
in calcium and vitamin D will positively affect bone mineral density. As we mentioned earlier,
in adequate calcium intake will increase the reabsorption of bone tissue to maintain sufficient
blood levels. So dairy, preferably low fat or even better, non-fat, is the most obvious
route to obtaining calcium, with around 80% of our needs being supplied in this way.
In addition, protein has been found to be beneficial in post-menopausal women who are not
taking hormone replacement therapy. And also for those whose calcium intake is low.
And finally, fruit and veg help to decrease the amount of calcium lost in urine. So again,
we'll have a positive influence on bone density. So colloge, rhubarb, spinach, soybeans, these are
all high in calcium, for example. Alcohol actually impedes the formation of new bone by removing
vital supplies of calcium in the urine production. And so it has a diuretic effect, and that's not
a good thing. Smoking, again, you won't be surprised to learn it's not a good thing, because it increases
the degradation of estrogen in the bloodstream, having a knock-on effect of reducing the amount
of calcium absorbed by the bones. And then the really meaty one for me, exercise. Since bone
adapts to the mechanical stresses applied to it, then loading of the bone through physical activity
will lead to positive changes in structure. Exercise has been shown to improve bone density
at any age, although can be affected by a number of factors such as nutrition and the actual choice
of exercise. But don't just take my word for it, let's go back to Dr. Stephen Novella. I asked him,
if there is any area of fitness that people don't pay attention to but really should. So let's hear
interesting things he had to say. I think perhaps the most neglected aspect of exercise in the older
population is weightlifting. It seems to be something that a younger person would do. You
weightlift in order to body build, to build muscles. But actually doing some kind of weightlifting is
essential to maintaining muscle mass and functionality. So there are many recommendations
now to incorporate weightlifting into exercise because many people don't do that. They think
that by getting an aerobic exercise that that's enough. That's all that they need to do. But
really the resistance training is another essential component to that. So as you can see,
of all these modifiable factors, exercise carries the potential to impact greatest upon
bone mass as it produces gravitational force on the skeleton but also muscle loading. Both of
which have been proven to promote bone health. Therefore exercise should be the platform of
any program that is designed to reduce osteoporosis risk. One study showed that regular physical
activity can lead to a reduction of risk of hip fracture by 38% in women and 45% in men. And that's
not purely attributed to increasing bone mass but also because of the decreasing fall risk
due to the greater strength development. So exercise can be seen as a two-pronged attack
on reducing the risk of osteoporosis related fracture by giving greater muscle strength
and dynamic stability to remove the risk of fall but also giving greater resilience should
this occur. So just how is it that resistance training leads to this increase in bone density
and therefore a lowering of osteoporosis risk? Well the key to these positive changes is the
skeleton's natural inclination to adapt to forces applied to it. If demands fall above a certain
threshold then cellular activity will change to bring about an increase in the strength of the
bone. And this occurs to a phenomenon known as the piezoelectric effect whereby the mechanical
stress exerted by the tendon of a muscle on the bone which it attaches to will generate a voltage
and this term is derived from the Greek word for squeeze so now we can understand how it links to
the performance of strength exercises. And the piezoelectric effect dictates that the stress
applied will result in a change of charge within the collagen fibers. This charge then
attracts the oppositely charged osteoblasts or which we talked about earlier and which then
deposits minerals at the site. The result then will be a localized increase in bone density.
Believe it or not this principle was first observed as long ago as 1892 by Dr Julius Wolff and it's
actually referred to it's known as Wolff's law. So there's a really key message to take away here
and that is that lack of physical activity will lead to a reduction in bone density and an increase
in your associated risk but regular exercise will reverse this decline. So this is indeed
why osteoporosis along with many other conditions we once associated with being elderly is actually
nothing to do with age but it's linked to disuse. So in fact it's vital absolutely vital not to think
of osteoporosis as being associated with aging because committing to a regular exercise program
at a young age will ensure bone density starts at a higher level and so mitigating the effects in
later life. So think of your skeleton as a as a bank account instead of working to earn money
you can deposit when you need it later. Think about working to earn extra bone tissue that is
deposited for when you need it later. So now we've established the merit and mechanics of
resistance training in bone health. We need to understand the workout guidelines which you'll
remember from one of our earlier lectures regarding effective exercise prescription
relies on something called the FIT principle fit the frequency the intensity and the time.
Now studying 2000 published in Calcified Tissue International demonstrated that both female
and male subjects benefited from moderate and high intensity resistance training defined as
the former involving seated fixed weight machines and the latter being standing free weight exercises.
The workouts were performed three times per week with the high intensity group recording slightly
better gains in bone mineral density, lean body mass and functional strength when compared to those
following the moderately intense regime. I will remind you that you can spread out these workouts
throughout the day if that's the only way you can fit in enough time but before you rush off to
to get active however be aware that to be effective as prevention the exercise must achieve this
bone loading effect we talked about. So let me remind you that means it should be weight bearing
to achieve the gains resulting from gravitational force. It should also involve strength exercises
to take advantage of the influence of that muscle loading. So a menu of walking jogging and jumping
together with strength training will provide a stimulus to benefit bone health and in addition
there appears to be a bonus in varying the training environment from land to water and also
deploying different speeds of movement from slow to fast and even explosive exercises.
So a point to bear in mind is that the bone loading effect is site specific so what I mean by that
is if you're jogging it's not going to help to improve bone health in the upper body as lifting
weights will therefore we really need a wide selection of resistance or strength training
modes it's a must in order to ensure the whole body achieves these gains. So clearly there should be
a bias towards exercises that target the key fracture areas so we'll pay particular attention to
the femur the hip and the wrist. So let's think about some suitable strength training options so
they can include resistance bands and they provide for a wide range of strengthening exercises yet
they're incredibly portable so allowing you to take them anywhere and resistance bands have the
benefit of being one of the most cost effective and space saving pieces of workout equipment on
the market. Bands are available in different thicknesses so giving you different resistance
levels so you can work to whatever your fitness level is and then you're able to progress that
through thicker bands. Acqua training moving into the water now due to its viscosity water provides
around 12 times the resistance to movement of air therefore even the most basic exercises
transferred from dry land into the pool will attract a loading effect that will promote
bone density gains. A significant bonus to working out in water is that resistance is
proportional to force so by speeding up your movements you'll get a greater challenge and
therefore you can get progression as you begin to advance. Now whilst weight-bearing exercises
on land have been shown to be more effective in building or maintaining density a study at the
Oregon University of Bone Research Laboratory in 2006 found that water exercise can at least slow
bone loss whilst also promoting fitness. Given the difficulty of starting an exercise program for
some of you out there particularly if you're out of condition a little bit old or have joint
problems Acqua shouldn't be ruled out because it's a great way to start to build your fitness
and to maintain that bone density. So after Acqua let's think about fixed resistance machines and
these are the kind of machines you'll find in gyms and this form of weight training employs the
the use of machines at first appeared in around the 60s and usually feature a stack of weighted
plates on a central vertical rod with the option to select the number of plates lifted using a pin
and these have the advantage of being relatively safe to use as moving parts are shielded from you
and there's no possibility of dropping weights on your feet in addition to enabling you to isolate
specific body parts to be exercised which can be a benefit if you have weak areas that need
specific attention. Free weights on the other hand are using barbells dumbbells nowadays medicine
balls power bags body bars there's a whole range of things and this mode can be practiced in gyms
but might be more familiar in the body pump type of group exercise group resistance type of class
found in studios the world over. There's a greater skill requirement here though because what you'll
find here is it has great benefit in terms of being functional but you need to get the technique
right so what I mean by functional is the exercises will replicate many of the movement
patterns you'll go through in everyday activities and you could also use wrist ankle weights ankle
weights are great for instance because if we were simply doing leg raises to the front or maybe to
the side or maybe even behind those kind of movements moving the leg through these type of
exercises it's going to help to increase the bone density in the hips and then of course there's
body weight training require no equipment at all it's exactly as it sounds body weight training
so making the perfect mode for home workouts now since research reveals that most falls occur
walking up or downstairs simple step-ups on and off a platform are a fabulous way to strengthen the
bones of the legs and the hips but also to develop the strength and muscle memory to retain
competence at this vital life skill squats press-ups sit-ups are all exercises that use your body
weight moving against gravity as the resistive stimulus and of great value great value and
then let's go off at a slight tangent talk about vibration training this was originally developed
in Russia having been discovered to correct the bone density of muscle mass
loss that occurred in cosmonauts in space which we now know from earlier will be due to one of
the key stimulants to new bone growth gravitational loading being removed this development
gave an edge to Russia in the space race as it enabled cosmonauts to remain in space much longer
than American astronauts who were training with conventional fitness equipment at the time today
however this information is embraced by NASA and has also found its way into the health and fitness
industry via whole body vibration plates and these are machines that improve your bone density
by tricking your skeleton into thinking it's carrying more load up to actually six times
your actual weight which then leads to the osteoblast being excited and forming new bone tissue
assuming different exercise positions on the plate will satisfy the earlier mention point
I made about bone loading being site specific as a general exercise guideline in order to get
any benefit from your workouts the muscles need to feel fatigue which will almost certainly
lead to slight soreness and a stiff feeling on the following day or two so be warned and this
is something called delayed onset muscle soreness or doms and we're usually kicking around 12 hours
after your workout and last about 48 hours but learn to embrace this as this is a sign that your
muscles and therefore also your bones are going through positive changes now once bone has adapted
to the loading placed upon it similar loads will not fall outside that threshold we talked about
and so further remodeling will not take place in order to maintain or increase bone density therefore
it's vital that an exercise program is progressive i.e always challenging the skeletal system either
via increased weights or perhaps different exercises an ideal plan then will be periodized
with a focus on perhaps body weight exercises first for example then a change to the gym for a
while then perhaps into the pool before going back to the first mode the optimum duration for the
endeavor is 12 weeks as staying with the same workout for longer than 12 weeks not only will it
not result in bone density gains but you'll actually hit a fitness plateau so you'll be getting very
little fruit for your labors it's important to also be aware of the reversibility principle that
states that in direct opposition to progressive overload that we mentioned earlier if you cease
your regular exercise program whilst you'll get some improvement in bone density retained most
of it will be lost so we've now learned how bone is made up how it functions and what can go wrong
but here are a few key take home messages exercise can improve bone density and reduce
risk of osteoporosis fact an effective plan to mitigate the effects of osteoporosis can be started
at any age your minimum target is 20 minutes three times per week although an optimum target
is two bouts of 10 minutes five times a week remember it's better to work harder than longer
and weight training routines are absolutely ideal you must aim to increase the volume of
exercising workouts over time particularly switching whatever it is you're doing every 12 weeks
and a thought here it's worth including a tai chi to help prevent falls as mentioned before
balance training is critical in reducing the risk and tai chi is especially effective it's low impact
but recent studies show that it helps increase and maintain bone density because you use your
own body weight in the movements for instance standing on one leg for certain exercises and
that'll improve stability studies have also shown that it can help reduce stress and improve
flexibility as well so it's worth giving tai chi a go sometime so in summary then
there are plenty of options for building and maintaining strong bones and it's never too late
to get started follow these guidelines and you can not only delay the deterioration in bone health
you could even reverse it now since weight training is the prescribed medicine and it's
referred to as resistance training you now have the knowledge to truly resist the aging process
