According to USA Today, Americans spend around 86 billion dollars every year trying to combat
lower back pain, the second most common neurological malady behind only headache.
It can range from mild discomfort that's gone within a few days of taking it easy but in
some cases can be severely debilitating and can even affect children usually as a result
of carrying rucksacks also known as backpacks.
As in most fields of medicine however, prevention is better than cure and certainly cheaper.
So this lecture is designed to help you to understand the basic anatomy of your spine
to alert you to some of the problems that may arise and to arm you with a plan of action
to reduce the risk of becoming a sufferer.
And the good news is that a specific exercise regime can significantly increase the health
of your lower spine and keep you active for life.
So let's begin by looking at the structure of the spine.
This wonderful structure consists of 24 movable vertebrae which are divided into several major
sections. There are the seven cervical vertebrae, the 12 thoracic and five lumbar plus the nine
fused vertebrae that make up the sacrum and the coccyx.
The job of the vertebra in essence is to protect and support the spinal cord in addition to
bearing most of the weight put on your body.
Like all bones, vertebrae have a hard strong outer shell called the cortical bone.
You may remember from our lecture on bones.
The inside is called the cancerless bone and this is soft and spongy.
Groups of ligaments hold the vertebrae together and tendons attach muscles to the vertebrae.
Now all these bones stacked up wouldn't easily allow for movement if there weren't some form
of cushioning between them.
These are the intervertebral discs which are the shock absorbers for your body.
The discs have a strong outer ring called the annulus and each disc has a soft fibrogelatinous
centre that helps in this kind of cushioning work.
Now the top two vertebrae also known as the atlas and the axis respectively have great
degrees of freedom and so allow the many movements of the head and neck.
The base of the movable spine is the sacrum, connecting the spine to the pelvis via the
two sacroiliac joints, effectively the point where your upper body meets your lower body.
Like other points in the body, various joints, you'll find cartilages here to absorb shock.
In fact both haline cartilage around the ends of the bones and fibrocartilage between, yet
unlike other joints they're not very movable.
To give you an idea of the restriction it only allows for around four millimetres of
movement when you bend forward.
The joint's got a unique locking device that's essential to maintain stability in the pelvis
when you're walking as it allows for weight to be transferred from one leg to the other.
Now you'll have no doubt noticed that the spine is curved.
We have this thoracic rounding in the upper body being referred to as a primary curve
due to it forming in the embryonic stage, whilst the cervical and lumbar curves are
known as secondary curves due to them developing after birth, i.e. when the baby first learns
to lift its head and then when it first stands, respectively, that's when we develop those
secondary curves.
Although the curvy female back has long been a regular subject of great painters throughout
the history of art and remains a driving force in the fashion world's desire to create
the perfect dress, there's a little more to it than purely aesthetics.
The design is actually an engineering marvel as a perfectly straight spine would make it
really difficult to maintain a stable centre of gravity particularly when walking and also
a straight spine would lead to dangerous loads being applied to the lumbar vertebra.
The curves allow for the upper body loading to be dissipated through the muscles and so
protecting the vertebra low down in the column.
Each vertebra consists of a main body to the front and a central aperture.
There are two transverse processes and then a spinous process to the rear which is the
thing you can feel when you run your hand down your back.
The vertebra stack conveniently to allow the holes to line up providing a protected canal
down which the spinal cord runs.
This mass of nerves branches off into 31 pairs of nerve roots that feed out throughout the
neural foramen or gaps in the sides of the bony structure and reach out to all parts
of the body allowing for messages and information to constantly transfer between the brain and
the outer extremities.
Being an ingenious feat of engineering the spine is capable of movement in many directions.
We actually have extension, we have flexion, we have lateral flexion to the side and we
also have rotation.
In reality our everyday activities require a combination of these movements.
If you pick up a bag or a box or you put something on a shelf for instance these actions are
brought about by the muscles that attach to the spine and these can be split into two
groups those nearer the surface that are primarily linked to movement of the arms and then the
deeper muscles that move the vertebral column itself.
Now the surface back muscles are the trapezius that runs from the base of the skull and the
vertebra C1 down to T12 cervical down to thoracic 12.
Inserting into the clavicle the acromion and the scapula, the shoulder blade at the back
it can lift, can lower, can retract the shoulder blade then the levator scapula which reaches
from vertebra C1 to C3 sometimes to C4 and into the upper part of the shoulder blade.
Now in addition to assisting the trapezius in lifting this also tilts your head to the
side.
The rhomboids, the rhomboids major and minor start at vertebra C7 go down to thoracic 5
and attach to the inner border of the shoulder blade and from this position they can only
do one thing if you imagine they're running horizontal all they can do is retract your
shoulder blade and then we have the serratus anterior which is the antagonist partner having
the opposite function to the rhomboids.
So this is situated on the front surface of the scapula and links to the 8th or 9th rib
allowing it to draw the shoulder blades forwards and then we have the latissimus dorsi starting
at the iliac crest of the hip.
It comes up, connects through the vertebra thoracic 7 up to lumbar 5 passes across the
lower ribs and eventually inserts into the upper arm just here.
It's predominately responsible for bringing your arm back down to your side if you're
here or from here but also it's responsible for inwardly rotating the arm.
So there you're surface muscles but then let's think about the deeper muscles.
The deep muscles of the back are the spleenious muscles.
These are attached from cervical to thoracic vertebra and responsible for lifting your
head when it's down.
The erector spineis is not actually a muscle but it's a group of muscles.
It includes the iliocostalis, the longissimus, the spinalis muscles and they're at varying
lengths running down both sides of the spine from the cervical all the way down to the
lumbar regions.
And they produce movements including lifting you from a bent position, bending the trunk
to the side and also a little bit of rotation of your upper body.
The transversal spinalis muscles, namely the semi-spinalis, the multifidus and the rotator
muscles lie a little deeper than and generally shorter than the erector spineis but they
perform almost an identical function in extending, in lateral flexing and in that little bit
of rotation of the spine as well.
Then the segmental muscles are the deepest and they actually will only link from one
vertebra to the very next rather than connecting several as the previous muscle groups did.
The interspinalis assist in extending the spine and the intratransversari assist in bending
to the side although all of these muscles in these groups have a very limited amount
of force.
Now the spine is obviously the most important determinant of our posture described in the
Cambridge University Press Dictionary is the way in which someone usually holds their
shoulders, neck and back or a particular position in which someone stands or sits etc.
So good posture refers to a balanced body position that allows for movement with minimum
effort and this should be a proactive state from which the body can accommodate external
forces and respond with strength, mobility, stability or a combination of all these three.
Poor posture will decrease the body's ability to handle gravitational stress and it will
compromise functional ability leading to possible physical issues whereas aligning the body
correctly allows structural stability and creates harmonious movement patterns.
A proactive posture will result in both lumbopelvic and scapular thoracic integration together
with optimized unilateral and bilateral relationships.
So let's break this down into three key postural areas we can look at.
Firstly the lumbar region so in a neutral placement the normal curve is slightly convex
anteriorly just here.
This is the most stable and optimal shock absorbing position.
So while breathing and engaging the abdominals in this position no strain should be felt
through the spinal extensors in the lumbar area.
If muscular tension does occur here you really need to veer the pelvis towards a slight posterior
tilt and a slight lumbar flexion to take that away.
Now the normal curve of the lumbar spine will lengthen through flexion by engaging the
oblique abdominals that brings the pelvis and the ribs a little closer together at the
front.
Let's have a look at the thoracic region we'll move up slightly now.
Stabilizing the scapulae on the rib cage is important as when it's not done there's
a tendency to overwork the upper trapezius and the other muscles around the neck and
upper shoulders that we talked about earlier.
Although the scapulae move with the arms a sense of stability not rigidity should always
be maintained so keep the feeling of gently sliding the scapulae down at the back and
towards the spine in a sort of V movement so even though they may not stay still they
might actually elevate when you lift your arms the feeling is still keeping them down
rather than the shoulders so the shoulders should be allowed to move but not to fall
forwards or squeeze together in this way.
And then finally let's look at moving up again to the cervical spine and here we're
looking to hold a natural curve so the skull should balance directly above the shoulders
when in a neutral position so in most instances the cervical spine should continue the line
created by the thoracic spine during flexion, extension, lateral flexion and rotation.
So having established that the key to the spine function in optimally is the maintenance
of this curved alignment we now introduce the concept of core strength essentially strength
from the muscles in your back abs and pelvis working together remember we talked about
that harmonious movement pattern earlier.
Now this is currently a hot topic in health and fitness industries as not only is it vital
and protecting the lower back from injury but research has also shown that it's an important
contributor to sports performance from a health point of view weak core strength can
lead to an exaggerated lumbar curve or what we call lordosis.
Now this results in uneven pressure on the intervertebral discs and that can lead to
accelerated demise in sport poor stability in the lumbar spine again due to this low
core strength can negatively affect the functioning of the legs and actually increase the risk
of injury.
So to understand core strength we must appreciate how the musculoskeletal system works as a set
of levers therefore the fulcrums of these levers must be adequately stabilized for optimum
force generation.
So we can define core strength then as it's the ability to maintain correct alignment
of proximal body parts in order to heighten the efficiency of distal body parts during
movement.
So what we're saying there is being able to fix our center while we're moving the arms
or legs will allow us to generate more speed power and strength through them.
So bracing the lower spine will allow us to sit and stand without risk of injury but also
will allow the tennis player to produce very powerful two handed winners down the line.
The secret to maintaining core stability lies in generating intraabdominal pressure because
this then lends support to the spine in motion or under duress.
Intraabdominal pressure is brought about by the combined action of the transversus abdominis
here the pelvic floor here the multifidus at the back and the diaphragm at the top.
These muscles work in unity as contraction of the pelvic floor leads to a co-contraction
at the back in the multifidus so stabilizing the sacrum.
Also we then get a co-contraction in the transversus which begins to pull in here.
That in turn attaches to the thoracolumbar fascia at the back that pulls in and so the
end result is through all this pulling in we have an increase in the intraabdominal pressure.
So now we've mentioned a few new muscles here so let's just take a look at them in a little
bit more detail.
The transversus abdominis is the deepest of the internal abdominal muscles because of
its origin at the thoracolumbar fascia the sheath at the back it's responsible for spinal
stability it causes compression in the abdominal cavity when we pull in.
The pelvic floor has three major compartments the anterior middle and posterior.
Now the peritoneal cavity is the fourth layer with the fascia sometimes being counted as
part of that layer or sometimes being considered as a fifth layer.
The thoracolumbar fascia as I've just mentioned is this diamond shaped connective tissue in
the lower back area and that consists of three layers that are critical in stabilizing the
trunk particularly when transferring load from the upper body to the lower body.
It's attached to many other body parts including the spine, the ribs plus a number of muscles
even embracing the erector spine between its three layers.
Tension within this fascia can be increased through motion of the arms and maybe through
the trunk and maybe through the lower limbs you'll begin to feel that at the back.
So how can we effectively target these muscles through exercise to improve our core strength?
Firstly we need to use free movement and avoid fixed resistance machines that you find in
gyms because they put you in a certain position and then support your movement.
So actually they allow you to switch off your core muscles.
In addition most of these machines isolate movement so that only one group of muscles
is working at any one time which is contrary to how we function in everyday activity.
So a better option therefore is to practice what are known as compound movements using
several muscle groups at the same time.
So I'll give you an example something like a squat in exercise where I'm using here
and here and here and a little bit of here everything's working together.
So you can do this using body weight or with free weights as both have been shown to force
you to switch on your core muscles before you set out on your first repetition.
This is something known as pre-excitation.
So squats, press-ups, same kind of thing.
It's a body weight exercise using a number of muscle groups.
So in these type of exercises the core muscles have to work hard to maintain your natural
comfortable curve of your spinal alignment referred to as your neutral spine.
This ensures there's minimal stress on the soft tissues surrounding the spine such as
the ligaments and the intervertebral discs.
You should really consider balance when approaching core training as any exercise program should
develop limb strength in a coordinated fashion from left to right, from front to back and
from upper to lower.
A perfect example is the increased risk of hamstring injury if the quadriceps at the
front of the thigh are too much stronger than the muscles at the back.
That's the hamstrings.
Now exercises for the lower back should build strength but also improve your range of motion.
The route to a healthy back involves five steps.
So let's go to work in the studio and show you how we can do this.
Some simple exercises and you can do these with me.
So press pause, stand up and get ready to join me on these exercises.
Our first exercise focuses on improving the movement patterns that you use every day.
So we're working on our coordination here.
So this is what we're going to do.
Taking a medicine ball.
I've got a medicine ball here for Peter.
It could actually be anything, any sort of weighted object because the idea is this is
something you would do in your everyday tasks with everyday objects.
So the aim of the exercise here, combining those movements is to reach down to this side
for me please Peter.
So in this position what we're doing here is we've got a little bit of flexion.
We've got a little bit of rotation as well.
What we're going to do then is lift it up to the high across to the other diagonal and
reach.
And again we're working now through extension as we come up and a little bit of rotation
and again back down to this side please.
So if you can keep that going for me please Peter a few times down and then back up.
And down and back up.
So at all times what we're trying to do here is to keep the abdominals pulled in tight
and be aware of rather than letting the weight move you or let the arms do the work it's
all coming from the centre yeah.
So we can make this slightly tougher by keeping your arms extended all the time.
Does that feel a little tougher just nod at me fabulous indeed.
See there how we can work through that arc getting that flexion into some extension and
some rotation.
Obviously I'd ask you to do both sides.
The great thing about this is it's a sort of movement if you want to take a little rest
there for me Peter thank you I'll take the ball.
It's a sort of movement you'll use if you let's say you've got the shopping you've taken
the shopping home you're putting the stuff on the shelves it's that kind of movement
and of course you can see straight away those who play goal for tennis the sporting application
for that.
The next exercise works on increasing our stability by practicing balance exercises
and again puts a lot of emphasis on core control.
So all we're going to do here is a little bit of work on the single squat.
So pick a leg you can't pick your good leg because you're going to do both legs.
So we're standing on one leg you might need the other arm out for balance.
What I'm going to ask you to do is simply bend that knee and reach this hand down towards
the floor for me as you can see it's not an easy exercise.
If you start to lose your balance then reset yourself that's fine the single leg squat
try and go nice and slowly reaching that hand down towards the floor if you can excellent
brilliant brilliant slow is better can I get a couple more.
So what we're having to do here is to try to keep your abdominals pulled in really tight
to keep your trunk stable yeah that's the challenge try to keep the trunk stable I did
say this wasn't an easy one brilliant and again we're looking for you to practice that
on both legs you're doing really well try it on the other leg excellent and take a little
rest there.
Now you'll be pleased to know the next exercise is a lot easier what we also need to do here
is to develop a platform of endurance through low intensity repetitive exercise this will
make make a big difference so what if we take the feet about hip width apart and then just
went for a normal squat down and back up please good good hands are comfortable you can have
on the hips or both hands out in front however feels comfortable for you again I want you
to focus on keeping your abdominals pulled in tight can you keep your heels down on the
floor for me please that's it press the heels down onto the floor as you go down beautiful
there we go keep the heels down don't go quite so low on the heels to stay down that's fabulous
abdominal staying tight chest stays lifted and this will start to improve the endurance
through the front of the thigh the back of the thigh and also into the glutes into the
buttocks and having that extra endurance strength there is very useful for us good take a little
rest there.
We're going to move on now to using functional strength through multi-joint exercises so
this exercise is going to involve several joints at the same time so I'm going to ask
you to take the ball form again please again we're facing the front but what you're going
to do now is take your feet a little bit wider I don't do anything just yet but I'm
going to ask you to bend the knees keep your abdominals in tight we're going to drop the
ball down and you're then going to bring yourself back up okay so the knees will bend as you
drop down reach a little bit lower you are bending forwards and then as you come up straighten
up and straighten the legs altogether so it's a modified deadlift the way we go fleets
so what we need to do here is there'll be a tendency for the weight again it doesn't
have to be a ball it can be anything to pull your shoulders forwards but we're trying to
keep those back trying to keep that nice alignment at the back there we're trying to keep the
abdominals in tight so make sure you bend forward don't bend the knees too much bend
from the waist fabulous so there's a pull there into the abdominals so what we're trying
to do is keep that pulling really tight through here and really tight through here so that's
the challenge for the core strength and you can see we're working through that flexion
and extension through the lower spine fabulous one more and take a little rest there so multi-joint
exercise we're working through the hip we're working through the lower spine we're working
through the knees also okay so finally the exercise that we're looking for now is a sort
of exercise that will introduce some speed and power developing on speed and power is
very useful so this you could do you can do this on your own if you have a ball and you
can throw it at a wall or throw it in the garden and actually we're going to do this
with a partner a very useful exercise what we're trying to do here is to develop a whole
body exercise that involves working as many muscle groups as possible but with some kind
of dynamic influence so that we're working that core strength a little bit harder so
what I'm going to ask you to do is for this exercise we're going to place the ball on
the floor and it's what's called a sprint pass so the idea is to get up throw the ball
and take a couple of sprint steps as quickly as you can all in one movement so are you
ready up we go brilliant and again please down you go and up quick beautiful back we
go so we're looking to develop power down we go the ball is on the floor and up and
push and you can see how many muscle groups are working together here and in order fabulous
to get that transfer of the power from the legs up into the arms we need to have a really
strong center away we go and of course the stronger our center healthier our spine is
going to be brilliant can we just get one more nice and dynamic you're going to take
a rest then weren't you go fabulous well done well done you'll notice that in all of those
exercises there's an emphasis on engaging the core muscles to create that intraabdominal
balloon that braces the lower spine this helps to maintain the lumbar curve that's essential
to take the load off the spine in associated ligaments particularly in the hinged position
where the long lever of the vertebral column creates a mechanical disadvantage now also
in this series is a lecture that looks at the abdominal muscles in detail and there
you'll find a wide selection of exercises in addition to the ones we just did to improve
your core strength that we've now learned is absolutely vital to protect this intricate
spinal structure so how does such a beautiful construction break down to cause us so much
so many problems more importantly when the worst happens how can we get ourselves literally
back on track well firstly we can divide back pain into two different categories namely
chronic lasting for months and often becoming worse but without an immediately obvious cause
and then there's acute pain lasting days or weeks and the result of either an incident
such as playing sport or gardening although it could also be due to an underlying condition
such as arthritis diagnosis is usually made by MRI a magnetic resonance imaging of the
soft tissue and extra of the bone although electro myography can also be used to test
the strength of the muscles and so identify any nerve damage sometimes dies injected into
the intervertebral discs or the spinal column as in discography and myelograms respectively
to highlight damaged tissue now most low back problems don't require surgery but simply
pain relief and anti-inflammatories followed by mobility and strength exercises to return
normal function and reduce the likelihood of recurrence interestingly despite the natural
inclination to rest an injury a survey in Finland found that sufferers who remained
active healed quicker than those who took bed rest which has also been shown to lead to
the additional complications such as loss of strength stiffness and possibly even depression
in addition research at the University of Alberta on people with back pain revealed
that those who engaged in weight training felt it enhanced their quality of life as
their joints loosened and the pain subsided so paradoxical as it may sound then when
low back pain strikes your best response is not to rest for fear of making it worse but
to actually grit your teeth and push on with being active clearly some injuries will require
an initial period of rest so I strongly recommend you work with the guidance of your physician
on setting a suitable plan of action but remember I mean action let's look at a solutions to
a few of the better known conditions the simplest and most common complaint is due to muscle
injury a strain resulting from an awkward lift for example in the early stages rest
is advisable with maybe gentle stretching of the hip flexors that can cause the pelvis
to tilt forward it can also be helpful to gently stretch the piriformis a hip rotator
because if this is tight it can cause a knock on effect to other joints core strengthening
exercises such as the bridge or a modified side plank and a cat stretch will also help
sciatica something a lot of us know about is characterized by pain or perhaps even numbness
in the buttocks and the rear of the lower leg caused by inflammation and usually as
a result of a rupture of the intervertebral disc that begins to impinge on the nerve fibers
and it's particularly felt when you're bending forwards stretching of the hamstrings and the
abdominals is advised together with Superman progressions to improve core strength lumbar
stenosis symptoms are similar to sciatica but are associated with standing and walking
rather than bending pains caused by a narrowing of the neural foramen or that gap through
which the nerve route passes that we mentioned earlier this could be caused by extra bone
growth due to arthritis or advanced wear and tear that again leads to pressure on the nerve
a useful stretch here is to lie on the floor and pull one or both knees into the chest with
the suitable strengthening exercise being to reach the hand to the opposite lifted knee
whilst marching on the spot and keeping that neutral or comfortable spine now with all of
these stretching and strengthening exercises always back off if you feel any sharp pain so to
conclude it's worth pointing out that in terms of a healthy spine public enemy number one is
poor posture the National Back Pain Association tells us that four out of every five people will
suffer at some time in their lives and mostly be self-inflicted as a result of poor posture that's
developed over many years of incorrect movement patterns and perhaps a sedentary lifestyle
kyphosis for example is a rounding of the shoulders and can result from many years sat at
a computer or at the wheel of a car like so and a simple exercise we can do keeping the elbows
by the side lifting the hands out is a great little exercise to train those muscles that will
help to correct that lordosis or an exaggerated lumbar curve can result from years of sitting
and as the hip flexors begin to shorten because of us being in that position then when we stand up
they don't fully extend and we have to correct ourselves with this position so a very simple
stretch like so pushing forwards here will begin to stretch the hip flexors there so something
we can do at the end of a day if we've been sitting at the desk for a while so these exercises
simple aren't they and in both cases incorrect alignment leads to weakness and stiffness and
you don't need me to tell you that these are the precursors to back conditions either chronic
or acute as we discussed earlier so whilst I've equipped you with a few exercises to help alleviate
certain low back problems I want you to forget about rehab and start to think about what I call
pre-hab by strengthening your core muscles now you'll reduce your risk of back pain possibly saving
yourself a lot of discomfort and a good few dollars along the way so remember your back is it's the
source of support for your whole body and it allows you to sit stand move and to bear weight
however it's also a delicate finely balanced structure that will break down if not cared for
adequately but now you know the basics of back care so you can look forward to a healthy back for life
