According to the US Census Bureau, during the 20th century, the population under 65
tripled, whilst at the same time their relatives over 65 increased by a factor of 11.
There's a proportion shifting the ratio of 1 in 25 to a considerable 1 in 8.
Projections suggest this will be around 1 in 5 by half way through this century.
So clearly then it's important for the population to develop and maintain good health, moving
into later years in order to reduce the risk of illness, injury and disease that will predicate
loss of independence and significantly increase health care costs.
More importantly however is the concept of maintaining a good quality of life and the
good news is that to a great degree this lies in our own hands with exercise being a key
factor as supported by the National Institute on Aging making it a platform for its Go For
Life campaign.
There's now an abundance of research to confirm that fitness levels achieved in our younger
years can impact upon not just the physical but also our psychological health in later
life.
In addition all the signs point to the fact that if we continue to be active then we can
expect to retain a desirable quality of life well into our advanced years.
So in this lecture we'll take a journey through the aging body and investigate just how it
changes as the years go by.
We'll also look at what value exercise has in helping us to resist the aging process
and draw up a plan of just what form that should take.
Whilst I don't deny we all have a biological clock if you stay with me for the next 30
minutes I'll equip you with the tools to seriously slow it down.
Be warned though I'm about to challenge some of your firmly held beliefs about growing
old.
The aging process is influenced by a number of factors but primarily genetics, disease
and lifestyle.
It's this later variable in particular that has been shown to be susceptible to manipulation
and capable of impacting lifespan.
Not only is an active lifestyle recommended for good health, whatever your age, there's
a school of thought that now suggests the older you are the more important it is.
But what about that old saying you can't teach an old dog new tricks?
Is that really true?
Let's go to Professor Sapolsky for just a minute and find out what happens in the brain
when you pick up something like exercise as an adult.
Amazing finding, one of the biggest revolutions in neurobiology in the last 20 years is the
fact that the brain, the adult brain makes new neurons.
New neurons and a part of the brain having to do with memory.
You took an introductory neurobiology class anytime since the pharaohs and the first
thing they teach you is your brain doesn't make new neurons.
At the time you're three years old.
Massive revolution that there is actually jargon, adult neurogenesis.
So what triggers this, what stimulates this?
It's environmental stimulation, it's learning new things, it's exercise as well.
And what is one of the coolest things about it is making new neurons in response to stimulation,
enrichment, exercise, all of that.
That is not just the purview of 20-year-old jocks, what the studies already show is get
a 90-year-old more stimulated through any of those routes and afterward when you examine
the brain there are new perky adolescent neurons there going about their rejuvenating business.
Aging is no more a time of life where stress is an inevitability than at any earlier stage.
Now that's encouraging, isn't it?
So you don't have an excuse if you've never been active up until now.
Of relevant note is that whilst exercise is of benefit at any age it's been proposed
at age 50 years is a critical point at which taking regular exercise can protect against
the physical and psychological deteriorations associated with getting old, in other words
frailty and even disability.
When we consider the benefits of regular exercise it's important to stress that these
apply at any age so it's never too late to embark upon a new exercise regime and enjoy
the lower risk of heart disease, stroke, diabetes, falls, stress and even depression.
Now add to that improved strength, flexibility, balance, self-esteem, better sleep and social
contact and you start to wonder why anyone would not voluntarily partake.
It's true to say that exercise can not only add years to your life but will certainly put
life in your years even if you're currently not active.
Before we can prescribe appropriate exercise advice we need to understand the changes that
occur in the body as we age.
So let's begin with the bones.
We know from our earlier lecture on this topic that a drop in calcium levels is the most
noticeable result of aging more so in women than men due to the issue of reduced estrogen
levels postmenopause.
Now this manifests itself in bones becoming brittle and more likely to fracture as we
age.
It also introduces the risk of changes in the spine, notably exacerbated curvature
leading to poor posture, also increased risk of falls and extra pressure on key joints.
Fortunately though there's a wealth of evidence to show that inactivity is the major contributor
to osteoporosis and that weight-varying exercise can retain bone mineral density.
This is why there's so much emphasis on encouraging regular exercise from an early age as a preventive
measure.
However, older adults who commit to one hour each day could reduce risk of hip fracture
by as much as 50% although the type of activity is important.
Tennis and jogging for example are favoured in comparison to walking and gardening which
have showed no effect on the rate of fracture incidents.
This is the first point at which we notice the idea that exercise can actually slow the
aging process although listen carefully as this will become a recurring theme.
Since osteoporosis sufferers may already exhibit reduced mobility clearly exercise will need
to begin gently with aqua exercise for example being a recommended option to help improve
movement although the buoyancy of the water reduces the weight-varying which is needed
so switching to dry land will be necessary as soon as possible.
A combination of cardio and strength training is the ideal recipe to begin with and these
exercises should focus on improving the ability to perform daily activities.
It's also important to remember from our lecture on bones that adaptations to exercise
are site specific so a program must incorporate a total body approach.
Now a common feature in older adults is a slight forward bend at the hip and in the
lumbar spine this sort of position like so so it's recommended to stretch the muscles
at the front of the body particularly if we take the hip flexors so I'd take a stretch
where I'd take one foot behind and then a little tilt of the pelvis forwards will start
to stretch through here but also to strengthen the posterior chain of muscles so exercises
that will work through the muscles that protect the lower back and if you look at our lecture
on the spine you'll find several examples there of how we can do that.
Let's move on to the joints the most obvious consideration in the joints is the decreased
range of motion caused by stiffening of the connective tissue around them in combination
also with the muscles losing their elasticity.
Also the production of synovial fluid that's the fluid that lubricates the joints this
decreases and actually becomes more viscous the cartilage that covers the end of the bones
can actually tear and lose fluid so reducing the cushioning effect when the joints move.
These changes not only restrict movement but can actually cause pain although previous
injury is one of the causes for these changes but also a sedentary lifestyle can be a significant
cause.
In the spine the discs between the vertebrae that are also made of cartilage begin to lose
their fluid and increased calcium deposits are noted so their ability to soften movement
in these vital joints is somewhat impaired.
As mentioned then these combined changes lead to reduced movement most noticeably in the
ankles, in the knees, in the hips but this can be overcome through regular activity.
Arthritis is the most common ailment associated with old age and actually includes a large
number of different conditions that lead to degeneration and inflammation of the joints
examples being osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis and gout.
When considering exercise as an intervention the first thing to appreciate is that it will
not make the condition worse which can be a common misconception.
Not only will it help to improve cardiovascular profile, increase muscular strength and improve
your flexibility it can also have a positive impact on mental health through additional
social contact as we mentioned earlier, enhance self-esteem and reduce feelings of depression.
But even better than this some studies have shown that exercise can help to relieve pain
symptoms in nearly half of arthritis sufferers.
So here are some guidelines for this population.
Firstly we need to consider low impact activities and try to avoid prolonged one leg work.
We need some balance work but make sure we're switching side to side.
Focus on strength and flexibility at first and avoid positions that involve you kneeling
for prolonged periods.
Repeated short bouts are a better option than a long workout.
Let's have a look now at muscles.
If we now look at muscles the changes are similar to bone in that there's a progressive
loss of tissue with advancing years but again the general decline we see is more often associated
with inactivity rather than age.
Order persons who remain active display better strength and ability to perform their daily
tasks than sedentary counterparts.
Research suggests that as we age there will be a decline in type 2 muscle fibres known
as the fast twitch variety due to the speed of their contraction.
So as a result of this our power will reduce and so it's fair to assume sprinting speeds
for example will decrease with age.
Still maximum tension however is unaffected as the motor unit which is the nerve and the
muscle combination will still perform as designed so any decrease in strength is due to other
influences.
This is why some bodybuilders have been able to compete well into their later years.
Reductions in the number of blood vessels, enzyme concentration and the ability to store
energy in the muscle cells and all these factors will contribute to a decline in muscular
endurance.
Exercise prescription then is clearly going to incorporate strength training as gains
can be made at any age.
The beauty of strength and endurance training is that the benefits will not solely be restricted
to the physical as the associated increases in the ability to perform everyday tasks and
the reduced risk of falls promote a psychological boost also.
In support of the argument that exercise can bring positive changes at any age a 2007 study
showed that after 26 weeks of progressive resistance training a group of elderly persons
with an average age of 68 years were found to improve their relative strength from 59%
lower to only 38% lower than the control group with an average age of 24 years.
You could even argue that in this case exercise doesn't just slow the ageing process it actually
reverses it.
Let's move on to the cardiovascular system and we find that age related changes here
are less pronounced than in the bones and the muscles as we've just discussed.
The heart retains the capability to supply blood to the body and allowing it to perform
everyday tasks.
So again the theory here is that most of the changes we see are due to inactivity rather
than age.
There will undoubtedly be a decrease in the heart muscle performance, the efficiency of
the blood vessels to transport the oxygen and the ability of the skeletal muscle to
use it but fortunately these drawbacks can be significantly mitigated by regular exercise
which can lead to increases in stroke volume which is the total amount of blood pumps with
each beat, the total blood volume and high density lipoproteins or the good cholesterol.
So adherence to a suitable exercise program then can afford a high protection against
cardiovascular disease, the sort of things we associate with ageing for example hypertension
and diabetes.
Let's consider breathing and how ageing affects the mechanics of respiration.
Although our breathing apparatus is fully grown by our mid-20s the efficiency of gaseous
exchange continues to improve into early 40s and you'll recall that the gaseous exchange
is simply the process of carbon dioxide and oxygen circulating between the blood and the
lungs.
Now this is why endurance athletes such as marathon runners will reach their peak a little
later than athletes in other disciplines.
Ingeniously the respiratory system is designed with extra capacity so that when a decline
begins from age 40 onwards it isn't noticed in the course of carrying out common daily
activities.
Changes are more likely to restrict the ability to accommodate strenuous exercise.
So let's consider some of these physiological changes.
Firstly the lung volume will decrease as the lung tissues and the chest wall lose elasticity.
There will be a reduction in the number of cilia, the tiny hairs that remove particles
from the airways and that can increase the risk of infection.
Collagen builds up around the alveoli, those little air bubbles leading to a reduced surface
area and so diminishing the exchange of gases leading to a little less oxygen being available.
Calcification affects the trachea and the rib cartilages leading to a stiffness that
reduces the ability to expand and take in more air.
Now these factors combine to initiate a gradual increase in the rate of breathing that tends
to be shallow chest breathing.
This doesn't preclude exercise but leads to the suggestion that deep breathing should
be consciously encouraged and alternating intervals of higher and lower intensity will
be preferable.
Positive adaptations have been noted in asthmatics who engage in regular exercise although in
this case recommendations are to begin gently and gradually increase to a medium intensity.
A training program should also include exercise to encourage good posture especially in the
thoracic region as this will clearly impact upon breathing mechanics.
Finally on our tour of how aging affects the body and its functions we'll consider
the nervous system.
Now here evidence shows that coordination declines with age but interestingly research
has shown that active older people have faster reactions than inactive younger people again
suggesting that a sedentary lifestyle is the key factor rather than the passing sands
of time.
In our look at the brain we established that neurons do decline naturally but physical
challenges such as learning new motor skills can lead to development of an unlimited number
of neural pathways.
A notable point here is that if a muscle is not regularly used the motor units that control
it can shrink and the neuron becomes less efficient so proving that inactivity accelerates the
aging process.
In addition due to the cardiovascular changes that take place that we discussed earlier
blood supply to the brain may decline restricting the oxygen provided and without this fuel
brain processes can be prolonged which is what causes loss of coordination and an increased
risk of balance issues with of course the potential for falls.
Diminished neural activity can also lead to a slowed reaction to requirements for redistributing
blood supply that results in blood pooling at the term given to blood remaining in the
extremities which can cause dizziness.
This can manifest itself in a drop of blood pressure if standing up quickly from a sitting
or lying position something that's known as postural hypertension.
So as you'll be aware already aging is linked to degeneration in both sight and hearing
ability the lens loses elasticity and so making it harder to focus in addition to which the
iris muscles weaken and so the amount of light entering the retina is reduced and hence the
problems.
The light adapted eye of a 20 year old receives six times more light than that of an 80 year
old.
In dark adapted conditions the 20 year old eye receives about 16 times more light.
In comparison to younger people it is as though older persons will wear in medium density
sunglasses in bright light and extremely dark glasses in dim light.
With hearing it's mainly the ability to detect higher pitch tones that becomes difficult
although other sounds can be a problem if there's a high level of background noise.
Whilst many elderly persons are unwilling to accept the reduction in these senses it
clearly happens and it's a contributory factor in balance issues especially when combined
with the slower speed of information transfer from the skin vibratory senses and the muscle
and joint receptors.
You may remember we talked about the muscle spindles and the Golgi tendon organs in our
stretching lecture.
As we've already discovered in previous sections regular exercise can bring about improvements
in the cardiovascular system.
Also breathing function, muscle performance and all of these will enhance the efforts
of the central nervous system.
Now thus far we've only really scratched on the surface in the domain of exercise prescription
so let's dig a little deeper.
A critical phenomenon to take on board at this stage is an appreciation of diversity
amongst the older population.
So to support this bear in mind the oldest person to complete a marathon was get ready
for this 98 years old yet a UK study revealed that over a third of people over 50 who have
no restrictive medical conditions just simply don't exercise regularly.
In the US national data shows that only 31% of those aged 65 to 74 participate in 20 minutes
of moderate physical activity on three or more days of the week.
Only 16% report 30 minutes of moderate activity five or more times a week and the figures
decline even more for the truly vigorous physical activity that can really help to maintain
your cardiovascular health.
So when we try to define the concept of aging it's clear it has relative social, functional
and chronological dimensions.
The gym is the home of an incredibly wide variety of exercise and program variations
but a proportion of these are purely for aesthetic gains.
For the older exercise however the desired goals are more likely to be the ability to
carry the groceries being able to stand up from a chair without emitting a groan that
I notice I've started to do and having the energy to take the family dog for a walk in
the park.
This is what the physiologists refer to as functional fitness.
It's totally relevant to your day-to-day living and it's the difference between independence
and potentially becoming a burden on those close to you.
So your quality of life both today and tomorrow is at stake here.
So this then provides the framework for us to build an exercise regime in order to develop
and or retain a desirable degree of functional fitness.
Following components of the targets for improvement firstly cardiovascular fitness on muscular
strength and endurance, flexibility, balance and motor skills.
So let's look at these in order, look at them in a little bit more detail.
Cardiovascular training will induce improvements in your maximal oxygen uptake leading to an
enhanced ability to walk, cycle or swim without discomfort in addition to giving a general
feeling of having a good energy level.
Cardioca output, lowering heart rate and also reducing hypertension are key bonuses.
The blood supply and enzyme concentration leading to better muscular endurance will increase
and so we've got you know various improvements here but the requirements to bring these about
are that we need to aim for something every day if possible even if you have to build
up to this.
Try to avoid high intensity exercise, we're looking at medium intensity around five to
seven out of ten on an intensity level depending on your current fitness level.
Thirty minutes is the target but remember benefits can be accrued in a piecemeal fashion
so two lots of fifteen minutes or three bouts of ten minutes will produce the same gains
so suddenly it doesn't seem so onerous, I'm sure you can manage ten minutes.
The exercise mode should incorporate movements of large muscle groups so walking, cycling,
swimming and the favoured options.
If we move now to training for muscular strength and endurance these are the kind of things
that we can expect.
We can expect increased strength and so the ability to lift and carry things at home we
can look forward to better endurance enabling us to walk up and down the stairs much more
easily.
This lean muscle tissue helping to boost metabolism and so controlled body composition
is a welcome change and of course enhance bone density decreasing the risk of fractures.
So how do we bring about these improvements in muscular strength and endurance, this is
how we do it.
Firstly we need to include exercise for all the major muscle groups and that's in common
with our cardiovascular training.
Three times per week ideally with the days rest in between to allow the muscles to rest.
Overload is the key so workouts must lead to muscular fatigue so you may need to build
up to this at first.
Again expect to take around 30 minutes performing maybe 2 to 3 sets of an exercise and we're
looking for 10 to 12 repetitions of each exercise.
For those who are comfortable gym workouts are an option but beginners may prefer the
comfort of home workouts using just your body weight as a resistance and we've got a specific
workout for you later in the series to do just that.
Let's have a look at flexibility training and this can bring several positive benefits
such as increased range of movement making it easier to perform our daily tasks, lengthening
the key postural muscles leading to better static and dynamic posture plus improved balance.
Less stiffness less pain on moving wouldn't that be welcome.
So let's look at the guidelines for flexibility training.
How do we get these improvements?
Begin with just two stretching sessions each week and build up to five.
Remember to always warm up first with at least five minutes of gentle cardio type activity.
Mix dynamic stretching techniques but not bouncing with static stretches that are held
at the end point of mild tension for 15 to 30 seconds.
And have a look at our flexibility lecture for some tips there.
Try to include stretches for the whole body targeting problems that may exist for example
stiffness due to old sports injuries or maybe rounded shoulders and short hamstrings due
to years of working in a seated position.
Remember when doing your stretching exercises try to keep your breathing relaxed.
Next on our shopping list is balance.
As we have seen balance is a composite of several functions working in harmony and will
be directly affected by the previous fitness components muscular strength, flexibility
especially in the lower limbs.
Now balance as we've already established can be static or dynamic and it's covered
by three senses as the visual the vestibular sensors in the inner ear detect the position
of the head and then somatosensory which includes touch.
So how do we train to improve balance?
Firstly adopting wide narrow and single legs dances for basic exercises such as a bicep
curl or squats will help to develop a static balance.
Use movements in all directions to promote gains in dynamic balance so try not to always
be working forwards backwards and side to side.
Let's move at diagonals as well.
Include exercises that employ functional training equipment the core board the wobble board
the TRX the straps that you can hang from the ceiling and things like flexibar or body
blade the things that we have to shake and use the vibrational energy.
Finally let's have a look at motor skills that will unfortunately deteriorate but can
unfortunately benefit automatically from the previously mentioned balance exercises.
However including the following also will lead to even further gains in coordination.
Playing catch with a knobbly ball an uneven ball or a partner to give an element of surprise
will develop quick reactions.
Performing your exercises at different speeds simple things like walking your usual route
to the shop but in a different direction learning a new swimming stroke all of these
things will help.
Whilst much of this presentation is focused on the multifarious benefits of exercise for
the elderly we've also established that regular exercise throughout our lives will build a
degree of protection against many conditions and make a big difference to quality of life
in later years.
So let's try and put together a blueprint then to help you to adapt your exercise regime
to the challenges of aging ensuring you derive the maximum benefit.
Let's break it down by decade.
We'll start in your 20s.
At this point bone density is increasing so it's vital to exercise appropriately in
order to lay down as much bone tissue as possible before the decline begins.
Cardioactivity should be weight bearing therefore so opt for high impact aerobics and aim for
two weight training sessions per week.
If the free weights area of the gym is not your cup of tea try a group exercise class
maybe something like body pump group resistance.
Your target working heart rate is at its maximum now so your cardio session should be intense
you should be pushing yourself maybe up to 90% of your recommended range which you calculate
by subtracting your age from 220.
You're also at your most flexible around now but don't let this lead you into a false
sense of security.
This will decline as you age so don't skip your stretching particularly after your workout.
Allow at least 10 minutes and aim to lengthen the muscles in the whole body.
It's a great time to start including yoga or Tai Chi in your workouts for example.
Moving on to your 30s this is when the first signs of ageing process will really begin
to manifest with loss of muscle tissue most noticeable in the back of the upper arms sometimes
unsympathetically labelled as bingo wings.
Unfortunately losing lean body tissue also leads to a slowing of your metabolic rate
so this is when the pounds might begin to pile on.
Use weight training to three times per week now target your problem zones the triceps,
the abdominals, the buttocks as this could be the decade of childbearing so this could
be an issue.
Busy mums be aware that you need those cardio workouts but we've said that three times ten
minutes is just as effective in terms of calorie burning as a 30 minute bout.
The main density here is at its peak so choose weight bearing exercises such as jogging.
The metabolic rate begins to slow in your 40s together with changes in hormone levels
so you may notice the storage of extra pounds in addition your target heart rate declines
so it's important to lower the intensity but therefore increase the duration of your cardio
workouts if you want to burn fat.
Not to think now about protecting your joints from wear and tear by opting for low impact
exercise.
So switch jogging for power walking, high impact aerobics for spinning indoor cycling.
Weight training should remain a staple of your exercise diet not only to counter the
inevitable muscle loss we've already spoken about but also to give the requisite strength
to tackle your daily tasks such as carrying the shopping to the car digging the garden
whatever.
Moving on to your 50s it's vital here to maintain activity levels as the risk of heart disease
increases and bone density decreases due to the lowering of the estrogen levels post-menopause.
Circuit training here is ideal it'll combine cardio and strength work so it ticks both
the boxes for us.
The best option here is the PHA format we spoke about that in a different lecture alternating
upper and lower body exercises at each station as this will give a greater calorie burn.
Now this is the time when stiffness is noticeable particularly in the lower spine so flexibility
work is seriously recommended consider yoga and core conditioning exercises to improve
posture and to protect your back.
The good news is that after 60 it's actually better to be slightly overweight caution the
word slightly there and this is because the risk of osteoporosis and fractures is actually
higher if you're too thin.
Now don't let this deter you from the prescription to maintain cardio exercise to burn calories.
Think about activities here that are easier on the joints as the thinning cartilage and
the stiffening of the tendons and ligaments can leave them a little more susceptible to
injury so this is where aqua workouts are perfect since they allow for the muscles to
work against the water resistance for toning benefits but the buoyancy supports the joints.
Walking should be your prime cardio option here whether in the form of a country hike
early morning mile walking before the shops open whatever it is a stride session on the
treadmill or just a weight loss power walk.
If you carry some weight while you walk you'll also help to maintain your body density so
couple of little dumbbells in the hands perhaps.
Whilst not an obvious choice for most pensioners gym sessions are also vital particularly if
practicing functional strength work on the cable machines to mimic everyday movements
so doing chopping type movements will mimic the idea of picking things up and putting
them on a shelf.
I remember a few years ago one of the leading sportswear brands gave birth to the slogan
fitness is a race with no finish line and I certainly hope I've now convinced you of
that the quality of your life in later years is only loosely linked to your actual age
rather the most important factor is your activity level.
Although often muttered as an off the cuff phrase the concept of use it or lose it carries
much greater meaning than it first appears to.
If like many of us in this day and age you're looking for the secret of eternal youth I
think that in exercise you may just have found it.
