A short spell of surfing the shopping channels and you'd be forgiven for drawing the conclusion
the whole world has gone ab-crazy and this is supported by the cover stories of many
of the mainstream health fitness and lifestyle magazines on the shelves in the newsagents.
The truth is that in my 30 years of teaching fitness in clubs, hotels, gyms, spas, corporate
facilities with sports teams the question I'm most often asked is how to achieve a
flat tummy by females or how to get a rippling six pack by the guys. The perfect stomach
remains the most significant aesthetic indicator of fitness and continues to be the focus of
advertising campaigns for well-known brands and a multitude of products and services.
In this lecture we'll look closely at the abdominal muscles, whether our expectations
are realistic and explore a range of exercises to target this most important area. The starting
point then when looking at the trunk is to establish the difference between mobiliser
muscles that bring about movement and stabiliser muscles that work to fix body parts in place.
So here's a practical way for you to understand this. You can actually do this with me. I'm
going to stand with my feet about hip width apart. You could even do this sitting. What
we're going to do is put one hand here just where your ribs meet, one hand just below
the belly button and the trick here is can you get your hands closer together without
leaning forwards and what we're actually doing there is squeezing the abdominal muscles together,
bringing your ribs down to your hips. Okay, so that's one exercise. Secondly, I'm going
to stand on one leg and catch the ball. Now what I had to do there was to use my stabiliser
muscles to lock on in the centre to hold my trunk steady so that when the ball hit me
I didn't fall over, fortunately. Now let's look at these two muscle groups in a little
bit more detail. Firstly, the mobilisers we spoke about. The rectus abdominis is the
most visible, stretching from what we call the xiphoid process where the ribs meet and
the sternum and the ribs 5 to 7. Down to the pelvis, via a sheath or a poneurosis that
joins to the symphysis pubis, that aponeurobus we talked about in the lecture on muscles.
It's divided by tendon insertions that run across it, but also more noticeably, centrally
from top to bottom, the linear elbow, to give the appearance of separate blocks and interestingly
these divisions are not uniform, so you may see in some people an eight-pack rather than
a six-pack or perhaps blocks that don't line up but are actually staggered and that's purely
down to genetics rather than a response to working out. Now when contracted, this muscle
like any other draws its ends closer together so the ribs will move closer to the hips.
Moving to the side, the oblique muscles, the external obliques, be in larger and running
from ribs 5 to 12 down to the iliac crest or the highest point on the hip and also partly
into the linear elbow at the center and also then there's the internal oblique muscles
positioned between ribs 8 to 12 and the linear elbow itself and these work in tandem to assist
the rectus abdominis in drawing the ribs and hips closer together but also they have
two other functions, to rotate the trunk and also to laterally flex. Now interestingly
when we're bending sideways, the two obliques on the same side will work together but due
to their diagonal alignment this way and this way, the external oblique on one side works
in harmony with the internal oblique on the other side when we're doing that rotating
movement. So now let's look at the key stabilizer muscles and these we have to go a little bit
deeper to find. So beneath the above three muscles we've just talked about, we have the
transversus abdominis running like a cummerband from what's called the thoracolumbar fascia
at the back and the iliac crest through the lower six ribs and then into this linear elbow,
this tenderness line at the center. It's only got one action and that action is to pull
in compressing the abdominal cavity and so it creates pressure that effectively as we
pull in, splints the lumbar spine. Now the internal oblique muscles, that smaller of
the oblique muscles can actually assist in creating this intra-abdominal pressure through
its attachment also to the thoracolumbar fascia. It's not directed, attaches through something
called a lateral raft but it still has that effect of helping to pull in and more detail
on this we'll talk about in the lecture on the spine. So clearly then if we have two
different groups of muscles we're going to need two distinctly different sets of exercises
to tone them and this is often where confusion arises. Selecting the wrong exercises will
mean you may not achieve your goals. You won't be surprised to learn that the mobilizers
require movement to train them whilst the stabilizers require static or isometric contractions,
no movement that challenge you to hold a position. Let's look at examples of the two and you
can join me here you just need enough space to lie down on the floor so ensure you can
get in a position so that you can turn your head to the side and still see what we're
doing and you can join us in trying these exercises. So we've reached an important part
of the series now because this is where we begin to get into our actual exercise and
you'll notice that what I'm going to do through the workout is continually refer back to the
knowledge that you've just acquired. So look out for little references back to lectures
we did earlier but also little graphics to help you understand to help you visualize
the muscles you're working. Talking of working muscles let's get started with our abdominals
and we've got two different muscle groups remember we're working here the mobilizers
and the stabilizers so let's start with our mobilizers. These are the muscles that move
you. So I'm going to start with a couple of very basic exercises the sit up and the reverse
curl but I'm going to work with some different timing. So hopefully you're ready to go with
this just a couple of tips on the sit up technique make sure you're keeping your elbows back
not pulling with the arms rest the head into the hands so that you can support the weight
of your head and also be aware of having a neutral or comfortable spine position and
you'll notice that Jen's brought a feet up here knees bent and that helps to keep that
nice relaxed lower spine position. So hands behind your head for me please. So we're looking
for our single sit ups first of all so I'm going to ask you to just do those little sit ups
and back down for me in a nice comfortable rhythm. Beautiful. So a little visualization
helps here when we're working the moving muscles the mobilizers. Try to imagine your
abdominal muscles like a spring and think about squeezing that spring together so you're
trying to bring your ribs closer to your hips. Can I get a couple more please?
Fabulous and take a rest there and you'll notice that Jen's breathing out as she comes up and
in as she goes down. It's not absolutely crucial but it does help to exhale on the exertion
and the hardest part is actually lifting but whatever you do don't hold your breath. So
what I'm going to do now is change the timing. I'm going to ask you to sit up and down at
half that speed. So what we're going to do is sit up and up and down and down and again
sit up and up and down so you're going much slower. Keep going up and up and down. Really
focus on sit up and up getting that maximal contraction squeeze and squeeze and down and
down. Relax your head and neck and up and down and down. Keep the elbows back up and
up and down. Try not to hold your breath. Sit up and up and take a little rest there.
Well done. Have a quick rest. Okay. Let's take this one step further and I'll explain
in a minute why we're doing this. I'm going to ask you this time to sit up three counts
and down for one. So you'll go up, up, up and then down for one. Okay. Get ready. Here
we go. Sit up and up and up and down and again sit up and up and up and down. Sit up and
up and up and down and again sit up and up and up and down. Take a quick rest there.
Hopefully you're beginning to feel that getting a little bit more difficult as we go along.
Just to be sure, we're going to slow it down even further. I'm going to ask you to sit up
for seven counts and down for one. So take a deep breath first to get ready to go. Here
we go. We go up and up and up and up and up and five and six and seven and down and again
sit one and two and three and four and five and six and seven. Can we do two more of those
please? Sit up and up and up and four and five and six and seven. Just one more. Let's
go. You can do it. Sit up and two and three and four and five six seven and take a quick
rest there. Just have a little rest. So what we're doing there is by slowing down the count
I'm actually forcing you to recruit all the muscle fibers in the abdominals. The slow
twitch fibers will work first and then they'll start to exhaust so then you have to recruit
some of the fast twitch fibers and then as they begin to exhaust as we slow down again
you recruit the rest of the fast twitch fibers so we get to that point of momentary muscular
fatigue which is what we need. We need overload for all the muscles. We can use that same
timing on the reverse curl. You may have noticed on that exercise you're working predominantly
the upper part of the abdominals. What we're going to do now is switch this to the lower
part so if we can take the hands down by the side bring the knees up to the chest and
cross your feet over for me please. Important point here, drop the heels down. What I don't
want you to do is swing with the legs. Now this is only a very small movement. All that's
going to happen is you're going to bring your knees a little closer to your chest, lift
your hips off the mat and lower it back down but don't swing the legs so when you come
back down don't let this drop too low. So it's a squeeze in the lower abdominals that
lifts your hips off the floor so we'll do the same thing. Let's work with our single
count first of all. So we'll lift up and down and up and down. Fabulous. Now you may find
in this one keep going up and down and you keep going up and down. You may notice a little
bit of strain in the neck. Try to keep the neck relaxed on this one. Try consciously
to think about that by drawing your shoulders down. You may use your hands at the side for
a little bit of balance but the important thing is don't squeeze with the feet upwards.
Up and down and up and take a little rest. So we'll move straight on to what we did before.
Two counts up, two counts down. So we'll go up and up and down and down. We go up and
up and down and down and again sit up and up and down. One more of those please. We
go up and up and down. Hopefully you're feeling that in the abdominals. We're going to move
straight on now. Three counts up, one count down. We sit up, up, up and down and again
go up, up, up. How are you doing at home? We go up, up, up. I hope you're still with
me. We go up, up, up and hold it there. Next one you hopefully you remember now. We're
on to sevens. Seven counts up, one count down. Come on, be strong. We can do this. Let's
go. Up, two, three, four. Come on. Five, six, seven and down. One more. Go up, two. Get
those hips off the floor and four and five and six and seven. Two more of those. Let's
go. Sit up, two, three, four, five, six, seven. Can we do just one more? Let's go. Up, two,
three, four, five, six, seven and take a quick rest there. Well done, well done. Now remember,
I'm doing a certain number of repetitions here but you might need to build up to those. If
you found that easy you can always throw in a couple of extra repetitions but the secret
there is taking two very common exercises, the sit up and the reverse curl that will
target the upper part and then the lower part of the abdominals but to vary the timing and
what that will do is force us to recruit all the muscle fibres so we'll get that improved
tone. Okay, we're going to move on now. We're going to shift from the upper and lower abdominals
into the obliques at the side. Now, the important thing here is you may have seen this exercise
bringing your elbow across to your opposite knee, this sort of twisting motion which indeed
will get a little bit of rotation through the spine. However, what generally happens
is most of the movement comes from the arm and from the leg and so we end up not getting
much benefit for the waist. So what we're going to do with this is I'm going to change
it slightly. So when we do knee to elbow, I'm going to ask you to do the same side,
the same knee to the same elbow. So this is what I mean, hands behind. So it's four movements
again. So we're going to sit up, twist, back and down. Sit up and twist and back and down.
Beautiful. Up and twist, the same elbow to knee. Sit up and twist and what I also want
you to do is a little tilt up and tilt to the side as you do it. Sit up, tilt with that
back and down. Fabulous. Up and tilt and back. Now we're getting a little bit more rotation
and that work has got to come from the oblique muscles. It's not coming now from the arm
and the leg. We go. Sit up and tilt and back. We're looking at those oblique muscles. Keep
going. Sit up and tilt. Keep breathing. Keep the head in the hands to support the weight.
Up and tilt. Can we feel something going on in the waist? Sit up and tilt and back and
down and again. Sit up and tilt. Well, I'll be pushing our relationship too far to us
for two more. Sit up and tilt and back. One more at home please. Sit up and tilt and back
and take a rest there. If you're finding that easy, you can always do a few more repetitions
after we've done. So we've got a little bit of work for the obliques there. What I'm going
to do now is combine those exercises together. So we've just done off sitting up. We've also
just worked with a rotation movement. So what if we can put those together for the ultimate
exercise? So this is what I'm going to do. I'm going to take a dumbbell. It doesn't have
to be a dumbbell. It could be a tin of beans. It could be anything that's a little bit of
weight. I'm going to ask you to take that in your right hand please. So this is what
we're going to do. We're going to do a sit up and a reach twist. So we're going to sit
up and twist this dumbbell across. So lift your left hand for me please. So the movement
here is to sit up and reach the dumbbell across to this side. Okay, so sit up and reach and
back and keep going for me please. Sit up and reach. If you've got a dumbbell great, if
not any weight, sit up and reach and back. You'll know if it's too heavy. Sit up. Now
ideally we're looking for 12 to 15 repetitions on each side please. Sit up and twist. Beautiful.
So now we're getting that work through the upper abdominals and the lower abdominals
as we're picking up. But then also through the obliques at the side as we get that twisting
movement. Is that about 12 yet? Must be there or thereabouts. And take a quick rest there
and we'll switch over to the side. Just have a quick rest for a second. So we're putting
this arm out as a marker to see where we want to be and twisting across. When we come back
down also add the twist so that we're just going down onto this shoulder so that we're
really maximizing that rotation through the waist to combine with that sit up movement.
So should we try it on the other side? Beautiful. Dumbbell by the shoulder and up we go and
twist. Now when you go down just put your left shoulder down. Good. See how the right
shoulder stays up. Just the left shoulder goes down and away we go. Sit up. Beautiful.
And down. Sit up. So look for that twist. Look for that reach. Good. Sit up. A real combination
a compound exercise using lots of different muscle groups here. And the benefit of this
as well by extending the arm we're getting a little bit of work for the triceps for the
back of the arms. Beautiful. So you'll have fabulous arms as well as an hourglass waist.
Up we go. Not that you've not already got that of course. How are you doing at home?
And reach. Can I get a couple more please? Our target remember 12 to 15 repetitions is
what we're after. You might need to build up to that. If you find it too easy you could
take a slightly heavier weight. One more and take a little rest there. Beautiful. I'll
take the dumbbell. Thank you. Cool. That is heavy. Put your knees into your chest and just
have a little bit of a rest there. So those are your mobilizer muscles. As you can see
there in all of those exercises we're moving. Yeah. We're going to move on now to the stabilizers.
These are the muscles that really work to hold your posture in place. And the exercises
as such then are slightly different. Let's have a look at those. Let's move on to the
stabilizer muscles. So by definition these are holding your position particularly your
neutral alignment. That comfortable position for the spine particularly the lower spine.
So by definition they will be isometric muscles. They're not moving they're just holding the
position. And what I'm going to ask you to do first of all is a plank. Now before we
do this you may have seen the plank done resting onto the forearms. What I'm actually going
to ask you to do this time is to go for the full plank. I'm going to challenge you to
go into the full position. The reason for this is that what this will do is cause some
bone loading. It'll overload through the wrist which is a good thing because remember we
talked about how fitness works this theory of progressive overload. What we'll do here
is start to strengthen the bones in the wrist. Now bear in mind that the wrist is a common
fracture site as a result of falls. It's important for us to get some kind of exercise
that gives us that bone loading that will develop the bone density. So we're going to
our plank position first of all please Jen. Hands are under the shoulders. Drop the hips
just a little bit for me please so we're into that neutral spine or comfortable spine position
where we've got that gentle lordotic curve. We're not sticking the backside in the air
we're not dropping the hips down. Gravity here is trying to pull you down. So what we're
doing is pulling in tight through the abdominals particularly the transversus the muscle across
the middle but we're also pulling in at the side through the waist. Yeah. And take a little
rest there. You can rest into child's pose like so to release the pressure. OK. Fabulous.
So our challenge here or your challenge here is I'm going to take Jen through a progression
here and they'll get a little bit more difficult as we go along each of the exercises. You've
got to find the exercise you can do comfortably and what you're then trying to do is hold
the position for as long as you can. It will increase with practice. So we're going to go
into our plank position please. Let's set ourselves up first and the key here and this
is a really good tip is to lock on in the middle first of all engage those core muscles
pull in through the tummy button pull in through the waist. Excellent. We're pulling up through
the pelvic floor also. So we've created this energy in the middle. Keep it fixed and we'll
lift one foot off the floor please. So the challenge here is can we hold that position.
You'll see now gravity is really trying to pull you down. You're in a disadvantage position
but we're keeping the abdominals pulled in tight. Well done. You want to take a rest
there and drop down onto your knees. So it's important to have a little rest in between.
When you get to the point where you start to shake that's where really we need to have
that rest. OK. So should we move on to the next level but remember you just work to the
level you're comfortable with. I'm showing you these exercises so you've got some room
for progression somewhere to go. OK. Shall we move on to the next one. When I say we
obviously I mean you because I'm not doing anything at all. OK. So we're going to drop
the hips down slightly. So you've got that natural curve in your lower spine. Perhaps
you can use a mirror if you have one handy just to check your position. Could we lift
one leg off the floor please. Could we now lift it slightly out to the side. Now it's
getting a little bit tricky because we're trying to keep that pelvis fixed. We're trying
to keep this lower spine this lumbar pelvic region in our natural neutral alignment and
put it back down and take a little rest. Yeah. So again looking to just hold the position
and then over time can we gradually build that up. So that should have felt a little bit
more difficult than the one before. OK. So having done the lower body should we try something
with the upper body. We're back into the plank position please. And you may be beginning
to feel this which is good because that means we're getting to that point of overload. So
our challenge now again is can we stay fixed in the middle. So stay strong in the middle.
Can we lift one hand up towards the shoulder without rotating please. We can do this. That's
a tricky one and back down and take a little rest there. Well done. Drop onto your knees.
Well done. So the challenge here is can you fix yourself in position first. Can we really
get locked on and then can we lift a hand. It's not an easy exercise to do. It really
isn't very easy. OK. So should we take that one step further please. Now this is a tough
exercise. I warn you. So we're going into our plank position with fixing in the middle
keeping the abs in tight. So this is what we're going to do. I'll let you choose. Can we lift
one arm and the opposite leg. Stay fixed in the middle one more time. That's a really
good effort. Go on one more third time lucky. Brilliant. And rest down onto the knees. Excellent
stuff. Well done. Well done. Have a little rest there. It's a tricky exercise but it's
giving you something to aim for further down the road. And the challenge is there. Can
you keep the abdominals pulled in really really tight. The hips in your neutral position
when you lift into that difficult lift. So something to aim for that. OK. Let's change
things slightly. We're going to go on to our knees please. But sitting up nice and tall.
OK. So you're sitting up tall through the knees. Brilliant. What I'm looking for here
is a simple lateral flexion. So we're going to bend to the side. That's all I'm going
to ask you to take a bend to the side. Brilliant. So we're getting a little bit of work through
here. Now there's a possibility that you'll start to feel an arching through the lower
spine. A little rotation. This is where our core muscles are beginning to work because
I want you to keep that position fixed and then come back up to the center. Shouldn't
feel too difficult. Yeah. OK. What I'm going to ask you to do now is to take one leg out
to the side. So if I can turn you so that you're on the mat that way around. Brilliant.
So if you put your. That'll do. One leg out to the side. This is what I'm going to ask
you to do. You're going to bend to the right for me please. Let the top of your head drop
and hold that position there. Now what we're doing here is working on keeping the abdominals
pulled in really tight. Yeah. We're stopping ourselves from rotating. We can hopefully
feel something going on in the middle. And also what you'll feel particularly in this
position is that as the abdominals pull in they're pulling on what's called the thoracolumbar
fascia. It's this structure at the back that's supporting the lower spine and bring yourself
back up to the top please. Perhaps just have a good rest for a second. Now obviously we
do this on both sides. But just for the purpose of today I'm just going to go through one
side. So can we go back to that position for me please. Only this time what I'm going to
ask you to do is lift your hands up above your head. OK. So hands are up shoulders are back
down. Brilliant. OK. So this is where we go. Stay fixed in the center. Engage the core
muscles before we move and then we'll take the lean please. Lean time. Brilliant. We're
not twisting through the hips. We're keeping the abs pulled in tight. Drawing the tummy
button in. We're pulling in through the waist. Lifting up through the pelvic floor. Can we
feel something going on at the back here. What's happening is those internal obliques
and this this muscle at the front the transverses attached to this sheath at the back and it's
now splitting supporting the lower spine. That's great. That's what we want. Come back
up to the top. Have a rest for a quick second. Only a quick rest. I feel really cruel doing
this to you. We take that place. Same position. Same exercise. This is not easy. Now remember
hold it there just for one second. The problem with these exercises is they look easy. That
just means they're easy to do wrong. So lift the hands up. Abdominals are in tight and we
lean to the side and hold it. We're trying to fight the rotation. There should be no
rotation. No arching through the lower spine. Keep the abdominals pulled in really tight
back up to the top. Take a rest and I'll take that dumbbell. You'll be pleased to hear.
You're going to be lying down on your back. Well done. Well done. So the aim with all
of these exercises is can we get into the position. They're stabilizers. We're challenging
them to hold us in that position. These are postural muscles. So what we're going to do
here is lift the hands directly up to the ceiling and the feet directly up as well please.
To start with I'm going to take the knees bent so if we can have the knees bent. Fabulous.
So all I'm doing here in your lying down position is I'm going to challenge you to maintain
your neutral or comfortable spine. Once you start to feel that pulling to the arch that's
the point to stop and go back a level. So we'll start in an easy movement first of all.
Be aware of your position in space. Can we just take one hand down behind your head to
the floor please. Just just slowly lower it down. Beautiful. And then slowly bring it
back up to the top. And can we do the same on the other side. And back up to the top.
So what we're doing here is a simple exercise. It's challenging. You might begin to feel
a bit of an arching going on already. I want you to keep your abdominals in really tight.
Also try to keep the neck relaxed. That's fabulous. And take a little rest there. Top.
Okay could we make this slightly more difficult. Could we do the same thing one foot and then
the other. All I'm asking you to do is lower it down to the floor. Touch and back up. You're
making this look really easy. So the challenge is can we keep a neutral comfortable spine
by keeping pulled in. Keeping that engagement through the core muscles. And relax. We could
make that slightly more difficult. Could we take the legs straight up please. Brilliant.
Okay so we're looking for our neutral comfortable spine. There should be a little bit of an
arch. Could I ask you to lower slowly the right leg down towards the floor please. Nice
and slow. And hold it. And then back up. So now and the other leg. We're getting a little
bit more of a challenge. And back up. On those core muscles. Nice and slow. And then back
up. Beautiful. Hold it there for me please. Yeah. All the time I'm trying to pull you
into this position. You've got to work to pull it in. Could we make it slightly more
difficult. Remember I'm giving you levels you can aim for. So if you're having a go
at these and finding them difficult right now. Stick with the easier level. This gives
you something to aim for. The challenge now is can we do the opposite arm and leg. Nice
and slowly please. Slower is better. Try and keep your breathing relaxed. And slowly back
up. And across to the other side. And again we're feeling now that feeling that your back
wants to arch. But we're fighting against it. We're keeping the abdominals in tight.
We're pulling in through the waist. Really working through those core muscles. One more.
And then take a rest at the top there. Brilliant. Hold it there for me for a second please. The
idea here. What I'm trying to do is challenge you in a position that you'd never be in.
And it's like an elite sportsman will always train harder than they'll perform on the day.
What I'm doing here is making you work harder than you would normally need to in your everyday
tasks. And that'll ensure you'll be able to accommodate those tasks. Final version. Can
we take opposite arm and leg out to the diagonal please. So brilliant. You've been dying to
kick me. That was deliberate. And back up to the top. Beautiful. Slower is better. And
trust me Jen's making this look a lot easier than it is. Out to the other side. It's a
great exercise. Your challenge. Keep your abdominals in tight. Work those core muscles to maintain
that natural normal curve in your lower spine. Take a rest now. Pull your knees into your
chest and give them a hug. Well done. Well done. So there's a range of exercises that will work
your stabilizers. The idea being that we're really challenging ourselves to hold a position by
doing some other exercises. So you have a range of exercises for the mobilizers. Your six pack
muscle and for those obliques at the side. And now you have a range of exercises that'll work for
your core muscles on that spinal alignment. So remember we've got different levels so you can
work your way up and practice makes perfect. Now if you found those exercises difficult don't
worry you can build up gradually in terms of the number of repetitions and on those stabilizer
exercises in terms of holding the time. So start at a comfortable level but aim to progress. You'll
find as you get stronger you'll be able to do that. Now once these exercises will over time help to
firm the muscles and possibly create a slimmer outline through improved posture leading to you
pulling in the tummy. And a point worth mentioning here is that we've all got a great six pack
naturally. But for a lot of us it's actually hidden in a corpulent cover up. So don't be fooled by
the advertisers claims of spot reduction. The myth that exercising your abdominals will remove
body fat from your problem area. It's not true. A crucial factor in any plan to redefine your body
shape is to strip away the body fat that covers your abdominal muscles which can only be achieved by
creating a negative calorie balance. As we've learned the best way to achieve this is through a
combination of cardio exercise and sensible eating. However there's an important question here
that's very rarely discussed. What use is a six pack? As we saw earlier the six packs achieve by
targeting the rectus abdominis muscle with sit up type exercises. But think about it. How often do
you actually need this movement in your everyday tasks? I'm going to guess twice. When you get
out of bed in the morning and when you get back into bed to go to sleep at the end of the day. So
it's fair to say then that the six pack muscle is not the most important muscles to get you through
the day. It's primarily cosmetic. So I wonder why it's become the omnipresent symbol of fitness
that it is. The transversus abdominis on the other hand serves to brace your lower spine in
essential movements such as pushing, pulling, twisting, lifting, carrying, protecting it from
injury and allowing you to generate force in these activities. So in conclusion, I'm not
suggesting you avoid training the rectus abdominis entirely. But to support my argument that you
should devote more time to core stability exercises, think function rather than fashion. Let me put
it this way. Our bodies are not a lot different than our primeval ancestors who to survive as
hunter-gatherers needed very strong core muscles to throw spears and then to drag their spoils home
to feast. And I'm pretty sure they didn't spend much time in the cave doing sit-ups.
