Well, it's both speed of movement and pure strength are important criteria for just about
any sportsman. The vital ingredients and often the deciding factor that gives you that winning
edge is the marriage of the two, namely power. Now, the ability to quickly generate force from
whichever body part is a useful skill to help to get us through our daily tasks. But for the
sportsman, it's vital. It can be the difference between being the MVP or warming the bench,
being on the medal rostrum or standing in the crowd, shattering records or shattered dreams.
Now, a medicine ball is ideal for use at home. It's relatively cheap, takes up a little storage
space. It's great to develop power and lends itself to a plethora of both individual and
partner drills that will enhance performance in most sports. But you can also adapt these to
ensure your home workouts are fun and always keep you moving closer to your goals. Now,
believe it or not, the medicine ball has been around for an incredibly long time with the first
reference to restless training with sand-filled bladders appearing in Persia around 3,000 years
ago. Hippocrates had them sewn out of animal skins stuffed with sand and used to challenge
his patients to throw them back and forth for injury prevention and rehabilitation. So,
get your ball out and get ready to take your medicine. Now, first of all, here are a few guidelines
to make sure you train smart. Always, like the guys are doing now, make sure you warm up first.
Take around five minutes to raise your core body temperature with some light cardio, some mobilizing
gentle movements, moving your limbs through various planes of motion, and that'll get you in the
position ready to go. You need some space for a couple of these drills, which won't be a problem
if you're at the gym, but if you're at home, you might want to take a couple of these exercises
into the garden. Choose a weight of ball that's challenging, but doesn't slow down your movements
too much. Remember, we're trying to generate power. Our target is going to be 12 to 15 repetitions.
That's what I'm asking you to do. 12 to 15 repetitions of each exercise, and some of them
will flip over to both sides. Never sacrifice good technique for speed of movement. Remember,
workouts like this that concentrate on power are best done when you're fresh. So, this is not
something you do after a heavy cardio or a heavy resistance session. All right, let's get started.
So, our first exercise. So, guys, we're going to take the feet about a little bit wider than
hip width apart. Take a hold of the ball. We're holding it low. Let's just get a little practice,
first of all. We're going to squat down, pressing into the heels. Keep the abs in tight. The shoulders
are back. Don't let the ball pull you forwards. This is a plyometric, an explosive exercise. We're
going to press through the heels, extend the legs, lift the ball, and actually throw the ball. Now,
with it being a medicine ball, it'll go up and bounce pretty much right in front of you so we
can grab it again ready for the next exercise. This is a plyometric. We talked about it in
lecture three in our energy systems about explosive movements. So, this is what we're going to do.
Bend the knees. Are we ready for our 12 to 15 repetitions? And away we go. Throw it up.
And away we go. 12 repetitions, please. We're pressing through the legs,
and you're going to keep going, and I'm going to keep talking. So, we're looking for an explosive
movement as we come up. Yeah? See how the ball bounces in front of you so it's easy to grab it
again. Keep the abdominals tight all the time. We're not throwing with the arms. Importantly,
we're lifting an almost straight arm and lift. Abs are in tight. Make sure we get a good bend.
How low do we go? We go as low as is comfortable for you. Work to your full comfortable range of
motion. That will nearly go bouncing then. And up. You can see why I said you might want to take
some of these exercises into the garden. I'm looking for 12 repetitions. Done. Well done. I trust you.
Excellent. And we're moving on. So, the next exercise is a lunge and twist. Going to put a
little bit more work into the core muscles here, which we talk about in our lecture on the spine.
So, a great exercise, working both sides. So, important things here. Focusing on your core,
pulling your abdominals in tight, pulling in through your waist, lifting up through the pelvic
floor. We're generating that. Remember that abdominal bloom we talked about. We're starting
with the feet hit with the parts. An important balance one here. Now, the ball is actually
going to start up high. Okay? It's up in front of you, but the arms are slightly bent. We're
going to step forward with your right leg, nice and long. We're going to go down into a lunge
position and we're going to twist the ball down. Yeah? Come back, lift, step up to the top at the
same time. We're going to swap over to the other leg. Down it goes. Lunge down, knee down towards
the floor and rotate and back up. So, like the first exercise, the arms are staying just slightly
bent all the way through. We're looking for as much rotation as we can and that deep lunge and
twist. Are we set? 12 of these, please. Abdominals in tight and away we go. Right leg, lunge down
and back up. And to the other side. Beautiful. And keep going for me, guys. Excellent stuff.
So, be aware when you're stepping out into that lunge, see how the guys are keeping the feet
about hip width apart. Yeah? Otherwise, what will happen is if you step onto a tram line, you'll
find that you'll start to lose your balance. So, keep those feet hip width apart. Keeping the
abdominals in tight. Let's try to get a little bit more rotation if we can through the upper body.
Beautiful. Remember, we talked about the spine and its movements. We talked about flexing and
extension, but we also talked about this rotation and that's what we're doing here again. A little
bit of work into the obliques as well. Fabulous. You're doing really well. Hope you're still with
me at home there. Oh, didn't lose our balance there, did we? Blame it on the mat. Fabulous.
And that will happen. If you need to reset yourself, that's fine. Is there one more there?
Beautiful. Excellent stuff. Okay, well done, well done. Should have found a little bit of work
getting into the legs there as well as working through the waist. And we're going to isolate
that one a little bit more now. Really getting into the muscles that protect the lower back.
So, what I'm going to ask you to do this time, and this will be a great exercise for
any of you who play golf or tennis. Perfect exercise. So, what we're going to do here is start with the
ball high again, but this time take a look at the feet. I want you to take your right foot
and turn it onto the ball of the foot here like so. We're lifting up and we've actually turned our
hips over towards your left side now. What's going to happen is a simple chop, keeping the arms
almost straight. We come down through that semi-circle, reach down, and there's a little bit
of flexion at the hip here. So, we're reaching down to the floor and then back up. Okay. And again,
we're looking for 12 of those, please. Away we go. Nice and slow. Slow is better on these kind
of exercises. And away we go. Beautiful. Okay, so we're looking for that rotation. There's also
that little mix of flexion and extension through the lower spine as well, because we're flexing here
at the hip to reach the ball down to the floor. That's great. And really go for that big movement.
Try and get a big semi-circle. Keep your chin back. Keep your head lifted. Try not to drop your head
particularly as we come down here. See how Cameron's keeping his head lifted there. Try and keep that
neutral, comfortable position in your lower spine. See how we're getting that twist through the movement
and no surprise that this exercise clearly, as I said, is going to help you with your goal for
your tennis swing. We're looking for 12 repetitions and then we'll swap sides and do it the other
way around. Remember I said right at the top there that we will do some exercises on both sides.
Beautiful.
Are we on the other side yet?
Swap over. So, set yourself up. Excellent. That's it. And up to the top.
Fabulous. And for obvious reasons this exercise is called the job. Great. Now,
one thing you may notice switching from side to side. You may have already seen this on the last
exercise when we're on the lunge. You may have difference from one side to the other. Maybe
one side's a little more flexible. One side's a little stronger. Don't worry, that will happen.
But be aware of those weaknesses. We do need to try and iron out those muscular imbalances.
And the weight of the ball you need to select for yourself. Remember what we're saying is it
shouldn't feel too easy. We should be getting to somewhere between those 12 and 15 repetitions.
That's your target. It should be beginning to feel difficult when we get there.
Now, just something to be aware of here as well. If you do have any shoulder injuries,
any shoulder mobility problems, and Cameron's working through one at the moment, you might
want to drop the ball for this exercise because you can just as well do this with the hands. The
important thing is getting that rotation, getting that flexion as we're doing now. As you can see
here, we're still getting that movement through the lower spine. We're still getting that work
for the core muscles, particularly here, getting a bit of work into the obliques. Remember we
talked about the obliques working contralaterally. So you're working your external and internal
this way, or external and internal the other way. Fabulous. Great stuff. Okay, you'll be pleased
to know we're going to hit the floor now. You might not be pleased to know that we're doing a sprint
pass. Now, I'm going to set this up and use the guys as partners. You can do this with the ball
and throw it against the wall. So we're going to lose one ball and take just your ball there into
the sprint position for me, please. So this is actually called a sprint pass. The ball is on
the floor. You're in your sprint position. You stand up nice and tall for me, Cameron. All that's
going to happen is in one movement as we step up, we're going to throw the ball at the same time.
We're going to catch it, then you're going to take your step back and you'll get ready to sprint.
Okay, so let's have a couple of examples. Pick it up, throw the ball and up you go,
and we swap over. Down you go. Ball on the floor, knee on the floor, up you get and push the ball
all in one movement. Fabulous. Down we go. Can we keep that going for me, please, guys?
So this is a true power exercise. Yeah? Great thing about it is we're working through your whole
body. Now, the key is that you stand up and throw the ball at the same time. Yeah? So we try and get
the whole body working together. Working through the legs as if you're driving out of that sprint
position. We're also then transferring that power through into the arms. Now, to get that power to
move from your legs to your upper body really relies on a strong core. So this is putting some
emphasis on the abdominals as well. It might not look like an obvious abdominal exercise,
but be aware of keeping your abdominals in really tight on this exercise. Protect your lower spine.
Yeah? And this will work as we talked about in our lecture about the spine. We talked about
the thoracolumbar fascia. This is the key to transferring that power, transferring the load
from the upper body to lower or lower to upper as we're doing here. Using that power through the
legs to transfer into that movement through the ball. How many have we done? One more.
I don't want you both throwing the ball at the same time. That would be a tough one. Beautiful stuff.
Okay. So that's your sprint pass again. If you haven't got somebody to work with, excuse me,
you can do that by throwing the ball against the wall. What we're going to do now is take the ball
and get down onto the floor for a little leaning exercise. Really get into the obliques. So what
I'm going to ask you to do here is set yourself in a kneeling position nice and wide. And if you
take my ball because I'm going to take the easier option on this one, this is what I'm going to
ask you to do. Set yourself up nice and wide. Keep your hips square to the front. Take your left leg
out to the side like so for balance. Yeah? Now the important thing here is you're going to keep
your hips, chest and shoulders to the front. We're going to take the ball and lift the ball up to the
top and I'm showing you the easier version without the resistance. Again, if you have any shoulder
problems or particularly in the lower back pathology, we want to make this slightly easier at first.
Our aim here is to take a lean. We hold it just for three seconds and then we come back to the top.
Yeah? Smooth movement and away we go. Take it down, get a nice long lean, challenge yourself
and then back up and away we go. Can I get 12 of those please guys?
So the important things here, he says, try not to trip over anybody, is to keep your hips,
chest, shoulders square to the front. Yeah? Don't let yourself twist and there'll be a feeling
like you want to twist but you really need to work through pulling your abdominals in tight,
pulling in through the obliques. You should begin to feel something at the back as we begin to brace
ourselves on that thoracolumbar fascia. Try to let your whole body move as one and particularly
to lower down and lift up. Excellent, well done. And again now as we said, if you have any issues
with your shoulders, we can always do this and you'll still feel, just nod at me, tell me you
can still feel that exercise, Cameron. Brilliant. Excellent stuff. We're looking for 12 repetitions.
Again, I'm trusting you guys to count for me. Can we feel something going on in the middle?
Brilliant. Excellent stuff. Keeping your hips square, keeping a long spine. Yeah? So this is
that, remember we talked about those spine movements, we talked about lateral flexion.
Yeah? Is that 12? Take a quick rest as we swap over to the other side. Well done guys. Towel down.
You know, we're famous. There should be somebody to towel you down, you know? That's where we
should be on this. Are we set guys? Left leg out for me please, Cameron. Brilliant. So get yourself
a nice stable base first of all. Slower is better on these exercises in a way we go. And you see how
we're dropping the top of the head this way so that you get this nice long line down through
the spine, nice alignment, keeping the abs in tight. So the things to look out for here,
we're trying to avoid that rotation of the hips. We're trying to avoid any exaggerated lumbar curve.
Yeah? So you should really feel like this transversus muscle across the front. Well done. Take a rest.
And that's a great little tip there. What Cameron's doing is working
with the resistance for as long as he can. But then instead of sacrificing his technique to
stick with the resistance, puts the resistance down and makes sure he gets the technique right.
We said that right at the top. Don't sacrifice your technique to get a little extra speed,
power or resistance. Yeah? It's all about getting the technique right. So this transversus muscle
that wraps across the middle here, you're really pulling that in to prevent you from arching the
lower back too much. Excellent. Good work. Try and keep your breathing relaxed. Again,
I'm trusting you guys to give me 12 repetitions. Although we did say 12 to 15. So if you want to
throw in an extra three, I don't mind really. You know, it's your choice. For you at home,
get your money's worth. Excellent stuff. Well done, guys. Take a quick rest for a second.
So we're moving on now on a little bit of a press up work for the chest, for the front of
the shoulders, for the triceps. But we're going to vary things slightly. By using the ball here
for this exercise, we can get an extra challenge, certainly for the core muscles by making sure
that we keep the abdominals in tight, keeping your hips in that comfortable position. When
you're in that press up position, whether you're in the full press up position or on your knees,
the important thing is that we've not got the hips dropping down. And also that we're not
sticking the backside up in the air. We want that nice comfortable alignment in your lower spine
and a tip to find your neutral spine is to drop it and lift it until you find a position that
feels most comfortable. And that's really your neutral spine now. But what I'm going to do for
this exercise is make things a little bit more difficult by using the ball. What this does now
is put a challenge on the muscles around the shoulder girdle here. We've got to really work
to try and keep that stability through the shoulder girdle as we work on an unstable surface. So
the press up is going to be one on the ball, then roll it to the other side and down. Roll it
and down. We're looking for 12 repetitions altogether. There's the ball. Now, I'm going to
give you the choice. You can either do the full press up if you're feeling strong or you can
start on the full press up and then go down to your knees. But if you're doing it on your knees,
I don't want you in a box position or want your feet lifted. So obviously I'm going to have somebody
in the full press up position, somebody on their knees. Did anybody guess the right answer there?
Okay, let's get 12 repetitions, please. Look at this. Fabulous. Roll it across and down you go.
Excellent work. We're looking for 12. Try not to twist through the hips. Keep your abdominals
in tight. Again, guys, I know it looks like I'm doing nothing, but I do feel your pain.
You're doing really well. A little bit of work into the chest, into the front of the shoulders,
into the triceps. Great work. Excellent. Keep those abs in tight. Remember, we're fighting
this feeling for your hips to drop down. Great work.
I did mine earlier, honestly. I did. That's my excuse. So as well as feeling this in those target
muscles, there's a little bit of extra work around the shoulder girdle there. Hopefully you felt that
as we're trying to really stabilize that position there. Excellent stuff. Well done, well done.
It's a great, great exercise. We're going to flip over now and really get into
a problem area for a lot of us with all these sit-ups. So for this position, I'm going to ask
you to sit yourself down. I'm going to give you two options, actually, for this one. So we're sideways
on. The first position is just having the feet down, like so. We're going to take the ball here
and we're going to lift. That's all it is to get the shoulders off the floor. Our easier version,
which I'm going to do, is like this. Or, as the guys are going to do, can we lift the feet up to
the ceiling, please? We've got a hold of the ball. So you've got my easy version, which is, I plan
this well, haven't I? I've got no weight and I've got the feet down. Or this version that the guys
are doing. Can I get 12 repetitions, please? Up we go. Remember, the target's 12 to 15. So we're
really looking to work into the abdominals here. Slow as better. Yeah? More time under tension.
And a little tip here on any of your abdominal exercises. Try to think of your ab muscles like
a spring. Really try and squeeze them together. That's what we're trying to do on this reach.
Really squeeze those abdominal muscles as we pull up. Yeah? Fabulous. Keep your breathing relaxed.
A little tip is to exhale on the exertion. So breathe out as Renee's doing there on the way up. Is that
12? You could have done 15 there, I'm sure. Go on. There you go. And that's a good point. Yeah? You
get out of it what you put into it. So push yourself a little bit. Well done, well done.
Brilliant stuff. Excellent. Just take a quick rest for a second and I'll steal your ball.
And then our last exercise you'll be pleased to know. Working into the chest and triceps again.
Triceps can be a problem area. So make sure you've got yourself in a comfortable position on this one
and make sure you've got a bit of space. So I'm going to have the feet close to the backside.
I'm going to find that neutral comfortable spine position again. Okay? Now I'm going to ask you
to go very easy on this one first of all. So we're resting the head down. The chest press is literally
pushing the ball up. Yeah? So go small at first. Don't go too far with the height of the ball. It's
a chest press like a basketball chest pass. And what we're looking to do here is to work again
into that, that idea of plyometrics, that idea of working the muscles a little bit more explosively.
So it's a similar movement to the press up, but we're using the muscle fibers in a different
way. So let's set ourselves up guys for this one. Brilliant. Sorry, I just need a bit of space there.
Excellent. So start nice and easy. Get a couple of practice ones. Don't throw it too high. Beautiful.
So the challenge here also is to keep ourselves in that neutral spine, that comfortable spine
position. Okay? And we're looking for that little bit of an explosive movement. So drop it down to
the chest and then give it a good push and blow out at the same time. Let's make it a bit more
dynamic. Fabulous. Yeah? And just a little tip. Make sure you catch it on the way down. Yeah? But
a few practice ones first of all will allow you to get the feeling of where you need to throw it.
And then we can start to get a little bit more dynamic with this movement. Yeah?
So again, as opposed to our normal press ups, we're working as we talked about in lecture 13
in our energy systems, we're working a little bit more plyometrically here on this exercise.
Great stuff. And push.
Feel that? Oh, I only just caught that one.
And take a little rest there. And if you sit yourselves up. And there you go. You've got
yourselves there, a full top to toe workout. Now, what we're going to do is finish off with a little
stretch, which I'll advise you to do. And we'll pick the major muscle groups to do that. So
since we're in this position, shall we just start with a little hamstring stretch?
Remember for our static stretching, we're looking to take the muscles to a little bit of
length past their normal length and hold that position for about 15 seconds.
Let's just hold that and I'll keep talking. Now, a couple of things here in terms of
progression for the exercises. If you're really starting out right at the start,
and shall we swap that over? Then I would advise you to perhaps run through the exercises with no
weight at first. Don't use the ball. And then maybe to go with a very light ball to start.
Obviously, increasing the weight of the ball makes it a little bit more difficult.
Let's get a little bit of work into the lower spine. Bring one foot across to the other side.
One hand behind. And let's get that little twist around. And then also in terms of progression,
we only did one set of each exercise there. So you've got two options here. You can either do
a set of the exercise, take a quick rest and then do it again. Let's swap over to the other side.
Or do it as a circuit. You could do the whole routine and then do the whole routine again.
But my advice to you is don't do too much too soon. You should only be doing that if you're finding
that it's easy, then you've got that room for progression. So either increasing the resistance
of the ball or adding extra circuits, maybe two as we go to intermediate and maybe three as we
move through advance. But also, and come back to the center, let's get a little bit for the inner thigh.
Take the soles of the feet together. Take a hold. Sit up tall and a little press down at the side.
We'll give you that stretch on the inner thighs. But also, bear in mind that one way to progress it
is to generate more power. And that's what we're doing here, these plyometric exercises.
So with the squat and throw, we'll throw it higher. With the sprint pass, we'll be a little bit more
explosive. So the actual technique itself can improve through your progression as well.
Beautiful.
And turn it over. We're on to all fours. A little bit of work for the lower spine. Pull up to the
ceiling. Now we've done a lot of work through the middle here. And release down and put one foot
forwards. Hands on the knee to help you get up. Beautiful. We're up to the top. Let's get just
a little bit of work for the quads. They did their bit. Take a hold of the left. You're struggling
for balance. I still haven't quite figured this out why. But apparently, if you grab a hold of
your ear like that, you'll stay upright. It's probably got something to do with the vestibular
balance system. And swap it over to the other side. Stretching through the quads. Front of the thigh.
Beautiful. The pulse rate should be coming down now.
And just to finish off, she'll take a deep breath in. From the top and back down. And one more.
And believe it or not, a sticker fork in you. You're cooked. That's your medicine ball work out.
Hope you enjoyed it. Well done.
