Now, whether you're a hardcore combat fanatic or have no boxing or martial arts experience
at all, you can expect to get great results from this combat workout. Combining cardio
punching and kicking rounds to burn calories with unique sculpting moves, this routine
is guaranteed to reshape your whole body at the same time as helping to improve your
suppleness, enhance your concentration skills and give you extra confidence.
Now while some estimates of martial arts based classes have suggested calorie burning may
reach as high as between 500 and 800 calories each hour, the American Council on Exercise
Research suggests that only very large individuals working at an exceptionally high intensity
is a likely to burn that many. However, you can still realistically expect to
expend 350, 450 calories during a typical workout, which is a significant amount if
weight loss is your goal. Now in addition to raising your heart rate,
making this good for cardio gains, fatiguing the muscles making it good for endurance gains
and moving the limbs through a full range of motion making it good for flexibility gains,
a combat workout doesn't just benefit these health related fitness components.
You may remember from our very first presentation in this series, we talked about the components
of fitness, we talked about health related and also skill related components of fitness
and this is where this workout really comes to the fore. We can work on agility, we can
work on balance, we can work on coordination, our power, our reaction time, all things that
really are quite unique to this type of workout.
As always here are a few guidelines to ensure that you exercise safely because you're going
to get off the sofa and join us today. This will make sure you get the maximum benefit
from your blood, sweat and tears. Emporically speaking of course.
So first of all it's always important to have around a five minute warm up as the guys are
doing now with some gentle movements such as arm swings, knee lifts, shoulder circles
etc just to mobilize your joints. Also add a little marching on the spot just to get
your heart rate up slightly and begin to increase your core body temperature. Remember that's
all about reducing your risk of injury. If it's possible, check your technique in the
mirror, particularly your posture. You've got to be careful not to round your shoulders,
try not to be a pseudo boxer and also keeping your tummy pulled in at all times. I'll allow
you particularly when we're kicking to take a slight lean backwards but not to sink into
your hips and you can see the difference there in the alignment of my spine.
Now be careful to control momentum and I'll keep reminding you of this as we go through
the workouts. I don't want you to be locking out your arms or locking out your knees on
the kicks, it's about keeping them soft and controlling them. And then at the end you'll
probably cool down with about two minutes of light shadow boxing something like that
and then we'll go into the stretches of the major muscle groups. So why don't we get started,
let's get a little bit of music, are we ready to go?
Now I'm going to be putting the right leg forwards for your left and my left for your
right so that you're mirroring what I'm doing. So what that means now is put your right leg
forwards please. Okay, hands up, practice your mean face. Now this is what we're going
to do, take a little bounce on the spot. Now I'm going to give you the choice how hard
you want to work, you can choose. If you want to keep the intensity fairly moderate we're
just taking this little bounce on the legs to keep your hands up. If you want to increase
that intensity you'll be on your toes. Now I'll probably be shouting at you an awful
lot for the next 30 minutes to get on your toes to make sure we burn more calories but
if you need to take that little stick down that's fine. Okay, we're going to learn first
of all three blocks, we're going to learn to defend your face. Okay, get ready. The
first thing we do is move off feet. Every technique goes from the feet first we work
from the ground up. Push that right foot to me, push your right foot forwards to me,
push. Okay, now the great thing about this it's a whole body workout because for any
technique to be effective you have to use your whole body. Push your hips forwards,
so you're now moving into a lunge. We're going to add a rising block, are we ready? To defend
your face, push. How are you doing? Push it up and again. Give me a couple more, lovely.
Some tension in the arms, double time please, let's go. Up, come on time to do some work.
Push it up. Imagine someone's trying to take a swing for you, you've got to defend your
face. Up, abs are tight, little tension in the arm, give me a couple more, one more and
hold it there. Take a little walk around, change legs, get your breath back and sit
it down. Are we ready to go on the other side? Your left leg forwards, we start from the bottom
work our way up, push, push. Best form of defense is attack, so push forwards, push.
Good, now the hips come with you, it's turning into a lunge, beautiful. Rising block, up,
left with left, good, and push. How are you doing? Hope you're doing this at home and
not sitting on the sofa, come on, push, beautiful, push. Can we double time that please? Go,
up, come on do some work. Pull your abs in tight, good, little tension in the arm, make
sure those muscles are doing some work. Give me just four and three, hold it, change legs,
beautiful. Sit down, let's do some work. You can now defend your face, let's defend your
body, cross. That's the technique we're looking for, across your chest. Okay, let's start
to build it up. Feet first, push, push, beautiful, push. Now, into a little lunge, push, using
your hips. Good, we're going across your chest. Are you ready? Right hand, cross, cross, cross.
Give me one more, should we double time? Speed it up, one, two, three, come on. Push it across,
little tension in your arm, tension in the arm, make sure you keep it in line with your
chest. Don't go too high, we're defending the chest. Good, give me four more, four and
three, abs are tight. Two, one more, hold it there, change your legs, well done guys,
sit down, sit down, beautiful. Get your breath back in between. How you doing at home? Let's
push that foot forwards, push and push. Looking good, good. Hips come with it, push. All the
powers here, all the powers in the middle, good. Arm across, chest, left and left, good.
Cross your chest, one more slow, double time, let's do some work, push. Come on, defend
yourself, push and again, push. Just give me four more, there's four, there's three,
there's two, change legs, beautiful. You can defend your face, you can defend your body,
we're now going to defend low down, okay. From the feet first, right foot to me, push
your right foot to me, push. Make sure the hips are coming with it and we'll go down,
down, give me a little sink, down. Now be careful, remember I said at the top, don't
lock out the arm, keep it slightly bent, down. Can we go double time, it's not really a question.
Go, and down, and down, and down. Give me four, give me three, two, beautiful, change
legs. You've got to imagine someone's taking a kick straight at you, for four and three
and two, push that foot forwards, left. Come on, and push. How are you doing? Let's go.
Now we're working in rounds, make sure your hips are coming, you'll get a rest soon, so
stay with me, down, down, left, careful not to lock, beautiful. Give me four more of those.
How are we doing? Imagine that kick coming towards you, block it down, double time,
let's work. One, two, yes, down. Your other hand, anywhere you like, like Frank's, have
it up, or you can have it down there, just keep it close. Last one, hold it there, change.
One more thing, you now have three blocks, is there any chance we can put those three
blocks together? Take a little sit, we can do this, sit down. So, rising block, rise,
cross, down, on your toes, five, six, seven, up, cross, down. Can we go a little quicker?
You know you can. Let's go, up, cross, down, and again, up, cross, down. Two more like
that, up, cross, down, just one more, up, cross, do some work. Get on your toes, double
time, one, two, three, one, two, three. How are you doing? Three different blocks, up,
cross, down. Yes, come on, you can defend yourself. One more, change legs. That's not
fake sweat, that's not makeup, it really is getting warm in here. So, put those blocks
together, up, cross, down, one more that's low, up, cross, down, slightly quicker, up,
cross, down. Get ready, up, cross, down. Beautiful, let's go, up, cross, down. Come
on, let's go, one, two, three. Give me four more of those, come on, one, two, three, up,
cross, down, boom, boom, boom. Can I get two more please? One, two, three. Last time,
let's go, one, two. Now, hold it there, take a quick time out, go get yourself a sip of
water, quickly come back. You've got three blocks, we're going to move on to the punches
next. Hurry up. Okay, so, you've done your blocks, we're now going to move on to our
punches. Now, there are four punches. As with everything, to generate the power that's all
in the middle, we need to start from the ground up. Okay, so, feet first, push your right
foot to me, right, push it, right. Beautiful. Now, make sure you're taking your whole body
with you, bring your hips forwards, hips, beautiful. Now, all you're going to do is place it, the
right hand on the chin, place it, nice and easy, place, beautiful. Make sure the arm doesn't
lock out, we can now add a little bit of snap to it, snap it back. Can we go double time,
let's go, one, two, come on, let's go, push. Make sure you're not locking the arm out,
make sure there's some tension in your abs, give me four more, just four, just three, and
two, and change legs. Get a breather in between, remember you can always squat down or stay
on your toes. Hands up, look me, foot first, good, good. Make sure you're bringing the
rear hip forwards, push your hips, some work going on in those glutes, push. Should we
place the punch on the chin, just place it first, make sure you're accurate, straight
down the middle, good, push. Don't lock it out, can we add a little bit of snap to it,
let's go, snap it, snap it back, good, make sure it doesn't lock out, good, couple more.
Last couple, abs in tight, other hand ready, double time, let's go, push, push, shoulders
down, relax, abs in tight, is there something going on here, make sure you're pushing, give
me four, and three, and two, change legs, beautiful. So we're going to move on to the
cross or reverse punch, give me a little squat down, important thing here is to get your
body in the right position. So your rear foot, your left foot, turn it around, look how that
twists, twist. Now that allows you to twist your body, twist. Now we get some power when
that left hand comes straight down the middle to the chin, boom. How we doing? Push, good,
can we add a little bit of a snap to it now, pull, pull, pull, good, should we go double
time, boom, boom. Come on, how you doing? Twist your body, all the power is just here,
that's why we're getting this big twist, look at that twist, and also working through your
core, working through your obliques, our glass figures, come on, boom, boom, boom, give me
more, there's four, three, two, change legs, get your breather with just the right foot,
twist it, twist the right foot, twist, now the hip, turn it to me, good, now the right
hand on the chin, how you doing? Hope you're still with us, good, add the little snap,
pull it back, pull it back, twist, let's go double time, let's do some work, one, come
on, come on, twist, twist, twist, twist the body, go, boom, boom, come on, give me four,
three, two, hold it there, beautiful, change legs, we're back onto the front, this time
look for the twist on your right leg, twist, twist, on the ball of the foot, turn it in,
now the body can turn, now you see how we can get some power into what's going to be
round the corner with a hook, round, elbow high, good, we're going around the side of
the head, side of the jaw, good, round with the body, beautiful, double time, let's go,
boom, boom, push, how you doing? Come on, hope you're still with us, you can do this,
give me four, three, two, and change legs, left leg forwards, just the twist, twist, twist,
make sure onto the ball of the foot, turn the knee, now we'll add the body, rotating
through the core, twist, twist, beautiful, shoulders down, head up tall, round the corner,
boom, boom, come on, your hands are lethal weapons, double time, boom, boom, boom, come
on, twist, how you doing? Let's go, twist, elbow high, give me four more, just four,
just three, just two, fabulous, change, one more punch, I did promise you four, this is
like the second one, the left foot, twist forwards, now instead of just turning your body
to the front, this time I want you to lift it, lift, lift, keep going where you are,
so the movement is like that, lift, lift, see it? Lift, beautiful, because now we're
going to add the uppercut, up, under the chin, under the chin, up, see how the legs are working
now, you're going down and up, hand up, beautiful, up, okay, double time, come on, speed it,
come on, do it like you mean it, you need to picture someone in front of you, you really
don't like, not me, give me four more, four, three, two, well done, well done, change it,
same feet as the second one, just a twist, how you doing? Good, twist, remember the body
this time, down and up, down and up, good, work those legs, getting into your quads,
getting into your hamstrings at the back, getting into the glutes, up, fabulous, right hand,
chin, come on, up, twist your body into it, fabulous, how you doing? Come on, up, up,
super, up, okay, double time, you know it's coming, let's go, up, up, up, twist the foot,
twist the body, down and up, give me four more, four, come on, three, you can do this,
two and one, change it over, okay, you may remember with the blocks, we learned three
blocks, then we put them together, same thing with the punches, right leg forwards, take
a little squat down, get your breath back, so nice and slowly, yeah, hands up, punch,
twist, twist the front foot, twist the back foot and up, yeah, a little bit of work remember
we talked about coordination in those skill related fitness components, so nice and slow
in four and three and two, come on, let's put it together, jab, cross, hook and up on
your toes, remember all the power comes from here, if this isn't moving then neither are
you, so let's go, we push, one, twist, twist, up, hold it, are you ready, in four, three,
two, jab, cross, hook, up, on your toes, last time slow, jab, cross, hook, up, okay it's
the moment of truth, speed it up, let's go, one, two, three, four, hold it, one, two,
three, up, let's go, one, two, three, up, we go, jab, cross, hook, up, four more, you can
go, one, two, three, up, let's go, beautiful and again go, look at the legs, look at the
legs, one more, one, two, beautiful, change legs, can we skip it on a little quicker now
because you know what's coming, left leg forwards, in five, six, seven, jab, cross, hook, up,
there you are, make sure the legs are moving, make sure the body's moving, jab, cross, hook,
up, in four, this is your last time slow, let's go, boom, boom that sounded a bit mean
then, sorry, come on, you can do this, let's do this, in five, six, seven, go, one, two,
three, up and again, one, two, three, up, we start with the jab, jab, cross, hook, up,
come on, one, two, don't get flustered if you get it wrong, if you get one or two wrong
that's okay, as long as you're moving you'll be improving, just so long as it doesn't look
like that, one, two, three, up, one more please, one, two, three and hold it there, take a
breather, quick time out, get yourself a quick drink, you now have three blocks, four punches,
quickly come back and we'll add on to it, three kicks.
Welcome back guys, so now you've got three blocks, you've got four punches and we need
to finish it off, we're going to learn three kicks, front kick, a side kick, a round kick,
all three quite different, now, beauty of this is I'm going to set up each technique with
a step first, so we're going to start nice and slowly, I want to get your hips in the
position, you're going to take your left foot and step it up nice and slow, step, we're
going to lift the other leg, your right leg, we're going to put it down, we're going to
take it back, take a little bounce, so that's generally where we're going, step, lift, down
and back, are we ready, nice and slowly we'll go, step, right, back and down, we're just
working on that right leg, take a step up first, when you step make sure you point your
foot to the front, towards me, because what I need you to do is keep your hips, chest,
shoulders facing the front, because the power, like we said, is in the hips, so I want to
push them forwards, do we see that, little step and push, keep going, when you step,
push the hips in, this is where the power is in the glutes, push, good, but do you notice
the head tilts back slightly so I still get a nice long line through the spine, we'll
add the front kick to that, step, flick, back, now you're actually kicking here with the
ball of the foot, so in reality you pull the toes back, but what I'm concerned about is
just making sure it's not going up in the air, the kicks going forward, step, push it
forwards, one more, step, beautiful, can we go double time, let's do some work, step,
kick, step, kick, beautiful, now I want you to keep your hands up, remember you're a lean
mean fighting machine, we're not doing this, this is not the challenge, hands up, push,
good, push your hips forwards, abs are tight, shoulders down, good, and hold it there, turn
it around, let's build it up nice and slow off the other side, so remember first of all,
step with the right, lift the left, down and back, take a deep breath, be aware of abs
tight shoulders back, let's go, step, lift, down, back, how you doing, lift, now you may
notice fighters, boxers will normally have either one side or the other, they'll either
be orthodox or southpaw, we'll all have a stronger, more flexible, easier to coordinate side,
so you may notice as you swap from side to side, one side is not as good as the other,
that just means we need to do a bit more work on it, so here we go, step, lean back, good,
step, lean back, push your hips to me, can we add the kick, push, beautiful, one more,
step, okay I think we're ready, let's go double time, step, push, come on with that front kick,
let's go, come on do it like you mean it, this could save your life one day, come on,
up, let's go, push, good, abs in tight, shoulders down, push your hips to me, come on, up, one
more, change your legs, hold it there, so you've got your front kick, everything to the front,
we're gonna change it to the side kick, turn your feet and your body this way but keep your
head and your hands towards me, yeah, take your little squat down, good, now this time
you're gonna step up with the back leg, you're gonna lift the front leg but you're gonna
lift the knee in that direction, step, lift, are we ready, step, lift, see how the knee
is over there, step, lift, the beauty of that is it allows you when we add the kick nice
and low to push, push, see that, step, push, now your toes should be pointing in that
direction, you're pushing with the side of your foot, hips, push, should we get a couple
more, make sure your knee comes back after the kick, control it, should we go double
time, let's go, step, push, step, push, step, push, come on, how you doing, four more, step,
push, step, push, two more, one more, beautiful, change legs, feel it this way, chest is this
way, hips this way, with the hands and the head to the front, good, so let's set it up
the same way, step up first, knee, good, step, knee, fabulous, up, knee, keep your hands
up, shoulders down, beautiful, now we'll push, push, see how you're pushing somebody away,
good, push, push, good, push, double time, let's go, step, push, step, push, give me
four more, come on, side of the foot, toes are pointing that way, come on, up, one more
and hold it there, change legs, so you've now got a front kick, you've now got a side
kick, we're now going to go for a round kick, right leg forwards, give me that little bounce,
hope you're getting warm, this is what we're going to do, turn yourself sideways on a
game, same beginning, step up but now lift the leg into a hurdle position, so you can
do this, we go, step, lift, see that hurdle position, you see how the knee is slightly
higher than the ankle, don't be lifting this way, keep the hip, chest, shoulders there,
lift, lean away from me, lean away, what that's going to allow you to do is lift that leg
a little higher, now when we kick, you're going to point your toes to me, because that'll
allow you to kick with the laces on the top, let's add the flick, step, flick, see how
the toes pointed, so the contact will be with the laces, control it on the way back, good
and again, step, flick, let's do some work, double time, step, kick, good, step, kick,
good, how you doing, control the momentum, abs are tight, lean back, shoulders down,
one more, change legs, beautiful, turn yourself sideways on, beat this way, chest this way,
hips this way, but head and hands are to the front, give me a little bounce, we start by
stepping up with the right, lift the left, step, lift, see how you're lifting into that
position, hurdle but with the knee a little higher, keep going, than the ankle, see that
kind of slope, step, beautiful, what we're going to do now is take a lean back, beautiful,
keep going, step, lean, so you can lean away from the kick, lean, beautiful, let's add
the flick, step, flick, point the toes to me and again, give your hands under control,
step, double time, let's go, step, kick, step, kick, come on, beautiful, point the toes,
abs are tight, shoulders down, beautiful, really getting into the hamstrings to control
that, pull back on the kick, come on, three more, two more, one more, hold it there, beautiful,
one more thing to do, can we, like we did with the blocks and we did with the punches, can
we link those three kicks together, so just bear with me, hands up, right leg forwards,
give me the little bounce, so front kick, side kick, round, so we go step, step, front,
down, step, side, down, step, round, now you're going to need to take small steps in between
and shuffle yourself backwards, four, three, two, let's go, step, front, turn sideways,
stay sideways, round, so you've got a little step in between each kick, so we'll try that
again, in four and three and two, step kick, step, kick, down, step, side, down, step, round,
yeah, how we doing, can we go double time, four, it's not really a question, in four,
three, two, step, front, step, side, step, round, get back, get ready, in five, six,
seven, step, front, step, side, step, round, back you go, hold it, so we change legs, left
leg forwards, exactly the same thing, we'll go slow first of all, in five, six, seven,
step, front, down, step, side, down, step, round, how you doing, should we do one more
time slow, in four and three and two, to the front first, step, front, down, to the side,
push, round, beautiful, back we go, any chance would I be stretching our relationship too
far to ask you to do that double time, five, six, seven, go, step, front, step, side, step,
round, back you go, in five, six, seven, step, front, step, side, step, round, watch that
one, in five, six, seven, go, I nearly lost an ear then, and round, and hold it there,
so you now have three blocks, four punches and three kicks, get a quick sip of water
and get ready for the finale, we're going to put it all together, okay if you're still
with us well done because this is the final round, you've made it to the final round, we're
going to put everything together nice and slowly, okay, on your toes, come on, so finishing
straight, what we're going to do is add the blocks to the punches to the kicks, we'll go
slowly first, get ready in four and three and two, here we go slow, block, block, block,
punches, one, two, three, step, front kick, step, side kick, step, round kick, boom how
did you do, get ready, okay the whole thing, let's just call the first one a rehearsal
just in case, on your toes, mean face, like a butterfly, get ready, in five, six, seven,
go, block, block, block, one, two, three, four, step, front, step, side, step, round, fabulous,
change legs, left leg forwards, slow first, five, six, seven, block, block, block, get
ready, punch, punch, remember to twist your body, front kick, turn for the side kick,
flick for the round kick, fabulous, back you go, left leg still forwards, double time,
in four, in three, in two, show me what you can do, one, two, three, one, two, three,
four, step, front, step, side, step, round, and there you go, what we're going to do on
those is have a little cool down, a little bit of shadow boxing to cool us down and then
we're going into a static stretch, remember if you can't figure out which stretches to
do, you've got that flexibility workout, you can pinch some stretches from there, although
if you've still got any energy left, I wouldn't mind you doing a couple more combinations off
each side, just be careful as you get tired not to lock out your arms and legs, stick
with this workout and you'll soon be fighting fit.
