Welcome to the workout today. What we're going to do is work with our Swiss balls, fitness
balls, stability balls. They get called different things. But the point is, they're a great
tool for working whole body strength. And because we're working on an unstable surface,
we can start to put a little stress on the core muscles, helping to develop those core
muscles, which in turn is then, well, first of all, it can help you to look a little bit
slimmer and taller almost immediately, but certainly will help to improve the health
of our lower spine. Now, these balls, it's reckoned, were first used in Italy in the
early sixties. But since then, we've come a long way and awful lot of stuff we can do
with them. Now, importantly, you need to choose the right ball. You may have noticed that
balls are slightly different size. And if you take a look at the chart on your screen
now, you can see roughly the right size ball to choose for you. Now, as with any exercise
program, we need some safety tips. Firstly, particularly these balls, you need to check
regularly that they're fully inflated. Ideally, you're going to use them on a smooth surface.
We're using the mat today. And at all times, be aware on these exercises of keeping the
natural curves in your spine, particularly that normal neutral curve in the lower back.
So you'll notice that it's always important to warm up. The guys are using the balls for
the warmup. Our warmup is about getting our body temperature up. So it's a mobilizing
exercises. And you can see a few of the things the guys are doing. Now, you need about three
to five minutes to do that. Always exercise under control. Remember, slower is better.
And it's always worth getting a little bit of practice if you've not used the balls before,
just by sitting on the ball and get a feeling for your natural alignment in the way it changes.
Our target, as with most of our workouts, is 12 to 15 repetitions. That's where we're
aiming for. Beginners, you're probably looking at one set. If you're already doing a little
bit of exercise, maybe two sets. Those who are advanced will be looking for three sets
of each exercise. Okay, so the first exercise we're going to do is actually a wall squat,
an exercise you do against the wall. We don't have the wall here, so I'm going to cheat
this exercise and use my other wall for today, Cameron. Sorry about that. So this is what's
going to happen. Imagine you're against the wall here. What Renee's going to do is take
the feet about hip width apart. So I hope you're ready for me. And we're going to start
with our squatting exercise. Now, the beauty of this, the way we go, please, we're looking
for our 12 to 15 repetitions, please. The beauty of doing this against the wall using
the ball is it actually allows you to get a little deeper into the squat because you've
got that support. Without the ball there, that wouldn't be a possible position. Now,
the great thing is that by going a little deeper into here, we're working through a
greater range in the quadriceps. We're working through a greater range through the gluteals,
through that hip flexion, hip extension movement. Now, the beauty of that is, is that our strength
is angle specific. If we only work through a partial range, we'll only develop strength
through that partial range. The great thing about this is now that we're developing that
strength through a greater range of motion, which could be useful to us in sports performance
and in everyday tasks. How many of you know that? Beautiful. Now, the great thing about
this is we can also vary it and move around to do our single leg squats. So this is a
little tougher. One leg forwards. Notice that Renee's using the arm for balance as well,
keeping your abdominals tight. Remember, we said at the beginning about being aware
of our alignment. We've got a nice lift through the top of the head, long neck, long spine,
abdominals in tight. Now, what we're working against here, Renee's making this look a little
easier than perhaps you're finding this at home, making sure that we're keeping the
hips square. She's actually having to fight against a little bit of rotation in this exercise
as well. Yeah. Now, you can either when you come to change legs, turn around and face
the other way or we could do it the same way. Beautiful. Harm out for balance. Good work.
Lean into the ball. Excellent. So if you do want to do it against the wall, you can do
it that way or as we're doing here, Cameron's providing the balance also. If you're feeling
particularly flash, if you've had a few goes at this exercise before, what you could do
is both of you work together, but I'll warn you that is tricky. You do need to work in
unison. So great exercise this. A little bit of research at University of San Diego found
that the best exercise for your gluteals for your buttocks is actually the single leg squat.
So this is a fabulous exercise to do. Are we done? Brilliant. Well done. Thank you. If
you grab your ball for me, please. We're down onto the floor now. So get yourself down ready
for some single leg adduction. So you guys are down the balls at this end. We're facing
outwards. Brilliant. Now, this is an exercise that works into the inner thigh. Beautiful
exercise, but also works into your core muscles, particularly the obliques at the sides. So
you'll notice we've got two positions here. First of all, I've got Cameron resting on
his elbow. If you're comfortable that way, then that's fine. Resting on the elbow. The
important thing here is making sure that we've got a nice line through the body from the
heel through to the tailbone through to the top of the head. Or perhaps we might be resting
the head down on the hand as Renee is doing, whichever is comfortable for you. Can we start,
please, guys? We're pressing down with the top leg, pressing into the ball, lifting
the hips from that position. And we'll start to get that work into the inner thigh, also
into the obliques. Try and keep your breathing nice and relaxed. We're looking for those
12 to 15 repetitions. Remember we said all exercises we do slowly under control. So making
sure we're not dropping down with gravity. A tip also is to exhale on the exertion. We
always say that. So try to breathe out as you press onto the ball. Hopefully we're feeling
this working into the inner thigh and then we're also feeling it into the obliques, into
the waist, working into those core muscles. Looking for our 12 to 15 repetitions. Well
done. And then we're flipping over to the other side. Great stuff. So this top leg,
you're going to keep the knee just slightly bent, not locked out for me, please. You'll
see the other leg is bent underneath the support and away we go. Fabulous. And you've
got that choice, remember, between working either resting the head onto the hand or resting
on the elbow, whichever works for you, as long as we're getting that lift of the hip,
making sure we're not twisting, not rotating through the hips. Yeah? And focus a little
bit on the muscles that are doing the work, a little bit of mind and muscle. So let's
think about the inner thigh doing the work. Let's also think about this work through the
obliques. Can we feel something in the waist? Yeah? Concentrate on those muscles. We're
going to take that as a yes. Fabulous stuff. Okay, so we're changing exercises now. We're
going to shift onto the leg curl, the hamstring curl. Great exercise for the back of the thighs.
And for those of you sports guys out there, be aware that hamstring strains are a common
problem. It actually results from a muscular imbalance a lot of the time. Having very strong
quads and weaker hamstrings is not a good position to be in. So this is a great exercise. So
what we're going to do here is let yourself down on the floor, heels on the ball. I'm
going to give you two options here. You could keep the hips down a little lower and we're
looking to just curl the heels towards the backside. You also have the option to then,
as Cameron's doing, as we curl in, we're lifting the hips up as well, getting a full extension
through what we call the posterior chain. Fabulous. Working through those hamstrings
and working through the glutes as well. Beautiful. So we're looking for our 12 to 15 repetitions,
making sure it's nice and slow. It's under control. Try to be aware particularly in this
position that you've got your shoulders down on the floor that we're not getting any strain
through the back of the neck. Excellent. You might find that you need your hands just
to help you with that balance. And again, the guys are making it look perhaps a little
easier than you're finding it at home. So don't worry if you lose the ball a couple
of times. Just reset yourself as Cameron's doing there and then get ready to go for
your final few repetitions. Okay. It's a fabulous exercise to work the hamstrings at the back
of the thighs. Brilliant. And we're going to change it over now. So we've done some
work for the hamstrings. What about a little bit of press-up work on the ball? So let's
flip ourselves over, please, guys. So what we're doing here is working on challenging
not just the chest and the triceps, a little bit of shoulder work for the press-up itself.
But we're also going to add an extra challenge here in terms of the instability. Remember,
this is the whole point of the Swiss ball, of the stability ball, to work that extra
challenge. So we've got two options. We can either go full press-up or we can go on to
the knees for the press-up. The key here is dropping the chest down to the ball. I want
12 repetitions, please. Let's go. And controlling this movement. So we're working the smaller
muscles, those little stabilizers around the shoulder girdle. We're talking about your
rotator cuff muscles. There are a group of four muscles there that are helping to stabilize
the shoulder. Okay? We're talking about the supraspinatus, the infraspinatus, the terrasminus
and the subscapularis. These are the four little muscles that attach to your shoulder
blade that help to fix it in position. Yeah? And they're doing the work here in controlling
this little bit of wobble that we might feel. They'll be a little bit of wobble. Don't
worry about that. Excellent. But also hopefully at the same time, as well as working that
stability, you've felt that little bit of work for the chest, for the triceps. We're
moving on now to a little bit of hyperextension for the lower back. So what I'm going to ask
you to do now is to roll forwards on the ball. So the ball is about under your hips. Excellent
stuff. Feet are on the floor. The ball is under your hips. Excellent. So we've got two
options here. First of all, Cameron's going to put his hands on the ball to stabilize himself.
Rene's going to make it slightly more difficult and put the hands behind the head. What we're
looking to do here is simply lift yourself up backwards. Now, try and maintain a nice
long spine as we do this. Remember, your spine is designed, as we talked about in our lecture
about the spine, to flex and extend. Now, also, if you take that extend past the center line,
it's actually called hyperextension. And this is a sort of movement to put it into a sports
context. If you were to smash the tennis ball, you'd probably be in a position where you would be
in a hyperextended position, first of all, perhaps on the serve even also. So the easier
version is to support your weight there. What's happening here is what Rene's having to do is to
balance through the pelvis, because otherwise there's this little bit of wobble going on. So
she's stabilizing herself through the lumbopelvic region, as well as working these erector
spinei muscles, the muscles in the lower back, that are helping to give us that nice strong
movement through the hyperextension. Excellent stuff. Try to keep your breathing relaxed.
It can be a little bit more difficult here. You have to breathe consciously here because of the
press on the abdomen. So I'm going to move up the back now to the prone fly. So this time,
if you can grab your dumbbells for this one, so I can show you two alternatives. If you find this
easy, we can add a little bit of extra weight to this exercise. So now you're resting the ball,
probably abdomen, chest, area. Arms are at the side of the ball. And our aim here is with the
reverse fly. What we're trying to do is lift up and out to the side. Now the elbows, if you have
the elbows a little bit straighter, now they'll never be straight, they'll always be slightly
bent. This is a little bit more difficult. If you bend the elbows, that lever is smaller so it
makes it slightly easier. So what I'm looking for, away we go, please. I want 12 repetitions,
at least, if you're feeling flush, we'll go for 15. What we're looking to do here is don't change
your upper body position on the ball. We're looking to squeeze the shoulder blades together. So
we're really working into the rhomboid muscles that attach from the inside of your shoulder blades
to the first four thoracic vertebrae. And then also we're working the middle part of the trapezius
as well. Now this is a great exercise for those of you who spend much time sitting at the desk
working or if you're driving a lot. This kind of rounded shoulder position, this kyphosis position,
this is a great exercise to toning those muscles at the back and helping you to draw back back to
your natural neutral alignment. And remember, your spine works more efficiently when it's in that
natural position with those normal curves. Now I'm going back to hyperextension again, but this
time we're going to do the reverse hyperextension. So we can bring the ball back a little bit,
please, guys. So be careful how you get into the position for this one. It's a little bit more
tricky. You're walking over the front of the ball. Always do that slowly. You're resting on your
hands. So the great thing is here, we're going to get a little bit of work. Again to stabilize your
shoulders. There's a little bit of work through the triceps here. You're getting some bone loading
through the wrists. Now this is important. In terms of our risk of osteoporosis, we need to try to get
to that point where we're getting a little bit of stress through the wrists. Remember this is a
common fracture site. So I am leaving you in this position and it'll feel a little bit uncomfortable,
but trust me, that's doing us some good. So what we're doing here is a reverse hyperextension. So
we're lifting through the lower body. The legs are lifting up and back down. Now be careful with
this movement. Remember we said right at the top that we want controlled movement. So while you're
doing this, please make sure it's smooth. No jerking movement. Now we're working here through
a little bit of work through the erector spinae, through the glutes and also into the hamstrings
as well. So nice and smooth with this exercise. And again, we're working through the core to
maintain that balance. We're not wobbling around on the ball. And the whole purpose of this, again,
we're working on an instable surface, which is great for challenging those core muscles. But at the
same time, you can see we're really working into the glutes here, buns of steel. I feel I know you
guys well enough to say that now. And away we go. Fabulous. I'm looking for those 12 to 15
repetitions on every exercise, please. Well done, well done. Take a quick rest there. So what I'm
going to do now, and again, you can take a little rest in between each set just in case we're getting
a bit of stress here. But remember, that's what we're after. We're after this bone loading and
it's site specific. Remember, particularly as we get older and that risk of falls, this is a common
fracture site. And so it's important for us to get that extra bone density work if we can. Remember,
our bone mineral density begins to decrease with age. So we're going to try and do a little bit of
work on that. We're going down now into the press ups. So I'm going to give you an option on this
one. So start from this end, feet on the ball. Yeah. You weren't taking the easier option then,
were you? So we've got two options here on this. You can either have your feet on the ball, or you
can rest the ball a little higher onto your knees, or maybe even onto your hips. So the higher the
ball is on the line of the body, the easier the exercise will be because obviously that's taking
more of the weight. The important point for this is we want to keep a nice natural curve through
the lower spine. Yeah. There'll be a tendency in this position for your hips to drop down. We've
got to fight that. Yeah. Lowering the chest down, elbows out to the side for our push up, press up
position. So remember what we said. If the ball is a little higher up the body line, it's a little
bit easier. If the ball is further away, so you have perhaps just your feet on the ball, then
you're taking more of the weight. It's a little tougher. Well done guys, you're doing really
well. Be careful on this exercise not to lock your arms out at the top. That can put a little bit
of strain on the elbow. So try to keep them soft. And again, it gets back to that point we were
saying about trying to make sure that the movements control. Well done, well done. You're making this
look too easy. Good work. We're moving on now from the chest. Let's move on to our abdominals,
and we're going to do a little crunch this time. So this time you're on the ball for me, or you're
both taking the easy option. If I get you sitting on the ball facing me, please. Fabulous stuff.
Okay, so first of all, you need to stabilize yourself. So make sure you've got your feet nice
and wide. Make sure you're planted. And again, this is why, remember we said you want to be on a
smooth surface, and the mat helps us for that. So we're looking into our normal sit-up crunch type
exercise. So away we go, please. What I want you to be aware of on this is that the hips are
already slightly lifted. Don't let them drop down. And you've got options here, because you've got your
normal crunch movement. And again, with any of these crunch type exercises, really try to pick to the
abdominal muscles squeezing together like a spring. In fact, what we're trying to do here is to move
your ribs closer to your hips. That's how we work the rectus abdominis. That's what we're looking
for. What you could also do with this, as Renee is doing, is dropping a little further behind the
ball. So if you were doing this on the floor, obviously you can only go down to horizontal. This
allows us to work through a greater range for the abdominal muscles. Yeah, fabulous exercise. So
you've got the choice to be doing that. Maybe experiment with it. Can you go a little bit further
back? That would be great if you could. Fabulous. So having worked through the rectus there at the
front, all we're going to do now is same position, guys. We're just going to flip around to the side
and work on the side crunch. Yeah, so you're turning yourself sideways on now. That's it. That's
it. Now one leg over the top one leg straight out. Yeah, doesn't matter which way first because
you're going to do both. Beautiful stuff. One hand behind the head. Stabilize yourself on the
ball. So get yourself in a nice comfortable position. First of all, the aim of this exercise, again,
we're just doing a crunch, but we're on a side crunch now. Yeah, so you'll see how for this
exercise, we've got one leg out straight, but then we've also got one leg over the front. What
that will do also is prevent you from twisting your hips. We don't want to twist. Let's keep this
as remember, we talked about the spine moving in lateral flexion. We're working laterally here,
a little bit of work into the obliques, giving you an hourglass figure, he says, all your money back.
Excellent stuff. Really feeling that into the obliques, really squeezing through the way. So
remember what we said? When you've done your 12 repetitions, we'll swap over to the other side.
Remember, we said on this, we want to get our mind in muscle. So really focus on the waist,
really focus on pulling the ribs to the hips. That's what we're trying to do on this exercise.
And again, don't hold your breath. Stabilize yourself first of all. And remember, as we said,
you might be finding why you're doing this at home, that you're wobbling a little bit on the
ball. That's okay. Just reset yourself and get ready to go with the next repetition. It will
happen. If it was easy, it wouldn't be worth doing. Yeah, the whole challenge here is we're
taking some fairly common exercises you may have seen before, but we're doing them on an
unstable surface. And that's the key. We're going to end up working a lot more muscles.
Beautiful stuff. Just one more. Excellent stuff. Well done. Well done. We're getting down now for
still on our abdominals. We've only got two more exercises to go. So hang in there guys,
you can do this. We're going to be down now for the jackknife. So the balls that descend,
you're down on your backs, please. Fabulous. Okay, so a little bit of a tricky one. Doesn't
matter whether you start with the ball in the hands or the feet, but the key is each time you
come up with the hands and feet, we're going to swap the ball over. So a little bit of work for
the abdominals, but we're also working through the chest and squeezing the ball. And then you'll
find the inner thighs as well as we squeeze the ball. So away we go. We're going to sit up,
transfer the ball. I hope it's not going to go rolling away and back down and then back up.
Beautiful. Sit up, then back down, then back up. Fabulous. And we're just going to do 143 of these,
please. I'm only kidding. We're aiming for 12 to 15 repetitions. That's our target. Up we go.
Sit up. Brilliant. And up. Excellent. Slow as better with this, otherwise you're going to find
you'll spend half your time chasing around the ball that's rolling all over the place. And up.
Brilliant. Hopefully beginning to feel this a little bit in the abdominals now.
Again, I do feel guilty that I'm not doing it, but I just got to check that we're all doing
it right. Okay. Fabulous work. Well done. Really getting into those abdominals. It's a target area
for a lot of us. Yeah. Brilliant stuff. Well done. Well done. How did you do at home? So we're
going to change it over. You'll be pleased to know this is the last exercise and it's a little easier
than that one. We're going to flip it over for our rollout. So this one, rather than the rest of
your exercises you've done are all dynamic. They're all what we call isotonic. The muscle that we've
targeted has been shortening and lengthening, shortening and lengthening. We're now going to work
through an isometric exercise. And that's because the deeper postural muscles work that way. That's
what they do. They hold us in position. So for this exercise, I'm challenging you to get into a
fairly awkward position, but then to hold it. So you'll see the guys are starting on the knees
with the elbows hands on the ball. And all we're going to do for a rollout is I'm going to ask
you to roll the ball forwards. So as we roll the ball forwards, we get ourselves into a position
where you'll see the hips are now starting to drop. So the challenge now is can we keep the
abdominals in really tight and stop that from dropping. So I'm going to ask you to take it out
there and hold it please. Hold that position. When we get to the point where you feel, hang on, my
hips are dropping down or I'm beginning to shake, we can roll back and take a little bit of a rest.
And our aim here is just can we begin to build up that time. We're training the endurance in those
postural muscles. That's what they're designed to do. Remember, as we said, right at the top,
it's absolutely vital to ensure we get the technique correct. So if the hips start to drop down,
we need to come back, take a little bit of a rest and we'll try that again. Now you're only looking
at about three to five of these repetitions. This is not one that we're doing for 12 to 15 because
the challenge here is the time. Can we hold the time on this exercise? Beautiful. Can we try just
one more of those? When I say we, obviously, I mean you and you. Holding it. Fabulous. Try to keep
your breathing relaxed. You want fries with that shake? And sorry, I have to get that line in
somewhere. And beautiful. If you put the balls back on the stands for me, please, and get yourself
up, we'll have a little bit of a stretch. So we're going to cool down with a little bit of a stretch
now. So the whole idea of that workout targeting your whole body but also really getting into those
core muscles as well. Let's take the hands up, interlock your hands, chest level. Let's just
press them out. Spreading the shoulder blades apart. That prone fly really got into the upper
back. So we'll open that out. We're going to hold our static stretches for around 15 seconds.
You can always press pause and hold them a little bit longer. Lift the hands up,
keep the abdominals in tight, press high, press high, press high. Lifting up through the upper
back, through the waist. Remember those side crunches we did. Really important to get that
little stretch out. Take them down behind. Remember the press up work we did for the chest and
shoulders. Lock them behind. Squeeze the shoulder blades together to feel that stretch. Try not
to arch your back too much. So we're just going to stretch through the key target muscles here
that we've been using, the major muscle groups. Though remembering our lecture on flexibility
will show you lots of other exercises. And ease that off. The knees are slightly bent.
We take one hand up and we take a stretch across to the side. Let's reach.
And we'll take you back up to the center. You should feel like your core body temperature is
dropping a little bit now. Your breathing is coming back to normal, but hopefully you can feel
a little bit of a buzz in the muscles like we've done somewhere. And back over. Beautiful. We're
going to take the left foot, get a hold of it. Now a little bit of balance work since what we've
been doing here is working on our core strength. You're going to need it for this exercise.
Heel up to the back side. Should be feeling that stretch on the front of the thigh there.
I'm going to take that foot and put it down in front on the heel with the toe lifted.
Put your hands onto the right thigh and then take your chest forward. So we get that little
stretch in the back of the thigh. Remember that hamstring curl when you were pulling the ball
towards yourself. Important to get that little stretch of the hamstring curl.
And drop your chin onto your chest and slowly curl up your heads the last thing up. We'll swap
over to the other side. Let's take the right foot, get a hold of it. Squeeze the heel towards the
backside. Remember for your balance, keep this knee slightly bent. You might want to put this hand
out to the side or grab a hold of the ear, whichever works for you. Keeping the abs in
tight. A little bit of a core challenge here also. The heel goes down in front, the toes up,
hands on the other thigh. So just the basic stretches of our key muscle groups.
Now we've done a little bit of work for the inner thigh. Chin on the chest and slowly curl up.
So to get a bit of a stretch there we're going to take the feet out a little bit wider and point
the toes out for a little plie position. See how the knees go out. Take the hands just above the
knees and press backwards. Keeping the abs in tight. Should start to get that little stretch
on the inner thigh there as we press backwards. Good. Keep your breathing relaxed and straighten it
up. Walk them in. Give yourselves a deep breath. Give your hands a shake. Give your legs a shake.
Good work team. Well done. I hope you enjoyed your fitness balls, stability balls, Swiss ball,
whatever you call it. I hope you enjoyed your ball workout.
