Earlier in this series we looked at the topic of flexibility, why it's important to us,
what factors influence it and finally how we can work to improve it. And this workout
is to do just that, taking you through a range of stretches. So all you need for this is
a bit of space around you, some loose clothing, a thermostat set to a comfortably warm temperature.
But before we begin let's review the key knowledge we learnt from the flexibility lecture. Now
flexibility refers to the range of motion around a joint or a group of joints and not
only varies from person to person but for each individual it also differs from joint
to joint. It's primarily dependent upon the specific joint structure and is significantly
influenced by the connective tissue around each of the joints. Since joint health is
related to activity levels, age and gender then it's no surprise these are the key considerations
in determining our flexibility. In general it's fair to say that females tend to have
better flexibility than males at most joints and that can be attributed to small differences
in the joints and the associated connective tissue. The effect of age on flexibility however
is considerably greater than gender. In addition to the three fundamental determinants of activity,
age and sex there are three other less influential items that are nonetheless worth considering.
Firstly body temperature can affect your range of motion, it's known to improve along with
increasing heat. Hence the reason in all our other workouts before we exercise we have
a warm up period. Now contrary to common belief rather than shortening your muscles and making
them stiffer, weight training or exercises actually work through your full range of motion
will improve your flexibility. And during pregnancy the joints and the ligaments particularly
in the lumbopelvic area are relaxed to allow for the growth and movement of the fetus plus
the actual delivery of the baby itself. Now regular stretching has been shown to produce
lots of positive benefits. Enhanced range of motion, reduced risk of injury and the degree
of injury when it occurs, increased sports performance, also improved posture leading
to a reduced risk of back problems and a positive impact on mental health through the vehicle
of physical relaxation. So a lot of benefits there. Static stretching is the most common
method of practice requiring gentle movement towards the end position. It slowly lengthens
the muscle and then we hold at that point of mild tension for somewhere between 15 and
30 seconds. Now although you may remember we looked at two other techniques involving
partner work. This static method is the most easily accessible and that's the one we're
going to do today. So first of all let's make sure it's nice and quiet, make sure you've
got some space switch your phone to silent to lock the kids in the bedroom if you need
to. It's a bit of me time this is just for you now. We're going to start with a little
mobility work just to get the sign over your fluid into the joints and then we'll move
into our stretches. So we're going to start by taking your feet about here with the part
knees are slightly bent. First of all I'm going to do is work from the top and work
down. So we'll take a little tilt of the head from side to side. Tilt it one way and the
other at your own pace. Nice and relaxed. Keep it moving. You don't have to be in time
with me just as long as we're working through a little bit of dynamic mobility work first
of all. Just a few more of those. We'll rest that working through our rotation as well.
Let's get a little tilt from one side to the other. Doesn't matter which side you go first
just enjoy that movement. Try to be aware if there's any difference from one side to
the other. We're going to drop it down and lift it up but don't flick the head back.
Just lift the eyes up to the ceiling. Repeatedly squeezing back and cause a little impingement
on the blood vessels at the back. So we just lift from the chin up to look up to the ceiling
and in the circle we're going to half circle to one side, drop down to the other. Again
we're going to avoid that movement where we squeeze at the back. So just rolling from
side to side. Hopefully we're beginning to release that tension through your neck and
hold it there. Let's take the shoulders and just roll them forwards nice and gently. Little
roll of the shoulders. Just enjoy that freedom of movement. Let's take them backwards. This
is all just about mobilizing those joints. We're also beginning to increase our core
body temperature a little as we go along. We're going to bring the arms up to chest level
and we're going to open them out and again nothing stressful at your own pace. Keep your
abs in tight. The hips are fixed. The knees are slightly bent. Good. And let's hold it
there. Can we take the arms forwards? Nice big circles. Remember in our lecture on movement
in the muscles we talked about circumduction. Shoulders the only joint in the body that
can actually do this. And we'll go backwards. That means we're getting a full circle. Doesn't
happen around the hip. Beautiful. And now just a little tricky one for those of you
remember our mental fitness lecture. Can we do one forwards and one backwards? I'm not
even going to look at you guys to check whether you're doing it right. Swap it over. One forwards,
one backwards. You weren't ready for that. I didn't tell them we were going to do that.
And hold that there. Have a little rest. We're going to get a knee lift. I'm just going to
ask you to bring it up to about waist height. That's all. Just a little knee lift. Working
through the hip flexors. A little bit of movement through the hip. A little bit of bend through
the knee. Nice and easy just up to about waist height we'll do. As long as you're not sticking
to the yoga mat. Beautiful. Going to change that slightly to a leg curl. Heel up to your
backside. That's all we need to do. Heel up. Getting into those hamstring muscles at the
back of the thigh. Fabulous. Lift it up. And take a little rest there. We're going to
hip circle. It'll go in and it'll go out and in and out. Get that little circle through
the hip. Beautiful. One more on this side. It doesn't matter which side you're on. As
long as you now swap over to the other side to circle it. In and out. Beautiful. Try to
get a good range of motion through this ball and socket joints at the hip. And hold it there.
We're going to change for a little heel dig. Doesn't matter which leg you do first. I just
want you to put one in front and then the other. All you're doing is putting the heel
down and lifting the toe up. Getting a little bit of a stretch there through the calf into
your Achilles. Fabulous. And a couple more. And hold it there. This is what I'm going
to do. Take the knees slightly bent. All we're going to do here is take a little work through
the spine. Get through that flexion and extension that we know we've got in the spine. So first
of all I'm going to ask you to take a deep breath and be aware of lengthening the spine.
And when you exhale I want you to try and blow all the air out. Keep blowing, keep blowing,
keep blowing. And what you'll find is it'll start to draw the ribs down towards the hips.
When you deep breath in make sure you're extending through and lifting the face up and forth.
When you exhale try to blow it all out. Keep blowing, keep blowing, keep blowing. And as
you blow as you get towards the end of the breath you'll start to feel the abdominals
engaging deeper and putting you down into that flex position. Let's make more of that.
Take a deep breath in. And down. What I'm going to ask you to do is add the arm swing
to that now. Let the arms lift up when you breathe in. And when you exhale let them drop
down. Blow all the air out. Let it pull you down slightly. Feel the back rounding and
then open it up. So we're trying to be aware of the spine now. Flexing and extending. Keep
breathing. I'll turn sideways as we go down. Exhale. Let it roll forwards. Knees are slightly
bent. Lift up. Remember when we talked about the movement through the spine we talked about
that extension. And we talked about the flexion. Let it round. Let it round. Let the head come
down. And again a couple more deep breath in. Just mobilizing through the lower spine
particularly. And down. And relax yourself back to the centre. Well done, well done.
We're going to work through our static stretches now. So you remember from our electron flexibility
we talked about collagen creep. And I'll remind you about that once we get started.
We're going to arrange our stretches standing and then we're going to get down to do some
on the floor. And you know what? This is really pretty boring TV so I hope you're not watching.
You need to get up and join in on this one. So this is what we're going to do. Let's take
one ear down to the shoulder. Should we go this side first? Drop the ear to the shoulder.
Take the palm out to the opposite side and press it down to the ground. Now hopefully
when you do that we can start to feel the stretch coming through the neck and down into
the shoulder. We're looking to hold it for around 15 seconds. Is our target for maintenance
work. To develop our stretch then we'll take it a little closer to 30 seconds. Try to keep
your breathing nice and relaxed. And we'll ease that off and come up to the other side.
Center yourself. Take it across to the other side. Ear to the shoulder first. Feel the
stretch through the neck. Take the palm out and push it down to the floor. And feel that
stretch come a little deeper down through the neck and into the shoulder. Beautiful
feeling. Particularly if you work at a desk all day. Very easy to get that stress around
the neck and shoulders. So beautiful way to release this. And remember with these kind
of stretches you can do them any time, any place, anywhere. And bring that in. We're
going to work into the shoulder lift the head up. We're going to take the arm across the
chest. It doesn't matter which one you use. If you're on the same as me that's good if
not just remember to alternate. You're taking a hold just above the elbow and squeezing it
a little further across. Don't let the body twist but you'll feel this now getting into
the shoulder. Ease into your stretch position to the point where you feel the mild tension
and then hold it there. Good. Keep your breathing nice and relaxed. And just enjoy being at
peace for a moment. We'll swap that over to the other side. Bring it across. So we're
working through a whole range of stretches here just above the elbow. Squeeze it in.
The beauty of these standing ones you could be standing at the photocopier at work and
you can do these stretches. When you get a moment why not have a stretch. And open that
out. Let's work into the chest. We're going to take the hands behind. We're going to put
the palms together. We're going to lift away slightly from the backside and squeeze the
shoulder blades together. Now this is a great stretch for the pecs but also gets into the
front of the shoulder. Try not to arch your back. Try not to stick your chin out. Remember
we just had a relax through the neck. So just feel that stretch through the chest. And again
really try to get just as when we do our workouts with the flexibility work. It's just as important
to get your mind in muscle. Try to think about the chest. Try to picture the chest muscles
stretching gently. Imagine those elastic fibres just stretching out. Breathings nice
and relaxed. And we'll ease that off and do the opposite of that. Bring the hands up to
the front. You can either interlock the fingers or put one on top of the other. The arms stay
slightly bent. And now we're stretching forwards. So the aim here is to reach your hands forwards
and to really round the back. We're trying to pull those shoulder blades apart. Really
stretching through those muscles in the upper back. A great stretch. Really feel those shoulder
blades pull apart. You can drop the chin down onto your chest even. That would be a trick.
And drop them down. Beautiful. We're going to shift onto the triceps at the back of the arm. Take
one arm again. It doesn't matter which one. Drop it down behind. Now what you're looking to do here
is to put the hand on the fingers down pointing down onto the back of the spine there. What we're
going to do is put the hand on top of the elbow and simply encourage that hand to walk a little
further down the spine. That'll stretch into the triceps at the back of the arm as we press down.
Hold that stretch. Keep abdominals in tight. Now remember what we're looking for here. I talked
about collagen creep. The idea here is that once you stretch into this position after about six
or eight seconds if we hold it you'll find those connective tissues around the muscle will begin to
ease off. We'll begin to stretch a little bit. Actually begin to align themselves all in the same
direction and ease off. So I know that with each of these static stretches let's swap over to the
other side. That if you really focus on your mind and muscle after about six seconds or so it'll
begin to ease off and at that point we can then take it slightly further. So really try to identify
that on each of your stretches. Getting into the position feel the mild tension and it will
subside and then you'll be able to ease a little further into the stretch and the best way to do
that is to link that to your breath. Take a deep breath in and when it eases off breathe out as
you stretch further into the position. Beautiful. Ease that off. Let's bend the knees. Put the hands
on top of the knees. We're going to work into the lower back. The stretch here is to pull the tummy
button in tight. Try to lift your lower back up to the ceiling. Really rounding through the lower
spine there. Really getting into those. Hopefully you remember those erector spine eye muscles.
Really pulling the lower back up to the ceiling. Supporting the weight on the back by putting
the hands on the thighs and then we'll slowly curl ourselves back up. Beautiful. We're working our
way down through the body. So let's go on now to the hip flexors. So I'm going to take the left
foot back and put it on the ball of the foot. The hips chest and shoulders are staying face in
the front. We're going to bend both knees down. Now the secret here is we're going behind and
tilting the pelvis up and forwards. So tilting up and forwards will give you that stretch on the hip
flexors here. Now this is a really important stretch because if we're sitting, hold that position
for me please. If you're sitting a lot when you're working, these muscles are shortened. What that
tends to do then is start to pull the pelvis into a position. We don't really want it to be in,
which can put a strain on the lower back. So this hip flexor stretch, feeling it on the front
here, really push forwards with the hip there. It's a really good stretch, a really important
stretch. Remember you're looking to that point where it begins to ease off a bit so that you can
take it a little bit further. Beautiful. Slowly ease out of that. Let's swap over. Line the feet up,
take the right foot back, put it on the ball of the foot, sink the knees down, keeping the abs in
tight. Let's tilt the pelvis up and forwards. It's really getting into that stretch on the front
here, on the hip flexors, the iliopsoas muscles there. Also getting into the top of the quadricep
muscles there. Fabulous. Hopefully you can feel that. And we'll ease out of that and go a little
bit further down. Let's work from the hip flexors down into our quadriceps. Okay, so let's set our
balance up. The way we're going to do this is take a hold of the left foot. You're looking to squeeze
the heel close to the backside, but be careful. Don't squeeze the heel right into the backside. What
I'd like you to do here is hold it just a little bit away from the backside and then push the hip
forwards. Okay, now the reason for that is that if you really squeeze the heel into your backside,
what it does here is remember this is a synovial joint and we talked about that in our electron
joints. And what that means is there's a sack of fluid here. If you squeeze this in, it pushes it
all forward, puts a lot of pressure under the patellar tendon. So what I'm trying to do here is get
that stretch on the quads, but in not to extreme a position for the knees. So we're keeping the
heel a little bit further back. But as you push forward, you'll still feel that on the quadriceps.
Let's swap over to the other leg. Remember for your balance, you can bend the supporting knee
or for some reason I'm not quite sure why. We take a hold of the earlobe and that might help you
with your balance. But you know what? If you're struggling with your balance, you can hold on
to something or you can reset yourself if you wobble. That's okay. Remember from our balance
lecture, this is one of the things that we look to improve over time. Pushing that hip forwards,
can we feel that stretch on the front of the thigh in those quadriceps, those four muscles,
powerful muscles on the front of the thigh that we use when we're squatting, when we're lunging,
when you're walking upstairs for sure. And let's put that one down. Let's move on. Remember we
talked about our opposing muscle groups. So from the quadricep at the front of the thigh,
let's move to the hamstring at the back left foot first, heel down, bend the other leg. Now what
I want to do is put the hands on this right thigh because then what I'm going to do is try not to
round your spine but take your chest forwards. As you drop the chest, you'll start to feel that stretch
into the hamstring, into the back of the thigh. Again, this is a great one to get down there.
Feel the mild tension and hold it. Take a couple of deep breaths. Some time around now we'll get
that collagen creep and if you take a deep breath in exhale you'll find as if by magic you can go
a little bit further. So really focus on the muscles that you're stretching. Chin is on the chest,
slowly roll yourself up and swap over to the other side. Now while we're flipping side to side, try
to be aware if you've got difference from one side to the other. If you've got one side particularly
tight it might need a bit of extra stretching. Bend down, hands onto your left thigh, chest drops
forwards, keeping your abs in tight, nice natural curve in your lower spine and then we'll start to
get that stretch into the back of the thigh, into the hamstring there. Let the top of your head drop
forward as well. We don't want an uncomfortable position in your neck. Remember we've already
stretched out the neck at the top there. Put that toe down, chin on your chest and slowly curl back
up. Beautiful, we're going to move on to your inner thigh so you might straddle the mat now
because we're going a little bit wider. We're going to point the toes out, we're going to point the
knees out on that line. We're going to sit down, hands are just above the knees and push backwards.
Pushing backwards now, we'll begin to open out through the inner thigh, gives that stretch for
the adductor muscles, the hip adductors. These are the muscles that bring the legs
in towards the centerline of the body. We're not just resting the hands, we're pushing them
backwards. Make sure we can feel that stretch on the inner thigh. Keep your breathing nice and
relaxed, you're okay to forward body hinge on this a little bit. Try and keep the shoulders relaxed.
Again, I'll talk it's about 15 seconds at least. If you've got time to hold it for longer, that's
even better. Slowly come up out of that and walk them in. Fabulous. This is what we're going to do,
we're going to take your left foot over your right. Looking for a little bit of stretch into
the outer thigh, into the iliotipial band, which is a really important one for runners.
All we're going to do here is take this left hand up and I'm actually going to displace the hip here.
What I'm going to ask you to do is to lean this way and physically push your hip in this direction
as well at the same time. So you're pushing the hip across as well as leaning at the same time.
So we're really getting into this lateral complex on the hip there. Working a little bit through your
smaller glute muscles, but also particularly into the ITB down the side.
And bring that back up to the top. Let's swap over the other way, keep everything balanced.
We're taking the right foot over,
bringing the right hand up and push the hip that way.
And that's slightly fabulous. Looking to feel that down the outside here. Remember,
we're still after that. Hold it for a few seconds. See if we can feel it ease off a little bit.
Perhaps it'll go a little bit further and ease out of that position. Okay, so for our calf,
we have two muscles in the calf, the gastronomious and the cilius. We talked about them in our
muscles lecture. Let's take the left foot back. Now for this one, we need to keep the feet facing
forwards. So make sure your feet are facing me. You're going to sink onto your front leg
and keep your heel down at the back. So you're looking to keep that heel down, but can we
shift the weight forward, really get that stretch? You might need to support your weight on the
front leg. Really get that stretch into the calf muscle at the back. Now this one's particularly
important for girls if you wear high heels or even for guys if you wear high heels.
So now we're going to change that to get a little lower. Just ease off down into the cilius and
also into the achilles. We ease out of the stretch slightly, but now I'm going to ask you to bend the
knee. As you start to bend the knee, you'll feel that going a little lower down. So we're still
in the gastronomias, but we're really now getting down into the cilius underneath it and down into
the achilles. Beautiful stretch. For you runners, sports jocks, this is particularly important.
Achilles does a lot of work. And ease that off. Should we swap over to the other side? So you're
taking your right leg back this time. Make sure your feet are about hip width apart for your
balance. Shift the weight forwards, keep the heel down at the back, the leg straight. Let's
start to get that stretch through the calf. And interestingly, the calf muscle, the bigger calf
muscle, the gastronomias, actually attaches above the knee. So it assists when you're doing knee
flexion exercises, when you're bending your knee. Now ease out of that stretch slightly
and now push that knee down to the ground, but keep the heel down. And you'll really feel that get
a little lower down into your achilles. It's a great stretch.
And we'll ease that off. You'll be pleased to know we're going to hit the floor now. So there
are your standing stretches. Beauty of those. You can do them absolutely anywhere. We're going to get
down onto all fours. Do a little bit of work for our lower back. Obviously a key area for lots of us.
So we're going to get the hands directly under your shoulders, the knees directly under your hips.
And all I'm looking for there is that lower back stretch, dropping the chin down and lifting
the tummy button. Pull it in as much as you can so that we're really pulling the lower back up
towards the ceiling. Really trying to round through the spine there.
Really get this flexed position and feel that stretch through the muscles, particularly in the
lower back. Excellent stuff. And we'll ease ourselves out of that. We're going to take your left arm,
simply reach it down. Now can we get down onto this shoulder
and hold that position there. Feel that stretch across the shoulder a little bit into the upper
back. Hold that position. Trying to keep your breathing nice and relaxed. Feeling that stretch
through the shoulder. Also a little bit of rotation there stretching through the upper back as well.
Holding it for at least 15 seconds, a little longer is better. And we'll come out of that
and swap it over to the other side. Try to keep your hips over your knees as we drop under.
Try and let the shoulder go down if you want to turn your head as well
into that position. It's a beautiful stretch through the shoulder.
Great stuff. Keep your breathing nice and relaxed.
And ease yourself out of that and we're going to do completely the opposite of that now.
So again, reset yourself. Hands under the shoulders, knees under the hips.
Let's take the left hand only this time. Keep looking at the hand. Keep looking at the hand.
Lift it up and keep looking at the hand. Okay. Doesn't matter where you go to.
Yeah. As long as you go to that point where we can feel that rotation through the lower spine,
we're getting that stretch through the muscles through the lower back. We're also releasing
through the shoulders, releasing through the chest here. Doesn't have to be pointing up to the sky.
You can be reaching across there as long as you're working to your comfortable range of motion.
Good. Should we ease that down and swap it over to the other side?
Set yourself first. Try not to sit backwards when you do this one. Keep your weight forwards.
Press into your left hand so that your right hand is released. Keep your weight forwards.
Don't sit back just as far as is comfortable. Feel it open through the chest.
Try and keep your breathing nice and relaxed.
Beautiful. Rotating through that lower spine. Again, particularly if you're sitting down an
awful lot, you'll find that you can be in a natural position. It can cause a little bit of
stiffness around the lower spine. This is a great way to release it. And we're going to ease that
down. Let's take this a step further. We're going to go into our upward dog position. Those of you
who are yoga disciples, let's take the feet behind. Now for the Cobra, you'll keep your hips
down. But for the upward dog, we're actually going to lift the hips up off the floor. Lift up.
Lift the face up and forwards. So we're really working through that back bend. Really trying to
extend through the spine. But not backwards, but up and forwards. Lift your face up and forwards.
Shoulders are back and down. The hips are off. Looking for that nice lengthening through the
whole of the spine. From the top of the head, right down to your tailbone. Remember your back
is designed as we talked about when we looked at the spine. Our lecture looked at the way it moves
and we talked about flexion and extension. And also what's referred to as hyper extension,
like this where we go back slightly beyond the norm. We're going to sit that back down now
and take it back into our child's pose. Now this is a great position. Sit it back into child's
formula please, because it can affect different people in different ways. So you might be feeling
a little bit of a stretch through the lower back into the glutes. Or it's possible that you could
be feeling it if you're sitting your hips back into the quadriceps on the front of the thigh.
You might actually be feeling it if you press down through the armpits to the floor,
feeling it a little bit more in the chest towards the front of the shoulders also.
So the great thing about this pose is it offers us many benefits. But sometimes it's
worth experimenting with it. Sometimes sit with your feet together resting onto your feet. Sometimes
sit with your feet apart and sit between your feet. Sometimes experiment with the pose to see
how it works for you. We'll come out of that and come back onto all fours and we're going to change
slightly now into a swan position. All I'm going to ask you to do is bring your left foot forward,
bring the knee up and turn it slightly to the side. We're now going to sit back and again this one
has many benefits. Pushing this hip down we might feel it on the front here. We might feel it here
into the glutes. Depending on where you put this foot, if we move it a little further across
you'll feel it a little more into the glutes here. If you need to support your weight that's fine. I'm
just looking really to get this hip down and this hip down. Hold that position. Try to keep
your upper body relaxed. Remember we've had a nice stretch for the neck and shoulders already.
And well he's out of that. Swap over to the other side. Now for me I don't know why it is. It might
just be me but more than any other stretch I feel a difference from one side to the other on this
one. So see how it works for you. We're bringing this foot across. We're trying to push this hip
down to get a stretch into here and then turning this forwards getting a stretch into that hip
flexor as well. It's a great combination stretch. Signally again if your job involves you sitting,
if it's driving or office bound it's great to get this stretch. And let's ease ourselves out of that.
We're going into wide leg stretch now. So if you guys both face that way for me and I'll do it to
the front and then everybody at home can see what we're doing. Taking the legs out wide just as wide
as is comfortable. Hands are down in the centre. Lift the head up tall nice long back. Now we're
hinging from the hip. So don't round your shoulders. Just walk the hands forwards a little bit so that
we start to get that stretch through the inner thigh. Just as far as is comfortable for you and
hold that position. Try not to round the shoulders too much. Can we feel that on the inner thigh?
Hold it there and remember six, eight seconds. We'll start to get that collagen creep. We'll
take a deep breath and ease a little further into that. Beautiful. Hopefully you can feel that.
And we're going to walk the hands back out of that.
And guys you get the best part now because what you're going to do is turn your feet to the back,
head down this way and just lie down in the corpse pose for me for a second. So always a good idea
at the end to have a lie down. Have a little relax. Enjoy the moment and also take a moment there.
While you're relaxing to just be aware now of how loose you feel through the body. Hopefully
you should be feeling a little more supple now. A little free of tension but also maybe a little
bit energised as well. So just as a reminder here's some guidelines for stretching. Try to stretch
regularly daily if you can. We're holding static stretches to the point of mild tension for around
15 seconds to maintain your flexibility and 30 seconds to improve it. Always ensure you're warm
before you start either with a bit of cardio or even if you're fresh out of a hot bath. Be aware of
your posture. Important to ensure you're focusing on the target muscles and perform the stretches
that target the joints where you feel particularly stiff. Remember we went from side to side so that
you can check if you're having any weak areas. Always use deep breathing and maybe some suitable
visualisation. Imagine lengthening the elastic muscles. However if at any time you feel any sharp
or stabbing pain you really must release that stretch immediately. Now that brings us to the
end of our series and if you've been with me the whole way through I really hope you've enjoyed
the journey. But remember this particular workout the stretch workout you can use at the end of the
other workouts. We only did a little very quick cool down at the end in some cases not at all so
this stretching this flexibility workout you can actually use in combination with the others to
get a really good workout. Remember they're only 30 minutes so you've got the time to do that.
But also importantly remember in terms of those workouts you now have the knowledge we've talked
about progressive overload. We've talked about how the muscles and the bones adapt and so this is
not just a one-off deal. These workouts we talked about increasing the resistance or increasing
the time you're working reducing the the rest in between or maybe instead of doing one set of a
workout you could do the whole routine twice or the whole routine three times which we did a couple
of times for instance the plyometric workout we did that three times. So you've got the opportunity
to progress the journey doesn't stop here and remember in one of our lectures you may remember
the line we pinched from one of the sportswear giants we said that fitness is a race that has no
finish line and hopefully now that you've got that extra knowledge you know how to achieve fitness
why we're doing it in a certain way then hopefully you're going to be running that race for some time
to come
