Lecture 3 Mind's Possessed, Wichery and the Search for Explanations
I've titled this lecture Mind's Possessed and I want to offer it as sort of a moral tale.
The topic of the lecture covers the three centuries, approximately 1400 to 1700,
in which tens of thousands of persons in Europe and in the American colonies and in England
were tried for witchcraft and in fact were executed.
Surely over 80% of them being women and in fact the percentage was probably higher than that.
In many instances men who were tried for this and executed were because they had lived for a long time
with those judged to be witches and part of the witch theory occasionally included the notion
that it was infectious or catching or if you spent too much time around such people
you'd come away with some of their sins actually.
Now it's a bit of a moral tale because in this three centuries there were fairly well developed trial procedures,
rules of evidence, medicine not as a developed science by any means but certainly medical people,
trained people who otherwise were able to diagnose and provide remedies for one disorder or another.
There was a definite attempt on the part of both the church and the secular authorities
to make sure that no one was unfairly charged with this and when charged with this
had an opportunity to mount an appropriate defense and of course at the end of the day
there was the desire to liberate the bewitched from bewitchment so that one's eternal soul could know God
even if to do this one's less than eternal body had to be set afire.
So what we have here is a three century affair which will cover the period that includes Galileo
and Isaac Newton and Francis Bacon and the development of what we take to be modern science,
a period that includes almost all of what we take to be the great achievements of the Renaissance
in humanistic scholarship and art and architecture,
a period in which canon law is refined and developed,
a period in which the ancient law of Rome and Roman legal procedures
are again in the hands of the western world and are being used to great effect
in all sorts of contractual negotiations, the settlement of disputes and the like.
In other words, this is all going on at a time when it shouldn't be going on so to speak
so we have some reason to ask how could this particular psychology,
this theory about human mental life, this theory about moral responsibility
come to take the form that it did and count so many innocent persons in this massive body count
that becomes ever more macabre as we learn more about it.
Well let me begin by saying that there's no time in recorded history
that doesn't make some room for witches.
And indeed, there's no time in the recorded law of the West
that doesn't make some provision for what it is you're supposed to do with witches
just in case you find one.
Rome's Twelve Tables, which is about as foundational for Western jurisprudence
as any document can be if we can refer to stone tables as a document.
Rome's Twelve Tables makes provision for dealing with destruction achieved through witchcraft.
This is very, very old.
But of course in the ancient world, a distinction was made between a witch
who for example would provide herbs or ointments of one kind or another
or deliver up incantations that had very positive effects.
It would get rid of a wart on the nose or have your palsy diminished and whatever.
Doing good things, the so-called white witch who is referred to as a lamia
and that other kind of witch whose workings produced evil, destruction, pain, punishment,
loss of property, death of cattle, and the like.
One who actually perpetrated evil, perpetrated what in the ancient Roman law was referred to as a maleficium.
Now the distinction in the ancient world was important
because if in fact you practiced white magic, the law virtually ignored you entirely.
Took no notice of it.
You might be regarded as some sort of pest.
You certainly would be regarded as a hopeless eccentric.
But if you weren't bothering anybody, you weren't doing any harm, then that was that.
The law took no notice of you, though your family might be encouraged
to have you comport yourself in such a way that wouldn't frighten children or horses.
Now this started changing in the Christian era
and it started changing for reasons that are subtle, not easily traced briefly,
but which can be illuminated briefly.
Now let me start this part of the tale by noting the great stress that Christianity lays
to personal responsibility, moral responsibility,
the fact that by your intentions your moral standing can be known.
This great stress also accentuates what historically is referred to as the free will determinism issue.
And once you begin to consider the terms of Christian teaching, you begin to see how important this is.
If in fact terrestrial life, our earthly life, which is numbered in days,
is just a stage set on which we express and develop and satisfy
just those conditions by which we would warrant eternal salvation.
Then in fact, in order for us properly and justly to be judged in terms of how we conduct ourselves in this life,
our actions must be within our powers.
There must be sufficient moral freedom for us to be held responsible for what we do.
So that part of the story is fairly basic, fairly well in place.
It might be of some interest to note that although I think a case can be made out for the proposition
that ancient Greek philosophy recognizes the free will determinism issue and to some extent deals with it,
it is quite a remarkable fact that the classic ancient philosophical texts do not dilate on the question of free will.
Aristotle makes distinctions between actions that are sort of intended,
ecusios, and those that are unintended, ecusios.
But there isn't a sustained argument about free will and its limits and the like.
This really is put in place during the period of Christian philosophical and psychological thought.
Now, just in case it's possible for satanic influences, for the devil himself,
so to occupy an individual as to steal that person of that person's moral autonomy,
then you would never be in a position to judge wrongdoing as in fact something that is blame worthy.
There always would be the possibility that indeed the devil just made this person do it.
And you'd have this peculiar situation of the church itself not being in a position to determine whether an act is a sinful act.
For it to be a sinful act, it has to be something intended by the actor.
And it also has to be something which the actor could forbear from doing.
Not only something the actor could do, but something the actor could forbear from doing.
Now, if you put that in one position as this tale develops, we then get to a second consideration.
That's vital if we're to understand this three centuries of which prosecutions and persecutions.
And that has to do with how one understands the achievement of the witch.
One understands the successful practice of witchcraft as achieving something that ordinarily cannot be achieved by natural means,
that is bringing something about in an unnatural way.
Obviously, if what comes about is entirely predictable given the very order of nature, then there's no reason to suspect witchcraft.
But if something comes about that is outside the order of nature, it isn't natural.
And if it isn't natural, it is, in a manner of speaking, above the natural. It is supernatural.
So the witch then is displaying powers of a supernatural nature.
Now, how is it that she can do that?
Well, there can only be two sources of the supernatural.
There can be the divine source and there can be the satanic source.
One, in fact, can take on supernatural powers or be given supernatural powers by the dark angel.
Now, if you put one and two together, you start developing what has come to be called the witch theory in the late,
the very late medieval and Renaissance period.
The witch theory goes something like this.
No one actually can be robbed of their free will and, at the same time, be worthy of judgment.
And those persons, therefore, who take on supernatural powers and do so because they are supplied these powers by Satan,
must have entered into a pact with Satan agreeably.
This doesn't mean that the witch actually has conversed with Satan, but there must be something in her nature
that constituted a willing entering into some kind of pact knowingly doing so and, therefore, being responsible for it.
In the Latin, it was referred to as the pactum implicitum. It was an implicit pact.
Even if it weren't explicit, it was implicit.
It's the only way of accounting at once for the exercise of these supernatural powers and, at the same time,
granting the continuing free will and autonomy of the witch.
So the devil cannot impose his will willy-nilly.
The devil has to find a workshop in which these packs are likely to be entered into.
Now, of course, if there are trial procedures in place and if you want to do this in such a way as to pass muster
and sincerely pass muster as regards the adjudicative processes that have been passed on by Rome,
then there's going to have to be evidence adduced in support of the claim that this particular person is a witch.
How that evidence is obtained becomes important.
Torture will be allowed. Torture is allowed.
But, in fact, no admission gained during the period of torture can be used against the witch.
She must then and later in open court admit to her witchery, even though the original admission was secured through torture.
If she's pregnant, she's not to be tortured.
If she's pregnant and found guilty, she's not to be executed.
Rather, she's to give birth to the baby, and I'm sorry to say, usually within a month of that, then executed.
She's not to be racked more than twice in any given period, and that period of torture, duress and the like, is to be finite.
All these things allegedly were in place.
I could provide ample evidence for the fact that, well, as the witch persecutor at Dreiziger said to one of his victims,
who, by the way, happened to be pregnant,
I do not torture you for an hour and I do not torture you for a day or for a week or for a month.
I will torture you for your lifetime, and if you do not own up to what you've done, I'll torture you nonetheless,
and then I will run the sword through you.
So there was a great variation in the practices, even though officially and technically,
the authorities were trying to rein in some of these practices.
But there did have to be evidence.
Now, what kind of evidence was admissible?
Well, you were charged with doing something.
You caused my sheep to die or my barn burned down after you said in an angry dispute with me that you would get back at me.
Now, of course, under ordinary procedures, even at the time, certainly by the 12th century or the 13th century,
the accusatorial process being what it was, I would have the right to face you in open court,
to hear the charge that you were bringing against me, and if I could successfully defeat that charge,
I would be in a position to collect damages.
And this constituted a damping effect on reckless charges.
In dealing with the witch, however, the courts came to a rather different kind of reasoning,
namely, the accusers could not be identified.
Why?
Because given the power of the witch, the accusers would be vulnerable.
So, here you've got an accusatorial process, but you don't have the ordinary corrective for the accusatorial process,
which, after all, is the countersuit once you've identified who your accuser is and what the accuser has said.
More than that, even the accusatorial component was muted because the charge of witchcraft was such now as to invite both secular and clerical authorities.
All witchcraft was now viewed as a species of heresy, because if you've entered into a pact with the devil,
you, in fact, have declared yourself a heretic.
And this is a grave offense.
It's an offense against God.
It's an offense against cross and crown.
The question, who prosecuted more vigorously?
You might be surprised to know, I think all things considered.
One's chances in an ecclesiastical court probably were a little bit better than one's chances in a secular court,
because the princes of Europe were hellbent on establishing the orthodoxy of their Christianity
and remaining in favor with the church and showing that they were more papal than the pope and holier than the priests and the like.
I gilded the lily a little bit, but I do think that the trial records would sustain the view that, if anything,
you suffered more in the secular courts than in the ecclesiastical courts.
Well, now what we need is some evidence of a scientific nature.
We're not going to go solely by hearsay, and after all, nobody was there to see the witch causing this fire in the barn,
and a witch can cause a barn to go on fire without her even being there.
She can by witchery do this.
She might fly off with her coven in the middle of the night and drive the animals mad.
We're going to see this, this.
So certain tests were developed to establish whether or not someone indeed was a witch,
and I should rehearse just a couple of those tests for you.
There was, for example, the flotation test.
Now, the way this test was administered is the person charged with a rain for witchcraft would be put in the middle of a deep tub of water
that would otherwise be higher than her own height.
But she would be suspended in this pool by a circle of men holding her suspended by the end of very, very long sticks.
They'd have poles just reaching over to keep her body suspended.
Freudians, of course, would have a field day with this whole spectacle to say no more on the subject.
And then at a given point, the poles would be pulled back and the question is, does she float?
Does she sink?
If she floats, that's positive evidence of witchcraft.
This tied in with a certain theory about how the gravity of the soul is altered when the devil is allowed entry and the like.
So that's one test.
It's not the decisive test, but the flotation test is one of a number of tests.
Then there was the famous tear test.
Now the way the tear test was administered is someone practiced in this form of interrogation would stand before the accused
and would recite a more or less official text having to do with Jesus sacrificing himself for all humanity,
allowing himself to be crucified in forgiveness of our sins,
the blood of his tortured body pouring down onto the face of his adoring mother,
whose rivulets of tears, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
And at the end of this reading are the witch would be looked at directly, pointed at,
and she would be told, now do you cry?
And if she could not form tears after this extraordinary and lamentable account of Christ's suffering on the cross,
that also is evidence because in entering into a pact with the devil, one had a diminished capacity for remorse,
and so tears would not form.
Well, of course, sometimes tears did form.
In fact, James I, who wrote a book on demonology, this is something he backed away from a little later in his reign,
but in James I's book on demonology, he warns those who are applying the tear test not to be gulled by, quote,
the tears of the crocodile.
So James I wants the evidence gatherers to recognize that you can be taken in by one who can feign remorse
and actually form tears inauthentically.
Now then there was the third test which was designed to find, to locate the devil's mark.
Because when this pact is entered into for the devil to provide the powers necessary to achieve what witchery achieves,
there has to be some kind of physical occupation or physical influence within the body.
And where the devil has provided this, there will be a mark somewhere on the body.
It'll be a region that is insensitive.
And if you carefully use calipers, little pricking devices, and you shave the body, shave the body completely,
and strip it down so that the person charged now is completely nude and shaven,
and you systematically probe the body, it's important to recognize that the devil, cunning as he is,
is likely to leave his mark in the most remote places.
But practiced witch-pricker will be able to find that devil's mark and thus additional proof, additional evidence of witchcraft.
Persons made a decent living as witch-prickers and you can guess what some of the motives behind that form of work might have been.
Now, in the 15th century, the procedures required for doing these tests right,
for understanding what the nature of witchcraft is, for saving the immortal soul from the wages of sin arising from the implicit pact,
the official book on this was the Malleus Maleficarum, which was written by two Dominican priests
and which became the official handbook for the better part of a century.
Don't let anybody tell you otherwise, this was THE book and it was consulted by kings and bishops alike.
We find this passage in the Malleus Maleficarum.
And is it not wonderful that witches are able to undergo this trial by ordeal unscathed with the help of devils?
For we learn from naturalists that if the hands be anointed with the juice of a certain herb, they are protected from burning.
Now, the devil has an exact knowledge of the virtues of such herbs.
Therefore, although he can cause the hand of the accused to be protected from red hot iron by invisibly interposing some other substance,
yet he can procure the same effect by the use of natural objects.
Now, what the Malleus is making clear here, what the Malleus Maleficarum is making clear here,
is that you might need additional expert testimony from herbalists and from, well, we'd call them doctors now.
The question is, could this particular effect be produced naturally?
Well, of course, the devil has a complete knowledge of natural remedies and the like.
Is it your suspicion, doctor? Is it your suspicion, father, witch-pricker, expert?
Is it your position that in this particular case, the effect we see really is brought about by entirely natural means,
or brought about by supernatural means, or perhaps brought about by the devil, but using natural means to bring it about?
What we have is the dawn of expert testimony in trials in which the offense is at the level of the psychological, the spiritual,
the eccentric, the mental, and the like.
When you find something you can't quite deal with, you don't own up to the possibility that there can be no expertise here.
You find such expertise as might be around and might be promoting itself just that way.
So doctors and priests are routinely called upon in hard cases or even in ordinary cases to provide what at the time was taken to be evidence.
Well, by the 16th century, there's some skepticism being expressed toward this entire venture.
Johann Wehr, W-E-Y-E-R, wrote a text that in many respects really is something of a psychiatric treatise having to do with the power of demons
and also alerting people to the fact that what they're calling evidence really can be explained in entirely different terms.
Note this. It's the 16th century and Wehr has no doubt at all, but that there are witches.
He has no doubt at all, but that Satan does work his evil in the world.
What he wants to do is refine the procedures.
He's particularly concerned that so many women are being subjected to these trials and persecutions.
He notes, for example, regarding the flotation test.
Most of the people called up on charges of witchcraft are not only women, they are elderly women.
Their bones are very light and porous. He's a doctor and he knows this.
He says it's quite obvious that they might float for reasons that are entirely natural and skeletal.
One has to be very careful about using evidence of that kind.
It's also the case that as one ages, one's capacity for lacrimation is diminished.
It could be that tears are not formed as readily again owing to age.
Now, I don't want to say that Johann Wehr put an end to any of this.
Rather, he is an important voice expressing itself in the 16th century
and recording some degree of skepticism regarding the adequacy of these tests,
even while accepting the witch theory itself.
In 1628, one of the great, great works, a much neglected work,
one of the great works in the western canon appears, it's Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy.
This is a thousand-page treatise. It's a rich psychiatric work.
It's anthropological. It's various. It's medical and scientific.
It's wonderful as literature.
The part of this work I would draw your attention to
has to do with the whole question of mental aberrations and how they should best be understood.
It's in the chapter in which he takes up questions of witchcraft and possession and the like.
For Burton, the evidence was complete enough for an objective scholar to declare
that diseases of the mind, and here's Burton's quote,
have their chief seat and origins in the head, close quote.
And that the diseases arising from the brain proper include, for Burton, quote,
frenzy, lethargy, melancholy, madness, weak memory, sleeping sickness, insomnia, close quote.
Those especially prone to madness, Burton tells us,
especially prone to melancholia, include both sexes,
men more frequently, but women more violently.
People, just in case you think this is modernity speaking, let me give you the added words here.
People born under the moon, Saturn or Mercury,
people with little heads, hot hearts, cold stomachs, moist brains, and melancholy parents.
Now, the 17th century is yielding here in Burton, and Burton is a luminary in this regard.
He has one of the most fully prepared minds for anyone who would take on something like the anatomy of melancholy.
It really should be called a textbook in morbid psychology. That's what it is.
It's a textbook in abnormal psychology.
Here's Burton. It's the 17th century. The book comes out in 1628.
Francis Bacon is alive, Galileo is alive, Descartes is alive, all that.
We're still talking about people born under the moon or born under Saturn.
We're still talking about people who have small heads, who have moist stomachs,
who have parents of a certain stripe and the like.
So what do we see in this?
We see in the 17th century, one foot in a world of superstition, natural magic, dark forces,
another foot in that world that is just around the corner, which is a modern scientific world.
It's not a world of natural magic. It's a world of natural science,
a world in which we discover the causes of things by doing the right kind of research,
where theory is held in abeyance until confirming evidence is produced,
and where there even is a growing recognition that any theory will find support in any kind of evidence
if you're willing to make radical adjustments in your orienting assumptions.
Well, what is the moral tale that I hope to have conveyed with this story about minds possessed?
First, theories come quite easily to us when we seek to explain the aberrant or eccentric behavior of others.
Secondly, we tend to describe those who are different from ourselves,
not in the neutral terms of merely different, but in the evaluative terms of sick, diseased, sinful.
Thirdly, sometimes in our solicitude, we take out after those to cure them of diseases
that exist only in our theories and not in them.
Fourthly, as reasonable and judicious people, when we set out to do this,
we want to be sure that we're using the right kind of method, that we have the right kind of data,
that indeed if there's something actually juridical or adjudicative going on,
that we even have settled and defensible trial procedures.
I've rehearsed the which panic for you, shouldn't call it a panic, it went on for over three centuries,
to say that all these considerations were operative at the time,
that the motives by and large were probably salutary and even laudable motives,
and that the conduct was deplorable, the victims numerous and savaged,
the complacency enduring for the better part of 300 years.
The moral tale is, once you're absolutely sure what makes Smith tick,
you know everything about him you would care to know, look in the mirror and say three times,
I may be wrong, I may be very wrong, I may be hopelessly wrong,
and you'll probably be right. Thanks very much.
