Lecture 24, Comprehending the World of Experience, Cognition Summarized.
In an earlier lecture I made a rather general distinction between cognition and perception
and I think it's timely to examine more closely the differences between the two, not settling
for cognitions being rather complex and perception perhaps being somewhat simpler, but in fact
cognition involving mental operations that are quite different from what one finds in
the domain of perception.
And I might begin by saying that cognitive processes tend very often to be of an essentially
propositional nature, that is they are often framed propositionally, they are framed as
sentences of a certain kind, they are framed in such a way as to create the recognition
that one is dealing with a problem, it's not just the process of being stimulated by something
or seeing something, but it is as it were saying something about what one is seeing,
saying something of a hypothetical nature.
Some illustration of this is a standard in fact logical illustration, if A is greater
than B and B is greater than C, then necessarily A is greater than C and we recognize as I
mentioned in a previous lecture, we recognize that this relationship is true quite independently
of anything A, B and C might represent, including A, B and C representing nothing that has ever
existed or will exist in the history of the universe.
It is a purely formal relationship and it can be expressed propositionally even if nothing
in the external world answers to it.
Now I want to take this propositional nature of cognitive processes and revisit Piagetian
psychology, the Piagetian concept of conservation and when children do have it and don't have
it and what it would mean to have a concept like conservation and then more generally
what it would mean to have a concept at all.
Let's go back to Piaget's standard example, we have a beaker filled with an inky solution,
it's a tall thin beaker and we take the contents of it and we pour it into a short fat beaker
and of course it doesn't come up nearly as high on the walls of the short fat beaker
and the question is whether the short fat beaker now has the same amount that was in
the first beaker or more or less.
Now suppose you found somebody actually measuring what was going on here, I suppose you got
very very sophisticated scientific instruments, analytical devices and the like and you made
a measurement.
Well if you made that measurement I can guarantee that in fact the second beaker whatever its
shape or size will have less, of course it will have less, first some of the material
will have evaporated in transit as you start pouring it, the more sensitive the instruments
you have the more obvious it will be that you lost something here.
Secondly some of that fluid is going to remain on the inner edges of the first beaker, the
empirically correct answer to the question, does the second beaker have more or less or
the same amount is, it has less, that is the scientifically accurate empirically proper
response to the question.
Nonetheless if we did that experiment with high school students or ten year olds or university
students nobody is even going to look at the beakers.
That is if you started dumbing up a demonstration like this, bringing beakers and the like
and you said to somebody look I'm going to start pouring something from here into here
and I want you to look very carefully to tell me whether when it goes in the new beaker
there is more or less, they think it was some sort of trick that you were a magician
or performing some kind of act.
In other words if a person actually has the concept of conservation, one of the things
they surely don't have to do is look at the beakers.
The reason they don't have to look at the beakers is because to have the concept of
conservation is to know that something remains itself even when you put it in receptacles
of different shapes.
This is precisely what it means to have this formal logical recognition of a thing remaining
identical to itself, a thing otherwise having its properties independent of such transformations.
Well now I think we can ask a quite interesting question.
With respect to ink in bottles and all that, where is the quantity conserved?
Here's a general question.
We have some laws in physics, very very famous laws.
We have a famous 19th century law developed by Helmholtz, a law titled the conservation
of energy which we recognize as one of the thermodynamics laws.
I should tell you by the way that when Helmholtz developed his version of the law he did it
at the annual meeting of the Prussian Academy of Sciences.
It's a classic short paper and he tells those in attendance what the purpose of his lecture
is.
The purpose will be to assure everybody that there's no need to continue to try to make
perpetual motion machines.
The reason you haven't made a perpetual motion machine is not because you didn't have the
right amount of three in one oil or you didn't get the gearing right and so forth.
The reason you haven't been able to make a perpetual motion machine is that you can't
make a perpetual motion machine and then he develops the law of the conservation of energy.
Well that's a different subject.
But let's get back to the question, where is energy conserved?
Where is angular momentum conserved?
Where in the Piagetian framework is quantity conserved?
I hope I've made the case beyond appeal, but it certainly isn't empirically conserved.
Obviously, some amount of the fluid stays inside the first beaker, some amount evaporates
in transit, some might even drip down the side of the bottle.
Where then is it conserved?
I submit to you that energy and angular momentum and quantity are conserved in what are finally
our theories about reality.
They are conserved in a certain hypothetical or cognitive or theoretical framework that
we put together as an idealized account of what really exists, what really is the case,
what would be the case if everything worked out, all sources of noise, all outliers somehow
could be got rid of.
If we got that clear picture of pristine reality before it's corrupted by all sorts of measurement
errors and the like, then what?
Then angular momentum would be conserved.
What's the stock general physics demonstration?
The stock general physics demonstration since the time of Newton and Galileo and company
in the 17th century is rolling balls down inclined planes.
And you can come up with very, very good measurements of changes in velocity and acceleration depending
upon the angular orientation of the plane and all that.
Are Galileo's or Newton's laws confirmed in these experiments?
Never once.
Go to any physics laboratory in the world, do the most basic experiments in classical
physics and you will never get data that precisely echo the requirements of the laws of physics.
They're always going to be off by something.
Now if you run up to the physics professor and say, look, I've been rolling this blankety-blank
thing down an inclined plane all afternoon, I've been taking measurements as accurately
as I can.
I've got this electric clock, I've got this atomic clock, I've got this time x for goodness
sake.
It scarcely gets better than that.
And it never comes out the way it's supposed to come out.
Well the physics professor will probably say with great, even if mock, patience.
Look Jane, look George, this is a frictional medium.
The ball really isn't perfectly spherical.
Some heat is being generated as it rolls down, you're losing some energy that way.
The plane fact is, if you had an idealized context, a frictionless medium, no losses
due to heat, no irregularities in the surfaces of the plane or of the ball and the like,
then of course you would confirm the law every time out of the box.
And the student, and unless the student is quite an adventuresome and intellectual type,
is likely to sort of shrug his shoulders, accept what you've just said, go back, put
up with the fact that the world is a less than perfect place and get on with the serious
business of life, which at Georgetown usually begins at the tombs at about 7.30 in the evening.
Every now and then a student will say, am I to understand then that when Galileo, Newton
and company came up with these laws, they had the great advantage of doing experiments
in a frictionless medium with perfect spheres and surfaces having no irregularity?
Is it just that our equipment isn't as good as theirs or did they lie?
Well, the answer to both of those questions is no, they didn't lie and no, their equipment
wasn't better.
The answer to the question is this, the data were sufficiently reliable so that the data
could be absorbed into a general conceptual framework of how the physical world works.
That general conceptual framework is what we call the laws of classical physics, which
is to say what the great scientists achieved was a concept as it were, a cognitive realization
of what physical reality is all about, how it is regulated, what principles guide the
operations of material entities in the real world.
Now, it is, I say, an idealization, it is a conceptualization of reality.
Note what it isn't.
It is not a vertical, perfectly accurate measurement based perception of reality.
The perfectly accurate perceptions are the ones that tell you that the second beaker
doesn't have as much fluid as the first because I can still see some on the inside of the
first and I know some evaporated as I poured one into the other.
That's what a perfectly accurate perception gives you and it is precisely that, that the
serviceable conception defeats, replaces, serves as a substitute for, is an idealization of.
Well, well, if it isn't a perception but some sort of conception, what form does it take?
It surely doesn't take the form of something experienced, that's what perceptions are all
about.
I submit that the form it takes in one way or another is a propositional form.
Now, this is manifestly the case when it comes to the laws of classical physics.
They are advanced as propositions.
If you take a body of such and such a nature and do this, then that will happen and in
fact the propositions become extremely formal and mathematical in their expression.
Now, I'm not suggesting for a moment that the child who's reached an age at which the
conservation problems are trivially simple is advancing scientific and mathematical propositions.
What I am saying is that at least some version, however primitive, of the if A is greater
than B and B is greater than C, then necessarily A is greater than C, type, utterance is being
framed.
This is the only way reality can be represented such as to cancel out the errors of perception,
the measurement errors, the inevitable inaccuracies and departures from expectation caused by
the fact that the actual physical material world is filled with noise, irregularities,
things that go bump in the night.
Well, this raises a point that I have found over a course of years others regard as quite
controversial and I'm not quite sure where I would want to come down on this myself.
It's an idea I offered many years ago in a once widely read and I think now utterly
unread book called Systems of Modern Psychology, the subtitle of which was a critical sketch.
That was a bit of a come on actually.
It's a bit more than a critical sketch.
It's more sort of a two fist attack on what we take to be the certainties within the discipline.
But when I got to the question of cognitive development and the nature of concepts themselves,
it did seem to me that the psychology literature was very, very wooly on the question of what
differentiates percepts and concepts.
So I started developing this notion that the defining mark of a concept is that it is an
essentially propositional affair and that's precisely the sense in which it is not a percept.
Now for this, I had to rely on some very, very advanced thinking that had been served
up by that modern figure, oh yes, I think the name is St. Augustine.
Well, in one of St. Augustine's works, he notes, and I guess I should say something
about the context in which he was doing this.
He was not trying to develop cognitive psychology, mind you.
Saints generally don't spend their time trying to develop cognitive psychology, they're trying
to develop other things.
But of course, Augustine had to deal with all sorts of heretics, do you see, and one
very popular form of heresy denied certain attributes of God on the grounds that no such
thing could be perceived, that there wasn't any sensory evidence at all that was supporting
these claims made about the divinity.
Well, Augustine sets out to show that you can know any number of things, that you can
have the clearest concept of things which nonetheless cannot be perceived.
Augustine uses an example which I should tell you shows up centuries later, exactly
the same example as used by Rene Descartes.
He uses this example, he says, every person of normal sight can perceive a foresighted
figure, everyone can perceive a rectangle.
If your sight is normal, you can perceive a rectangle.
And of course, you can conceive of a foresighted figure, you can have the concept of a figure
with four lines joined by 90 degree angles.
Now, no one, no matter how acute their senses, can perceive a thousand sighted figure.
What from the Greek for a thousand is called a chiliagon, C-H-I-L-I-A-G-O-N.
No one can perceive a chiliagon.
But everyone in the audience can conceive of a thousand sighted figure, therefore you
can have an absolutely clear conception of that of which you cannot form any percept
at all.
Now, to have the conception of a thousand sighted figure is to have a form of knowledge
that without going into too fine a grain analysis, I would say is a form of propositional knowledge.
That is to say, you are framing a kind of argument according to which in principle something
can have one thousand distinguishable sides, whether you can see that or not.
We all have conceptions of black holes and big bangs at events we are never going to
experience, no one will ever experience.
We all have conceptions of the dark side of the moon, which before the Apollo program
could only be a figment of the imagination.
We have certain abstract conceptions at law that do not match up with anything publicly
observable.
For example, if I ask you to show me some mercy, you don't start reaching into your
pocket to come up with something, showing me mercy is to respond in a certain principled
way to something I've done, a response that is not as harsh as it might be, and that diminution
in harshness is predicated on the assumption that I am owed some dispensation or consideration.
It was late at night, I didn't know what I was doing, little too much Guinness, etc.,
etc.
These abstract conceptions of justice, mercy, having punishments fit the crime, we say that
at law a punishment should fit the crime.
What's the standard of fitness?
When we say, Your Honor, is this punishment properly fitting the crime?
The judge doesn't reach for a ruler or a butcher's scale or a time clock and the like.
So what is the measure of fitness?
It's a conceptual measure.
We're trying to tie up certain things.
We don't say, ah, the defendant, the guilty defendant was a rapist and the defendant now
will be raped.
The defendant plucked an eye out, we will now pluck out the defendant's eye.
Even if you used an eye for an eye, a quite mechanical standard, well, suppose the eye
he plucked out was Leonardo's eye, and suppose his own eye is totally colorblind, well, this
wouldn't be something that fit the crime.
We don't even try to match things up that way, it's not a rape for a rape or an eye
for an eye.
There are certain scriptural arguments for this, but I don't know any developed system
of justice that operates that way.
Again, what we're dealing with here is not something found in the realm of the perceptible,
but something argued in the realm of the propositional.
Now if you're prepared to stay with me that far, then a quite surprising consequence follows,
and this is a consequence I'm not quite sure I'm prepared to accept or live with.
But the consequence that would follow is that concepts then would only be available to entities
capable of framing propositions.
And that would mean then that a rich conceptual life is inextricably bound up with at least
one or another form of linguistic life.
Now again, I don't want to, these are introductory lectures, and I don't want to drag a decent
and intelligent audience kicking and screaming into the arcana of logic and cognitive science,
but let me say this much.
To argue that angular momentum or energy is conserved, only in the propositions that
we develop which we are prepared to call theoretical physics, that is the place this
conservation takes place, is that conceptual space in which we develop arguments that just
are the theories of physics.
Note what I am saying.
What I am saying is not that we have some laws that happen to describe verbally something
called the conservation of energy.
What I'm saying is that the conservation of energy just is those propositions.
That is, it is just that discursive realm called the language, the explanatory and descriptive
language of theoretical physics.
That is the realm in which all of this is true.
What I'm saying specifically is that when you leave that realm and go into the domain
of perceptible objects, all bets are off.
There might be some correspondence, we're happy to conclude that very often there's
quite a close correspondence, but there's never a perfect mapping of the theoretical
or the conceptual, I should say, onto the perceptible.
This because, on the view that I would be defending, cognitive life, conceptual life,
is not a refinement of what we get by way of perception, it's a substitute for it.
The advantage of being able to have concepts is that at least in that domain you no longer
have to rely on percepts, you don't look anymore.
Nobody attending to these lectures given the Piagetian conservation problem will be found
looking at the beakers.
In fact, we might go so far as to say, if you look, and if you have to look, you don't
have the concept.
Part of what it means to have the concept is you get it right, closing your eyes.
So that's one aspect of cognition that I would offer as quite distinguishable from perception.
Another feature and a related one is that cognitions are inevitably relational.
They are not stimulus or object specific.
They inevitably pertain to relationships between and among objects.
And we find this richly represented throughout the animal economy.
Let me give you one of the stock textbook examples of what I have in mind.
This is an example from the research going back to the 1930s and 40s done by Carl Lashley,
who's a very important figure in the history of modern history of physiological psychology.
Lashley developed a little technique which we call the Lashley jumping stand.
And what it is is this, the animal is placed on a little jumping stand and in front of
the animal will be a pair of cards, usually white cards on which you can inscribe various
geometric forms and the like.
If the animal jumps at the correct card, the card falls down, there's a little food behind
it.
If the animal jumps at the incorrect card, the animal falls down into a net, a foot and
a half below.
Nobody likes to do that.
Rats don't like to fall that way.
Cats, people, babies and so forth.
So, in short order, the animal will learn to jump at the card that's got the food behind
it.
You alternate the cards left and right.
So, what is learned is not always, the heuristic will not work if it's always jumped left.
Now let me give you a standard Lashley experiment.
In one of the cards, we put a circle that has a diameter of one inch.
And on the other card, we put a circle that has a diameter of two inches.
If you jump at the circle that has a diameter of two inches, you get food.
And if you jump at a circle that has a diameter of one inch, you fall into a net.
Generally by the second or third trial, the animal always is jumping at the circle that
has a diameter of two inches.
And just to rub it in, Lashley will run these trials hundreds of times.
So, you now have a rat that has received hundreds of reinforcers for jumping at a two inch
circle.
Never makes a mistake again.
Always jumps at two inches.
Doesn't make any difference where you put the card.
It's always at two inches.
Now we insert two new cards.
One has a circle with a diameter of two inches.
And one has a circle with a diameter of four inches.
The animal in its entire lifetime has never been presented with a circle that has a four
inch diameter.
And the animal has received rewards hundreds of times for jumping at the circle that has
a diameter of two inches.
The question before the house is, on the very first trial, where does the animal jump?
And as you know from the very fact that the world has plenty of rats in it, that rats
are not stupid, are the rat, of course, immediately jumps at the four inch circle.
The reason, if I may be so bold, the reason why the rat jumps at the four inch circle,
something that might be very surprising to psychologists, is that what the rat learned
during that training is that the stimulus you're supposed to go for is, are you ready
for this revolutionary proposal?
You're supposed to go for the larger of two stimuli, do you see?
Now the reason one might have concluded in advance that the rat's going to be able to
do this traces back to something I said in an earlier lecture.
The physical world is never duplicated in our experience.
As I lean forward and lean back, as the rat moves on that platform, the purely physical
properties of a given stimulus are changing all the time.
If the rat starts to tilt his head, a circle now projects something oval on the surface
of the retina.
If the rat leans back, the retinal projection is now smaller.
If the rat leans forward, the retinal projection is larger.
So obviously any creature that's going to deal effectively with an ever-changing environment
is going to have to have the capacity to extract from that environment certain relational cues.
Lashley referred to this kind of learning as transpositional, and he borrowed the term
from music.
The fact is you can recognize a melody, whatever key it's played in.
As we go from key to key to key, the actual physical properties of the sound change.
The frequencies change.
What preserves the melody is the relationship among the notes, not the pure physical features,
the intensity and frequency of each note, but the relational ensemble that's formed
by something that is a recognizable melody.
Now this is an instance of what I take to be, and I think others would be inclined to
take to be, a fixed feature of cognitive as opposed to perceptual events.
The cognitive side of mental life is inevitably a relational side.
What is looked for, what's found, as the Gestaltists taught, often what is put there,
if there's any opportunity to put it there at all, is something that establishes a relationship.
Something that in Piagetian terms allows for ever-greater degrees of assimilation, forming
ever-larger knowledge structures.
Where the pieces don't fit, they don't fit, you look for some other strategy.
But where the pieces will allow this kind of conceptual richness, this kind of conceptual
growth of knowledge structures, there is a tendency to do that.
And this raises another feature of cognition that I think often distinguishes it from perception.
And that is the very active nature of cognitive processes.
This tendency to look and find in contrast rather to just seeing or receiving.
Now I've already declared and illustrated the senses in which perception itself is an
active process.
But on the conceptual or cognitive end, it's not just the activity as activity.
It's the activity for the purpose of discovery rather than the activity for the purpose of
establishing clarity.
An activity seeking the new, the original, and the creative.
The cognitive side of mental life is a creative side of mental life.
Now there are obstacles to our success in domains like this.
I mentioned one of the obstacles in a previous lecture.
One of the obstacles is functional fixedness.
We do have this tendency to stay with what has worked.
We are sticks in the mud in this regard and we can be forgiven for it.
After all, life is short, the shock of the new is not always a very, very pleasant thing.
And indeed sometimes what worked for grandpa really is the thing you're supposed to use
now.
Now that's all right.
But of course if the papers are blowing all over the place, as you do your annual income
tax, and the only thing within reach is a hammer, then indeed the hammer is a paperweight.
One has to be prepared to accept the possibility that this thing that looks like and works
like a hammer right now is going to be a paperwork.
There used to be a quite distinguished professor of English at Amherst College when I was there
many years ago.
I think I can use his name publicly, Professor Baird.
And Professor Baird and his Shakespeare course used to insist that the class meet on the
first floor of the building.
He had a reason for this.
The freshman would be assembled and they'd all heard all sorts of things about Professor
Baird.
And next thing you know, Baird would come in through the window.
And Amherst College was an all-male college then and I'm told that he'd go over and choose
some freshman at random in the front row and he'd point to where he had just come from
and he'd say, young man, boy, what is that?
And the boy would look over and he'd say, it's a window, Professor Baird.
And Baird would say, no, it's not a window, didn't you just see me come in through that?
It's a door.
Well, the point that Baird wanted to make is that you understand what something is by
seeing how it is used.
You don't understand what something is simply by looking up a dictionary definition of it.
Baird was trying to break down.
I don't think he'd use this language.
In fact, I might mention to you that Baird was actually married to Titian's daughter.
And I don't think that made him especially fond of psychology or psychologists.
So I doubt he would have used this language.
But what he was breaking down in the students was that kind of functional fixedness which
would make it very difficult for them to enter into the life, the mind, the time, the culture
of Shakespeare.
And you do that by illustrating in as dramatic a way as you can that things are not always
what they seem.
Life is real.
Life is earnest.
And the grave is not its goal.
Dust there are to dust.
You've got to liberate the imagination from habitual modes of understanding.
Functional fixedness is useful.
But it's an habitual mode of understanding that actually can stand in the way of cognitive
achievements by imposing an inflexibility on our problem-solving powers.
We also have a tendency towards something called the confirmation bias.
Once we accept a hypothesis or advance a hypothesis, almost inevitably we look for means of confirming
it.
We tend to eschew anything that might disconfirm it.
My mind is made up.
Don't confuse me with the facts, that sort of thing.
These are tendencies very well illustrated in experiments where even the most highly
educated original thinkers and the like will hold on to that favored cherished hypothesis.
The consequences are outrageous, leading to lifelong prejudices and acts of injustice.
But when we free ourselves of these constraints, we can enter into a very, very rich cognitive
life which not only refines but in important respects replaces the mere facts developed
through acts of perception.
I'm Tom Rawlins, president of The Teaching Company.
I hope you've enjoyed the lectures on these tapes.
To order more courses or to receive a copy of our most recent catalog, call 1-800-Teach-1-2.
That's 1-800-TEACH-1-2.
Or visit our website at www.teachco.com.
Thank you very much for listening.
