Hello, I'm Tom Rawlings, President of the Teaching Company.
These lectures are part of the Superstar Teacher Series.
They are produced by the Teaching Company.
The lectures on these tapes are titled, The Great Ideas of Psychology, Part 3.
The lecturer is Professor Daniel Robinson.
Dr. Robinson has been teaching psychology at Georgetown University since 1971.
He earned his doctorate in neuropsychology at the City University of New York.
His scholarly books and articles have established him as an authority in the history of psychology,
philosophy of psychology, as well as in psychology and law.
He holds the position of Professor of Psychology and Adjunct Professor of Philosophy at Georgetown,
and has lectured regularly for the sub-faculty of philosophy at the University of Oxford in England.
Professor Robinson is past president of the American Psychological Association's
Division of the History of Psychology and the Division of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology.
He is fellow of the American Psychological Association and of the British Psychological Society.
Dr. Robinson is also visiting senior member of Lynnacre College, Oxford.
Section 4, Psychology in the Materialist Tradition.
Lecture 25, Psychobiology, 19th Century Foundations.
Thus far in these lectures, we've paid homage to psychology in the empiricistic tradition.
We've done this through Scinarian behaviorism and Ebbinghaus' studies of associative memory,
not to mention basic sensory processes.
And we've paid close attention to psychology in the rationalist tradition,
this chiefly by way of cognitive processes, perceptual grouping, Gestalt principles and the like.
And now it's time to turn to psychology in the materialist tradition,
a psychology based on the proposition that all psychological processes, no matter how complex,
are finally reducible to events taking place in the body and more specifically in the brain.
So we come to that great philosophical conundrum, which is known as the mind-body problem.
Which is disputed even as we meet, there are philosophy journals being published all over the world
that are solving, somewhere in their pages, solving the mind-body problem.
It's a problem that the medievalists dubbed the questio vexata, you know, the vexed question.
In the 19th century, second half of the 19th century, one of the great physiologists of that period,
Noah Ramon, reflecting on the mind-body problem, declared triumphantly,
ignore abimas, we will be ignorant, that is to say, this is something that we're always going to be vexed and confused by.
Well, what is it that makes the mind-body problem a problem if it is a problem?
It's sometimes said that the ancient Greek world didn't even recognize it as a problem,
and I think that that probably isn't true, and I think that can be shown.
Not to be true, I'm fairly confident that Aristotle recognized that there was some sort of a problem here.
Well, what makes the mind-body problem a problem is this.
Once you start defining the mental, you inevitably define the mental in terms that would distinguish it from the physical.
And of course, once you start defining the physical, you do so in terms that distinguish it from the mental.
So that you say, by mind, you mean something like a spaceless, massless entity.
It isn't anywhere, actually, at some sort of ethereal, soul-like essence or substance.
It has no moving parts.
Whereas the physical world is located in space, it has mass, it moves meters and all that.
Well, what makes it a problem, what makes the mind-body problem a problem, of course,
is how it would be that something like a brain could cause a mind to think.
How a brain could initiate something like an idea which seems to have nothing in common with things like brains.
And of course, the problem works in the other direction also.
How my having a thought can make my body move so that when I have the idea that it wouldn't be a bad idea for me to raise my right arm,
and I fully intend to do that, there upon doing it, the question is how this psychological process without moving parts,
without any particular location, can actually get a massive entity like an arm to go up over another massive entity like a head.
So that's more or less what has led philosophers to be perplexed by the very nature of the relationship between things mental and things physical.
Well, whether or not we want to agree that the ancient Greeks or anybody right after the ancient Greeks recognized there was a problem here,
there's no question but that René Descartes in the 17th century recognized there was a problem,
and indeed might be said to have launched the modern issue of the mind-body problem.
René Descartes famously is the textbook dualist.
When someone is described as a dualist, it means that that person subscribes to the view that the ultimate constituents of reality require at least two kinds of stuff,
and that these are different kinds of stuff, and one can't be reduced to the other.
And in the context in which we're discussing it, dualism would refer to a reality that consists of mental stuff or mental entities,
and physical stuff or physical entities. Descartes was a dualist in that he regarded the realm of mind to be the realm of the race cogitons,
a thinking thing, indeed defining himself as essentially a thinking thing, and distinguishing between the race cogitons and what he called the race extensor,
that is an extended thing, something that has length, width, thickness, mass, etc.
Now Descartes is also an interactionist in that he was satisfied that the mental part of our life is what impels us to consequential behavior,
thought, ideas, motivations, rationality, and the like, that is to understand human behavior, the behavior of a rational creature.
One must assume that the mental part of that creature is impelling the physical part to do the sorts of things that it does.
So Descartes is an interactionist in that he grants the psychic end of life the power to operate on the physical dimension of human life.
Interestingly enough, however, he tends to be a one-way interactionist in that he does not regard the body as having the power to make the soul think.
So this is a one-way interactionism, but I think it's important to understand that Descartes was quite sophisticated in physiology.
He advanced a fairly up-to-date model of reflex physiology, the external world impinging on the organism and setting up physical events in the body
that then become reflected in the actions of the organism. We referred to all this in an earlier lecture.
And so although Descartes reserves to the rational soul the power to have an influence on the body that the body cannot reciprocate,
other aspects of our motion Descartes attributes directly to a reflex physiology and to an entirely, what might be called an entirely physiological psychology.
His philosophy of man, which was published, one of the last things he wrote, is a rigorously physiological psychology.
There's still a little bit left over for an immaterial soul, but I should say not too much.
Of course, Descartes had contemporary critics of a quite estimable variety.
Indeed, when he was putting together his major philosophical works, he asked Father Marcent to intercede and to get good critics of that work.
And Marcent not only included himself among the critics, but such worthies as Thomas Hobbes, for example, and not to mention Pierre Gassendi,
who was a premier figure in science and philosophy, contemporary with Descartes. Gassendi is not discussed as much anymore.
Gassendi had caused a revival of atomistic psychologies, physiological and physical psychologies, and he was just the right sort of person to comment on Descartes' work.
And what concerned Gassendi was this, if you leave room for the mental to operate on the physical, well then obviously the physical should have the same means available to it to operate on the mental.
And Gassendi is offering a much more common sense alternative to Descartes' system.
Gassendi is offering a kind of two-way interactionism that I think most contemporaries would accept.
That is, the mind influences the body, the body influences the mind, and away we go.
Now, much of this remained at the level of philosophical speculation until well into the 18th century,
when actually clinical findings in neurology with some rather primitive experimental approaches began to isolate specific brain mechanisms associated with what we take to be psychological processes.
The person I'd want to focus on in this lecture as quite the leader of thought, an extremely influential person was Franz-Joseph Gaul, G-A-L-L,
who is known to posterity as the father of phrenology, which is really unfortunate for Gaul because any number of jokes can be made at Gaul's expense owing to phrenology.
It was a scientific psychology which William James later would refer to as bumpology for reasons that will become obvious.
Let me try to improve the press that Gaul has enjoyed or endured over the years.
I should say that he was perhaps the leading neuroanatomist of his time.
His major works are appearing circa 1800.
But it was Gaul who very closely examined spontaneously aborted fetuses at various stages of gestation and quite closely marked out the gross anatomy of the nervous system as it develops in those various fetal stages.
One can say that Gaul was a pioneer in fetal neuroanatomy or just in the ontogenesis of the nervous system, the development of the nervous system within the single, in this case, human organism.
It was also Gaul who got permission, I don't think he always had permission, to have bodies exhumed, bodies of criminals and rapists and alleged madmen and the like, whereupon he would closely examine the conformations of their cerebral cortex, the size and mass of it, any peculiarities in it.
That is the morbid pathology of the brain of criminal types.
Gaul was also very interested in the cranial eccentricities or peculiarities of those judged to be geniuses, persons of great great talent and the like.
It was also Gaul who systematically studied and compared the nervous systems of different members of advanced species and did so much to develop a comparative neuroanatomy.
So the short script is this, Franz Josef Gaul was a leading scientist, a major figure and someone who nonetheless soon saddled himself to a theory and to a new science of his that will always bring smiles to the faces of historians of science just about any time his name is mentioned.
Well, where did all this phrenology come from?
It came from what Gaul took to be, to use his immodest language, for incontestable truths.
And of course, the minute someone in the scientific community serves up for incontestable truths, you're almost inviting the world of science to drop everything and to check out your claims.
And to that extent we might say that Gaul did perform a service in the history of science, he put things on the table, he said this is the way it is plus or minus nothing and in the process generated whole realms of research.
Well, what were these four incontestable truths?
First, Gaul took it as axiomatic that the mental and moral faculties, the mental, overall intellectual and personal characteristics of the individual are innate.
Now by innate, he didn't mean that it's a kind of, to use John Stuart Milds phrase, a kind of asiatic fatalism.
Not that the environment would not have significant influences on these mental and moral faculties, but that the influence had to be on something and the original dispositions are innate.
Secondly, that for every discernible mental or moral faculty, for every discernible aspect of the individual's intellect and overall personality and emotionality, there is a region of the brain specifically associated with it.
Gaul is quite clear in his writings to distinguish between a claim that says each of these intellectual and moral qualities is caused by the brain, he does not want to get into a metaphysical dispute on the nature of causation.
He's arguing instead that a specific region of the brain is a necessary condition for this intellectual or moral quality or faculty to appear.
Third, the amount of this faculty that one has, the amount of intellect or these moral characteristics that one has, and by moral here we would include almost everything that ordinarily comes under the heading of personality, do you see?
The degree to which one of these faculties or another is possessed depends upon the relative amount of brain devoted to it.
Now not just the total mass of brain devoted to it, but within a given cranium, how much of that person's brain, and for Gaul's work this means almost entirely the cerebral cortex.
The only thing he discusses in any detail other than the cerebral cortex is the cerebellum.
He's not at an age in the history of the brain sciences where he can speak with much authority on anything subcortical.
But within a given cranium, how much of that cortex is devoted to something like emotion, for example, and more granularly how much would be associated with something like amorousness.
The greater the relative contribution of the brain to a particular faculty or power, the more one has of it.
Now we're almost at phrenology. What is the fourth incontestable truth? Well the fourth incontestable truth is this, and here stay with me for a moment.
If you assume these dispositions are innate and you understand further that the developing fetus has a very, very soft cranium, the calvarium that encloses the brain is quite plastic initially.
So now you've got a genetically determined rate of growth going on in the brain. Some areas are growing much more quickly than others, this all unique to the individual.
Well of course the areas that are growing quite a bit are going to be able to push out on that part of the soft skull.
And other parts of the skull won't be pushed out as much by areas in the brain that aren't growing that quickly and that elaborately.
Now this is all going on during early development. Of course the skull hardens and the sutures form and all that.
But before that happens a given skull will take on quite characteristic conformations depending on the rate of growth of the cerebral cortex underneath.
Now I should point out that one of the criticisms brought against Gaul's theory is that there isn't a perfect correspondence between the conformations of the cerebral cortex
and the conformations of the skull covering it. This was a quite unfair criticism. The person who had worked out the nature of the relationship was Gaul himself.
So he knew that. But what he was developing was to be an imperfect and suggestive science, phrenology, a science of the mind, based on the kinds of observations that could be done non-intrusively.
Obviously if you could go up to somebody and take their brain out Gaul would be satisfied that you'd have a very, very accurate reading of their moral and intellectual faculties.
But you can't do that. You could only do that post-mortem and then not very, very often.
So the question is what can you do at a fairly gross superficial level of observation that will give you a firm handle on assessing the intellectual and moral and personality characteristics of the individual?
Well, Gaul concluded from all this that if you do careful correlational studies, if you examine geniuses and madmen and criminals and idiots and the like and start building up a thick clinical folio of what kind of skulls go with what class of person,
in the end you will have a very, very good taxonomy of personality and intellectual types. That's what phrenology was all about.
And in fact there were phrenological maps. You've seen them everywhere. You see them in stores. You can buy these.
We have a little phrenology bust in our kitchen at home with a straw hat on it. These things are generally now reduced to decorative purposes.
But for much of the early 19th century, these phrenology heads were used for diagnostic purposes.
And it was not at all uncommon for clinicians to have their patients comfortably seated as they would begin to palpate the skull surface trying to figure out just what sort of character they had in front of them.
Gaul would show up at cocktail parties and after making all of the proper apologies and in the most decorous way, then proceed to ask some famous violinist or pianist,
do you mind if I feel your skull and so forth. So I say this was all the rage. And in fact there were numerous phrenology journals in print.
If I'm not mistaken, the last one in the English language went out of print in Philadelphia and I think it was in this century.
And these are still fun to read. Of course there were major textbooks, phrenology matching up with criminology, social deviancy, theories of personality and the like.
So it was a non-trivial contribution to what today we refer to as the brain sciences.
But of course what Gaul put on the map was a set of propositions according to which every psychologically discrete characteristic matched up with a particular and specific region of the brain.
This I say was an open invitation to the experimentally inclined to see whether or not this theory held water.
Now as I've mentioned several times in previous lectures, every time we come up with one of these clever ideas, it usually works an extraordinary hardship on non-human animals.
And if ever a theory provided not only an invitation but a justification to take out after everything that creepeth with hammer and tongue, it was Gaul's theory of phrenology.
The first one to pick up the gauntlet here was Pierre Florens who had much to do with introducing as a major research method what is called experimental neurosurgery.
And a particular form of experimental neurosurgery that is sometimes referred to as the ablation technique or the extirpation technique.
These terms mean the same thing.
The procedure is as follows.
You train an animal to do something or you observe something that the animal ordinarily does and normally does.
You then expose the animal to a surgical procedure in which a specific region of the brain is removed.
The animal is then sewn up and nursed back to health and when the animal has recovered, you examine whether or not that particular faculty or ability, that particular form of prowess has in any way been affected by the surgical procedure.
The simplistic way of viewing this, which early in the 19th century was the way of viewing it, is that if a particular region of the brain is responsible for some particular psychological ability, then if you take that out, the ability goes away.
So that you end up with Gaul's theory, you end up with what might be called a modularity theory of mind.
And by the way, there are contemporary scientists and philosophers who subscribe to a modularity theory of mind.
That is, mind in its operation is really just a constellation of modular functions, some associated with perception, some with sensation, some with short-term memory, some with long-term memory, some with particular forms of emotional expression or emotional disposition, some with motivational states, reward and punishment centers.
And that mind, in quotation marks, is nothing but this constellation of the modules interacting in various ways.
Well, the birth of the modularity theory is very much in the wake of Gaul's phrenological theory and phrenological writings.
So Florence becomes one of the early investigators systematically cutting up and cutting out regions of animals' brains and writing that Gaul got it all wrong.
Well, I want to say a couple of things about Florence arguing that Gaul got it all wrong.
It is true that the particular functions Gaul associated with specific regions of the brain did not hold up under Florence's research, which is to say those particular functions identified by Gaul were not systematically eliminated when Florence undertook to remove these areas or destroy them surgically.
Nonetheless, in his very rebuttal of Gaul, Florence notes that these surgical procedures knocked out yet other functions.
So to a certain extent, the research that would refute what Gaul had to say does tend to confirm the more general theory, the more general theory according to which specific psychological processes, movement, for example, coordination and the like,
do match up with certain areas of the cerebral cortex and the cerebellum.
This is all at a quite primitive stage in the development of the brain sciences.
That's what was going on in the first quarter of the 19th century, and this would continue through the work of Majendi and Bisha and others, the French figuring notably in these developments.
Now, when we come to our own century, probably for the first half of this century, the most notable figure will be Carl Lashley, whom I mentioned in connection with transposition and relational learning.
The shortest script on Carl Lashley is this.
Lashley used maze learning, complex mazes, jumping stand apparatus of the sort I described in a previous lecture, a wide variety of behavioral tasks, learning tasks and memory tasks.
He then exposed the trained animals just about to every imaginable or relevantly imaginable combination of surgical procedures,
extirpating one region of cortex, another region of cortex, yet another region.
Lashley also, to some extent, getting involved with subcortical mechanisms.
And over a period of 25 or 30 years, in searching for what Lashley referred to and others referred to as the engram, some place in the brain where what you have learned is stored.
That one region, which when cut out, will eliminate all the mazes that you've learned, or the particular maze you've learned, or some pattern of left and right turns, or some visual discrimination and the like.
Lashley wrote a very, very famous paper titled, In Search of the Engram, and based on his own research, reached the ironic or droll conclusion that, quote, learning is simply impossible, close quote.
And of course, what he was recording with that was that you could not find any specific region which would actually knock out or eliminate a specific pattern of learned behavior.
You couldn't go in and remove the animal's fourth birthday party, so to speak, do you say?
So Lashley actually cast a pall of pessimism over those who, I say, in the tradition of Gaul, had been at work identifying particular psychological processes with specific regions of the brain.
The processes we'd most want to associate with specific regions would be learning and memory, the domain in which we find adaptive behavior.
And this is where Lashley could find very little. Certainly we knew a lot about specific regions associated, for example, with movement.
There's a strip on the cerebral cortex called the motor strip. Fridge and Hitzig in the 19th century showed that if you apply an electrical stimulus to that strip, you will initiate movements in the body of, they use the unanesthetized dog in this research.
You can generate movements from the tip of the toes to the wiggling of the ears by simply moving the stimulating electrode across the motor cortex.
So it had long been known that there were specific motor areas in the cerebral cortex and, indeed, sensory areas in the cerebral cortex and regions involving coordinated movement in the cerebellum.
But on the richly psychological processes of learning and memory, Lashley came up empty.
Indeed, what he ended up concluding was this. He offered two generalizations based on his research, and these generalizations were authoritative for quite some time and have more recently been challenged and successfully challenged.
He offers them, by the way, as generalizations, not as the last word on the subject.
First, he discovers that although you can produce quite significant deficits through a surgical procedure in experimental animals that have learned a maze and the like, those deficits are recovered in the course of retraining and time.
Now, the brain doesn't grow back. There's very, very little by way of neuronal re-sprouting once you've removed cortical tissue. So the animals can reacquire the task. They can recover and overcome these deficits.
Lashley's argument is that this takes place because the brain is sufficiently plastic, such that when a primary region is removed, some other region can take over its function.
And this, Lashley referred to as the principle of equi-potentiality. Now, you don't want to overstate the equi part of this, but the point Lashley wants to make is that extensive regions of the cerebral cortex have the potentiality
for mediating specific learning and memory functions. If you remove an area and get a deficit, other areas in some way must be able to take over these functions.
And indeed, the potential for doing this seems to be quite extensively represented in the cerebral cortex, equi-potentiality.
The second point that Lashley wanted to make was based on his finding that the degree of deficit depended much less on where the surgery was performed than on the total amount of brain mass actually removed.
So that the greater the brain, the massive brain removed, the greater the deficit. And Lashley summarized these findings under the general principle he called the principle of mass action.
It seems as if the brain, he says, functions as an integrated whole. And the degree of deficit or disruption you get depends then on how much of that hole you've interfered with rather than some specific region within the brain that you've destroyed or removed.
Well, what are we prepared to say as the 20th century comes to a close about mass action and equi-potentiality, which were principles advanced by Carl Lashley half century ago?
First, we'd want to say that Lashley overstated the case. As it happens, there is a greater degree of specificity, even with respect to functions like learning and memory, than Lashley was able to discover using the techniques he discovered
and indeed focusing on the areas of the brain on which he focused. For example, it is well known that the hippocampus, which is not the cerebral cortex, the hippocampus is vitally involved in memory.
And indeed you can produce selective memory deficits in organisms that have been trained in a maze or otherwise given some sort of complex learning task by introducing hippocampal lesions.
So just at this point, also we know for example that prefrontal cortex will produce deficits when it comes to certain short-term memory processes, the animal's ability to go to something that the animal has seen, has seen a reward.
Now the reward is put under something that occludes it, like a cup that's covered over with a cup, and the animal has to pick which cup the object is under, so the animal has to keep in mind where it had been.
Now there are regions of frontal and prefrontal cortex which when destroyed will disrupt behavior of that kind, time-binding kinds of behavior, where the task is to knit together events over a period of time as opposed to making some ongoing discrimination.
Now obviously I can't in this lecture get down to the level of detail here, but let's just say that as a generalization, the better the research methods get, the more systematically regions are examined,
and indeed examined by techniques that are non-invasive, the more obvious it becomes that there's a much greater degree of localization of function even within this mass-acting cortex than one would have concluded from Lashley's studies.
Work goes on, the story is not even half in, Gaul got it going, where it will end, I submit, nobody knows, but at the end of the day I'm with Dubois.
Ignore our beamers, I don't think we will have the point where we can look at some physical process and say, aha, that must be what's generating this idea.
