Lecture 27 Rationality, Problem Solving, and Brain Function
In this lecture I want to pick up where I left off.
We do see that language is disproportionately represented in one side of the brain versus the other.
That is, there is a laterality of representation with respect to linguistic functions.
Certainly one chapter in the book launched in 1800 by Gaul has been written.
Yes, there is localization of function in the nervous system.
That degree of localization might even include something as profoundly complex and consequential as language itself.
Localization of function is an abiding issue in the brain sciences.
In clinical neurology, it's sometimes said by clinical neurologists that the whole business of the clinician is, quote, locating the lesion, close quote.
And any number of sophisticated neurological diagnostic measures are brought to bear on a patient to determine where a lesion might be
and how a given lesion matches up with a particular behavioral, perceptual, cognitive, or emotional disturbance.
And I say there's a thick literature now establishing quite substantial degrees of localization of various functions which we would identify as psychological functions.
It still leaves open the question of whether and how the brain should be regarded as, quote, the organ of thought,
or as one scientist and wag in the 19th century said, if it is the case, that just as the liver secretes bile, the brain secretes thought,
whether our entire cognitive and intellectual and moral life should be understood as a collection of secretions, squiggles, electrical discharges, and the like.
And even on the correct assumption that a number of functions are closely associated with specific regions of the brain,
we still want to recognize the extraordinary plasticity of the nervous system, the ability to overcome deficits,
and how this ability is particularly well-developed, the younger and younger the nervous system is.
That is to say, although specific structures will come to mediate specific functions, certainly early on,
there's something much closer to the lashly insensitive equi-potentiality than one might guess on a strict localization hypothesis.
I might begin this part of the story with some findings reported, oh, about 10 or 12 years ago, I guess, by the British pediatric neurologist John Lorber.
The rationale here was really quite sound and summoning. Lorber understood that at the time he was prepared to do the research that he wanted to do,
there were a number of young British people who had been, as it were, among the first survivors of hydrocephaly.
And I should tell you what I mean by the first survivors of hydrocephaly.
In the typical and awful instance of hydrocephaly, as the fetus develops and as the ventricles of the brain begin to form,
cerebrospinal fluid begins to be produced. This is fluid that should fill the ventricles and indeed, in the normal case, does.
And when that happens, there is a control mechanism that sees to it that no further cerebrospinal fluid is produced.
But in some few instances, this mechanism breaks down and, in fact, the fluid continues to be produced.
Now during fetal development, the skull, the calvarium, the skull covering is soft enough so that as this fluid is produced and as it increases the intracranial pressure,
the cranium grows in response to that increased pressure. The head becomes enlarged.
At birth, this is a quite characteristic, this is a telltale sign of hydrocephaly, this enlargement of the head.
Well, of course, the fluid continues to be produced throughout late fetal development.
And during the terminal stages of fetal development, the bony covering is not as pliable as it was.
So now there is increased intracranial pressure. It is not compensated for by the further enlargement of the cranium.
The net effect being that the underlying cerebral cortex is increasingly compressed, compressed, compressed.
In the worst cases and on autopsy, the cortex might be found to be almost paper thin, perthin.
And of course, there are profound intellectual and general consequences of this process.
If there is mercy in the world, at least in the old days, the mercy expressed itself in the form of these dear, tragic cases not really living very long.
Well, the story has it that an engineer had actually lost a daughter as a result of hydrocephaly and dedicated himself to doing something about it
and indeed developed what is known as the hydrocephaly shunt, such that this can be surgically implanted.
And as the excess fluid is produced, it is picked up by this shunt. It's picked up as in a pump.
It's delivered down into the peritoneal cavity where it's deposited, where it does no harm.
And indeed, the condition can be rendered manageable that way.
Well, Lorber understood that some number of youngsters alive and functioning in England had been the beneficiaries of this procedure.
And what was important to Lorber was this.
In the same period of time which he was working, there were further developments of what we call PET scans.
Now, a PET scan, P-E-T, refers to positron emission tomography.
You can radioactively tag a substance, inject it such that it gets into the cerebral circulation.
And depending on what you tag, you can see the rate at which it's metabolized.
You can see, for example, the rate of oxidation. It actually comes out in the form of a picture.
You can code these things so that the more active, the redder the picture, the less active, the bluer the picture.
And you therefore can get essentially an online picture of brain activity as a function of various things,
like someone sitting and doing a math problem in their head or a response to a flash of light or a click of sound and so forth.
So Lorber puts it together and says this.
What will PET scans show in children who during late fetal development surely had been victimized to some extent by hydrocephaly
as a result of the shunt they've survived. Where are they? What are they doing and what do the brains look like?
In fact, the PET scan technique had only been sufficiently developed for these purposes by Dr. Larson in Copenhagen
so that Lorber actually had to arrange to bring his subjects to Denmark for the studies to be done.
Well, without going into the details, let me just say that the findings were absolutely remarkable.
First, the psychological findings. He rounded up perhaps a score of youngsters quite normal in every respect.
Charming, friendly, responsive, talkative, chirpy, all that. Some going to school in computer technology,
some interested in law, there's that and the other thing, young working people.
Now, what about the PET scans themselves? Well, remarkable to say, in some instances it was quite clear that massive regions of the Cerebral Cortex
hadn't developed at all. That is, in the area that would be occupied by cortical mass, there was nothing but a fluid filled space.
Indeed, one of the youngsters showed virtually no occipital cortex at all, nothing back here at all.
Nonetheless, visual functions were quite normal. Now, what happens just in case you flash lights into the eyes of that observer
who is lacking most of what would pass for a visual cortex? Ah, you now see an excitation of activity within the Cerebral Cortex
but not back where the occipital cortex would be, rather in a much more anterior place.
Clearly, what has gone on in these cases is the following. As a result of the insult being very, very early in the development of the system
and Allah, a lashlean form of equipotentiality, other regions of the developing cortex took on certain of these functions
that otherwise would have been served by regions of the Cerebral Cortex now destroyed or missing as a result of the hydrocephaly.
In some instances, in some of these patients, you're looking at a total reduction in cortical mass on the order of 30, 40 or more percent.
These are very substantial changes in the gross anatomy of the brain and yet in most of the important respects and certainly in any day-to-day sense
you would have difficulty discovering anything wrong with these youngsters at all.
I do recall one of the young women smiling into the camera and saying something, oh, something rather ironic about, well, you know,
her friends might tease her for being brainless and the like, but it really was quite surprising to look at the screen and see that there was so much missing, actually,
but she then did a 180-degree turn and wandered off to resume the full and flourishing life that she was living.
Now, I don't want to suggest for a moment that you can undergo 20, 30, 40 percent reductions in brain mass and everything will be just fine.
It's quite obvious that in these exceptional cases, the explanation is based on the plasticity of the brain during its earliest stages of development.
Anything approximating an insult such as that endured by the hydrocephaly case, anyone enduring insults even fractionally of that magnitude later in life would show profound and irreversible losses, no question.
What survives as a quite interesting theoretical and indeed scientific issue is just what mechanisms are in place that will now give brain tissue the specificity of function that it comes to have as the system develops.
That is, when we go from a stage of very great plasticity to a stage of highly localized function, when we go from a stage of great plasticity to a stage where insults are unlikely to be overcome by retraining, by practice, rehearsal and so forth,
just what is it in the physiology and biochemistry of the nervous system that is rendering the system ever less plastic, but at the same time ever more economical and efficient in doing the specific and highly modularized tasks that the developed nervous system is supposed to do.
So, two main points then. Is there localization of function? Yes. How localized is it? The profound, immediate answer to that question is, that depends. Early in development, the degree of localization seems to be, it's not that localization is in present.
It's that compensatory abilities in the brain are of a very, very great order, so that disruptions in the normal anatomy and physiology of the system can be compensated for. Later on, that compensatory power drops and drops fast.
Well, what about rationality and problem solving, which together with language really do fit out the human psychological organism in such a way as to lead Descartes to believe you could never make a machine like it, particularly the capacity for abstract thought.
And as I said in the previous lecture, the capacity for linguistic proficiency. Is the brain responsible for all this? Is it what Gaul referred to as a necessary condition? Is it causally responsible?
This again brings us to issues in philosophy of mind, very, very interesting issues. The old Ignorabimus sort of issue. Remember the alternative solutions to this problem that you have. You can assume that mind, as it were, is a secretion of the brain, in which case you would qualify as a radical materialist.
In that, you'd be saying there really isn't any mind at all. There's just a congruence of very complex brain functions. And when you summarize all those functions, if you want to call them mental, well, that's sort of the residual of an older superstitious language.
But the ultimate language, the only real language, the only language that matches up with what is really there, is the language of physiology and biochemistry.
I say, if that's your solution to the mind-body problem, then you are someone who subscribes to a theory sometimes called Eliminative Materialism.
The Eliminative Materialist says, look, for now, we use the language of psychology. We talk about thought, hopes, dreams, aspirations, motives and the like.
Ultimately, we come to recognize that what these words are referring to, if they refer to anything at all, are events in the brain.
And when that science is developed, that science will result in the elimination of such words as love, hope, aspiration, and so forth, in just the way that once we discovered there weren't any witches, we stopped talking about witchcraft, do you see?
In just the way that when we discovered the planets do not move across the heavens because gods and chariots are pulling them, we stopped talking that way.
So there is a folk psychology in place that really camouflages a very basic ignorance.
When the brain sciences have reached their full flower, that ignorance will be fully exposed and mentalistic terms will be eliminated, Eliminative Materialism, do you see?
Others might take a standard Cartesian form of dualism, according to which there really are mental events.
Those mental events, however, are caused by brain events.
That indeed the brain is causally responsible for everything we call the mental.
The mental just sort of jumps out of these complex neurophysiological processes.
Not to bore you with terminology, that position, which was argued for in the 19th century by Thomas Henry Huxley, is called epiphenomenalism.
That is, mental events are, as it were, epiphenomenal.
Of all the things a complex system generates, well, the nervous system happens to generate thoughts too.
So I say there are these various philosophical, quote, solutions, close quote, to the problem.
The question is, what does the clinic turn up by way of evidence? What does the laboratory turn up by way of evidence?
What the clinic and the laboratory reliably turn up is this.
Any profound alteration in the functional characteristics of the central nervous system result in discriminable changes in the psychological functions of the organism, including the human organism.
Thus, the relationship between brain dynamics and anything we're prepared to call the psychological side of life is direct and quite easily and readily documented.
Well, what about rationality and problem solving? Is there a particular region of the brain which, when it's destroyed, spares everything else but doesn't allow you to solve math problems,
doesn't allow you to handle logic problems or crossword puzzles and the like?
Well, as it happens, frontal lobe syndromes get very, very close to answering Gaul's aspiration.
Disorders in the frontal lobe, lesions in the frontal lobe, and in prefrontal cortex, have been identified as causally responsible for any number of quite specific cognitive deficits.
Again, the degree of specificity found very often depends on how sophisticated the tests are, do you see?
If you do a lashly type test that involves only maze learning, you may discover very, very little.
If you do a rather more sophisticated and indeed subtle kind of test, you might find that the deficits are quite closely tied up with specific regions of the brain.
One of the characteristics of a frontal lobe syndrome is a failure in what I referred to in a previous lecture as time binding, the ability to knit events together over a course of time.
The subject has no trouble dealing with a problem right before him.
But if in fact the subject, or the patient, has to solve a part of that problem now, and at some later time, take advantage of the earlier steps in the solution now to proceed with greater and greater powers of solution, that's where the failure takes place.
The patient just can't bring the immediate past to bear on the present in solving a problem.
Similarly with time binding, or temporal binding problems in general, subjects with frontal lobe syndromes tend to perseverate, and in fact you'll see this in the speech itself.
The subject might repeat entire passages, entire sentences, over and over again, sometimes five or six times.
This perseveration seems to be a property that arises from the system having insufficient feedback resources to recognize that in fact it has achieved a success.
Therefore you don't have to do that again, so to speak.
That is the system seems to be engaged in these iterations, the sort of thing you would get from a system that's lacking a governor or some kind of damping mechanism, or some kind of feedback resource such that once you've solved the problem, you've solved the problem, don't keep doing it over and over and over again.
You might recall from an earlier lecture on the kinds of habits that we have, that defeat clear thinking and problem solving, this tendency to stay with heuristics that happen to succeed once before.
And you keep adopting that same heuristic over and over again, we refer to the availability heuristic.
Frontal low patients very often seem to be especially vulnerable to what might be called an availability heuristic, reaching for the most recently successful problem solving technique, and then applying it to any problem that comes along.
There also seems to be a diminished flexibility in thinking, part of the availability heuristic, a flexibility that has the patient adopt novel approaches to new problems.
There's a kind of fixed focus, a kind of edifice, which sometimes is characteristic of neurotic patients. The mind gets set on something and it's very, very hard to give it up.
I say these are characteristics of frontal lobe syndromes arising from stroke, from lesions and the like.
Now, Alzheimer's disease is probably the headline stealing cognitive deficit of our age. The cost in human terms, in financial terms is extraordinary, and as we get older and older and older, it's a cost that's likely to go up, barring some solution to the problem.
The very diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease is non-trivial. That is to say, if you use standard neurological diagnostic instruments, you might come to the conclusion that there are much greater losses endured by an Alzheimer's patient than in fact there really are.
The standard Bendergestalt, you can find reference to these in textbooks in clinical neurology, but I say the standard neuropsychological workup may actually be insensitive to powers and abilities that the Alzheimer's patient still has and that can be found if you engage in protracted interviews,
long conversations, giving the patient an opportunity to collect his or her thoughts, perhaps express himself or herself in some non-linguistic medium, perhaps by making signs or establishing similes of one kind or another.
And the highly experienced and patient clinician very often will report to staff that an Alzheimer's patient thought to be entirely unable to do X, Y, and Z, in fact can do X, Y, and Z quite well under favoring conditions.
What do we know about Alzheimer's disease? We know something about the formation of amyloids within the complex anatomy and physiology of the nervous system, the biochemistry of the nervous system. This seems to be highly correlated with the condition.
It's not quite clear why that particular symptom pattern would arise from that particular biochemical disturbance. We do know this. On average it seems Alzheimer's patients show something on the order of a 40% shrinkage in the hippocampus.
And the hippocampus has been so intimately associated with memory processes that here there really does seem to be something we can get a handle on because when you take a look at the broad range of cognitive disturbances that qualify as Alzheimer's disease, you begin to see how so many of these so-called cognitive disturbances could arise from profound losses in memory function.
Just in memory function, that is so much of our problem-solving ability, so much of our time-binding performance, so much in what we call perseveration. Do you see the continuation of something already completed?
So much of this matches up with, indeed, memory itself. Why does Smith perseverate? If not because a correctly functioning memory system is not available to tell Smith, Smith, you've done this. You've done it twice already.
Indeed, you've done it four times already. Why the time-binding problem? The time-binding problem is knitting events together over a period of time, precisely what a properly functioning hippocampus allows us and non-human animals to achieve.
So it could very well be, as the ancients thought and as many of the medieval writers on the mind thought, that memory is at the bottom of many of the functions we otherwise identify as cognitive, intellectual, and indeed, personality.
What, after all, is personality except the persona that we bring to bear in a reliable way on a variety of situations based on what? Based on lifelong experiences, based on our understanding of the context, based on our recollection of what certain facial expressions mean and don't mean and the like.
And typically, with conditions like Alzheimer's disease, some of the problems of advanced senility, post-stroke syndromes, the memory disturbances seem to generate a whole host of disorders that are not themselves or do not seem to be memory disorders but are inextricably bound up with memory.
Well, what are we going to do about all this, if anything? Might there be a drug down the road someplace that corrects this? Might there be drugs down the road that make us better at the sorts of things that we now do less well than we'd like to do them?
Actually, there are some drugs that have been tried out here and there with mixed results, but in some instances encouraging results with senile patients. They're referred to as nootropic drugs, N-O-O-T-R-O-P-I-C.
Noose, you know, is the ancient Greek word for reason, and a nootropic drug is a drug that, if it works, should improve the rational or problem-solving or cognitive abilities of the recipients.
Animals and even geriatric patients have provided positive evidence of memory enhancement when given administrations of such things as vasopressin, for example, or peracetin, and drugs related to the peracetin family.
The effects have proven to be somewhat ephemeral, but these drugs are produced all the time. Are we going to become super smart as a result of all this? Well, I don't know.
Now, on the matter of brain function and biochemistry in general, I think there's one more category that deserves some attention. It doesn't quite grab the headlines that Alzheimer's grabs, but it's a pathetic condition that does count many, many victims in its number.
And I refer to autism and to particular forms of autism that seem to be bound up with general cortical dysfunction. One case that is quite suggestive of a strong memory pathology contribution to autism,
a case that I had an opportunity to look at quite closely, involves a young fellow who has put together a list of the major cities and towns in the United States. The list is alphabetical.
It is his mission in life, a mission that must be completed. It must be completed almost as if this were wartime. He must visit each of these cities and towns in alphabetical order. He sets out to do this on his motorcycle, and he has the list with him.
In fact, he doesn't really need the list with him because he can name these scores and scores of places in perfect order, do you see, almost like the mathematics idiot Savant, the calculation Savant.
Well, this particular form of autism expresses itself not only in the need to visit these places, but in the exact order, alphabetical order. And because it's an alphabetical order, it really makes no sense cartologically.
I mean, anybody putting together a trip itinerary for somebody would not have them visiting places alphabetically. You would visit places according to their geographic proximity.
That is, some kind of proper geographic narrative is put together such that if you're going from Washington, D.C., and you want to see Philadelphia, and you know your terminal point is New York City, you certainly wouldn't go Washington, D.C. and then New York and then back to Philadelphia because N comes before P.
Now, with this particular patient, not only must these places be visited in order, but should he find himself having violated the order, the trip must be initiated again. You go right back to square one and you begin with A.
If you listen to this patient being diagnosed, there's a very pronounced monotonicity in the voice. The voice is very flat like this. There are virtually no inflections, whatever. There's no outward sign of happiness or joy or exhilaration.
It's that kind of thing. It's almost as if someone was staging a kind of speaking computer sort of thing.
The parents of the young man in question who have the patience of Job and the love that you always would expect parents to have for their children do note that indeed there are occasionally explosive emotional outbursts, not very often, but that it is very, very difficult to elicit genuine signs of pleasure and signs of flourishing and personal satisfaction.
The love here instead is a compulsive behavior, something that must be done. It has a controlling influence on every waking moment of this youngster's life. He is a problem solver. He can do routine sorts of academic things. He is not what you would call a retarded person in the usual sense.
And such limitations as he has are so closely bound up with this mission in life that it's less a matter of his being limited than his being engaged, but his being thoroughly engaged, engaged in a compulsive, obsessional way.
And this as a result of what we are inclined to think are cerebral mechanisms. We don't know precisely how it works in a case like this. This obviously involves frontal lobe function. There are time binding problems.
In this case, the time binding is of the worst sort. It's not that Smith can't knit together sequential periods of time. It's that they must be knitted together and it must be in a precise and undeviating order. And in fact, it becomes the very cause of life.
It becomes the very thing that gives meaning to life. Note, I do not say it gives happiness to life. It is a duty that must be performed. And when the duty is not being performed, there is great, great agitation.
If you finally ask the person, why are you doing this? He tells you that he's doing this because you must visit these places in order. So you don't really get a rational justification. You simply get a repetition of the act itself.
And if you say, when you fall out of order, why don't you just correct that particular mistake and then go to the next city? He will tell you in that characteristic monotone because you are obliged to complete the sequence in order.
And to complete the sequence in order, you have to start at the beginning.
You
