Lecture 36, Freud, Breuer and the Theory of Repression
It's sometimes disconcerting for the new student of psychoanalytic theory to discover
how quite modest Freud's objectives were when he began that line of writing and theorizing that
would culminate in perhaps this most famous of all psychological theories, a theory that
has been taken up by literary critics and postmodernists and sociologists, economists and
the like. Freud received his medical education at what was then perhaps the leading medical
institution, certainly in Europe and one of the leading medical institutions in the world,
the University of Vienna. His training was in neurophysiology and in neurology. In fact, his
major teacher was one of the leading neurophysiologists of the time, Ernst Brucke. Freud's intention
was to do original research and theoretical work in the neural sciences, what today we would call
the neural sciences, and he showed great, great promise in that regard. He was an outstanding
student. Ernst Brucke himself is a figure of some interest. I'll mention this just in passing,
but Ernst Brucke was part of a celebrated quartet of physiological scientists, all of whom in one
way or another had been associated with the great physiologist, one of the fathers of modern
physiology, Johannes Bührer, either as research assistants or students. And who comprised this
quartet? Well, there was Ernst Brucke, there was Emil Dubois Ramon of the famous Ignorabimus
Dubois Ramon, Karl Ludwig, who would distinguish himself in the physiological sciences,
and perhaps the most agile and creative member of the bunch, the famous illustrious Hermann von
Helmholtz. Now, Johannes Müller's textbook in human physiology had gone through multiple editions,
and although Johannes Müller himself was at the leading edge of physiology, you could still see
in this handbook of human physiology the residuals of an earlier kind of thinking in the biological
sciences. Certain vitalistic elements, the idea that there was something so mysterious and magical
about life that it would never be reduced to chemistry or physiology, you could just sort of
pick up with the fact of life and then do science on it, but life itself was something special,
something unique, something beyond the reach of a reductive science. In the same handbook,
estimates were offered as to the speed with which the soul comes to influence the body,
and some of these estimates were actually multiples of the velocity of light. So here we are in this
1830s handbook discovering something of the old world of vitalism, a more innocent biological
science, and at the same time, in a manner of speaking, a foot sort of reaching out and trying
to reach what we would take the modern biological science as well. The four people, the four young
Turks as it were, entirely impatient with these adivistic tendencies, this looking back to an age
of vitalism and the like, entered into something of a pact with each other, that for the rest of
their careers in science, they would accept no statement in biology that was not reducible to
the principles of physics and chemistry. So they're already committing themselves to the view that
life itself is a subject for scientific inquiry and that there isn't any aspect of living systems
that cannot finally be understood in basic physical and physiological terms.
I might mention that Helmholtz, in an attempt to demystify science, and of course this will be
much the project of science in the second half of the 19th century, but Helmholtz would give a
paper before the Prussian Academy of Sciences, I think the year was 1841 or 42, I'm not sure on that,
but he tells his audience in this classic paper right at the beginning that the purpose of his
talk is to explain why it is nobody has successfully made perpetual motion machines, and he wants to
make clear to the group that the reason nobody has made a perpetual motion machine is that you
can't make a perpetual motion machine, and you might be interested in knowing what the title
of this paper was. The title of this paper was On the Conservation of Energy, and Helmholtz is one
of the pioneering figures in that conservationist physics of the middle of the 19th century,
of course the point of conservation principles is this. Energy can appear in radically diverse
forms, but in any closed system the overall energy content remains constant. You can change
mechanical energy into heat, you can change heat into light, but at the end you will recover
exactly the energy that you had to begin with if you would add up all of the different components
of energy in all of the forms that energy will take. And I would want you to keep in the back of
your mind these conservationist principles in physics, because Ernst Bruecher of course is just
a member of that scientific community, fully conversant with the new conservationist principles
in physics, and later on when Sigmund Freud has to figure out exactly how it is that hysterical
symptoms come about. He's going to rely on such principles, he's going to say that the hysterical
symptom, the blindness, the paralysis, the palsy, is the physical manifestation of a
blockage of an essentially psychic energy system. That is, you might try to channel or
dam up this psychic energy, but it will manifest itself somewhere else in some other form in the
system. And so we have here the application of conservationist notions in the new physics
to this domain of psychodynamics, and Freud of course is learning this not only out of books,
but shoulder to shoulder with Bruecher himself. Well, Freud was planning marriage and planning
a family and the like. Freud was in the most Catholic city in Europe and at the most Catholic
university in that Catholic city, and it became quite clear that as a Jew, he was not likely to
rise into the highest academic firmaments at the University of Vienna. The smart course of action
was to undertake the practice of medicine, and it was with some regret that Freud left the world
of academic science and medical academics and entered the world of clinical practice. And of
course he enters that world as a neurologist, and that's what his training has been. Now,
what sorts of cases might a neurologist confront in Freud's day? Well, he confronts cases not
unlike the cases that a neurologist would confront now. Someone shows up with a neurological
symptom, a leg that seems to be becoming increasingly paralyzed, a leg that might have to be
dragged behind the body, or regions of the body that have developed insensitivities. You can't
feel a pinprick. It's entirely numb. Or indeed, in extreme cases, someone who shows up, wakes up
in the morning and is deaf or has begun to lose vision, and precipitously so, maybe to the point
of nearly complete blindness. Now, these are neurological symptoms. But of course, what was
well known in Freud's time and well known even a century before Freud is that some of these symptoms
though they take a neurological form are not actually grounded in a bona fide neuropathology
because enough is known about the nervous system for the skillful diagnostician and clinician to
recognize that neurologically you couldn't get that symptom. Of course, the classic case of a
symptom that seems to be neurological but can't be is what is called glove anesthesia. The patient
comes in and reports a total insensitivity over a region of the body that would be just covered by
a glove. That is, the hand seems to be anesthetic. No sensitivity there. Well, of course, by Freud's
time and well before Freud's time, one knows what the distribution of nerves is from the sensory
spinal nerves out to the periphery that feeds the hand. You can't get just a glove anesthesia
neurologically. So one of the tasks that the clinical neurologist has is distinguishing between
genuinely organic sources of neurological disturbance and nonorganic sources. Now, what
term is to be applied to apparently neurological disturbances that are not of organic origin or
at least are not of specific neurological origin? Many of these symptoms were put
generically under the heading hysteria. Now, the very term hysteria has a quite interesting
history. It goes back to the time when symptoms of this sort and symptoms of a kindred sort
were judged to be the result of a, quote, moving uterus. And indeed, the Greek word for uterus
is just the word from which we form hysteria. So for the longest time, it was the understanding
within medicine that hysterical symptoms are unique to women and are inextricably bound up with
the reproductive anatomy of the woman. I don't want to say that Freud was particularly influential
in ridding the world of medicine from this antique prejudice and ignorance because, in fact, the
world of medicine had long given up the view that hysterical symptoms were in any way uniquely tied
either to women or to the reproductive anatomy of women. Freud will go off to attend lectures at
Paris given by Dr. Charcot. And in fact, Charcot long earlier had pointed out that indeed hysterical
symptoms are very often more common in men and the like, though complaining patients may tend
to be women because of men's disinclination to show up with symptoms of that kind. But in any
case, the term hung on, the term hysteria hung on to cover a pattern of symptoms that could seem
to be grounded in neuropathies, but indeed were not, were grounded in something else. The practicing
neurologist not only had to make those diagnoses, but presumably had to try to do something about
this. What do you do to treat the hysterical patient, to treat hysterical symptoms? And there
was a grab bag of possibilities available and some of them a little more successful than others.
Nothing really all that promising. Well, Freud's agenda to begin with was simply to understand
more fully the source of these hysterical symptoms and techniques for the ever more
accurate diagnosis and the ever more effective therapy. That's really all he wanted to do.
He wanted to come up with some way of handling the hysterical patients in his patient population.
Now we find him going off to Paris to attend lectures given by Chaco because Chaco has reported,
it has shown up in the literature, Chaco has reported some success in treating hysterical
patients with hypnosis. Chaco has much to do with restoring hypnosis to a degree of respectability
such that the scientific community will pay attention to it again. He's not alone in this,
but he's an important figure in the restoration of hypnosis. Hypnosis as we would come to know it
in modern times was the discovery or at least was very much put on the map by Franz Anton Mesmer
who was also a graduate of the University of Vienna back at the, toward the beginning of
the 19th century, the late 18th beginning of the 19th century. Mesmer is a very very interesting
figure and he has been the subject of some good biographies and the definitive biography of Mesmer
awaits an eager and thoughtful writer indeed. Mesmer was a great music enthusiast and quite
quite a good musician himself on the glass harmonica. He married well, his wife was very
very well off. Mesmer was a patron of the arts. There was a young chap who had a lot of trouble
raising enough money, raising a sufficient subscription for the performance of the first
opera he ever wrote and he would write back to his father that happily Dr. Mesmer has agreed to
provide me with the necessary sums and the first opera will actually be performed in Dr. Mesmer's
house and that young chap in case you haven't guessed is a young chap by the name of Mozart.
In fact, Mozart developed as a quite young person a fascination for a blind young
blonde pianist who would become a patient, a famous patient of Dr. Mesmer's and indeed
Mozart's, I think it's the parody of Sonata was actually named after her. Well,
Mesmer was a quite quite interesting figure. He regarded himself and was regarded as a medical
scientist and he subscribed to what he took to be the developed physics of the day,
which was a sort of Newtonian physics and Galilean type physics. He applied this,
he thought it was applicable to biological systems as well and that just as there are
gravitational fields, just as there's a north and south pole, there are magnetic modes of
magnetic induction and the like, it was Mesmer's view that certain disease conditions might be
the result of a misalignment of the corpuscular properties of the body and this whole technique
of stroking limbs with a metal bar was intended to achieve a realignment. Well,
now take a look at the mesmeric setting in which this is going on. Smith comes in and Smith can't
move his arm. Now, Mesmer has the idea that this is a result of some sort of particular
misalignment in the limb. So, Mesmer is going to do the realigning by taking a magnetic bar
and stroking the arm. Now, while he does this, he might be saying to the patient,
look, as I move this bar down your arm, there are certain particles that form the
medullary substance within your body and these are being realigned. Well, look,
if you repeat this often enough, if you say it in a certain way, I want you to relax completely
and I want you to feel this bar moving down your arm and realigning and over and over again,
well, sure enough, in some number of cases, Smith gets up and says, good grief, doc, this is
terrific. I don't know how you did it, but I'm feeling just fine now. Well, Mesmer presses on
with this and, of course, he's criticized hip and thigh. He becomes rather defensive about it.
At one point, the heat gets so great that he actually has to leave Vienna. He sets up a practice
in Paris toward the period of the French Revolution. People are selling mesmeric waters
on street corners. It's good for whatever ails you. He subsequently, under the weight of
denunciation and persecution and the like, begins to think of himself as the necessary
instrument by which these cosmic forces work on the body. So it's not just the bar, but it has
to pass through Mesmer. He starts putting on rather ridiculous robes to do all this and he
becomes a figure of great, great celebrity and controversy. And of course, the entire phenomenon
of hypnotism now gets the sort of black eye that any scientific person will recognize and stay away
from like plague. So hypnosis becomes an untouchable, unutterable kind of activity. You might be
interested to know that the French authorities thought that Mesmer's claims deserved a hearing
and they actually impaneled a committee to investigate the claims of Dr. Mesmer and they wanted
that committee chaired by someone whose scientific integrity and plain common sense were of such
celebrity in their own right that the results of that committee's deliberation would be accepted
as credible and authoritative by all with eyes to see and ears to hear. Here's the trivial pursuit
question. Who chaired that committee? And the answer is our own Ben Franklin coming across the
ocean in his dotage, but still doubting and jaunty, chairing the committee. And the committee, I
think, turned in a very good performance for themselves. The claim was that at the level
of clinical observation and the like, much of what Dr. Mesmer claims he actually has been able
to document, but we are under no burden to accept the theory on which these findings depend. And I
think they are given the time, circa 1800, that actually a little earlier, that was about as good
as you would expect a thoughtful committee to come up with. Well, it's a bit of a digression,
I hope an interesting one. In any case, Charcot is using hypnosis. And one thing that Charcot
discovers is that hypnosis is very good as a differential diagnosis because the bona fide
neurological disorder can't be affected during hypnosis. If you have a paralysis as a result
of a genuine neuropathy and you hypnotize the patient and tell the patient that when he wakes up
he'll be able to move that leg quite well, never happens. But if you have the hysterical patient,
hypnotically, you can induce a paralysis in the other leg and this leg now will be normal
when you wake up. And indeed, you can move the symptoms all over the body hypnotically. And
this is one way of distinguishing between the hysterical case and the genuine organic
neuropathic case or neuropathological case. So that's quite interesting. And Charcot also
thinks that there is encouraging news as regards the treatment of hysterical symptoms. Well,
with this as a background, Freud takes himself off to Paris and attends these lectures. Indeed,
he writes back home to his wife saying how difficult it is for foreigners ever to get to see Dr.
Charcot. But Freud overhears Charcot reporting to a colleague that he's entirely unhappy with
some recent German translations of his lectures. And he really wishes that the French to German
could be done better. And Freud, who was wonderful at languages and the like, intrudes himself,
says he'll be happy to help with these translations. And he says this, let me get a little closer to
Dr. Charcot than foreign visitors otherwise would get. Freud comes back and starts using hypnosis.
And before long, he gives up on it. And he tells us that he gives it up for three reasons.
My own view is that the third reason was the real reason. But here are the three reasons that
Freud gives. First, he says not every patient can be brought under. And there's no way of telling
in advance just who can be brought under the requisite degree of hypnotic suggestibility.
Well, all right. But is that really a reason to give up a therapeutic modality? I mean,
if not everybody can be brought under, then why not just use it on the people who can be brought
under? After all, even today, there are medicines that are highly effective, but not with everyone.
So I don't find that a quite convincing reason. Secondly, he says the therapeutic effect is
quite ephemeral. It passes with time. It's not a permanent cure. Well, all right, that's a reason
to be reserved about it. But why not re hypnotize the patients? Why not keep it going as long as you
can? A partial relief of symptoms is better than no relief at all. And a temporary relief is better
than no relief at all. Thirdly, he says the whole process seems somewhat mystical. Now, here I think
we're getting to something and something worth pausing on. Here's Freud, graduate of the University
of Vienna. The University of Vienna, whose leading scientist and philosopher of science
before Freud's time is Ernst Mach. Ernst Mach, who sets out to put in place a scientific positivism
to rid science of all philosophical and metaphysical baggage. Ernst Mach, whose analysis of sensations
will declare a law of science to be only a systematic description of experience, putting
science on a firm, empirical, empiricistic foundation. Ernst Mach, the one whose writings
would influence Skinner and the like. And I mentioned Ernst Mach, I could mention Helmholtz,
I could mention the entire scientific establishment of the second half of the 19th century. What it
has in common is it wants to rid science of ancestral metaphysical influences. And here Freud
finds himself, after that kind of education and training, sitting next to a patient and saying
things like, your eyelids are becoming very heavy, you are getting sleepy, you're listening only to
my voice, you can hear nothing but my voice, I mean what's next? So you can imagine Freud almost
embarrassed by the technique, giving it up, not because you can't bring everybody under,
I'm inclined to think he gave it up because you could bring some people under. And so there's
a strain here that we're going to find repeated in Freud's works, this constant, almost constant
insistence, that no matter how theoretical this psychoanalytic language seems to be,
it will ultimately match up with observable neurophysiological processes. He's going to put
together, but in a sense, abandon and not publish his famous project for a scientific
psychology. And what that project has as its goal is the conversion of all psychoanalytic notions
into basic physiological, neurophysiological observations and processes. So I want to say
that Freud on the subject of hypnosis is disclosing a side of Freud's thought that will show up again
and again in a variety of his literary productions. Namely, he always feels breathing down his neck,
he's always looking over his shoulder and finding gaining on him that positivistic scientific community
that is hostile to theory, hostile to speculation, hostile to anything that looks metaphysical,
metaphysical now referring to almost anything that you can put on the table and measure and weigh.
Freud has a slightly older colleague, also a graduate of the University of Vienna, also a
neurologist, Joseph Breuer, whose practice is taking place in the same city. Freud and he get
together very often, they discuss patients, what patients are doing and the like. And Breuer has this
very, very interesting patient, a woman, an attractive, intelligent, rather garrulous woman
who has hysterical symptoms, but has informed Dr. Breuer that she has told her friends that
Breuer really is something of a genius. He's invented a cure that nobody ever would have guessed,
and she explains to Breuer why she's so enthusiastic about these discoveries of his because in she
comes for a therapeutic session of sorts, she finds that the whole hour goes by with her just
gabbing away, she doesn't see him doing anything, he isn't moving his hands, he isn't pushing any
pills and the like, she gets up and leaves and for a period of days she has quite distinct,
symptomatic relief. And what she has told her friends is that Dr. Breuer has discovered nothing
less than, quote, a talking cure. Now this is enough to get Freud and Breuer giving some very,
very serious thought to what might be going on in cases like this. What could it be that the sheer
act of expression, discourse, conversation, just sort of unburdening oneself of things,
would actually produce symptomatic relief of hysterical symptoms?
Well, not all patients are quite as garrulous, so Freud and Breuer developed techniques,
word association techniques, other techniques for getting the otherwise non-communicated patient to
speak up, to chirp away, and indeed it becomes part of their general observation
that the more you can get the patient engaged in discourse on his or her situation in life,
the things that are bothering, you really do begin to see symptomatic relief. And they see
this in a number of patients and they are so fortified in their observations that indeed they
publish the results of these observations in what will be Freud's first book, it's a book by
Freud and Breuer titled, Studie en Huber Hysterie, Studies of Hysteria. And in Studies of Hysteria,
the thesis that is advanced is this. The reason hysterical symptoms form is as a result of an
essentially repressive mechanism, that is psychic energy that otherwise would be flowing more freely
and to greater consequence somehow becomes blocked up. The process of free association,
the process of discourse itself, does to some extent have a liberating influence,
and as this psychic energy enjoys some degree of release, the hysterical symptoms enjoy some degree
of attenuation. So in this work we discover the early form of the theory of repression,
the mechanism of repression being the mechanism that brings about hysterical symptoms. You can hear
the echo of conservationist principles in the background. You also see the attempt at an essentially
mechanistic, in quotes, scientific explanation for what otherwise might seem to be a quite mysterious
pattern of symptoms. Now of course in repressing these things, the patient is not dealing with
these things at a conscious level. So within this same early work there are intonations of what will
become a much more fully developed theory of the unconscious, the unconscious being that sort of
spaceless place, that psychic place in which repressed material is located. Also we begin to see
anticipations of the techniques that will be used to plumb the unconscious, including an analysis of
dreams, an analysis of slips of the tongue, the form that humor takes and the like. Well there's
much in this. I should tell you that the work was actually reviewed by a person who would
become very very famous in his own right, Pierre Genet. Pierre Genet had done systematic studies
of hysteria and did a book on hysteria that was a very influential book. Genet reviews the book
by Freud and Breuer and it was the convention in that day when you reviewed a book to give the
name of the first author, if it were multiply authored, and the city in which the work was
published, do you see? Genet's critical review is positive but there is much criticism in it.
He charges Freud and Breuer with overgeneralizing. He says, I too have had patients, we have had
patients that answer to this description, but many that don't, that it's a quite sober and
systematic criticism. And when he cites the work that is under review, under critical review,
he cites it as foined amvine, a friend in Vienna. Genet's review includes a Freudian slip. T'was
ever thus. I'm Tom Rawlins, president of the teaching company. We hope you've enjoyed the
lectures on these tapes. To order more courses or to receive a copy of our most recent catalog,
call 1-800-TEACH-1-2. That's 1-800-TEACH-1-2. Or visit our website at www.teachco.com.
Thank you very much for listening.
