Hello. I'm Tom Rawlins, President of the Teaching Company. These lectures are part of the Superstar
Teachers Series. They are produced by the Teaching Company. The lectures on these tapes are titled
The Great Ideas of Psychology, Part 4. The lecturer is Professor Daniel Robinson.
Dr. Robinson has been teaching psychology at Georgetown University since 1971. He earned his doctorate
in Neuropsychology at the City University of New York. His scholarly books and articles have established
him as an authority in the history of psychology, philosophy of psychology, as well as in psychology
and law. He holds the position of Professor of Psychology and Adjunct Professor of Philosophy
at Georgetown and, since 1991, has lectured regularly for the sub-faculty of philosophy at the University
of Oxford in England. Professor Robinson is past president of the American Psychological
Association's Division of the History of Psychology and the Division of Theoretical and Philosophical
Psychology. He is fellow of the American Psychological Association and of the British Psychological
Society. Dr. Robinson is also visiting senior member of Lynn Acre College, Oxford.
Lecture 37, Freud's Theory of Psychosexual Development.
The topic of today's lecture is Freud's Theory of Psychosexual Development, which, as everyone now
knows, was an extremely controversial theory in its own time, particularly aspects of it that
included the notion of infantile sexuality. It's a theory that has its racy elements, and, of course,
one is not surprised to discover that students of psychosis and psychotropic
elements, and, of course, one is not surprised to discover that students of psychology are rather
more interested in Freud's Theory of Psychosexual Development than in Weber's studies of absolute
and different thresholds earlier in the 19th century. The theory is an evolutionary theory in two
respects. It is a theory about the evolution of sexual maturity in the individual organism, and it is a
theory about the role of sexuality and the instinctual mechanisms of sexuality as these serve the
preservation of the species as a whole, and, therefore, the theory in its biological manifestations fits
in quite generally into the more overarching evolutionary theory of Darwin's to which Freud was
indebted and explicitly indebted and quite respectfully indebted. Now, I want to show you
reminded listeners and viewers one more time that Freud was extremely defensive, if I can use that
term, about criticisms of his being excessively theoretical. He fashioned himself and understood
himself to be a scientist. He had had good training in medical science. He was a student of
Bruckers. He was a neurophysiologist and neurologist by vocation and training. And the last thing he
would want to be accused of, at least early in the development of his theory and writings, is
excessive theorizing or metaphysical speculation or philosophical digressions. He's brought up very
much in that climate of scientific thought exemplified in the writings of Ernst Mach, a
positivistic scientific framework in which there is some suspicion of theory itself and
particularly theory that is not closely tied to observable facts. This is going to be a war
within Freud's thinking, all of Freud's productive intellectual life. His project for
scientific psychology, as I mentioned in the previous lecture, already finds Freud trying to tie
down psychoanalytic notions to basic and observable processes in the nervous system or processes that
are, in principle, observable in the nervous system. Well, what about the theory of psychosexual
development? It takes us from the earliest stages of infancy to adult heterosexual sexuality. And the
question that arises as Freud's approach to psychosexual development is, what is the
actuality? And the question that arises as Freud's theory is developed is, first, what do we
find at each of these stages? That is, what do we find in early infancy that fits into a
general evolutionary theory of psychosexual development? And what seems to be the aims of
nature as regards the preservation of the individual organism and the preservation of the
organism? And how are the aims of nature realized in the observable behavior of the organism
during various stages of development? Well, in the preceding lecture, I raised the question,
why is it that an infant would engage in the strenuous labor of sucking to drain a bottle of
milk or sucking at a mother's breast when, after all, the infant has absolutely no idea about
its own nutritional requirements. And indeed, the labor in question can be absolutely exhausting.
And of course, the answer to that, the answer served up by Freud, is that the infant derives
pleasure from an activity that indeed is a life-preserving activity. And this is the way nature
works in the psychosexual domain. Nature works in such a way that what actually moves the organism
further and further along in the path toward sexual maturity are just those activities that are
pleasure-yielding activities. It is the pleasure principle that is guiding the behavior of the
developing organism. It now is a developing organism whose sole purpose in life seems to be
self-gratification. And indeed, the pleasure principle operates in such a way throughout the
phylogenetic kingdom that animals move away from sources of distress and pain and toward
sources of gratification. There's a kind of avariciousness about sensuality itself. The
creature does what pleases. Now what sort of world would you have, what sort of human world
would you have if everyone spent all of his and her time simply sensually gratifying oneself,
paying no heed to social conventions, having no sense of responsibility, incapable of even
comprehending the notion of decorum, let alone chivalry. Now, cynics in the audience might say,
well, the world you'd have is the world we have, but it's not the world we have. Rather, we have a
world that is characterized, a human world, that is characterized by restraint and certain degrees
of conformity, self-inhibition. There seems to be a trade-off between the desire to gratify
oneself and the need to fit in. And Freud's theory is a theory about how you get an organism
that is a self-gratifying, self-preserving organism into a state in which it is able to
participate in the civic life of a community. So the theory is a biosocial theory. Biological,
at the level of instinctual drives and impulses, social at the level of socialization and
acculturation. The theory is designed to explain how you get from A to B, or as it's a multi-stage
theory, how you get from A to perhaps E. Now, oral gratification for Freud was just a
manifestation of sexuality at the infantile stage of development. And, of course, one might say
that this was not going to be an idea, especially pleasing to a proper Viennese society, including
a society of medical specialists in Vienna. The notion of adorable little infants in their crib
actually harboring these lusty thoughts and engaging in activities of a quite, quite dubious
and suspect nature surely offended the sensibilities of some. But I don't want to overdraw that,
and I think it has been overdrawn in the literature, particularly secondary sources. The plain fact
is, just in theorizing this way, Freud was obviously going to cause some discomfort and trigger some
criticisms on the part, as I've said several times, of a scientific community that was trying to move
away from speculative discourse and tie itself more directly to observation and measurement, so that
it was infantile sexuality, obviously didn't help very much, but that it was a theory of that sort
really was the nub of the matter when it came to the sorts of criticisms that Freud would confront.
Recall, Jeanet's criticism of the Freud-Broyer book is based chiefly on the fact that the theory goes
beyond what Jeanet has seen in his own clinic. It applies to some cases, but surely not to all cases.
And Jeanet here, I think, is quite faithfully recording the scientific ethos of the time.
If you're going to theorize, stay close to the data. Now, as the infant moves from the oral to the anal
stage, this second stage being a stage at which gratification is achieved through the
eliminative functions of the body. And, of course, this is something that can be expressed in ways that make it
downright risible. I mean, you can certainly get a lot of people chuckling if you spend too much time on the notions
of anal gratification and the like. But what Freud notes markedly at this stage is you now have an organism,
you now have a child, a young child, who actually can gain some control over the events in his world and,
indeed, over the behavior of adults in his world, placing a very, very high premium on toilet training.
That is, there's now something quite reciprocal going on to the extent that the child works on the control of these
eliminative processes and is greatly rewarded for success in this. Profound lessons are being taught.
These are lessons that go well beyond toilet training itself. They have to do with the influence one can have on one's
world, the nature of reciprocity in this world, the relationship with other adults, what their expectations are.
So this anal stage is no pun intended, bloated with possibilities as regards the fuller development of the adult personality.
Now, in the genital and phallic stages, there is a movement progressively toward what culminates in adult heterosexual sexuality.
And I think it's rather interesting to reflect on how this theory would consider something like homosexuality.
It sometimes argued that psychoanalytic theory is priggish or judgmental about homosexuality.
And I think that this is entirely the wrong way to understand a theory like Freudian psychoanalytic theory.
Psychosexual development realizes nature's ends when psychosexual development culminates in procreative sexuality.
I mean, from a purely biological point of view, that's the whole point of it.
The whole point of it is to see to it that the species is preserved.
The species gets preserved when members of that species engage in behavior successfully repopulating the world.
So if you take this in the fullest teleological sense to be that end toward which psychosexual stages of development are moving,
then obviously in any case in which the culmination of psychosexual development is in a form of sexuality that is in principle non-procreative,
it obviously must be a case of a kind of arrested development.
Now, understand what Freud is not saying.
Adults do not engage in heterosexual procreative sex because they've sat back and they've calculated the replacement ratios given the mortality rates in society.
And Jack says to Jane, for goodness sake, we've got to do our civic duty.
The population is thinning out.
Time for us to have some children.
No.
No.
Any more than the infant is saying, given the Kreb cycle and all of these other biological requirements for metabolism growth and development,
I guess I better suck this bottle.
No.
Nature fits us out in such a way that the greatest degree of sensual pleasure happens to be associated with forms of behavior that indeed can and do reliably result in procreation.
The problem, of course, crops up in this way.
The organism left to its own devices is a pleasure-seeking, pain-avoiding organism driven solely by the pleasure principle.
The impulse behind behavior is the impulse to gratification.
As early as the anal stage, society begins to regulate these modes of gratification and the infant soon comes face to face with what in psychoanalytic theory is called the reality principle.
That is, there are certain consequences that attach to given modes of gratification.
Certain things have costs.
So the process of socialization begins.
The reality principle and the pleasure principle are now on what will be a lifelong collision course.
Certain modes of gratification are at the great, great cost of social acceptance and all of the threats that go along with diminished social acceptance or that go along with social criticism and rejection.
At the same time, if this life is going to be authentic and flourishing in the fullest biological sense, one cannot be constantly held hostage to social conventions and expectations.
So this really is a kind of lifelong dialectic.
It's not a problem that gets solved.
It's not a tension that gets fully relaxed.
Rather, it is a set of processes that must be dealt with.
And I say on psychoanalytic terms, in psychoanalytic terms, it is a lifelong process.
Now, one aspect of psychosexual development that would cause great controversy and still causes great controversy is that regarding the editorial complex.
Understand that the principle source of sensual gratification for the infant is the mother, or at least most typically in the society in which Freud lived.
The female caregiver, typically the mother, or a wet nurse, but that woman who was there regularly with sources of sustenance and comfort.
This is also the same person who is presiding over the toilet training period, the manner in which the child is going to get to and through the anal stage of psychosexual development.
In the ordinary course of events, as a more adult form of sexuality begins to appear, as it becomes possible for sexuality now to include another.
The most obvious object on which this sexual energy or sexual interest will be projected will be just that person.
That is to say, as heterosexual modes of gratification undergo their process of maturation and expression, the quite natural target is invariably going to be that target that socially cannot be used for such purposes.
Again, this is not something going on at the conscious level.
There are going to be these tendencies, this tendency to project one's sexual energy, cathexis is the expression, onto this adult, great, continuing, abiding source of gratification.
This obviously is a no-no.
Freud regarded this as a taboo in all cultures.
And he, as he often did, goes back to ancient myth in order to see the wellsprings of taboos like this and how these taboos have been represented in different cultures and in different literatures.
And so famously, he settles on the sad, sad fate of Oedipus.
Now, I think if only to honor Sophocles in the ancient Greek world and the like, we've got to make one claim that will brook no opposition, or at least very, very little opposition.
If there's any chap I had to name in the history of our species, any known chap, somebody you could actually point to and say, if there ever was an Oedipal complex in the history of the world, at least we know that chap didn't have it, it would be Oedipus.
I can't imagine anybody going to such lengths to avoid the very possibility of fulfilling a prophecy that would have him sexually joined to his mother having successfully killed his father.
Oedipus, you know, is born to Lyos and Jocasta, and on the basis of a pre-existing prophecy, Jocasta has to abandon this product of her womb for it is prophesied that he will result in the destruction of the realm itself.
Oedipus is supposed to get killed, but as a result of solicitous attendance and servants, he's not killed, rather he ends up the adopted child of a royal couple who love him and raise him as a lordly young man.
He's excellent in all respects, and then there's the fateful day where he hears this prophecy, that it is written, it is ordained that he shall kill his father and enter into a conjugal relationship with his mother.
This fellow leaves the parents he loves, he leaves the city he loves, he undertakes to do everything to prevent that prophecy from being fulfilled to the great, great personal cost of his very soul.
With, with dejection, sadness and melancholy, he leaves these people, he leaves this community that reveres him, and he gets to a choice point, do you see, as he leaves town, you can almost see the signs pointing in various directions.
There's a sign that says this way to Dallas, and there's a sign that says this way to Thebes. Which way shall we go? The frost poem, two roads diverged in a yellow wood and I, I took the one less traveled by and that has made all the difference.
Well, Archum Oedipus picked Thebes. Wrong turn, Oedipus. You know, it's interesting that the original sense of the Greek word deke, the word for justice, but if you go back to pre-classical times, deke actually is a diverging path and the right path, the deke path is the one chosen by the gods.
And I think Sophocles is picking up these resonances with this path and Oedipus going one way instead of the other way. Well, he's confronted by a band led, led by a royal personage. It is lyos, he doesn't know it's lyos, and they rather rudely say, you know, out of the way, boy, and an altercation breaks out, and in fact, he kills them all, and he gets to Thebes and way leads on to way.
And before you know it, he becomes what in some lectures I've referred to as Joe Castor's naughty boy and second husband. But I do want to point out that Oedipus himself does not seem to suffer from an Oedipal complex, but I'm sure psychoanalysts would reinterpret this in a manner much more consistent with the theory.
The main point in the Oedipal complex is that one has to find a surrogate or substitute. The process of socialization must allow for a proper adult female now to become the object of these mounting and ever more maturing sexual tendencies.
Freud was once reported to have said, of course, men marry their mothers, and on the question of Dorsey, he was reported to have said, of course, men marry their mothers over and over again.
Well, the interesting thing about a theory like this is if you find Jack picking a Jane who has nothing in common with Jack's mother, well, this is some sort of reaction formation or he's really fighting at its evidence of a kind of resistance.
Of course, if he does pick someone who in many important respects matches up very well with characteristics of his mother, well, then you see the theory is more or less confirmed.
This is a theory that will not surrender to the usual modes of challenge critique and the like, which makes it not a strong theory, but in important respects a rather weak theory actually, maybe not a theory at all.
I have argued and will argue that it's an extraordinarily fertile narrative account, a kind of story in its own way. It's a kind of ancient Greek story about human nature and the challenges that it faces.
And I think we almost appreciate it at that level when we try to scientize it and reduce it to something more mechanical. It's an extraordinary Gothic kind of story too, like evolutionary theory itself.
It's the castle of Otranto writ large and it will always attract us and summon our imagination and allow us to interpret the world in rich and diverse ways thanks to its language and its theoretical, its quays, its rather loose theoretical structure.
Well, the edible complex is either going to come to dominate the life of the individual or it's going to be resolved in some way. If the castration anxiety that arises as a result of the recognition that the object of one's affection is already spoken for, one indeed has to, one has to resist this, one has to avoid this.
At an unconscious level, one is instinctually fearful of the very feelings that are beginning to attach themselves to mother because of that authority figure, that father, that source of paternal power and control.
Well, my goodness, how does one handle this? One way one might handle this to prevent victimization for one's own inclinations is by adopting a more female persona, that is, you identify with the one that is actually protected and spoken for.
Psychoanalytic theory occasionally accounts for homosexual tendencies in terms of problems at the level of the edible complex being settled in terms of a greater passivity and adoption of the female persona.
Like Oedipus himself, but in symbolic ritualized ways, you get the titanically anti-authoritarian type, the anti-paternalistic type. You can get a kind of macho, nobody's going to tell me what to do.
You can get sublimated forms of this sexuality and the philanderer who sort of, the edible problem is solved by attaching oneself to no one in particular, do you see?
So you don't face the threat because you actually haven't narrowed the cathetic field, so to speak, in such a way as to be found guilty.
How are these themes uncovered? Smith doesn't come in and say, you know, I've had this hankering for mom for a very long time and I'm awfully frightened about how my father is likely to respond to this.
None of this is going on at a conscious level. So the royal road to the unconscious, the royal road to the place in which these instinctual impulses and the processes of socialization are played out, that unconscious realm is found, Freud says, chiefly through the interpretation of dreams.
And his book on the interpretation of dreams is a 20th century classic. It's whatever you think of the theory, the book is a page-turner to say no more on the subject.
So that you have this recurring dream of a keystone cop turning a corner and tripping over little dogs and cats and so forth and it doesn't take a space physicist to realize that a policeman is a figure of male authority,
that little pets are little pets, younger siblings perhaps who are shown great favor by parents, perhaps by mother or father.
Being tripped up by little pets is the figure in authority being tripped up by those who have gained more paternal affection and respect and the like.
Then one has dreams of this sort, do you see, tell Freud that he's on to something and tell the contemporary psychoanalyst that he too is on to something.
There are also techniques that we develop to protect ourselves from the kinds of impulses at the unconscious level that are socially unacceptable when expressed.
There are ways we have, do you see, what happens is this. We have this pleasure-seeking, impulsive, instinctual psychology as the necessary consequence of our being biological entities that must survive if the species is to survive.
All of these urges, these primitive biological urges are represented in what Freud called the id, choosing the Latin for it.
Now society gets to work on us very, very early and must instill in us, if there's going to be any kind of social cohesion at all, standards of conduct.
What has to be developed in this otherwise pleasure-seeking creature is what we are pleased to call a conscience.
This pleasure-seeking creature must come to learn that some actions are no-nose, there's absolutely no two ways about it.
You can't do this, you mustn't do this. Sit up straight, Johnny. Look, please use the fork. Put that bib under your shirt and don't get your clothes dirty.
Do come in when you're called. Do you realize you're holding up the whole family when you take so long to come to the table?
If everyone else is doing well in that course, why aren't you? You know, Johnny did very well in the basketball game. Could it be because he practices harder than you do?
Do what your mother tells you. Sit up straight, son. Don't answer your mother back there. This goes on and on and on.
So what's being developed here is, I want to, I can't, I mustn't, I shouldn't, I won't. Nice people don't do this.
Nice people are the people other people are nice to. Nasty people are the people I must shun.
What's developed then is this ever more elaborate superego, this heavy weight of conscience that renders us fit for life within society.
Now the tentative moment-to-moment reconciliation between the impulses of the id and the controlling socialization impulses, impulses so to speak, acquired impulses of the superego,
is the person as the person recognizes himself and herself, the ego. And that self-perception is what we must learn to preserve.
This is the thing that assures us society will accept us, parents and wives and husbands will love us, children will admire us, et cetera, et cetera.
And when that ego is threatened, we have psychodynamic ways of defending it. We rationalize, we engage in compensatory acts.
You come over and say, Professor Robinson, you seem to be gaining even more weight. And without my even thinking of it, I kind of tuck in my stomach and say,
well, no, actually, you see, why is one doing this sort of thing? Well, it's not because one wants to be featured on a magazine cover.
But one's very body type becomes part of a pattern that determines the extent to which one is socially accepted or not, the extent to which one has self-control and discipline.
After all, here I am in a quasi-humie and roly-poly way. Does this mean that I have no discipline at the table? Am I someone you might wonder about?
I mean, is there some sort of debauchery? Is there some impulse within me that's sort of screaming to get out? And it does so through an avariciousness that's satisfied through the northern Italian cuisine, et cetera, et cetera.
Reaction formation, the minister and Sadie Thompson, the chap who rails against prostitution and women of the night and women of the...
And of course, by the time the thing is concluded, he's attempting to rape her.
Now, what the reaction formation is, is we protect ourselves against our own innermost impulses by criticizing and railing against the very thing which, at the unconscious level, we are desperate to engage in or to do.
The neurotic symptoms show up when these ego-defense mechanisms are most fully engaged. Obsesional mechanisms, Lady Macbeth washing her hands, the compulsive behavior, the obsessive thought, interestingly enough, as long as you can hold on to a number of these things, you will remain symptom-free.
The full-blown neurosis breaks out when the ego-defense mechanism stops working. It's actually when you stop playing these little tricks on your unconscious, when you are no longer able to preserve the integrity of the ego that you think you are, that other kinds and more severe kinds of neurosis crop up.
What's required at this point is to bring one back through those usually traumatizing stages of psychosexual development to the point where the problem was put in place and to undertake what Freud described therapy as being, which is a process of reeducation.
You've got to go through the thing over again, see what happened to you there, relive it, and now absorb into your psyche a different set of predispositions and understandings, not by way of a cure, but by way of coming to grips with the inevitable frustrations of real life.
