Lecture 38, Critiques of Freudian Theory
One can't give lectures on psychoanalytic theory
without answering the question whether it's raised or not
as to whether or not psychoanalytic theory is right.
And of course, the responsible way of answering that question
is to say that the corpus of Freud's work
can't possibly be understood in terms of whether or not it's right or wrong.
The people today who probably would be prepared to go to battle over
tend to come more from fields of literary criticism,
certainly than the brain sciences or neuropsychology.
For that matter, I think it becomes increasingly difficult
to discover entirely orthodox psychoanalytically oriented psychotherapists.
The movement away from the strictures of the theory began quite early
and indeed schools of so-called neofroidian psychoanalytic theory
began to form even during Freud's heyday and to his great-great consternation.
Now, I come neither to bury nor to praise Freud,
but I do want to say a couple of words about his temperament,
what might be called his own intellectual orientation
toward criticism, toward theory, toward what it was he was up to.
There was an American who wrote to him on one occasion indicating
that he thought he had come up with some experiment
that would tell quite decisively for psychoanalytic theory.
Freud got a lot of mail, as you might guess,
and Freud wrote back rather tersely that psychoanalysis needs no confirmation.
Now, in a way, there's a sense in which he's right,
because I think psychoanalytic theory, as he developed,
it couldn't possibly be confirmed anyway,
and if it couldn't be, then it certainly doesn't need it.
It's desperate actually to need what is impossible,
but that's not the sense in which he meant his reply to be understood.
Princeton's Bowlingen series features the correspondence of Freud
and one of the preeminent figures in the psychoanalytic tradition, Carl Gustav Jung.
And I think that a Freud admirer, and there are many things to admire in Freud,
will find that admiration eroding as you go through the pages of this correspondence.
You see a Freud who is quite small-minded,
absolutely contemptuous toward critics,
very often referring to them in terms that are not only disdainful but quite crude.
He is at pains to make clear that continuation within the psychoanalytic community
is tied up with the right kind of orthodoxy.
Jung, page after page, is ever the gentleman, thoughtful, decent, yielding, generous, and the like.
Now, this of course has nothing to do with whether or not we accept psychoanalytic theory,
Freud's version or anyone else's, but I do want to make these statements about Freud
because I want you to be aware of the fact that he recognized he was launching a movement,
and movements do have these political dimensions
and understand that the success of psychoanalytic theory early on
was very much tied to political manipulations, manipulations within the profession,
how you got standing, whether the great man actually had you to tea or not.
And this feature of psychoanalytic theory survives today, I would say,
in fields like literary criticism, where if you're not part of the solution,
you're part of the problem, and there are great, great orthodoxies
in how one is supposed to understand characters in a text and the motives of the author
and all this reaches back to Freud.
So perhaps where it has failed in dealing with pathology,
it has succeeded in dealing with what I sometimes refer to as café metaphysics.
On the actual substantive factual details of the theory,
it was as early as the researchers of Margaret Mead and Bronislav Malinowski
that anthropologists began reporting the so-called psychoanalytic universals are not universal,
that rearing practices are quite different.
Certain taboos judged to be universal are not universal.
Evidence of eatable tensions don't show up everywhere.
The Arapash don't seem to suffer from this sort of thing.
Toilet training practices are not of a universal sort.
You don't invariably win gold stars when you can use the potty yourself and the like.
So I say the anthropological record wasn't as consistent as the theory would require it to be.
Cultural variation in child rearing practices, initiation rights,
certain features of gendering, that is, the labor that a society expends
to make sure females are females and males are males.
I say the anthropologists recognize that there was wide variation in these regards
and far wider than anything that the theory could embrace.
There are societies that do encourage male children to defend themselves physically,
but there are other societies that very strongly encourage male children to do no such thing.
I mentioned the Arapash who are quite interesting in this regard,
not only for their pacifism, but perhaps revealingly, in addition to this pacifism,
diminished evidence, if any evidence at all, of anything that a psychoanalyst would identify
as an eatable conflict or eatable tensions.
The neofroidians also were concerned about Freud's emphasis on biological instinctual principles
at the expense of society and culture.
The neofroidian movement was much more in the direction of recognizing social and cultural forces
as shaping the adult personality, rather than the adult personality being a kind of reconciliation
of the ego by way of acculturation to what are finally basic instinctual tendencies.
You see, on the strict account, excessive development of the superego is at the expense
of what might be called an authentic life, because on the strict psychoanalytic account,
the authenticity is carried by the biology.
Freud is very much a biologist of the mind, and so socialization is inevitably a process
of compromise and concession and surrender.
The entity you end up with is, in some sense, not quite the natural entity, not the real McCoy.
This is not Freud agitating for a more primitive form of human expression, but it's Freud recognizing
that the discontents in civilization, that the psychopathologies of everyday life,
just are the inevitable consequences of a creature designed to gratify and preserve itself,
coming to grips with the strictures of developed societies.
Well, I say the Neofroidians, Adler, for example, wanted to move away from this kind of fatalistic,
as we might say today, in the genes, it's in the instincts, and much more toward an appreciation
of the transactional nature between a developing personality and a surrounding society.
Some of these compromises, so to speak, are entered into quite willingly.
And of course, at a certain point in life, one actually stands as a rational creature
able to articulate principles of conduct, and those principles then become dispositive,
and it's not so much that we're constantly at war with our basic instincts,
but perhaps consistent with the teachings of Aristotle, we become ever more virtuous
in a rather habitual way so that the temptations really aren't temptations any longer.
At some level, I agree with Irma Baumebeck that the whole point of growing up is chocolate,
but there are yet other things about growing up that go beyond chocolate,
and part of that is not merely the ability to resist temptations,
but in fact not to be tempted by the same sorts of things as one develops a certain maturity,
a certain maturity of personality.
Now, just to point to how radically different a theory of human nature you can come up with,
a psychoanalytic theory, and a theory based much more on socialization, social practices,
and a self-investment in a culture.
Think of Erickson's multi-stage theory of personality development,
his theory that he in various places refers to after Shakespeare's The Ages of Man.
How is infantile life best represented?
Is it best represented in terms of infantile gratification through the sensual experiences arising from sucking,
or is it best represented in the form of a definite attachment between mother and offspring,
an attachment that constitutes the grounding of all feelings of security and having a place in the world,
a world that is either rendered predictable or unpredictable depending upon how that attachment process works,
a child that is made ever more fearful, a child that is made ever more fearful,
or a child that is made ever more confident, confident actually to move out into the world
because these earliest attachment experiences have been covered in solicitude, warmth, generosity,
fondness, smiling faces, security, and the like.
So yes indeed, on the Ericksonian account, the infantile stage is profoundly important
vis-a-vis personality development, but not on the basis of some instinctual pleasure principle,
rather on the basis of transactions that are ineliminably social, maternal social,
maternal offspring relationships here now, being reciprocal relationships that are actually teaching
from the earliest moments just what kind of world one has entered.
And we can see in the so-called strange effect, the periods of infancy in which the facial expression,
the posture, the degree of muscle tension, the ridging of the forehead, the looks of concern,
the squinting of the eyes take place as mother leaves the room and a stranger enters the room,
the so-called strange effect that John Bolby in Britain described and Mary Ainsworth at the University of Virginia.
And then the mother comes back into the room and you now have this restoration of placidity
or relaxation, a very definite change in countenance, and this is showing up in the earliest months of life.
Now this doesn't match up with anything like instinctual modes of sexual gratification.
There are, shall we say, instinctual processes involved in something like this,
but these are processes that are getting linked up quite directly with experience.
They're getting linked up to experiences that are learning experiences
and that will indeed be foundational for the adult personality.
Now at the next stage, which Erickson takes to be roughly one and a half to three years old,
we see the appearance of genuinely autonomous behavior.
At this stage now the child is personally undertaking experiments with the immediate environment,
experiments in the world, organizing its day, so to speak, choosing one toy over another
and rejecting it presumably and evidently on the basis of choice,
on the basis of some kind of deliberative and discriminatory process.
This is not a period of passivity in which instinctual impulses are driving behavior.
This is a period in which the autonomous powers of the very, very young child are beginning to express themselves.
Could this match up with toilet training?
Yes indeed, it could, of course it could.
It could match up with aspects of the anal stage because there is an element of cooperation
or defiance witnessed at that stage, but does one want to view this primarily in instinctual terms
or does one want to view this within the context of what might be called social learning?
And the social learning by an autonomous entity who indeed can refuse to learn,
can defy, can resist, can express himself or herself.
From three to six years old, the stage of life now is characterized by an entity that actually is taking the initiative.
This is someone now who is operating on the world, trying to make the world into a certain kind of place.
It may be a place just outside the playpen or in the park near the swing.
It may be a place in the preschool classroom.
It may be a place at the dinner table.
But you now have someone who is actually trying to impose a different kind of order,
a different character on the world in which one lives.
And depending on the success one enjoys here and the encouragement one enjoys here,
one might enter onto a path in life in which one really is intending to be an instrumental source
of improving the world and changing the world or one who retreats from it
and comes to regard oneself as having no power,
one whose initiatives are bound to be frustrated when in fact they are not simply disliked and rebuked and criticized.
This again being the significant social learning taking place that is foundational for what we do find in the adult personality.
And here it's of little avail to say that we are products of the animal evolution
and we've got instinctual mechanisms and we've got a certain genotype and all that.
None of that anticipates the day-to-day encounters that we have in society
and how we're going to deal with them and how our characters are going to be changed
depending upon how that world responds to our initiatives.
From 6 to 12 years old on the Ericksonian account,
what we have is the development of nothing less than competence itself.
Now there's a difference between taking initiative, moving toys around,
shouting out, trying to get some attention, trying to call a halt to something, do you see?
And actually developing the abilities to do what at an earlier age
you were simply asking to be done or insisting be done or striving to get undone.
The development of competence this period from 6 to 12 years old is of profound importance.
It must be something that causes concern to all of us as we see the state of our public school systems
when it comes to dealing with children in just this 6 to 12 year old period.
Understand what competence yields.
First, it yields confidence that one's initiatives have consequences
and consequences of the desired sort.
That is, when I commit myself to something, good things happen.
This is a virtue-forming disposition.
The acquisition of competence is just the feedback one needs,
the ability now to do well, what initially one could not do at all,
and then could do only poorly and haltingly, tentatively, incorrectly, meanly, do you see?
But with time, the other thing that's conveyed by the acquisition of competence is that good things do take time.
So not only is this character-forming, but it's character-forming in that rich ancient Stoic sense
that good things happen only in the fullness of time,
that you can't predict at the earliest moment on a voyage what the full voyage will look like.
A kind of mythos develops, a kind of narrative develops in the process of gaining competence.
It's a kind of 16th or 17th century emblem book where characters are presented as prudence, virtue, charity, and the like.
This all comes to children as they gain competence.
Take a look at children at play.
Schiller says in his letters on the aesthetic education of man
that man is never so authentically himself as when at play.
Take a look at young boys in a schoolyard playing baseball.
Take a look at this child, particularly the one I would say that has the famous attention deficit syndrome.
Watch when he comes up to home plate facing a pitcher who's known to throw a very fast, fast ball.
And take a look at that attention deficit syndrome as the hands wrap around the bottom of the bat,
as that head tilts down, as the eyes focus so intensely on that ball
that if he's lucky he can actually count the seams as it comes up to home plate.
Now what's going on here is a form of self-control and discipline over body and mind and spirit
that can only be helpful in the days and months and years ahead.
Competence is not something trivial, it's something magical.
Try to recall your first attempt to ride a bicycle.
You knew to a moral certainty that your situation was hopeless.
And then in a matter of days, a matter of weeks, with bruised knees, with sore elbows,
and perhaps with a bump on your head, you found yourself pedaling down the street
with an independence that comes as close to a sense of liberty as a child will ever know.
Competence is not to be underestimated, it is to be venerated.
Now I do understand that competence matched up against something like originality.
Billy is so original why he misspells words like they've never been misspelled before.
I understand we place a very, very high premium on creativity.
You know, it's the Lake Wobegon thing.
Every child in this family is a genius.
And of course, he doesn't do very well in school, but that's just competence.
Well, let's try to eliminate the word just every time we use the word competence.
Let's try to say things like, my goodness, that's competence.
Wonderful things will happen if you do that, I promise.
In the next Ericksonian stage, we find the child in a period of adolescence,
that troubled and vexing period.
It isn't just vexing to parents and the adult community,
it's especially vexing to the one who's going through it,
because this is the period in which you actually can try on different roles.
This is probably the point where you're going to find out that with all that focus
and all that intensity and all that sharp eye on the ball coming in,
no, you are not going to be in the New York Yankee batting order,
because the a priori probability of that is almost zero.
So, enjoy the game, but understand that this is a game
that's going to end for you sooner rather than later.
And you try something else, and then something else again.
And you enter into a relationship with friends,
because you're sure that what you like and what they like
is just so absolutely likable that you're all destined for each other.
And then in the course of a month or the course of a year,
a half year or a year, you discover, uh-oh,
the grounds of compatibility were really quite superficial.
This isn't working, but who do I have if I don't have them?
This is a tumultuous period,
but it is also the training ground for social and civic life.
It's also the training ground for recognizing one's own principles
as something that can be brokered away only at great cost,
indeed at the cost of an authentic life.
Not authentic in the Freudian psychoanalytic biological sense,
but authentic in the sense of an autonomous being
trying to find a place in the world right for himself or herself.
Shall we say right for oneself?
The next stage is the stage of early adulthood,
and this is where we find ourselves depending on what came before.
As engaged in relationships of an intimate and meaningful nature,
or unable to achieve this, finding ourselves ever more isolated.
This can be a period in life that is stormy and portentous.
Aristotle, of course, is right.
We are by nature social animals,
whose inclination it is to live in the company of others.
Intimate relationships with others complete us as it were.
When Aristotle talks about perfect friendship,
he says the perfect friend is like an alter ego.
You love that other in the sense in which properly you love yourself.
This is a perfect melding and sharing of values.
These are characters that have been refined to the point
where they're right for each other,
and something happens in that kind of relationship
that couldn't possibly happen in isolation, do you see?
At the same time, attempts at intimacy can be thwarted.
They can be entirely frustrating and traumatic.
Depending upon how these earlier stages were went through,
by this time in life you might already have given up the game.
You are that lonely figure. You're never at the party.
You're the one no one talks to because you don't want to be talked to.
And then it's a question of how you find a place in a world of people
with whom you are never entirely comfortable.
This, I say, this is the wellspring of adult problems
of the most serious nature.
Well, then we reach something I once recall going through,
the Ericksonian stage called the Middle Age, do you see?
I think it's supposed to be women and chaps in their 40s,
that sort of thing. I do recall the 40s.
One week, I think, going through the 40s.
Erickson says this is the period in which we come to enjoy
either productivity or suffer stagnation.
And you see how this is now going to shape the stage that comes after it.
What have you done with this period?
Well, suppose you entered into one of those hopeless ritual forms of life.
Up in the morning, on the same train, to the same desk,
coffee by 9.20, hello Jane, hello Bill, morning newspaper,
the paperwork, back on the train, back home, hello Helen,
it's supper ready, day after day after day.
No Schubert, no Tolstoy, no Sophocles, no surprises.
What's the point of it all? What form of life is this?
Now this, of course, is the form of life that comes
when earlier initiatives have been thwarted,
when one has been given the view, has taken on the view,
has taken on the role of that passive being,
whose initiatives in the world never came to anything,
so why bother?
Versus a productivity that, you know that old Charlie Chaplin film
where he works on the assembly line,
and he's required to make these adjustments during the day,
and at the end of the day you see him walking home,
and he's still doing this, because this is what he did.
I'm not talking about that kind of productivity.
I once had a chum, I'm relieved to say that I haven't seen him
for years and years, it was exhausting to have a copy with him,
but he would say things, we'd get together,
and he'd say things like, one must have a good idea every day,
at least one good idea every day,
and I was sitting there saying to myself,
well, what do you do on those days when you don't have a good idea?
Or by the way, what happens if you happen to have three that day?
Can you then go three days without having one?
I mean, he so mechanized the very process of productivity,
of initiative, of getting things done.
He made a bore out of achievement,
you know, it's the sort of thing where you'd say,
I would rather be a mom, you know,
I have perfected the art of doing nothing
as an alternative to the technology of doing one thing a day.
Now, productivity on the Ericksonian account
is a rather more elastic, a rather more fluid,
protein sort of thing, it's the suit that fits,
it's the conversation that works,
and productivity is not referring to something that comes off the assembly line,
it may be wood cutting, of course, it may be carpentry,
it may be getting better at the keyboard,
it may be better at crossword puzzles,
but it means that you are engaged by and in the world,
that in fact the resources that you have,
moral, psychological, dispositional, emotional, musculoskeletal,
are being deployed towards some end,
because there's something constructive about having ends,
they don't have to be grand ends,
it doesn't have to be, you know, victory in World War II,
oh, thank goodness we got it,
but it has to be something that matches up in a realistic way
with what you take to be all of the sides of your nature,
and one side of your nature is a romantic side,
and there really isn't then a conflict between realism and romanticism,
once one recognizes that a realistic appraisal of human nature
includes this romantic element.
Well, even Ericsson must own up to the fact that all good things come to an end,
and if life has been a good life,
then of course that is one good thing that comes to an end,
and it is during what Ericsson calls the later stages,
the period of later life, the final stage,
that one faces the twin poles of integrity and despair,
and integrity here includes, but it's not limited to the moral sense of integrity,
as in being one's own person,
it is the continuing integration within one's own life
of the intellectual, moral, emotional, social, civic, aesthetic features of that life,
keeping it all together.
If you can't get to the concert hall,
you can at least get to the tape deck, do you see?
If you can't quite sing the aria anymore,
you certainly can do it vicariously as you listen to Kiri sing it.
If you can't quite get around to see your friends,
if you can't even write to them, you can still think of them,
you can ask others to write to them for you.
The chaps who come to mind,
I'm not commenting now on the assets and liabilities of their political achievements
and their achievements in the world,
the chaps who come to mind when I think of integrity in the Ericssonian sense,
are Jefferson and Adams,
these adversaries early on competing for office,
working different sides of the political street,
having rather different ambitions for the New Republic,
serving with distinction, though not without controversy,
the best interests, what they took to be the best interests of our country,
and then entering into a lifelong correspondence
that would end just weeks before the two of them died on the same day, the 4th of July.
And what do we find in this correspondence as they get much, much older?
The early correspondence has to do with things political,
do you see, it has to do with party considerations,
and what about this chap, do you think he's really worth the time and so forth?
And then the correspondence moves on.
And now what they're arguing about is the best rendering of certain Greek expressions
found in Scripture.
What a New Testament would look like, asks Jefferson,
if the only thing you included in it were the words of Jesus Christ,
which, when pulled out of the hole,
would constitute the most profound contribution to ethical thought
authored by the human imagination.
Adams wondering if Jefferson knows much about that fellow Dougal Stuart,
you know that Scotsman,
read some interesting work of his on this mind-body business,
and whether the whole thing is reducible to brain.
Jefferson writing back on this mind-body problem and saying,
well, I lay my head with comfort on my pillow at night,
whenever I face a philosophical conundrum that is, in principle, unsolvable.
Because once I'm sure of that, I don't really have to think about it much anymore.
And this tells us much about Jefferson.
Here, then, are two men who have preserved in the richest sense of integrity
an integral form of life, right up to the end,
through all of the sorenesses and pains and hair losses
and arrhythmias of heart and unsoundness of body
and indeed even weakening of mind,
but not a weakening of the resolve to fill the unforgiving minute
with sixty seconds worth of distance run.
