Lecture 48 Civic Development, Psychology, the Person and the Polis
The discipline of psychology, the discipline William James, as I've noted, referred to
as that nasty little subject, has taken on itself nothing less than the task of disclosing
the nature of human nature.
And I think it has become obvious over the course of these lectures that psychology can
claim much by way of progress, by way of ambition redeemed.
We know so much.
We know so much about brain function.
We know so much about the influence of reinforcement histories, about contextual determinants of
behavior, the things that render us more or less obedient and altruistic.
We know something about heritability and psychological phenotypes, such as those we
identify as mental illness, learning ability and the like.
We've even made some inroads into moral reasoning and reasoning at large, thinking, language
and thought, the conditions necessary and sufficient for the acquisition of language.
So progress here has been inevitably with something like this.
Progress has been two steps forward, one step back, but there has been progress.
We can say things now that would surprise and inform our intellectual ancestors.
And in response to the sort of shrugging claim, there's nothing new under the sun.
Well, there are things new under the sun.
I don't think that the ancient Greek world anticipated artificial intelligence devices
that would be taking on chess masters and all that, and if they did anticipate it, they
only would have anticipated it in a very sort of imaginative way and certainly not in any
sense at the level of detailed science and the like.
There's much new under the sun.
We've learned a lot.
But have we learned about the nature of human nature and have we learned about it by way
of psychology in a way that we hadn't learned about it by way of literature or philosophy
and the like?
And why are we interested in it anyway?
Of course, we're interested in it.
I mean, we take an interest.
It's one of the salient features of human nature that it takes an interest, and indeed
it takes an interest in things that are going to happen beyond the time of the individual
actor who does take the interest, the person who plants a tree that will mature 50 years
after he's dead, or starts a Gothic cathedral that will not be complete until 200 years after
the ground has been prepared.
We have this future referential perspective, and we also have to deal with the immediate
conditions of life.
What we lack, and I say this with the deepest, the most profound respect, what we lack for
this century of vigorous, rigorous psychology is anything that might present itself as a
genuinely systematic psychology.
And what do I mean by a genuinely systematic psychology?
Well, I can be brief here and say what I mean is the psychology developed by Aristotle
in the fourth century BC.
And then I must go on to say what makes this a genuinely systematic psychology, which by
the way is quite different from saying a genuinely correct psychology, or a perfectly accurate
psychology, or an unchallengeable psychology.
But systematic in this sense, Aristotle's psychological writings, which have to be extracted
from a wide range of his surviving work, and when I say his surviving work, I'm not suggesting
we've got anything he actually did, but what survives as best we can tell as the authentic
productions of Aristotle within the framework of his Lyceum, the students he was teaching,
the issues he was dealing with.
We only have a very, very small fraction of what people close to him in time already knew
to be his extraordinary productivity, surely less than 10% of what he wrote or had written.
And it's already quite, quite bulky.
It's too, in English translation, too thick volumes are required for the works of Aristotle.
But let me say what I mean by the systematic psychology he provided.
It is a psychology that includes the biological, the social, the ethical, the moral, the aesthetic,
the political, the legal, the religious dimensions of human life.
All addressed, all paid proper respect, and then, and significantly, all integrated into
a general theory, a quite general theory about the nature of human nature and the conditions
that are necessary for the realization of our humanity.
I don't know of any systematic psychology composed since Aristotle that is either as
general and ambitious in its reach, or may I say as discerning and passionate in its
approach to the evidence, the relevance of the evidence, and the marshalling of that
evidence in such a way as to generate a form of life, a recommended form of life.
So let me finish these lectures on modern psychology by acknowledging a debt to an ancient psychology,
which I say in some respects is more modern than what we have, or at least has an ambition
and a range and a reach, rather more generous, and I should say realistic than any we have
on hand.
By way of apologizing for our own limited programs, let me say that between Aristotle
and now, those who have taken on projects of this size have found themselves concluding
either in error or comedy or in coherence.
It's a lot safer and indeed a lot more sensible, I guess in some pragmatic sense, to sort of
settle down and find out how the visual system operates or whether helping behavior occurs
under the same conditions in Siam as it does in Brooklyn and the like, and these have been
good important informing studies.
I don't know psychologists today who say, I'm going to give up all that, retire to the
armchair and try to generate a psychology that has the range and inclusiveness of Aristotle's.
We've all been taught on the stool of repentance that that kind of ambition generally leads
to disaster or an unintended humor.
Now I want to make quite clear that for all the references to armchair psychology, Aristotle
it seems spent very little time in the ancient Greek equivalent of an armchair.
He was voracious in his appetite for information, going off to study the behavior of cuttlefish.
After the death of Plato and the decision was made that it wasn't going to be Aristotle
who would head up the academy, we find Aristotle leaving Athens.
He's gone for a period of time.
It's during this time that he gets married.
It's during this time that he will teach the future Alexander the Great in the Macedonian
court.
It's at this time that he seems to be engaged most regularly and most passionately in his
naturalistic studies, his studies of the animal kingdom, animal species.
When he's back and he has the lyceum in place, he will have Alexander through his soldiers
sending back specimens from other parts of the world.
He's doing comparative anatomy and ethology.
He's learning about animals in their natural habitats.
He has some extraordinarily prescient understandings of why animals are behaving the way they
do.
Let me offer one illustration.
It was already a maxim in the ancient world, a maxim at the time of Aristotle's quote,
nothing new in Libya and I'm sorry, rather always something new in Libya.
I was thinking of nothing new under the sun, always something new in Libya, always something
original or different in Libya and what was meant here is this.
If you take any animal species that exists where you are, the version of it that you
will find in Libya is more various.
There's just great a variety of any type that shows up otherwise in other places and Aristotle
wants to account for this.
The account is in terms of the actual terrain that animals are found in there and where
the major watering holes are.
Now the major watering holes there, he says, are generally found in broad, broad plains
so that animals from great distances will converge there and because so many different
types spend time taking their nutriment there, there's an opportunity for what in today's
language we would call the kind of outbreeding that it takes to produce a great and various
assortment of phenotypes.
Is this not a wonderfully up-to-date account, a wonderfully sensible account, I'm inclined
to say a properly Darwinian account of how you get variety as a result of environments
making outbreeding ever more possible than more narrow inbreeding would be.
Now I want to say in response to the criticisms ordinarily heaped on Aristotle, and I shouldn't
say by Aristotle scholars themselves, that far from somebody sitting in an armchair and
speculating, Aristotle is a scientist and psychologist and philosopher who measures
his remarks in terms of the observations he's been able to make and constantly qualifies
his generalizations.
Osepi topuli, Osepi topuli, it's almost a mantra in his works, it's the Greek for what
in English we would say for the most part, in general, by and large, do you say.
He recognizes that within the great, great order of nature there is always variation.
The generalizations we make are generalizations, there will be exceptions to these rules, but
the rules do inform us.
I would also want to emphasize the overall ethylogical character of the psychology that
he develops, because there is a recognition that the realization of our humanity takes
place in actual physical places, that the physical conditions of life incline us in
one direction or another, there are advantages in being in certain kinds of places and disadvantages
in being in other, climate has a factor, food supply has a factor, whether or not you are
a maritime nation seeing the productions of diverse cultures, that will be a factor as
well.
And within this overall ethylogical scheme, Aristotle also recognizes the profound significance
of early rearing, of how parents actually bring up their children, of the examples presented
to children as worthy examples.
He knows the influence that poetry can have, the dramatic productions happen, the like.
But nothing is more important in these regards than the essential character of the political
community itself, the polis itself.
Now in one of Aristotle's most controversial works, which is, I think, a never quite finished
treatise on politics.
This by the way, is Aristotle the proper target of feminist criticism, and this is the treatise
in which we hear about slaves by nature, in which comparisons are made between men and
women, very much to the disadvantage of women.
This is tied in with Aristotle's peculiar notion about what it is in gestation that
determines whether the offspring will be male or female.
And here he concludes that the temperature of the womb and other factors result in an
incomplete development, and that's what yields the female, versus the complete development
which yields the male.
One at the end of the 20th century, even reciting this, tends to duck and bob and weave from
those who would be outraged by such notions.
This is a chap who died in 322 BC, and his greatest defenders understand that he didn't
know everything, and that his theories were themselves very much tied up with an overarching
ethos that we now would reject in many of its details.
The politics contains some other item sentences and the like that give pause, and that almost
sound quirky.
In fact, when you read the male-female comparisons, and then the sentence that I have in mind,
you say, for goodness sake, what was he on when he wrote these things?
Well, I guess I should say something about the male-female comparisons, because I think
in the male-female comparisons you do see Aristotle the ethologist at work.
Not the sexist, but the ethologist.
Because when he goes down the defining characteristics of men and women, and of course always qualifying
this with the occipitopulite, for the most part in general, and so forth, he talks about
women generally having better memories, for example, being much more given to emotionality
and less able to control their emotions by way of rational restraint.
Men are better at that sort of thing, for the most part in the life.
The last item on the list where women are concerned is, and by and large, occipitopulite,
they eat less.
Now, Aristotle is not famous for humor, so this was not an attempt to conclude a list
of attributes with a kind of knee-slapping, you know, listen to this, chaps, and as we
very well know, they don't eat as much as we do either.
No, this is an ethological, sort of a biosocial description of the defining attributes of
a couple of natural entities, a couple of natural kinds, men and women, and he thinks
on the basis of his observations and what he knows, that this general description of
the female type works, and this general description of the male type, and one of the defining
features of the female type is that generally they consume less food.
It's in other works that he tells us about the amount of food elephants consume daily.
So it is an attempt at a sort of descriptive social and biopsychology, and we can say that
well, here he's in the thrall of what it was he could observe in the ancient world, patriarchal
world, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
Well the sentence that Gibbs pause is this, that the polis, he says, that the polis, the
city-state as it were, the political entity itself, the political community, precedes
the family and the person.
And you step back and say, oh for goodness sake, no wonder anti-Aristatelianism really
took off in the 17th century, it is amazing that anybody had ever attached oneself to
this kind of philosophy at all.
The polis precedes the family and the person.
What was this chap, how much, how much retina was he consuming the night he came up with
that one?
But then of course you have to understand that this is a formidable and analytically
powerful intelligence who has a metaphysical system that will absorb the biological and
social facts as these become available.
Look here, he would want to say.
The notion of family is to be understood in more than one sense.
Now if all one means by family is a breeding pool, if all one means by family is some
degree of hereditary relatedness within a given sample or population of animals, then
in fact family in the human sense hasn't yet been reached and indeed an adopted son or
daughter could not qualify as a member of a family in that sense.
But that surely isn't the sense in which we talk about family, the sense in which we talk
about family has to do with the duties that parents have to children and children to parents,
the duties that brothers and sisters have to each other, the nature of family organization
and the rules that might govern the disposal of property in wills, the obligations tax
and otherwise on given families depending on their means.
Now all of this comes about only within what is ineliminably a political context that is
absent the polis, absent its customary laws and principles and precepts.
None of these familial attributes could come into being.
Well you might say all right, that does make some sense, but now how does this pick up
where the person is concerned?
Well again, Aristotle is not talking about that individuated entity called Smith.
He's not talking about a physical object.
Obviously Smith as a physical object born of a woman presumably can exist in the wild
before there's anything like a familial let alone political organization.
But he's talking about Smith in the sense of Smith having some personal identity.
Well how does Smith derive a personal identity?
Smith after all is a senator or a judge, a father, a mother, a brother, a sister, a
nephew, a niece, an aunt, an uncle, a farmer, do you say, a taxpayer, a hoplite, a soldier,
an infantryman, a horse trainer.
Well what's this all about?
These are the functions and possibilities contained again within an ineliminably irreducibly
political context.
Our personal identities are derived from our family associations and the family associations
and the very character of the family turn out to be an extricably bound up with the
Paulus itself.
Now by Paulus Aristotle is not confining himself to Athens and Sparta and Thrace and the like.
These don't have to be highly developed places with written laws and constitutions and the
like.
He's talking about that minimal degree of principle defileation constitutive of a community
that is an ongoing and enduring community, enduring in virtue of the values and principles
it upholds and which youngsters are brought up to uphold and revere.
He takes this to be absolutely essential to the fuller realization of our humanity.
We start off, Aristotle frequently compares and contrasts human beings and non-human animals
and I should tell you, up through a certain point, the comparisons don't tell significantly
in our favor.
That is at the level of basic dispositions, appetites, perceptions, sensory capabilities,
to some degree a certain kind of intelligence which the animal kingdom must have or it couldn't
get through the day, human and non-human forms of animal life are quite comparable.
Man is by nature a social animal, says Aristotle, but so are swans, so are bees.
He's going to make some important distinctions regarding the grounds on which we are social
animals, but he sees these patterns throughout the animal kingdom and we are included in
these regards.
When in his treatise on the soul, his major or what some regard as the major psychological
work, the Dayanima or Peripsuke, when he defines the nature of psychic processes, the most
elemental psychic process being a nutritive kind of thing where the organism has exchanges
with the environment in such a way as to sustain health and growth and then a reproductive
capability otherwise you couldn't keep the species going and a locomotive capability
and a sensitive capability and some kind of intelligence and the like, we're in here
with everything else and then he gets to us.
What is it human beings have that the balance of the animal economy as best as we can tell
doesn't have?
Now the textbook answer is usually reason for which the Greek word is noose.
At this point in his treatise on the soul, that isn't the word he uses, he would use
it elsewhere.
The word he uses is, I won't bog you down with this, but it's epistemonicon.
What he's actually getting at is the ability to frame universal propositions.
It's not just some rational power, it's a particular kind of rational power that renders
us capable of dealing with concepts like necessarily true, universally true and the
like.
It's precisely the intellectual or rational power that it takes to live within a rule
of law, to frame just those general and universal prescriptions that would guide a creature
prepared to live according to the terms of law.
So this now makes possible not only life within the polis, but it makes the polis itself possible.
What kinds of creatures are we?
Well we are creatures given to emotionality, our sentiments prevail upon us, there is this
ancient Greek sense of a kind of tension between reason and passion, between emotion and the
intelligent proper practical reasonableness that has us do the right thing in the circumstance,
recognizing the circumstance for what it is.
But as children we don't have that power, Aristotle is constantly putting children
and animals together in comparisons with things that we find in the adult community.
Children have a set of potentialities that must be realized, but if they're unrealized
all bets are off.
Man he says in the politics, when tamed by law is the best of animals, but outside the
law is the very worst of animals, the very worst of animals.
And he's catching up here with that summoning passage in Homer, where Homer has to identify
the most deplorable imaginable life.
And he says it is the life of the lawless, heartless, stateless man.
On the ancient Greek view, life outside the polis is not just nasty, brutish and short,
do you say.
It is a life that does not fulfill the very terms of our humanity, because the very terms
of our humanity summon us to a reasonable and productive life within a community itself
committed to the terms of virtue.
The whole scheme is generally referred to as a perfectionist scheme, but the whole point
of human life is to take a set of potentialities and under favoring conditions, materialize
them into something ever more virtuous, ever more worthy, putting down in ourselves those
inclinations that are vicious and of the worst sort.
And for this to be achieved, it is absolutely essential that we find ourselves within a
directing, disciplined, nurturing culture, a culture, a paiva that is instantiated in
a political community committed to justice and fairness and decency and recognizing every
minute of the day that we are creatures inclined to lapse, inclined to self-interest, inclined
to passionate excess.
As he tells us in the rhetoric, young men have strong passions which they tend to gratify
indiscriminately.
They love too much and hate too much and in all ways do things to excess.
Now this isn't a condemnation or rebuke or a finger wagging.
It's a clinical diagnosis.
It says that parents have duties and obligations, that if the parent does not occupy, and I
want to use this term though it's not his, but he would fully concur and it's consistent
with the text, if parents do not occupy the office of parent, do you see?
This is an essentially political station one has in the sense of life within the polis.
If parents do not occupy the office of parent, if they're derelict in discharging the duties
of that office, then what they bring into the world and what they nurture in the world
is something ever and precariously close to the lawless, heartless, stateless man, that
most deplorable of characters, that most dangerous of characters.
Think of ancient Greek law and the penalties that it would assess for crimes and felonies
of a given kind.
Smith knocks down Jones in a fight.
That's an assault and there's a punishment for that.
Now we discover the law that covers hubristic acts.
Smith knocks down Jones and proceeds to walk around Jones as a rooster crowing.
The penalty for that hubristic element is far graver than the penalty for the assault
itself because in that hubristic act the assailant is strutting and presenting himself as something
special apart from superior to more worthy than the community, the interests of the community.
He has sully the very dignity of a fellow citizen.
This makes him a threat to the polis.
That's why the penalty has to be so severe and the penalty often includes what translates
from the Greek as ostracism which was actually a period of exile, a ten year period of exile.
Now I don't want to affirm life in ancient Athens as what one is supposed to be aspiring
to.
There were injustices perpetrated, superstitions that ran rampant, conditions that probably
no contemporary citizen in a western democracy would want to accept.
At the same time there was a certain character and tone to life, a kind of integrity in life,
the integration of the moral, the political, the social, the biological and so forth which
we look back to in a most admiring way.
Perhaps we romanticize it to some extent but we know it when we see it.
Aristotle thinks that each creature, he knows that each creature enjoys species membership
for a kind of generic location in the world, in the animate world, in virtue of having
a defining characteristic, the fish with the aquatic life, the bird that flies.
That these defining characteristics establish defining tasks for that species if those tasks
are not completed the species life is imperiled.
What's the defining task we have in the Greek, the idion ergon, the unique mission?
The unique mission of course is to perfect ourselves at the level of moral and intellectual
virtues, to live in a manner consistent with our very nature which is the nature of a rational
being but a being that is brought to terms with its own rationality through a flourishing
and proper form of civic life.
On Aristotle's account you could not possibly expect a normal psychology to arise within
a pathological civic context.
You cannot have a bad state and good citizens.
You cannot have a bad state and good families, bad families and good citizens because for
the most part in general on the whole, the flourishing realized humanity of the individual
is a reflection of the polis itself, its laws, its customs, its values.
Well, a developed psychology should we ever have one may not be of an Aristotelian stripe
but it certainly will have to be one that comes to terms with human psychology as a constellation
of congaries of potentialities that either will be realized or frustrated, nurtured or
denied by what finally is the political reality of the world in which that life develops.
And short of that developed political psychology, much of the rest of what we do may be interesting
but painfully and obviously incomplete.
I'm Tom Rawlins, president of The Teaching Company.
We hope you've enjoyed the lectures on these tapes.
To order more courses or to receive a copy of our most recent catalog, call 1-800-TEACH-1-2.
That's 1-800-TEACH-1-2.
Or visit our website at www.teachco.com.
Thank you very much for listening.
