You're very much so let me also begin by thanking the organisers it's really a pleasure to be here and thank you for the invitation to talk.
You can hear me OK it the back.
Yeah great. Thank you OK so indeed I am going to be talking to you about dynamical dark energy and entertaining the possibility that it might provide us an opportunity
to connect string theory to observations, so I will be talking about work done recently with two very nice collaborations, one with David Angiol, Dimitrios Simpsis, Tim Raza and Yvonne Savalla, and another with Sukanya Bhattacharia, Julia Borghetto, Amic Malhotra, Jamasi Motazinato, Yvonne Savalla.
Sukanya, Julia and Amic are excellent postdocs and a student, Borghetto, in Swansea.
I thought I'd also mention for those of you who are interested in the field more broadly, a recent physics report review entitled String Cosmology from the early universe to today,
with Michela Cicoli, Joe Conlon, Anshuma Maharana, Fernando Cavedo and Yvonne Savalla.
Okay, so let's get into it. So, as you all know, since the very exciting discovery that our present day universe is undergoing an accelerated expansion back in 1998,
diverse observations has led us to the so-called concordance model, or lambda, CDN, which suggests that dark energy is a tiny vacuum energy sourcing the sitter universe.
So, the thing that's sourcing the accelerated expansion has an equation of state parameter equal to minus one.
This, of course, is tiny value for the vacuum energy, puts into sharp relief the cosmological constant problem and provokes the tempting question whether or not quantum gravity can help us understand the microscopic nature of dark energy.
So, within string theory and four-dimensional string theory models, this is, of course, related to the modular stabilisation problem where various classical and quantum ingredients conspire together to produce a potential energy
functional for the string moduli, the scalar fields, and stabilise the moduli at weak string coupling and large volumes so that we're consistent with our lower energy photofill theory descriptions, or string theory.
And in that case, then the value of the potential energy at the minimum gives a good approximation to the vacuum energy.
So, as we've had just in the last talk, there has been much progress towards explicit to sitter string solutions, even if they are always near the boundaries of control.
Still, it's fair to say that so far, at least, the best explanation that we have for the cosmological constant problem and dark energy is probably, arguably, the string landscape together with eternal inflation and the anthropic principle.
Despite, it should be said, various conceptual issues starting with the very basic question of how we construct observables, how we define observables in cosmological space times with event horizons.
Alongside those conceptual issues, as the cosmological data that we have grows in variety and in precision, there are intriguing emerging tensions within the different data when we're fitting the data to the simple concordance model, the lambda CDM.
The most well-known of these is, for example, the Hubble tension, which, depending on the analyses done and the data sets considered, is around three to six sigma tension between the value of H0, the Hubble parameter today, measured locally, directly, sorry,
with local model independent measurements, these late time measurements, the value obtained from those direct measurements to the value inferred from early time measurements like the CMB using the lambda CDM model.
So, it's still an open question whether or not this and other similar tensions are due to systematic errors, for example, in the local late time measurements, or an indication, a hint of new physics.
More recently, the recent dark energy surveys, which are aiming to measure the time, any possible time variation of the equation of state parameter for dark energy, are finding intriguing hints for a deviation from the cosmological constant, from a time independent dark energy equation.
Here, I give you one of the plots from the recent DESI collaboration, the dark energy spectroscopic instrument, and they've assumed a phenomenological parameterisation of the dark energy equation of state, where it varies linear with the scale factor of the universe.
You can see that by combining the DESI observations of the galaxies out to 11 billion years, plus the CMB data, plus various supernovae catalogs, they fit these two parameters of the dark energy equation of state, W0, WA, the cosmological constant,
would be here at W0 is equal to minus 1, WA is equal to 0, and you can see a clear preference in the data using this fit, a preference over lambda CDM, which is given as 2.5 sigma, 3.9 sigma, depending on the supernova dataset used.
It's this pantheon plus union 3 or DESI year 5. Again, the question is, is this just statistics or is it a hint towards new physics? It's too early to say. This is just an analysis of the first year of data analysed collected by DESI.
They've already collected three years of data, and we can expect more results to come in the next year out of analysis of those, and there's five years planned of data and, of course, upcoming other missions that will be working towards better constraining the equation of state parameter for dark energy.
Within that context, I have two very broad, big motivations for the work in the talk and beyond. Are there simple, controlled, stringy candidates for dynamical dark energy with observational signatures?
Also, what can we learn? What might we learn about string theory and the landscape when we're looking for such models?
I will be focusing today, for the purposes of the talk, on a class of quintessence models. That's dark energy driven by a scalar field in much the same way as will be familiar to you from early universe inflation.
Quintessence model is a scalar field, which corresponds to some runaway string modulus, a modulus that has some exponential, oops, sorry, I think all my elephants are missing here, some runaway string modulus.
I'm going to begin with some brief comments on asymptotic acceleration, the possibility of achieving acceleration at the asymptotics of modular space, event horizons in the swamp land, and then I'm going to argue that it's possible to evade the issues that I'll present to you when we consider runaway quintessence in an open universe.
Those three dimensional spatial slices are curved with negative curvature.
Then I will discuss constraining those candidate models for quintessence from the most recent observational data and give you some outlook.
These are some very important issues that I won't discuss in the talk today. The cosmological constant problem, the UV stability of the light mass, unobserved fifth forces, time variation of fundamental constants.
These are of course very important questions, and it's not to say that there's not interesting ideas around to address them, and indeed holding all these questions together will really be the thing that reveals to us what is the microscopic nature of dark energy.
I'm going to ask to what extent acceleration is possible at arbitrarily large volume and weak coupling.
Of course, in 4D string models, we have most control of the theory at the asymptotics of modular space, where we take the string coupling and the alpha prime corrections to be small.
We know that modular potentials are typically runaway in that region of modular space, so they typically take the form of some simple exponential, say in the canonically normalized fields, and it's a very natural question that of course has been asked, can such a potential source acceleration.
It's widely believed that desitu vacua do not exist in the asymptotics of the modular space, and indeed this has been quantified by a lower bound on the gradient of the potential over the potential.
So this would be this parameter lambda in our simple exponential potentials. This is believed to be greater than square root 2 in four dimensions, and again at the asymptotics there's no known counter example to that.
Of course there are candidates desitu vacua inside the modular space, but this bound precludes the possibility of having asymptotic eternal acceleration, indeed when one looks at the Einstein's equations with a source such as this,
one finds that one can have a ton of acceleration only when this ratio, when this parameter lambda in the exponent here is less than square root 2 as opposed to greater than square root 2, which is what's found in string theory.
Though I should note that it's long been known that transient acceleration is possible by say tuning initial conditions, for example starting rolling up the potential instead of down.
So this is all consistent with early insights that quintessence actually has the same conceptual challenges as desitu, including event horizons.
Moreover when one actually tries to fit such exponential quintessence models to the cosmological data, one finds bounds on the parameter lambda, lambda must be less than around 0.6 depending again on the analysis and the data sets used, and so this is outside the stringy bounds that we believe exist.
Okay, so I'm going to argue that there is a potential loophole to those arguments against having realising eternal acceleration in string theory, and indeed it's long been known that there do exist 10 dimensional, 11 dimensional solutions with eternal acceleration,
and the thing that gets us over the obstacles is that these solutions, these 10D solutions are time dependent, they have negatively curved, and they have negatively curved, negatively curved 3 dimensional spatial slices.
So one can consider such 10D, 11D compactifications, for example on Calabi Type 2, on Calabi Yaw's, on some Einstein manifolds, on some Einstein-Cailer manifolds, with various fluxes, 3 form fluxes, 4 form fluxes, external, internal.
One can derive 4 dimensional effective potentials for such constructions, they take these form, or sums of exponentials, for example if I consider just types away on some compact hyperpolyc manifold with just one geometric modulus, the volume, no fluxes.
After fixing the dilaton, I get this simple exponential, lambda, my parameter lambda is minus, sorry, square root 8 over 3, greater of course than square root 2 for the canonical normalised field.
Okay, so one can, again so these correspond to eternal acceleration, one can do a 4 dimensional analysis of such scalar potentials, now in an open universe with your negatively curved 3 dimensional spatial slices,
and one can show that one can achieve eternal acceleration, precisely when the parameter lambda takes values greater than square root 2, which are the values found in string theory, and these correspond then to achieving eternal acceleration.
Moreover, where you have small string coupling, small alpha prime corrections, and when one computes the position of the event horizon, it goes off to infinity, so no event horizon.
Okay, it's interesting to note perhaps that it's been argued that open universes are favoured by common dilution tunneling in the landscape.
Okay, so the question then is, can these kind of stringy curved in the 3 dimensional spatial slices, steep lambda being greater than square root 2, exponential quintessence, lead to a realistic cosmology?
So in order to answer that question, we need to include matter and radiation, and so now allow me to just do a 4 dimensional cosmological analysis of such a scenario, an exponential quintessence, we're including matter, radiation and curvature, so we can solve for the full 4 dimensional cosmology in an open femen,
well, but it's not more co-universe, k here in the metric corresponds to, equal to minus 1 corresponds to the open universe.
Okay, so we have our various contributions to the energy momentum tensor, radiation, matter, curvature and the scalar field, they're characterized by energy densities, pressure densities, and an equation of state parameter.
And for those of you who don't have any cosmology fresh in your mind, remember that the energy densities fall off with the scale factor of the universe in a way that depends on the equation of state parameter, we'll define some density parameters which are related to the energy density, the ratio of the energy density to the critical density.
And for a universe dominated by a single fluid, the behavior of the expansion is determined by, again, the equation of state parameter for that single fluid ingredient.
When you have multiple fluids, you can define an effective equation of state, which is kind of a weighted combination of the different equation of states contributing, and you have accelerated expansion when the effective equation of state is less than minus one third.
Okay, so one can work out the equations of motion, essentially the Ison's equations and the fluid equations, the scalar field equation for such system, and it turns out that it can be expressed very nicely in terms of a dynamical system.
So defining these new variables x, y, z, and u, which depend on the density parameters for the scalar field and its equation of state parameter for the curvature for the radiation, there's this constraint equation for the matter, and the time parameter is the number of ethos log of the scale factor.
One can express the equations of motion in terms of this autonomous system, the laws governing the system are independent of the time parameter.
Analysis of the fixed points then of the system, so the equilibrium states, gives you insights into the global cosmology, and the cosmological solutions correspond to orbits in the phase space with coordinates x, y, z, and u passing between the various fixed points.
So one can work out what are the fixed points of the system. Let me focus on the case lambda greater than square root two. The fixed points, their existence and their position in the phase space depends on the parameter lambda.
They can be characterized by their equation of state parameter, and by their stability. There's a unique stable fixed point, which behaves as a global attractor, so all the trajectories in the phase space end up in that global attractor.
It has an equation of state equal to minus one third, right at the boundary of acceleration, and the energy density has contribution from the scalar field and the curvature, but the expansion is dominated by the curvature.
Okay, there's also some unique unstable fixed points where all the trajectories will end up beginning.
One can also consider the flat case, that turns out to be an invariant subspace of the full space, and in that case the stable fixed point changes without curvature, the stable fixed point becomes a scalar field dominated one for lambda less than square root three, or matter dominated with some scalar for contribution for lambda greater than square root three.
I did plan to skip these slides, and I want to give you some drawings of the phase space, some interesting orbits, and compare what the trajectories look like with and without curvature.
For the purposes of visualising things, I'm going to turn off radiation, so we just draw our phase space in terms of the scalar field, x, y, and the density parameter, the flat cosmologies lie on the surface of the sphere,
and the curved geometries can go inside the sphere. One can look at the fixed points for these cases, the unstable fixed points, which are dominated by the kinetic energy of the scalar field, all the trajectories start from there,
and the trajectories end on the unique stable fixed point, which in the case without curvature is dominated by the scalar field, in the case with curvature is this curvature scaling point.
We can map out where in the region of the phase space where there is acceleration, and that's given by this green region, and all orbits, all cosmological solutions start at the unstable fixed points, go to the stable fixed points,
but they're undetermined by some initial conditions, and we can fix the initial conditions by the density parameters today, the equation of state parameter today, that depends on fit, to know what those are, we need to fit to the cosmological data, but we can make some reasonable guesses for the purposes of these plots, and that's this orange point.
Typically, orbits will not pass through the matter domination, but one can tune the parameters such that they do, and so these are the realistic cosmologies going through matter domination passing through today,
and you can see how the future, destiny of the universe depends on whether or not there's curvature or not.
The present universe will have, I just take two more minutes, the past universe seems in the end is very similar with or without curvature, that's because curvature we know is reasonably small today, so it's going to be even smaller in the past from the behaviour of the curvature with the scale factor,
and it turns out that with, by requiring matter domination in the past, we cannot get eternal acceleration any more.
So we were interested in this in these solutions because they gave, in these models they gave eternal acceleration, but once you include matter into the system, the cosmological and matter domination in our past, which we knew existed, you end up only getting transient epots of acceleration without requiring matter domination,
you can have trajectories which approach the fixed point from inside the acceleration region, and that's eternal acceleration, but requiring matter domination you cannot.
Okay, so, but one can still ask what are their viable models which fit the data in such scenarios, so it turns out that there are some, just asking for the very minimal requirements of past radiation domination and acceleration today,
leads to a theoretical upper bound on our parameter lambda less than square root 3, so there's still this window where lambda can be greater than square root 2 from string theory models, less than square root 3, and we can ask, would such models with curvature again, the key is curvature, do they fit the cosmological data?
Okay, so these are the, we worked that out, what's the answer to that, so fitting the model to the most recent cosmological constraints, including DESI and the supernova data and the CMB, one finds in the end a 2 to 4 sigma depending on the data set,
used preference for non-zero lambda in these models, non-zero lambda, so preference over lambda CDM, but the values of lambda are smaller than square root 2 from the data, and also there is no clear preference for curvature in the data, so data suggests lambda, if such a model were,
were the description of dark energy, lambda would have to be less than square root 2, this brings us back to eternal acceleration and the event horizon. Okay, thank you, sorry for everyone.
Thanks for a wonderful talk, any questions, Miguel?
Thanks for a nice talk, Shusan, so I wanted to ask in the Cosmoanalysis, did you include, am I right, because it seems to me that you included the latest DESI results, the one from APR?
Yes.
So you did, you, is the data public or the?
Yeah, so it's, somehow it's embedded in the, yeah, yeah.
Yes, Thomas.
So I was wondering if you find that eternal acceleration is possible in this corner of field space, but somehow there's no event horizon being formed. Is this so far only a numerical observation or is there some kind of an analytic proof that this will always be?
Yeah, no, you can understand that analytically, so the point is just that, that fixed point is curvature dominated, so you know the equation of state, say the effective equation of state from that fixed point, so you know how the expansion behaves.
So you can work out the cosmological, you know, the cosmological horizon, it's just the integral of DT over A, and so, yeah, and it goes off to, yeah, it goes to infinity.
Yeah, so you can also look at the asymptotic solutions analytically, look at the corrections net, so look at the solution, the behaviour of the solution near the fixed point, not exactly on the fixed point, and again show that the horizon is going to infinity.
Any other questions?
Does the H0 tension stay a road here?
Yeah, no, so the, to resolve the H0 tension is likely that we'll have to change the early time cosmology, here we're only changing the late time cosmology, and if you kind of, if you look at that whisker plot,
so our analysis is kind of, fits, are falling inside the early time, fits though, you know, not with lambda CDM obviously, but yeah, I mean if we were, if we were fitting lambda CDM it would be, yeah.
Any other questions?
I have a kind of comment, and also part of the question, so do I interpret correctly what you are saying is the following, that if you go to weak coupling string limits, there's evidence that the slope should be bigger than or equal to the score top two for any positive potential, and if you take the data of DESI, if you assume that's correct, and you get the slope which is 0.6 or so 0.68, whatever the number is.
0.7, so that means that if the string theory asymptotic is correct, and if the data is correct, we are not at asymptotic weak coupling of coupling, which means that the weak coupling description of that dark energy would not be easy in the context of string models, is that the fair assessment?
Not that there's any problem with string theory, but it's just going to be difficult.
Yeah, yeah, I agree with that, I think, yeah.
Okay, any other questions or comments?
If not, let's thank Susha for the wonderful talk.
