Welcome to the UOUC talk show.
Our goal of this show is to introduce you to the most interesting people with the most
interesting ideas.
Today we have a very special guest, Dr. Wolfram, which I would describe as someone who is
saying in a way most people are crazy.
So that could be a positive thing to say or it could be a negative thing to say.
We'll find out.
Go for it.
I think it's a very positive thing.
It's something that I admire.
But I want to focus the conversation and the first question is that if you were in college
what would you major be?
Would you even go to college?
It's an interesting question.
First question is what would I be studying or interested in?
So when I grew up in England and I was a kid in the 1960s and so on, when space was the
big thing, as it was then, as it perhaps is again now, with a 50-year gap.
And so I followed all the various spacecraft and things like that.
And I was interested in that partly because it seemed like the future.
And I was interested in the future.
And so interested in that, then from that I got interested in physics and sort of studied
physics as much as I could when I was like 10, 11, 12 years old.
Ironically, a project that I kind of got interested in when I was 12 years old about
the second war of thermodynamics.
I'm finally finishing that project now, so 50 years later.
That's a funny thing.
But anyway, separate topic.
But no, so I got interested in physics.
It so happened that in the mid-1970s was kind of a golden age for physics.
And so it was a time when quantum field theory was really discovering all kinds of things,
all kinds of experimental results were coming in.
It was super exciting field.
So for me, that was sort of the obvious field to work on because it was the exciting field
of the time.
What you generally see in kind of the rhythm of how things work is some methodological
advances made.
Maybe it's an experimental thing.
Maybe it's a methodological thing.
Maybe it's a theoretical thing.
And then some field gets really exciting for five or 10 years because there's lots of
low-hanging fruit to be picked.
And that meant that when I was a mid-teenager or something, I could discover a bunch of
things in physics which people still care about today because it happened to be a time
when there was juicy low-hanging fruit to pick.
So the fact that I was doing physics was a consequence in large part of the fact that
it was a hot thing at that time.
And so when I, well, I went to college kind of early and I was sort of...
You see, the problem is when you ask a question like, what would I major in college in today,
depends on whether it was the same me with the same kinds of constraints, whether it's
kind of a different, a me that might have arisen in modern times where different things
are the exciting things.
I mean, in the last few years, I mean, I get to see this from our summer camp and summer
school and so on.
Students come in every year and they're always like, we want to study this kind of thing,
where this is the popular thing of the time.
So it had been, there was a brief period when it was blockchain.
I think that one died too quickly because I think that one actually has an interesting
tale.
When there's been a longer period when it's machine learning, there really wants to do
machine learning.
That one, I think that wave is very crested at this point.
And then it's the question, so if you say, what would I study today?
An awful lot of people go and study computer science in college.
And this, I think, is not really the right thing because what is the thing that we realize
is computation and computational X is the big sort of paradigmatic thing about time.
And that's all these different fields, X for archaeology, zoology, whatever it is.
There's a computational version of those fields that is going to be the future of those
fields and that's the thing people should want to study because there's going to be
low hanging fruit to pick and it's really an exciting thing to do.
But then people say, okay, I'm going to do, I really, I'm not sure they say it properly,
but what they should be saying is I want to do computational X, what do I need to do
to get to being able to do computational X?
Well, they sort of say that implicitly and then they say, well, I better study computer
science in college, which I think is crazy.
And I think because if you look at what is, I mean, computer science departments that
have sort of a complicated story of what they actually teach and a lot of it ends up being
this is how to program in low level languages, which I don't know whether anybody's going
to care about in the future.
Right.
I mean, it's, you know, when I was, when I first learned about computers, when I first
used a computer back in 1973, I programmed in an assembly language and when I built my
first big computer system in 1979, was built in the C programming language, which was at
that time kind of a newfangled thing to use, and people were still saying, oh, anything
really serious, you have to build in an assembly language.
And, you know, turns out nobody says that anymore, because that, you know, we automated
those layers.
And so it isn't useful to, you know, hand program things in assembly language.
And I think, you know, the thing that I've spent a large part of my life doing is trying
to build sort of a higher level way of thinking about computation that doesn't require you
to sort of be in the guts of the machine, you know, programming the loop and saying this
thing should be stored in memory in this place and so on.
That is not something humans need to do.
It's just humans don't need to write assembly language.
And, you know, a large part of my life has been devoted to kind of building up this computational
language that gets one away from that.
And I think in terms of sort of the path of how do you get to computational X without
going through sort of traditional computer science, this is a path that, you know, I've
spent a lot of effort trying to enable.
But how does that relate to kind of what people should study in college?
Well, you know, if you study computer science, a large part of what you're studying is a
bunch of the past.
You're studying a bunch of, you know, how to deal with computers at a low level.
Actually, I think they stopped teaching assembly language, which is kind of a shame.
But it's kind of a sign because it's kind of like, well, there are these layers and,
you know, the more and more gets automated, less and less is worth learning that way.
So people, you know, now in terms of computer science as a field that colleges teach has
various kinds of sort of application areas that have been bolted on to computer science
as such, different ones in different schools, because they don't fit in any other department.
And that's sort of random.
And if one of the, you know, robotics is one that's often bolted on, computer security,
cryptography, another bolt on, machine learning is a sort of bolt on, but it's like, what
other department does it fit in, even though the methods are much more like physics and
things like that, it's all statistics.
So you know, it's complicated.
So gosh, what, this is a, this is a complicated answer, isn't it?
I think the, you know, if I look at, I mean, it also depends on, okay, there's another
which is when I was a kid, I made this sort of meta discovery that you could learn things
just by reading books, which was, it's, that's all gotten a lot easier because it's a lot
easier to read things, you know, to learn things by looking at things on the internet
than it is by bicycling to the, you know, to the local library and finding a book.
So, you know, some people like myself, for example, have a certain pattern of learning
that is pretty good to teach yourself.
I mean, for me, I can't learn stuff sort of cold in the abstract, but when I have some
project I want to do, then I go learn a bunch of stuff, and then I get motivated to do it
and so on.
That's my way of doing things.
That has little relationship to what the mode of learning that one gets in college.
If for people who are in that sort of autodidact, you know, learn it for yourself type thing,
I don't know whether a college is, you know, the benefits of it are not so clear.
I think there are plenty of people for whom the things, you know, the methods of learning
things that I've used just don't work, and they're not a good fit for personality or
whatever, and then, you know, college is a fine thing.
Now, in terms of what subjects one studies in college, I mean, it depends what one wants
to do.
I think that the traditional export fields, that is, if you study this field, you can
go and do all kinds of stuff.
The winner, historically, has been physics.
That's been the one where if you look at sort of the life stories of people who've gone
on and, you know, started molecular biology or started, you know, bunch of areas of computer
science or whatever else, they studied physics.
That's been, why is that?
I think it's because it's a quantitative field that has definite things, but it is not as
kind of detailed as mathematics and not as kind of, not as sort of formalistic as mathematics.
It's more practical.
It's like there's quantitative things, but you can study all kinds of stuff with them.
Now, the details of studying particular areas of physics, I'm not sure how useful that is,
but the general methodology has turned out to be a good export field.
I think the other export fields that in, you know, I think computer science is a little
bit of an export field and has become in some places as becoming more of an export field.
There are fields that, you know, if well-taught are good export fields, like philosophy, if
well-taught is a good export field for lots of kinds of things.
I think for some areas, economics and certain kinds of teaching is probably a reasonable
export field, but you don't see, you know, so that's one, you know, one consideration.
But I think in, you know, so the next question is, should you go to college at all, right?
And the answer is, if you want to do software engineering, techy stuff, I don't think going
to college is, you know, it's not, it depends on, it may be a life stage type thing that's
worth going to college for that, you know, having that experience in life, so to speak.
But in terms of, does it teach you to be a better programmer?
I don't know.
I know plenty of programmers who never went to college or went to college and studied
something that had nothing to do with programming, you know, never did a computer science course,
and they are better programmers than the people.
In fact, it's usually, honestly, it's a little bit of a bad sign sometimes when people say,
I went, I studied computer science, I did my four years, and now I'm a programmer.
It's like, well, actually, you know, many of the most sort of natural and talented programmers,
you know, don't need to go through programming schools, so to speak.
So I think that's, you know, and I've seen, you know, we've had a bunch of people at this
company, for example, who have come to work here, you know, without going to college,
going to, you know, some small amount of college and so on, and often very successful.
And actually, one of the things that's ironic is that often those people have broader interests
and knowledge than the people who've gone through the super-fancy educational process.
And, you know, the people who've got PhDs and so on, some of them have broad interests,
and particularly the ones who end up working at this company.
But the, you know, sometimes it's like, I studied this for my PhD for six years, and
now I'm, that's what I do.
And that's the only thing I know about and care about.
And so that's a very long answer to what might have been a simple question.
And I think the, I think probably the answer is it really depends a lot on the person,
how they learn things, and what they're actually interested in.
Which, you know, you unfortunately find an awful lot of kids these days who've gone
through school, they've done really well, and they say, you say, what are you interested in?
I don't know, I don't really know what I'm interested in.
And then they'll go through college, and they'll do well in college, and they'll get to the end,
and they'll say, what am I going to do next?
And maybe they'll go to graduate school, or maybe they'll go to the career fair,
and they'll see, you know, who has the best candy, and then they'll be working for, you know,
big company X. And then, you know, maybe they'll wake up a few decades later and say,
oh, maybe I should have done something different.
But that's, you know, I think it's always great when people have sort of things
that they realize they're interested in.
Sometimes people have things that they're interested in, and they're like,
how could I make a living doing this thing?
There's something they're interested in, but it's like they don't know how to get there
from here, so to speak.
I think the thing to say is, particularly for people who are young in modern times and so on,
it's, you know, with creativity, it's possible to make a living doing all kinds of things.
I mean, who knew you could make a living, you know, professionally playing video games?
Right.
Or, you know, being a YouTube influencer, talking about this or that.
It's, I mean, there's a certain, it requires a certain tenacity and a certain kind of entrepreneurial
spirit to get those kinds of things to work.
But it isn't the case that people should just say, well, I am interested in this,
but I can't do that because, you know, I'll never be able to get a job doing that.
I can't learn that in school.
I'm going to do these standard things.
And, you know, I think that's a shame because I think people can, you know, with creativity,
it's often possible to find those things.
I mean, you could be unlucky and you could have a thing you're really interested in that
at this time in history just isn't possible.
Or just isn't, you know, you could be interested in discovering the source of the Nile or something.
But sorry, that's what that's once been done.
Or you could be interested in, you know, taking a trip to a different star system.
Well, sorry, it's too early to do that.
But usually there are, you know, I think it's with a little bit of creativity, there are,
there are, it's, you know, that's the problem to solve, so to speak.
And I think that should inform what people study in college.
Another thing I might comment about college, I'll make two, since you asked me about college
and since, you know, first point is that in almost any large college, there are all
kinds of interesting things to find to do.
Point one, point two, you know, there are professors at colleges.
And one of the things, at least the brief time when I was a professor, one of the things
that kind of shocked me is students never come to talk to you.
And turns out maybe, maybe I was too horrifying a professor, I don't know, but it, you know,
students don't make use of, in many cases, the ability, you know, professors, you know,
some of them may have a bad day or maybe, you know, maybe otherwise, maybe jerks, who
knows.
But most of the time, you know, a student comes in, has an interesting question, professor
is going to be pleased, you know, a student gets all kinds of useful interaction.
I think that's one thing that, another thing is, you know, taking random courses about
things that you'll never otherwise learn about in your life is a good strategy.
Because, you know, if you take that one course about this or that, I mean, a famous sort
of pseudo-historical example is, you know, Steve Jobs with his calligraphy course, so
to speak.
You know, that, which, that story has some embellishment to it, but let's, you know,
I think, you know, this, this point of there are things to learn in college that you'll
never, you know, you'll never get around to learning any other time in life, probably.
I mean, I've been lucky enough that I've done all kinds of different projects and all kinds
of different things.
And so I have gradually learned all kinds of stuff about all kinds of different areas.
I mean, it helps that my main life goal has been building this computational language
that makes everything computable, so to speak, which means that I kind of have a driver for
learning about everything, so to speak.
But that's, you know, that's an unusual case.
Anyway, very long answer to what seemed like a simple question.
Yeah, and I think that there's something very interesting about this idea that, you know,
you can go through school and you can come out of, and you don't know what you're interested
in.
And I think for me, college has been a place where I stopped caring so much about, you
know, what shooting, like, what is the college telling you what you should do and more about
what are the hypotheses I could create and test out to see what I actually like.
So I, you know, random classes, I was thinking art history, I've taken, I don't stand up
comedy completely unprepared from 300 people, just to see, test out a lot of hypotheses
and see what I'm actually interested in.
Which you can come out of the other side, you're so sad, like, you know, what do you
want to do with your life?
Oh, I want to work at X company because, you know, I'm doing computer science, you know,
it's for the money, right, type of thing.
And, you know, that's another good point that you say, like, a lot of people are doing computer
science and in a way, you know, that's kind of the only major that has some sort of demand
for jobs.
And so a lot of people are doing that for the money and so on, and it's really sad to
see that in not doing what you love doing.
Well, it depends on what, you know, the problem is there is a whole lot of kind of drone computer
science out there.
That is, you know, you get, you know, you do all this stuff, you study all these things,
and then you're optimizing a piece of JavaScript code for the next, you know, have a long.
And that's, you know, that's kind of a, it seems pretty boring to me.
I mean, there are people for whom that really is interesting, and that's fine, but if you
look at their trajectory in school, it's often doing things which are much more sort
of intellectually kind of rich than that.
You know, I think this, you know, this question of sort of what do people do?
Well, you know, an awful lot of the sort of high-end fancy kids go into finance kinds
of areas, which is, you know, which I don't know, I have many friends in those areas,
the people in those areas use our technology a lot, so that's nice.
But it is a weird thing in the world that, I mean, it is true that if you want to make
money, being close to the money is kind of a, you know, a good strategy, so to speak.
It's, if you want to make, you know, and I think it is a little bit shocking that the
fraction of code of sort of the very high-end, very successful students who go into that
kind of area, I think it's been somewhat cyclical.
But, and by the way, you know, in computer science, you know, I don't know, you have
to pick your area, if you get into an area that happens to be a low-supply, high-demand
at the time when you are the first machine learning engineer, you're the first person
who knows, you know, how to do containerization, you're the first person who knows this or
that, that's, you know, that's a pretty good deal.
And it's also more interesting, probably, than being the, you know, 25,000th person
who knows about this or that thing.
What it takes to be the first person who knows about one of these things, well, there probably
isn't a class in your university about that thing, because none of the professors know
about it yet.
So, you know, so that means, you know, how do you get to that point?
And, you know, is it useful to have that base of, I mean, again, the thing that my impression
is that an awful lot of what's taught in computer science, you know, in colleges, not all, but
a lot, is kind of how to program, which is, it's kind of a trade, it's kind of a, you
know, it's a trade like carpentry, like lots of other things, it's a pretty rich and complicated
trade, but it's basically a thing where you learn it by doing it.
And you can do that by, you know, by doing it in a class, or you can write pieces of
code for yourself, or you can, you know, work at a company and gradually get better and
better at writing things.
And it's not clear, I mean, I don't know, it's like, you mentioned stand-up comedy.
I'm curious whether being a good stand-up comic is something that is actually, you know,
if you take somebody who was, you know, had never, you know, didn't have sort of any
intrinsic talents in this area, and you run them through these courses, you run them through
enough courses, what do you get at the end of it, so to speak?
You know, it's, I'm skeptical, you know, I think it's one of these things where you're
either going to have sort of the spark that makes that really be a thing that you're going
to be into, maybe it takes you a while to discover how to use that spark, I mean, this
is a thing when people do, I don't know, well, lots of kinds of things, but, you know, something
like management or entrepreneurism, you know, there are many, many, many different ways
to do it that's suitable for many different personalities, and, you know, you can be like,
I need to be this kind of entrepreneur, this kind of manager, and sorry, it's just not
your personality, it's not going to work very well, but if you can figure out, oh, you know,
I can run this kind of company or whatever, and you figure out what that is, then it takes
off and it's wonderful, and I think the same is true with a bunch of them, look, it's true
with these, you know, I think these things where somebody says, I really don't get computers,
but I'm going to study computer science, and eventually after four years, I'm going to,
you know, be able to write Java code or whatever, I don't think that's going to end that well,
I don't think that's a, I don't think it'll be a, you know, a fulfilling result, and it's
better to, you know, to find something you actually really like to do, and sometimes
the problem is that what you learn about in school is a small fraction of what's out
there in the world, and, you know, you don't, you know, you go good exercise, look at an
encyclopedia or something, and say, you know, pick a random article, is this something they
teach in school? The answer is maybe 20% of the time, maybe a little bit more than that,
but there's an awful lot of stuff that happens in the world that is not what you get taught
in school, and sometimes also confusing, like the things you get taught in school like math
or something, the low level versions of what you learn there are really different from if
you're going to be a math researcher or something, it really isn't much like doing arithmetic
problems. And, you know, and sometimes people like in math, for example, they'll say, I really
like math in school. What do you like about it? Do you like problem solving? Do you like sort of
definitive competition? Do you like having a subject where there's a right answer? Do you
like something about kind of the formal elegance of the whole thing? If you can kind of figure out
which of those pieces, then there are all kinds of different, you know, directions based on those
pieces, but just knowing, you know, it's like, I'm doing math, I want to go on doing math or
whatever, it doesn't even stay the same thing, because, you know, what it turns into in terms of
research is very different. I mean, you know, the thing to realize is the people who succeed
in doing research at a sort of high level, the number one attribute is sort of the strategy of
what you study. It is not the mechanics of how you study it. There are many people who can get
through the mechanics of how to study it. The question is, you know, the question is more
what question you're going to ask, than can you answer the question that has been asked, so to
speak, which is really different from what happens in, you know, in school, where you're fed
questions that you didn't make up. And, you know, so that's, right, I think, anyway, yes.
Right, so like it's important to like stumble upon the problem rather than someone feeding you
a problem and then, because I think like I agree with you, like it's much better to like find
something that you want to work on rather than someone telling you, okay, write this piece of
code or write this program, which does this for me, because if it's something that you actually
come up with, you will be more inclined to learn more about it and all the everything around it to
like, that's an idea like we have been talking about for a while now, which is project based
learning, like we were thinking how, how can we ask important questions and how can we change the
institutions that exist today, like what needs to change, so that the people who are a part of
this institution can think more broadly, more deeply about the world that they're living in,
right? Right. And what we thought was the like common denominator in all of this was that if you
come in or if you, if you have the right atmosphere, we can explore and find a project that you want
to work on. And if you're given the resources to work on it, like this university, for example,
right, we have so many wonderful, like brilliant people on the same campus in such close proximity.
But like you mentioned, students, once you're in a university, you don't really interact with these
professors. There's like, there's like a sort of disconnect you learn from them, sure, in classes,
but there's no, there's nothing beyond that. Just go knock on their door. Right. It's, it's, it's a
good strategy. Exactly. It's, maybe I'll get complaint emails from people saying you said all
these students. No, but professors, at least when I was in that business, even though I really
wasn't that interested in being a professor, you know, it was interesting when I would talk to
students. And one of the things that often surprised me, I'm a professor for a little while at
University of Illinois. And one of the things that, you know, occasionally, students would come and
see me. And, you know, the first thing I would ask them is, so what are you interested in? So we'd
have a discussion about that. And they'd say, that was a very useful discussion. Nobody ever
asked me that before. It's some, so, you know, I think that was some, but, but no, to your point
about, about, you know, what you study. And, you know, there are people like me, for example, who are
very motivated by things that they, you know, by questions that they're interested in answering.
There are other people for whom that's a less important thing. And I think the other thing that
I've noticed is, you know, sometimes I am confronted with things which, frankly, at the
beginning seem really tedious and boring. And, you know, the engineering problems that we have to
solve or whatever else. And it's like, you know, this is going to be really dull. I get into it. And
what I've discovered is that if you do basically almost any problem in an intellectual sort of
deep way, it will turn out to be interesting. And, you know, there is a way to do it. That will be
quite boring, where you're just sort of skating across it to try and get to the other side. Maybe
you'll succeed in getting to the other side. Maybe you won't. Maybe you'll fall into the ice or
whatever. But the, you know, when if you choose to think about these things, you choose to say,
what's the real problem? What is the intellectual underpinning of what's going on? Let me really
think about that. Even things which at the beginning were like, that sounds really pretty dull,
turn out to be quite interesting. And I'm sure that's true. Now, you know, a lot of students get
into the situation, but they're so busy. It's like, I've got to, you know, send, you know, write in
this paper, do this, whatever it is, that they can never do more than skate, because they have so
much to do. And I think that's an unfortunate feature of, I think, I don't know whether how
much that's true in the college experience at University of Illinois, for example, certainly in
the sort of elite high school experience, that does seem to be a terrible problem that people are
just like, like they can't really do anything for more than five minutes, so to speak, because
there, you know, it's just there's so much to do. But yes, I think, I mean, look, this whole thing
about people actually thinking is a, is an interesting issue. And it's something where for a
lot of education ends up getting very industrial, and ends up being, can you do this process? You
know, do this thing, do this thing, do this thing, there isn't really much thinking involved. I
remember when I was a professor at University of Illinois, briefly, I, I ended up with the last
class I ever taught was was about physics for non scientists. Okay. And I thought this would be kind
of fun, because you get to talk about all kinds of sort of conceptual things, and there were a
bunch of students in the class, and turned out some sort of local folks from around town started
showing up and being in the back. So that was a sign that at least somebody was finding it
interesting. But the, I remember that the very the first question on the first homework for that
class was estimate the number of years of corn in a typical cornfield. Okay. And this produced kind
of a almost, you know, a riot for the students, they're like, how are we supposed to do this? You
know, it's like, do you know how to multiply? You know, you know, you know, you've seen cornfields,
there are lots of them around here. You know, do you look at the corn plants? How far apart are
they? You know, you can figure this out. It just requires thinking and it doesn't require any kind
of thinking that is beyond what, you know, college sophomores or whatever they were, you know, should
be capable of it doesn't require fancy, you know, knowledge of physics or anything like that. It's
kind of common sense thinking that and it was interesting that people, I was kind of shocking
to me how, and this is now what 1986 or something so a while ago, the was a little bit shocking to
me how much people were like, we're not supposed to think, we're just supposed to be fed, you know,
this is these are the ingredients now run it through the machine and get out the result. So
yes, I think that, you know, this challenge of how do you get, how do you encourage people to
think? First step is to let them know that it's sort of okay to actually think, which is not always
the case that people communicate that because a lot of classes, it's kind of like, you're putting two
and two together, you're getting four, that's all we do in this class. And, you know, if you think
more broadly, oh, well, you know, if you write an essay, that is not what the teacher thought it was
going to be, you'll get a bad grade. Right, you get PLI for doing something that's not what you're
supposed to do. Right. Well, right. And I think that that is so, you know, how does one avoid that?
Well, you know, the thing that I think is a bit odd sometimes is that, you know, I have many,
many friends who are professors, and they, you know, at least people, you know, my friends are,
usually they're interested in things which aren't the I already knew that type of thing. It's like
I many years ago, I had a friend, a well-known physicist named Dick Feynman, who was who had the
following principle about graduate students. Okay. So if somebody came to, you know, wanted to work
with him, and they wanted to work with him on some project that he knew absolutely nothing about,
then he would do it. But as soon as it was something that he was kind of like, oh, I already know
about this and so on. You know, he wasn't interested. Now he he did pass on to me various kinds of
tidbits of like he was not that enthusiastic about that. That I think one of his tidbits was,
you know, a thesis is a project done by the advisor under adverse conditions by which he
meant that I think bad management in his part. But anyway, you know, the student would come in,
would talk about some problem. You know, the advisor would say, oh, you should do this and this and
this. Student would go away for two or three weeks, come back. The advisor has now forgotten what
they figured out. And the student has come back and hasn't made progress. Now, honestly, to me,
having managed people and projects for a long time, that's not what should happen. If you do it
correctly and you give the right input to somebody, they should be able to come back two weeks later
and have actually achieved something. If you give them a bunch of input, which they don't
understand, then that's not going to work. But, you know, it's part of the responsibility of the,
you know, teacher or whatever, or manager to sort of do things which are going to be possible for
that person. I mean, you know, one of the general problems of management, which I suppose I've
spent more of my life doing than professoring, is kind of, you know, you have to figure out,
you've got these people, you've got these projects, and the people have certain capabilities, the
projects of certain needs. How do you fit these together? If you try and sort of force fit it
and just say, okay, this person, just do this project, even though it's completely the wrong
project for you, it's not going to work. And so, you know, that's the, you know, that's the
responsibility there. And I think in terms of professors and so on, if they can figure out,
you know, enough about what's going on with the student to be able to say, hey, this is a good
project, you know, then they can really help. And, you know, I don't know, we've been doing this
summer school for college students, graduate students, and so on, for the last, gosh, how
long is it, 20 years now. And this is my, you know, now that I'm not a professor, this is my
moment each year of sort of extreme professoring, because, you know, three week thing, and I get
to basically make up projects for 75 people or something. And that it's an interesting process,
because I gradually over the years have gotten a little bit better at doing it. It's really
satisfying when you make up a project, and you discover that that the person turned that into
a whole sort of career starter, and sometimes even almost career. And that was, you know, it's like,
okay, that was that was a good, you know, that was worthwhile. And I think, but that's a this
problem of how do you match a project to the student is interesting problem and people, you
know, as I said, we learned more over the years how to do that. I mean, what tends to happen,
sometimes in colleges, graduate school, things like that is an advisor will have some definite
research program. And it's like, okay, you plug in here, which can be okay. Particularly if you
as the student pick that advisor well, and pick a project where you're like, I'm going to fit into
this part, and I really care about this project, then, you know, that's the thing that that can work
well. I can also end up that, you know, in some areas, like life science is one, but this happens
a lot, you know, you're, you're just pipetting things. And you're not really you're part of some
big machine. And you don't really have a lot of sort of self determination about what's going on.
And you know, I think, I think the other challenges for the student's point of view,
you can say to some professor, I want to study this. And that professor is the person who's
supposed to be teaching you whatever. Problem is the professor doesn't know about that, or they
don't care about it. And so, you know, again, you have the flip side of the problem, the professor
feeds the student something the student isn't, you know, isn't very suitable for them is the student
can end up, you know, asking the professor to do something that is just not in the wheelhouse of
that particular professor. And so that's again, you know, the more you can study what a professor,
you know, knows about and cares about, and the more you can show up, you know, when you knock on
the door and ask a question, that is really, you know, something that that professor is going to
find interesting, you know, because you study what they're doing. And so you can say, Well,
there's this thing, what about that? But I mean, this whole point about, you know, how do you
teach people to think it's a it's a fascinating problem. It has not helped the larger and sort
of more industrial educational institutions get the more difficult it is to make that happen.
Because if you've got, you know, 1000 students, you've got to get through this this program,
it's much more challenging to say, and each one is going to do some personalized thing.
That's, you know, it's not really a thing that is easy to achieve. And I think so, you know, again,
it becomes partly a, you know, doing projects that you're excited about is a way that you will
think about things that you kind of care about. It, you know, sometimes you may get stuck. And then
you have to try and figure out, you know, is there is there a person you can go talk to to get unstuck
who won't just tell you that's a stupid project, or won't give you a bunch of stuff where you say,
I don't understand any of that. And then you just get sort of dispirited and say, I can't possibly
do this project. You know, that's that's another challenge. But, you know, I think it's one of
these things where people, there's both things that could be done sort of on the on the professoring
side. And there's things students can do to make kind of them have a better experience in this,
you know, given given what the machine is, you know, the student can sort of figure out more
about that machine to optimize their experience in it. And I think that that like that ability to,
you know, in, you know, I think a lot about this question of, like, why are people in that way?
And in a term, I kind of use it's an NPC, which stands for non player character, which is, you
know, from a video game, which is this thing, it's kind of a funny way to think about this problem,
which is, you know, people do not seem to be thinking for themselves. And I used kind of,
you know, mob mentality type of thing. And, you know, how I think about it is that, you know,
perhaps if you start doing this type of projects more in public and sharing and inviting people to
work with you, you can actually kind of show them that it's actually it's okay to do this type of
things and it is possible. Yeah, I mean, look, you know, one of the things I've often done,
like at our summer school, we usually start off with, I do some live computer experiment.
Okay, one feature of live computer experiments is, you know, I've been doing them for years,
I'm pretty good at them. But you're going to discover something, you're going to work on
something you've never seen before. So things are going to go wrong. And, you know, usually,
my observation is about the two thirds point, things look, it looks like all is lost. And,
you know, typically, and, you know, we're not going to be able to figure out anything.
What's interesting about that process is you get to see both, you know, the fact that
I don't know, somebody like me who's been doing this stuff a long time, it's still not, you know,
you don't just do it, do it, do it, and it all just works. It's like things go wrong.
It's point one. Point two is the thing you thought you were going for at the beginning.
Another thing that maybe is a useful thing to emphasize there is that at the beginning,
one sets a strategy. We're trying to do this. And here's why it's interesting.
Then you get into it. Then you realize, gosh, the thing we were trying to do,
either you realize there's this other thing over here that we just discovered
that's actually more interesting than the thing we thought we were going to look at.
So, you know, we should kind of, you know, pivot what we're doing to look at that instead.
And that's, you know, the idea that, you know, you're kind of locked in, oh, I meant to do this.
Somebody told me to do this. And, you know, even though something more interesting showed up here,
we can't go chase that. But anyway, I think that's an example of something
that, you know, doing that kind of thing. I don't think that many professors, for example,
I don't know anybody who does that. I mean, I think it's a totally scary thing to do if you
are not fairly confident and don't really care if the whole thing blows up, so to speak.
I mean, I've also done, I do a lot of live streaming of a couple of different kinds. I mean,
one is several different kinds, actually. But one of them is, you know, software design stuff,
where it's just like the actual raw, these are our working meetings. We're going to live stream them.
Why not? They're interesting. We get good feedback in real time, which is helpful.
And sometimes people will suggest things that are useful, etc., etc., etc. But it's, you know,
it's a thing where that is a place where you can see hundreds of hours now, probably 500 hours,
maybe more than a thousand hours, I can't remember. But of actual, you know, figuring stuff out,
and you can see the results, because they're things that wind up in Wolfram Language, you know,
in the next version of Wolfram Language, this function that you can see there are four hours
of discussion about this thing, and then this is how it got resolved. And that's a place where,
you know, there's definitely thinking is visible, so to speak. I mean, this is a thing that happens
in the concept that thinking should be done invisibly is a strange concept. But, you know,
most university teaching, that's how it works, because the professor will present something.
It's not like they're figuring something out in real time. It's just like, let me tell you about
this thing. And I think that's, yeah, I mean, another live stream thing that I've been doing is
sort of live stream Q&As about science, about history, about other things. It's very educational
for me. I hope it's educational for the people who watch it, but it's educational for me because
it, you know, it causes me to think about things that, you know, if somebody asks me some question
about something, usually the worst, the questions where I say, that's a physics question, I know the
answer cold. And then I get into actually answering it. And I realize, oh, my gosh, there's this thing
that I've known since I was, you know, 10 years old, but it's not actually obvious. And you have
to explain it. And, well, I'm not sure I can explain that that easily. It takes me a bit of
thought to see how to explain it. But, you know, I think that there are these things where, you
know, this problem, okay, so a lot of people, a lot of educational settings, there's a certain,
this is a process you go through to solve this type of problem. And, you know, if you learn that
process, you will get a good grade. And then you'll go on and be able to do all these other things.
You know, to me, that's, you know, that's fairly, in some sense, by the time it's that
proceduralized, it will be automated in time. And the thing that's most interesting to do as a human
is things that are more kind of judgment oriented and more kind of involved with thinking. I mean,
I think that, you know, I don't, you know, this question of how do you, you know, how do you
teach people to think? Interesting question. It is not the problem that is being solved by most of
education. And it, you know, it, and again, and the machinery of education is not particularly
well set up for that, because it's a, it's a, it's quite industrial with lots of people going
through it, and lots of kinds of, you know, assessment mechanisms and so on.
Very standardized in a way.
Right, right. But I mean, it's, it's, but then from the point of view of the student,
it's kind of up to you to, to kind of learn to think, so to speak. I don't think, you know,
there are situations that can be more helpful and less. I mean, I like to believe that some of the
educational stuff we do with summer school, summer camp, some things that I do myself and so on,
are helpful in this regard, particularly in the, okay, so there's a, there's a point people don't
realize, perhaps, a couple of points. I mean, one point is, you know, you're given a question,
okay, you know, if you know a bunch of stuff, you will be able to engage somehow to think about
that question, even though there is, you know, the answer is not in the back of the book, there
isn't a book, you know, but actually almost any question you can think about. And one of the
things I've noticed, and it's true very much with them, with people in a, in sort of work setting,
is do people keep the thinking apparatus engaged when they are presented with different kinds
of things to do? People find that surprisingly difficult often. There are people who manage
to do it, and that's great. And there are people, well, it's like, well, how does it fit into this
class that I took? How does it fit into whatever? Well, actually, you know, you really do know how
to think more broadly. But for some reason, you disengage the thinking apparatus. So, for example,
one place where one sees that quite a bit is, you know, let's say academics going into business,
okay, where they're pretty analytical and smart, and they figure out lots of things.
And then they're presented with some situation with people, business, organization, and so on.
And they just like, they just, the thinking apparatus disengages. It's like, look,
you know, you've got this problem, you know how to think analytically about things,
you can figure it out. But it's like, they don't understand that they can take the kind of the
thinking that they know how to do in some technical field and apply the same underlying processes in
some sense to something completely different. Another thing that I noticed with students,
okay, pet peeve, right, so they, you know, students will study this in class A. Then you got sort of
thing you're talking to them about whatever. And it's like, you say, well, do you know anything
about this? Well, yes, I took a class about this. Okay, well, so you can apply a bunch of the ideas
from that field or whatever it is to this thing that's come up. Oh, they say, I can think of that.
And often they really find it very difficult to take, you know, even though they spent a year
studying whatever it is. It's like, look, you know, leverage what you learned there, you know,
relate it to what you now have to think about. This is a, you know, it's a thing one can do,
so to speak. But people find that really difficult. And even even the transference from one class,
you know, I learned about this in this class. I mean, it's something, you know, because people use
Mathematica with mouthful of language and so on a bunch in courses in college, etc. You know,
one of the things that I shocked me, okay, this is now 33 years ago, okay, first people were doing
calculus with Mathematica back in the day. So I said, we're going to have this get together
for the students who are in this very first class doing this. So I'm talking to these students and
say, what, you know, what are you majoring? What are you doing? You know, oh, civil engineering,
whatever it is. So I'm like, oh, that's good, because, you know, you just learned all this
methodology and all these computational tools that you can now use for civil engineering.
A person looks at me completely blankly, like, really? Why? You know, that that doesn't compute,
so to speak. That's a pity. And that's something where, you know, figuring out how you take the
thing you learned here and apply it there is very good exercise for people. Because, you know,
in a sense, these, these classes are very siloed, like, you know, Professor A is not going to say,
did you learn this in Professor B's class? They're just doing, you know, the thing that
Professor A is supposed to be teaching typically. And sometimes there are sequences of classes.
But, you know, I think that that's, you know, that's, that's another feature. I think I had a
different point I was going to make about sort of, yeah, another thing is this. So people,
people think, I think, a lot of students think, knowledge just existed from the beginning of
time. There was no moment when somebody invented that. I noticed this kind of interesting experience
with Wolf Malfour, because it happens to, you know, I put my name into the name of the product,
so to speak. And so I'll meet students who use Wolf Malfour all the time. They notice my name,
and there's this kind of strange double take of, of, where they're realizing that this thing,
which is just a thing that they use that sort of existed for a while, that a person was actually
behind this thing, so to speak. In other words, somebody had to create it. And this is a thing
people, I think, don't realize, you know, whether you're studying math or physics or whatever,
and there's some named algorithm or something or whatever, named, you know, law, whatever it is,
it's somebody had to invent that. Maybe it was the person who's named after, maybe it wasn't,
that's the way it works in, in, in academic science. But, you know, and then this, this idea
that, that everything that is now, and that you're being taught, somebody invented that stuff. And
you could invent stuff too. It's not such a people don't get that as easily as you might think.
And, you know, I happen to have been interested in history quite a bit and in understanding
why do I, why am I interested in history? I'm mostly interested in history because
very interested in how ideas come to be the way they are now. So, for example, I've just been
studying, I think I mentioned thermodynamics, which is a field that's about the second order of
thermodynamics. It's about 150 years old. Okay. And I, I really didn't know in detail its history
before the last few weeks. Its history is an incredible mess. Its history, I mean, some very
great people who figured it out in the 1860s, and they kind of nailed it down by the 1870s
or so. And turns out a bunch of things came to be believed within a few decades after that,
that are simply not true. And, but if you trace through what happened historically,
I now sort of understand how those things came to be believed. And it's interesting. And you kind
of see that as a, first of all, you know, one of the things is I sort of realized these things
aren't true. And it's like, how can I be saying these things aren't true? People have believed
this since 1870 or something. And it's like, I better go figure out why people ever came to
believe this. Because otherwise, I don't know whether I know what I'm talking about. And if you
trace it through, you realize people were having hypotheses about how things worked in gases and
so on. They didn't know gases were made of molecules. They didn't know molecules existed.
And so they had a bunch of theory. And actually, what happened is the theory that was done on the
basis of sort of idealized fictional molecules worked pretty well. When molecules as a real
thing were discovered, people said, so the whole theory must be right. So we proved the whole thing.
But in fact, there was a, you know, a different issue that happened there. But anyway, I think
this thing about sort of everything has a way that it was discovered. And sometimes it's pretty
interesting to learn how it was discovered. Another thing that happens is people will be some field,
there'll be some idea, and students will try and learn it, and they'll find it confusing.
And, you know, teacher will say, no, this is this way. Look, you know, it's in the textbook.
This is how it looks. Student will be confused. Turns out, if you look at the history,
people were deeply confused sometimes for a long time. And it really is confusing.
And what ended up in the textbook is some glossed version of what was really there.
And if you understand, you know, if you understand that it was confused,
and sort of how people got confused, and sometimes it's really a good idea often to try
and look at the original papers, books, whatever about things, they are, I would say about two
thirds of the time, they are clearer than anything that came later. One third of the time, they can
be impenetrable, because the notation has changed. The, you know, the way people were thinking about
it was kind of crafty. It was, you know, but a lot of this just happened to me. I was trying to
understand something about them in dynamics. And I'm like, look, these textbooks are just
absolutely opaque. And I don't think that what they're saying is right. So eventually,
I go back to a little book called The Theory of Heat, written by a certain James Clerk Maxwell,
who was the guy who did Maxwell's equations and so on.
So familiar, yeah.
Right. And so it's, and the, his book is really clear. And it's really clear that there are things,
and he pretty much says it, that we don't know how this works. Actually, he has a very lovely
thing at the very end. He's has a very lovely description of lots of things. And then he's
trying to explain, this is maybe 18, late 1860s, 1870s. So he's trying to explain why there are
only a discrete number, no, it was early 1860s, actually, why there are only a discrete set of
different kinds of molecules, even though he doesn't know that molecules really exist.
Okay. And so it turns out Darwin's Origin of Species had been published in 1859.
And so Maxwell has this chapter at the end of his book in which he says, maybe the reason that
there are discrete sets of molecules is for the same reason as there are discrete species in biology.
And, you know, which is of course, complete nonsense.
Right.
But, but it was interesting, it's interesting to see what, you know.
Hypothesis they come up with.
Yeah, right. And what's obvious and what's not obvious. And, you know, that was at the time not
known. Anyway, the, yeah, so we got down a bit of a rabbit hole there.
No, but that's, that's, that's a good thing. Like, you, okay, you mentioned like, even during
the Q and A's, right, you, you, you realize that sometimes the, the kids would not know what you're
talking about. Like what's obvious to you might not be obvious to them. Right. And all of these
theories, hypotheses that we learn about, they're all structured in a way that is intuitive to
someone, eventually intuitive to someone reading it. Right. We think we fully know how, like we
understand how this is working. But in reality, we're still, it's still in hypothesis. It's
still based on our observations of that particular system. Right. But what if there are things that
do not have an intuitive understanding? Like, you mentioned in one of your TED talks that
the reason that you came up with the, a new kind of science is because we're trying to describe
everything with these human constructs, which is like exponentials, integrals and everything.
Right. And what if there, there are things that we're trying to find answers for, but
we don't have the systems ready to explain any of that. Like there's, what if there are things
that are unintuitive to our understanding and things that we cannot comprehend. Well, so what
happens, this is the story of the advance of sort of paradigms in science and other places.
That's what happens is people don't have an intuition. They don't have a framework. They
don't have an understanding. At some moment, for whatever reason, the, the, the pieces assemble
and that paradigm emerges. And then, then there is an understanding. I mean, it's even often,
you know, the words didn't exist to describe that thing. And then one sort of sees how it fits
together and then one builds this paradigm and then one's off and running. And yeah, without
that paradigm, if you're, I mean, I literally was just looking at this in connection with the
thermodynamics thing. So when I was like 13 years old, I wrote, tried to write this program
to do some simulation of, of gas molecules, okay, and didn't work. And I only just realized
two days ago why it didn't work. Okay. And the reason it didn't work was because of things that
I discovered in the 1980s about the way that simple programs behave and so on. But those
things were so far away from what my intuition or understanding was when I was 13 years old or
whatever. And, you know, couldn't get there from here. And for example, in the physics project
that I've been doing the last three years or so, which has been going really spectacularly well,
you know, I realize that that project, which is sort of I think our 100 year shot at actually
understanding how a bunch of physics actually works. But, you know, to get to the point of being
able to do that project, there wasn't really a straight line way to get there. It required
different paradigmatic understanding from things about computation, things, you know,
actually doing experiments, things like this. And it's something where, yeah, you know, you,
you can't get to that point. It is not easy to get to that point. If you are, you know,
the student who is trying to solve this problem and it requires some new paradigm, then, you know,
you will not get to that point. It's that's now I have to say, the sort of the meta paradigm of
our times is computation. And they're just in a huge number of things where it's just just do a
computer experiment. Now, you know, the technology stack I've been building for such a long time
is the thing that I hope enables that for people across lots of fields. If you're down in the
details writing the piece of, you know, Python code to do this or that or the other, you won't
get there. Right. It's just you'll be submerged in this kind of swamp. And, you know, you, you have,
if you are, if you're operating at sort of a higher level, where you're really trying to think
about things in computational terms, and, you know, my attempt is to make a language that gives
people the primitives to sort of think in computational terms, then it's a really pretty
good meta approach to pretty much any field at this point. And it's one of these things where,
I don't know, it's got a, it's got a run of at least a bunch of decades, where there's still a
lot of low hanging fruit that is completely unpicked in all of these different areas. And so,
you know, for me, it's like if, if one is, you know, can one invent a paradigm for something,
can one understand what's going on, try and make it computational. If you can do it, you have this
big kind of, you know, this big accelerator, because actually, it's sort of a unique thing,
because something that has not historically happened, which is you get that automated
computational collaborator, so to speak. That's never been possible before. You know,
there's never been a place where once you can explain something in these terms,
it is not just a question of a human having to go do this, this, this, and this. It's like,
then I just put it in, and something automatically, you know, accelerates forward, so to speak.
So it's, it's, maybe I hadn't thought about it this way, actually, but, but I mean, maybe this is
people are always convinced that history, the things that are happening now are different
from the things that have ever happened before in history. But I think in that sense, the kind
of computationalization of things is a different thing that has happened in the development of
paradigms before, because it's a paradigm where you get sort of the automated assistant,
along with the paradigm, so to speak, in addition to just having a way to think about things.
But yeah, I think, I think that the, this question of, you know, a good example, I've been working
on a bunch is quantum mechanics, where actually the aforementioned physicist Dick Feynman always
used to say, nobody understands quantum mechanics, and he'd worked on quantum mechanics his whole
life. Okay. And he would say, nobody understands quantum mechanics. And I think he was right at
the time. And, you know, I've been excited that at this moment, we seem to be getting to the point
where I'm almost to the point where I say, I think I really actually understand quantum mechanics.
And it's a, you know, sort of a sound bite of how things work is you might think, you know, in
classical physics, sort of definite things happen in the world. Throw a ball goes in a definite
trajectory. Quantum mechanics, sort of the big idea is there are many different trajectories
that you can follow. And you're only looking at probabilities of different things happening.
But the question is, sort of, how does that really work underneath? And what we've kind of
realized is that the sort of the history of the universe branches and merges all the time. So
instead of there being a single sort of thread of time in the universe, there's this giant branching
merging graph of threads of time. So then the question is, well, why is it that we think that
definite things happen? Because if they're all these branching merging pieces, why do we think
definite things happen? Well, then we realize, well, we're part of this whole branching merging
universe. So our brains, our minds are also doing this branching merging thing. So quantum mechanics
ends up being the story of how does a branching brain perceive a branching universe, which is at
some level, you kind of realize even from that description, that it's going to be a little bit
difficult to see what happens. But once you realize that that is what is happening, you kind
of have at least a fighting chance of being able to see how it all works. And we're getting closer.
And it's very, you know, it requires some different ideas than people have seen before.
But it's something where in the end, it's not mysterious. And in the end, all those places
where, you know, you had to make this jump, you had to sort of suspend disbelief, so to speak.
And, you know, to understand the textbook, I don't think you'll have to do that in future. I think
it's going to be something where you can just say, well, it's this way, this way, this way.
It requires paradigmatic ideas that people like ideas about, about how computation works and this
notion of computational irreducibility, about how you sort of can't know the outcome of
computational process more efficiently than by following the steps and so on. It requires really
having some intuitive understanding of those things. And that's something that, you know,
slowly comes. But, you know, given that, I think there will be sort of a direct,
it won't be a mystery thing where you just have to say, the formulas work this way.
Trust me, it, you know, it's going to work out type thing. So, you know, but I think that
in terms of, you know, the, you know, what students do and don't understand from textbooks,
you know, the project I happen to be doing these few weeks could be classified as a thing a student
didn't understand in a textbook 50 years ago, because I, you know, I got this particular book
about statistical physics 50 years ago. And I thought it was pretty interesting, but I really
didn't understand how it came to the conclusions it came to. And so my plan a, you know, long time
ago was I would make a computer simulation. The book actually had computer simulations in it
to understand how it worked. I didn't manage to do it, because in the end, you know, I didn't know
a bunch of things that are from a paradigm from the future, so to speak. And that, that was,
you know, so, but that was in a sense, you know, for 50 years, I've been sort of picking away
off and on at this thing that was a thing I didn't understand in textbook 50 years ago.
And it, you know, I would say that that for the things you don't understand in textbook now,
you know, you go ask a professor, see whether they have anything sensible to say, they may not
have anything sensible to say. You know, another thing to realize about fields and things is that
usually a field gets invented, you know, this methodological advance happens, there's a bunch
people involved, they're kind of intellectually entrepreneurial, they build the field. Then
people work in that field for many academic generations. By generation number five or something,
nobody thinks about the foundations anymore. You know, if you talk to the people who built
the field originally, and you say, hey, why does it work that way? Why does it work? Say, well,
we think it works that way. I'm not absolutely sure. It might be a different way. You go to the
sort of fifth academic generation, it's kind of, well, of course it works that way. You know,
it's always worked that way. It's in the textbooks that way. You know, there's no
possibility of something different. So one of the things that I found, it's kind of a little bit
of a trick for doing research in a sense, is often if you go back to the foundations, there's a lot
of stuff there that is still kind of exposed and unresolved. And if you are 50 years later, for
example, the methods that now exist from other places will often allow you to, you know, make
progress on those foundations in a way that absolutely wasn't possible when they were first
laid down. And so the people in those fields will be like, you can't work on those foundations. They
were laid down 50 years ago, 100 years ago, whatever. And it's like, and so it's a little
shocking at some level, but it's also actually, it's often easier to do that than to go all the
way up the tower of all the stuff that's been built in the last 100 years, understand all of that,
and then try and add a little piece at the top. You know, that's a, that's a more difficult thing to
do sometimes. And if you can make a foundational change, the whole tower gets shifted, because
people may be very resistant to shifting the tower, but that's a different, that's a different
issue. But there's certainly in terms of personal satisfaction of what one does, it can be pretty
nice. I mean, I think, you know, it really helps in a lot of these things, you know, the thinking,
research, whatever, you know, having some confidence that the things, you know, that you
might just be able to figure it out is important. And I don't know different people get that confidence
in different ways. And some people unfortunately never get that confidence that they can just like
dig in and figure stuff out. But I think that's, you know, that's, that's a valuable thing to try
to achieve, so to speak. And I think, you know, it, I don't know whether people who, you know,
do the exercises, they do great in the exercise. I think some people come away from that
with the confidence that they can figure things out. And other people come away from that,
having been sort of trained to only run in this track. And if somebody shows them something off
that track, they freak out. And so, you know, I think it sort of goes both ways there.
That is such an interesting idea that you mentioned that, you know, how you explain
quantum mechanics in the sense of like a bunch of threats, and that we see, you know,
fields and ideas as a single threaded thing that how it could be. So over the last couple of months,
I've been obsessed about flying things. And the way how I've been teaching myself everything is
through writing. And one thing I've realized is that I always, I'm always inclined to learn about
the history and just teach myself everything about the history. Because like you said, is that,
you know, we went on a, you know, to put it in a more like GitHub way, is that, you know,
like you create a branch, and we go all the way from there. And we never like merge to like,
you know, other branches that could have happened. So when you go back to the history,
then you can see all the branches, all the different possibilities that you could have
picked and see and think that only by learning the history, like going back to the fundamentals,
you know, like reading, you know, Darwin or reading, you know, all this is just like,
or the original sources, how you can create possible like this new branches that you can
actually merge through different ways. Right. But what was the subject you said, flying?
Yeah. So I planes or drones. Yeah. So like my idea is that I don't want to ever walk on campus
or take the bike or anything. And I want to, I want to create a personal flying vehicle.
Stupid, maybe not. Who cares? But I've seen some demos of such things.
So I was like, okay, I'm gonna teach you. I said everything about it and build some drones and
things like that. Anyway, so that's an example of a, I have a similarity of like,
the history is such an interesting thing that can allow you.
Yeah. Well, I mean, drones are a great example of, you know, why were drones not built in,
you know, gas powered drones built in the 1940s or something? But the answer is because the
control systems were too hard, you know, and it was, it took, you know, flight control,
microprocessor based flight controllers to be able to actually make the thing stable,
because a human controlling it couldn't make it stable. It was something computers do better than
we do. But I think, yeah, I mean, that's a, it's an interesting case where that there probably is,
you know, I don't know, I was some, you know,
the Alexander Graham Bell, inventor of the telephone, right? One of his obsessions in
later life was kites and flying things. And so there's these wonderful pictures I just
happened to run across them recently of these tetrahedral kite structures that he built,
which are actually fractal like things. And I don't think anybody's looked at those again.
I mean, they're, you know, it's a kite structure that has is some kind of trust
that has some good weight to area ratio, etc, etc, etc. Who knows, maybe that's,
maybe that's the thing that should be, you know, delivering cell phone service or something from,
you know, from flying high altitude flying, flying things who would know. It is the case that,
you know, in engineering, for example, it's pretty common that an idea exists. And it was
50, 100 years ahead of its time. And it could not be executed in the way that it was conceptualized
at the time when it was first developed. I mean, you know, the fax machine now passed history,
but that was that had 100 year predecessor just wasn't possible until there was microelectronics
and so on. And I think, yeah, it is interesting to to there's probably, you know, people talk about,
you know, understanding engineering from biology, but there's also understanding engineering from
engineering history, so to speak. But yeah, interesting, you know, I was I was talking
of flying the, you know, in around maybe 1900 or so, Lord Kelvin of the temperature scale fame
famously said, heavier than air flight is impossible. Okay, which has been quoted as a goofy thing for
him to say, I only realized I realized a few weeks ago, what his conceptual framework for
saying that was, which was he worked on the second law of thermodynamics. And one of the statements
of the second law of thermodynamics is perpetual motion machine is impossible, right, that will
take heat and make mechanical work out of it. And I'm pretty sure I need to go look at what he
actually wrote. I'm pretty sure that his heavier than air flight is impossible. He thought that was
a statement, just like the second law of thermodynamics, there was a statement that you
couldn't, I don't know, I'm not sure exactly, I have to read what he actually wrote. But it's
sort of interesting to me that that that statement, which on its face just seems kind of silly,
is actually probably had for him, a not completely foolish kind of, you know, precursor in something
that people still believe, which is it's impossible to make a second, a perpetual motion machine of
the second kind that just, you know, from heat generates mechanical work. So, interesting, no,
I think, I think it would be, yeah, in fact, I wonder whether he actually imagined that,
actually, this is how they think about it, I wouldn't be surprised, I'm going to find this out,
but you know, birds fly. Life didn't follow what they thought of as being second law behavior back
then. The fact that birds can fly and birds are alive might have meant that he thought that there
was sort of a special exception for what would usually be true for things that were alive,
which he thought there was for thermodynamics. I mean, confusingly enough, back in those days,
the term, there was this term vis-viva, which is Latin for life force. That was what actually
turned into kinetic energy. So that was what the name for kinetic energy was before it was called
kinetic energy. So that, of course, created another whole raft of confusion. When people did start in
the late Victorian period, people were talking about life forces and so on in connection with
all kinds of spiritual stuff and the other stuff. And so that was another kind of entangled confusion.
But now that I think about it, I bet Kelvin made that mistake because he thought that birds were
a special case because they were alive. That's a homework exercise to find out if that was true,
but interesting. And all of that came due to that confusion, perhaps, came of a language issue,
which philosophy would never be complete because of language. And something related to that,
that I'm curious to hear, what you would think is that Marshall McLuhan said once,
we shape our tools and the tool shape us back. So in your life, your life could be described as
you created your own tools so you can outnit your intellect, which is kind of similar to
Angelbert had envisioned. When you look back, 50 years back, you created all these tools.
How do you think these tools have? No, they define how I think about stuff. If it wasn't for these,
you know, if it wasn't for orphan language, I would not be able to think about things computationally
in the way that I can. And the physics project, for example, would not exist.
Lots of things will be different. I mean, this is the way that tools, language,
these are the ways that one sort of concentrates thoughts so that one can build on them. I mean,
that is the people with human languages, people sort of wonder, does it matter what human language
you speak, how you think about things? It probably does a little bit, but it's not a dramatic effect.
With, you know, in the world of computational language, it's a dramatic effect. Like you can
see people, you know, who can think using, you know, orphan language or whatever, you can just,
you can think about how to set things up and you think, how do I make this computational?
You know, this is a way of concretifying those thoughts, which I don't think would be easy to
do without that. I don't think you would be able to, I don't think you would conceptualize those
kinds of things, just as it's pretty hard to think about things for which there are no words in
a human language. And it's, yes, so the answer is, I think that, you know, the tool building
is absolutely critical to, you know, things I've done. And, you know, there's been the sort of
spiral of do basic science, use that to build tools and technology, use the technology and tools
to do basic science. You know, I've sort of executed about five loops around the spiral,
so to speak. And that's, you know, another thing to comment on in the world of sort of
studenting and things like that is, it is shocking how much people don't use the tools they can use.
You know, it was, it's just like, like, you know, when I started, well, doing physics and things,
I started using computers to do sort of algebraic calculations and so on. And, you know, there were
experimental systems for doing this. It was not undoable, but nobody else did this.
And it was just like, why is nobody else doing this? This is not that hard. And it's, you know,
you had to know a little bit about computers and things. And, you know, your average physicists
might not have known that, but physicists tend to be an agile lot, and they can learn all kinds of
things. But it was sort of shocking to me, and it is today. I mean, you know, in our sort of
computational language stack, there are plenty of people who use it. There are plenty of people
who are sort of leaders in their fields who use it. And there are lots of people who aren't
leaders in their fields often who are like, oh, no, I don't use that. I don't need to use that.
I'm just doing this and I don't really need that. It's like, why are you doing this? You just tied
both hands behind your back. You know, you're not, it will be really difficult for you to achieve
things that way. But for some reason, people, I think, I don't know what it is. It's a, it's a
sort of strange trait of, oh, I'm not going to actually learn tools. Maybe it's the same thing
as people who do a class about something, and then are completely unable to apply that class.
And so it's kind of like, this tool is for the purpose of being applied. And somehow,
unless I just do a class to learn this tool, and then I'm just going to do that in that class,
and that's the end of it, and I can't apply it. And maybe it's the same phenomenon. I don't know.
But, you know, it's certainly something, you know, I see in the, I somewhat, I mean, I quite often
describe technology we built as kind of artifacts from the future in the sense that it's things that,
you know, if you ask people, could this be done? You know, it's like, is this in principle,
yes, it's in principle possible. Well, actually, you know, we've done that. And it's like, but
that really seemed like it was something that should happen only in the distant future, so to
speak. And it's one of the things I kind of like it. This week is our annual technology
conference, so a bunch of our sort of leading users and so on show up. And that's the first one
in person in a couple of years. So we'll see who actually comes. But I think the thing that's
interesting, I see these people who have sort of grabbed this artifact from the future,
brought it into the current time in their field, whatever it is. And it's like, you know,
it's like they got the extraterrestrial technology boost, so to speak. They're able to
do things that other people in their field can't do. And they're like, oh, wow, you can do this.
And it's like, look, I just, you know, they're just using this artifact from the future, so to
speak, that, you know, we happen to have built now. And it's, it's some, it's, I think it's,
it's cool to see that because it's something where people can just do things that seemed
like they would be, you know, that may seem to other people in those fields that were impossible.
And I, you know, I'm sort of shocked because I've been looking at some personal history of mine
to do with thermodynamics and so on. I'm, I'm reminded again of this craziness that, you know,
I've, I've done this many times of just taking tools from somewhere, using them and something.
And it's like, why did nobody else do this? This is not hard. This is not, you know, it doesn't
require a great cognitive leap to see that this is possible. But people just don't do it. And I
don't, I don't really know why. And that, that's, but yes, the, the, certainly for me, you know,
I have built tools that are sort of machinery for making things that I want to do be possible.
And then in the end, there are so many things, you know, as this tower has gotten built,
there are many things, there's no way I could have seen, you know, from the bottom of the,
of the building process, there's no way I could have seen what I can now see from where we are
in the tower. Now, you know, in terms of building machinery and tools, I mean, for me personally,
you know, I built a bunch of technology. I've also built company. And, you know,
company is in a sense, a, a different kind of tool, a different kind of machine for going from
ideas one has to real things in the world. And it's a different, you know, it's not something
where it's a transferable, you know, anybody can just get this, you know, can download this bag of
bits and run it themselves type thing. It's a different kind of thing. But it is the same,
perhaps the same instinct for me of, you know, you build a tool that allows you to do things.
And sometimes that's a technological tool. Sometimes that's an organizational tool.
Do you consider the, like the new kind of science to be that whole in the history that you were
mentioning that, like you mentioned, like, even when we look back at something that we have been
learning for like 50 years, right? We still find like some flaws or some holes in the history,
like things that they didn't figure out, but they just got accepted as time passed and that people
just started considering them to be true. And anytime you try to mess with that, people, people
are resistance and terrible resist basically, right? Like inertia. So do you think, is that why
the new kind of science is facing this kind of resistance? I don't think it faces any resistance
anymore. Okay. I mean, I think it won. Because, you know, back, if you look back 25 years, and you
look at, you know, when people were making models of things, how did they make those models? They
wrote down equations. If you look today at new models, people are making of things, they usually
make programs. That was the point of new kind of science. And, you know, it won. Now it's a somewhat
silent, you know, it's not something where it's, you know, it's a sort of trumpet blaring, you know,
thing. But if you actually look at the, you know, the actual practice of science and so on,
that approach won. And, you know, I think it's interesting in the, when the book first came
out, many, in many areas, people were like, oh, great, new methodology for doing stuff,
we're excited, off they went, they did things. And, you know, I think it's an important seed
for what has become this kind of program-based way of doing science. The one community that I
realized sort of long after the fact was the one that was hostile to the whole enterprise with the
physics community, which was very weird, because that was a community that, among other things,
essentially all those people use our technology every day. And those people had known me for
some cases a long time. And what I realized is that this was sort of an alien invasion type
situation, where it's like, this is paradigmatically different. You know, I remember one person no
longer alive, but a well-known mathematical physicist, who I'm talking to him about, about this
you know, the book and so on. And he's like, he's like, he's very upset about the whole thing. And
he's like, you know, I look through this book, I can't understand anything. It's a bunch of code
and pictures. And, you know, it's because as a mathematical physicist who was used to, you know,
trading in equations, so to speak. And it's like, well, you know, I said, well, you know,
that's the sound of a new paradigm, so to speak, you know, it is different from what you know.
And that's some, now the thing that's been surprising with our physics project last few years
is that what 20 years ago was a sort of a pitchfork, you know, a big thing with
lots of a certain number of sort of physicists, oh, this couldn't possibly be true type thing.
That's actually melted away. And there's been essentially no pitchforkery.
And which is interesting. I mean, I think it's happened because, first of all,
fields go through different levels of self-esteem. And another one was pretty
interesting was when Wolf Malfour came out in 2009. I wondered how the AI community would
respond to it. Now, the AI community at the time was in deep winter. AI was, you know,
it was almost dead. You know, there was barely a sort of heartbeat there. And in fact, the people
in that community were very positive. And I think it's kind of like, wow, something works.
You know, and the methodology of Wolf Malfour is utterly different from the methodology that people
had had for sort of doing kind of brain-like AI type things. In a sense, you know, one of the
things I remember is a big project had been done for about commonsense reasoning, where people
had tried to sort of encode commonsense reasoning in computational way. And you know, then in a sense,
and then Wolf Malfour comes out, and many of the things that you sort of thought you might be able
to do but couldn't really do with commonsense reasoning, you could just ask the question to
Wolf Malfour to give you the answer. Okay, so why did this work? What I realized after the fact is
that the commonsense reasoning approach used a period of intellectual history and science
that predated the 1600s. That is, before the 1600s, you know, it was all natural philosophy.
There wasn't a mathematicalization of the whole thing. So it was kind of a, you know,
if you want to figure out how this mechanical system will work, you imagine, you know, you say,
if you do this, then logically this happens, and that happens, and the other thing happens.
Well, you know, what we did was just cheat by saying, you turn it into a bunch of equations,
you solve the equations, and there's the result, which is what we learnt was possible in the 1600s
in the mathematicalization of science. And in a sense, the sort of the Wolf Malfour story
is in part a rerun of that cheating, because it's using computation to do a bunch of things that
were not paradigmatically possible in other ways. But it's sort of interesting at the time
that I would say that the AI community, such as it was, it was pretty small actually,
was very, very positive about it. And I think now with the physics project, perhaps physics has been
in a slightly, you know, there was a 20 years ago, it was kind of like, we're going to solve it with
string theory, you know, string theory, it's just around the corner, you know, we're going to,
and it's obvious that's not going to work that way. Although it turns out string theory is almost
certainly a limiting case of the underlying kind of machine code that we kind of have built
for physics. And although I'm still waiting for, you know, a bunch of string theory people are
sort of interested in this, but nobody's actually rolling up their sleeves and figuring out exactly
how this correspondence works. But I think there will be one. But it's, you know, so these fields
go through periods where they're in more or less, you know, we got it, we know how to do it, we don't
need anything from the outside. And, you know, I think, I think that that's so it's sort of a
different time for that. Is there anything you think you would have done differently back then
when it first came out? New kind of science? Well, I mean, the fact is, so one of the interesting
social media didn't exist, right? Had they existed, people who were like, Oh, you know, we got this
thing to say, and oh, no, it couldn't possibly be true. And, you know, it's kind of a funny thing,
because you you write a book that is basically based on computer experiments. Okay, people say,
they say, it's, it's wrong. So what do you mean it's wrong? You run the computer experiment,
does what it does. There's no that's not a there's not a concept. You know, it's like,
and I think it was a certain amount of you know, I made a conscious decision, not to kind of
you know, when people were, by the way, you know, I made a decade after the book came out, I made
this kind of, you know, analysis of sort of what responses to it have been. The fact is,
the overwhelming answer was positive, excited responses. So but somehow, you know, in,
you know, any negativism, you know, there's a there's a certain amplification in one's own
perception, and so on. And so it's actually but but what I decided not to do at that time was kind
of engage in the kind of the mud mud fight, so to speak. And it was very funny, because you know,
I gave, I went around the US, I gave like 25 talks at, you know, main universities and things like
that. And people are very polite. You know, nobody was kind of standing up and waving their hands
and like, you know, whatever. But yet, in a very cowardly way, people were like, oh, you know,
we can troll this, you know, we can write this thing. It was funny, because it was one guy,
this is dead now, chap called Steve Weinberg, who's a well known physicist, who wrote this,
was actually one of the, wrote this thing that was, I actually didn't read it, because I'm not,
I sort of follow the principle of not reading stuff that's written about, about things I do,
because I don't think it's a useful feedback loop. But, you know, he was like, oh, it's all
nonsense type, there was something I don't know exactly. But anyway, maybe a few months after
it came out, I happened to have lunch with him, I arranged to have lunch with him. And I'm like,
and it became clear that he just didn't understand it at all. And, and, you know, it's and he was
like, oh, I didn't get that. It's like, what part of, you know, again, it was one of these
paradigmatic things. And by the way, interesting thing there is, the name of the book was,
was more sensible, even than I had thought at the time. Actually, it was funny, I was doing a
podcast with a physicist person, Lawrence Krause. It's not the name can't be a secret,
because that's a podcast out there. Who is sort of, I think, was kind of like, oh, I can find,
you know, I can find fault with this or that. And then he was talking about, you know, a new
kind of science and so on, and was kind of trying to describe it and trying to characterize it and
so on, and ends up basically saying, you know, describing what it is and ends up sort of falling
backwards into saying a new kind of science. And I'm like, that's why I called the book.
You know, it's not like the stuff that had gone before. That's why I called the book that,
which was very important for many people in trying to read the book, because as soon as you prime
people for the idea that an idea is a big idea, their response and their way of thinking about it
is very different from the way you say, oh, it's a small idea. The thing I've noticed is kind of
interesting, even with stuff we're doing now. So I'll give a talk, some group, it'll have
scientists, sort of regular scientists, have some philosophers. Okay, is the thing I found
interesting. The scientists, even though they have a big advantage in terms of content, often
have a harder time grasping a bunch of things that are going on. And why is that? The reason is,
I think, I've noticed that they don't understand that there can be more than incremental progress
in intellectual things. That is, they're looking for, there's just this one step that goes from
what I already know to what I need to know for this purpose. Whereas philosophers are much more
used to the idea that there's many steps and it's complicated and you don't immediately understand
what's going on. So it's a funny phenomenon. It may be totally biased about sampling because
it may be that the philosophers who show up to these things are philosophers who have sort of
sophisticated thinking about science and things like this. So it might be a completely biased
sample so far. So I can't necessarily say it will be generally true, but it's been a little bit
notable to me that that's how that's worked. But no, I think had social media existed when
NKS came out, I don't know, it might have been interesting to see how that dynamic would have
been different. I think that the concept, as I say, of I can be a troll, so to speak, in a
and you know, write a review and nobody, there'll be sort of nobody will sort of come back to me
about it is something that I think has sort of evaporated in the world. So that sort of changed
the, I mean, a lot of other crazy things that happened about sort of being able to get ideas
out there and kind of this, you know, you can't get that idea out because it's, you know, has some
ideological political sort of bad resonance. That's a different thing. That's a different
phenomenon, which fortunately, I think it's fair to say that the science and things that I've done
has not really, it's been pretty independent of those those kinds of issues. I mean, fortunately,
you know, it's funny how these science things in science end up happening. I mean, like this idea
of computational irreducibility that I first developed in the mid 1980s, I was like, it's
idea in theoretical science. Okay, so many years go by. And I think it's the idea that ceded the
proof of work concept for Bitcoin. And so this idea, which I thought of as this theoretical idea,
you know, ends up being the seed for this thing that has, you know, is is for a while, at least,
you know, burning the electrical output of, you know, some medium sized country, and doing this
crazy computational irreducible computation, so to speak. So that's a, you know, it's very
unexpected what happens there. And, you know, one, the it is always a risk in doing basic science
that the things you do end up getting entangled with sort of what end up being ideological
political types of things, sometimes ones that you're completely horrified by. I mean, I think
I'm lucky so far, you know, that that hasn't happened with things I've done. I mean, the worst
case is burning electrical output in proof of work, which is, you know, a lot more benign than
other kinds of things. But I think in, I mean, it is true that, for example, the idea of computational
irreducibility, which is kind of this realization that even from within science, you discover that
science has limitations on what it can say. That is something which the realization of the fact
that that's the case. If that was a truly well absorbed thing, people's attitude towards things
like, can we predict this feature of a pandemic? Can we predict this thing about, you know,
global climate or something like this? Can we predict the results of this geoengineering thing?
Can we not predict whatever it is? The, you know, people, you know, when you really internalize
those ideas, you have a slightly different point of view about what, you know, because we are in a
period of time when sort of science can solve everything, except that even from within science,
science says science can't solve everything. So big people haven't yet internalized that
particular thing. I think it's actually not a, a, it is a, you know, when it is internalized,
I think, I don't know, maybe it will go horribly wrong. But I think it is something that will be
helpful in terms of, of things which are sort of ideologically, I mean, I don't know. And in a sense,
it puts humans a bit more back in the saddle, so to speak, relative to what, you know,
in some sense, there is an idea that science, it's like, it all got solved with science. You
don't need the humans for doing anything else. Turns out that's not true. And it's, you know,
you see that in, in the case of people, you know, wondering, okay, we're building a bunch of AIs,
what ethics should we give the AIs? Well, you said there's a scientific answer to that.
Really? You know, what is the, the scientific answer to what, you know, what the AIs should be
doing? And, you know, I think that that, that's a, that's a case where in the end you realize,
well, actually, it's a question of what we want the AIs to be doing. It's back to, you know,
back over to us, so to speak. And that becomes a, you know, a case where, and I think this is a
general thing that you kind of learn from computational irreducibility and so on, that the
humans need to be more in the loop. Without the humans, everything is generic, so to speak. In
other words, the, well, what was become clear from our physics project with this concept of the
Ruliad, which is a, this is okay, a deep rabbit hole. I mean, this is a, this is a, you know,
the question is, you know, if you believe that the universe is kind of a computational thing,
there are these rules that are running, they're generating everything that includes, you know,
us sitting here, yacking about stuff and so on. And then you say, well, why did the universe get
these rules and not other rules? And then you start realizing, well, maybe actually the universe
has all possible rules. But we are merely observing some slice of it, just like we are at a particular
place in physical space, you know, at this, you know, some corner of some galaxy and so on.
Similarly, we are at some corner of this kind of way that we are perceiving how the universe works
and what rules it's using. So this sort of the ultimate object that emerges from this is the
thing we call the Ruliad, which is the entangled limit of all possible computations. So imagine,
if you're sort of in the computer science, and I should have mentioned theoretical computer science,
when I was talking about computer science and kind of dissing it as a, as an area, because,
you know, theoretical computer science is great, and it has lots of mileage. It's not what people
mostly learn about when they, and people who actually want to be, you know, production IT
programmers or software engineers, you know, knowing the theory of Turing machines is really
not that relevant. It's a great field, however. But the thought about in terms of those things,
the Ruliad, one sort of instantiation of it would be, you take all possible Turing machines with
all possible rules, all possible initial conditions, you run them. It's kind of an entangled thing,
because two different Turing machines can end up producing the same state. And so it's not the
case that you just get all this definite, different threads of what can happen. So it's kind of that,
that's the, so anyway, this Ruliad object, very philosophically interesting object, because it's
kind of a necessary has to exist object, because it is just a formal thing like two plus two equals
four. Once you've defined the terms, you have no choice about the fact that two plus two equals
four. So you have no choice about the fact that the Ruliad sort of is what it is, so to speak.
And we're, we're kind of our experience is sort of based on these slices that we take
of this, of this, of the Ruliad. And what we realize is that, that in a sense, the Ruliad
is the bland everything, everything. It is, but our slice has all the stuff that is, you know,
our laws of physics, our, actually certain aspects of laws of physics are quite universal, but, but
our kind of particular experience and perception of the world, so to speak. And what you realize,
so here's, here's one of the kind of shocking sort of philosophical, almost theological things to
realize, is that, in a sense, the growth of knowledge is a growth of our extent in Rulial
space. That is, at some point, we think the world works in this very specific way. Then we learn
more about how to think about how things can work. And we're kind of extending this kind of
domain in Rulial space that we exist in. But now you say, well, what's the limit of that? What's the,
what's the future whole? Well, we could imagine expanding our domain of understanding to the
whole Ruliad. The problem is, then there is no coherent us anymore. Because in a sense, the us,
the thread of sort of, you know, we are at this definite place in the Ruliad, we are who we are,
we are, you know, we are localized in some sense in Rulial space, just as we're localized in physical
space. All of that goes away by the time we sort of have colonized the whole of Rulial space.
And so in a sense, it's a kind of be careful what you wish for, because in the end, and it has a
certain resonance, actually, with some, I don't know enough about it, but with some things that
people have concluded in sort of various kinds of sort of theological traditions and things like
that. Once you, you know, by the time you get to the point where you understand everything,
you kind of, and sort of encompass everything, you no longer coherently exist. And so this is a,
you know, which is to say that the specialness of humans and human history and all this kind of
thing is something that is kind of, you know, that's what makes it all make sense, so to speak,
without that, it is all generic. And that makes it, you know, and I think people kind of imagine
that with science, we have something that just genericizes, you know, it allows us to just figure
out what to do in some purely theoretical, we can prove it's correct kind of way. And I think,
you know, computational irreducibility and a bunch of things that have come out of NKS,
you know, kind of science have, you know, kind of show one and wasn't where I thought it was
going at all, by the way. So that's a thing that's sort of interesting because my personal, okay,
so this is sort of an interesting case. I mean, my personal ideology is looked very inconsistent
with the things that I was doing in science, even to me. I mean, that is, it seemed like I was
successfully deconstructing everything and making it sort of taking it to the point where everything
that exists is kind of ground down into these computational elements that have no soul, so
to speak, that have no kind of humanity to them. Right, bare bones. Yeah, right. But my personal
ideology, you know, I like people. I, you know, run a company, I've been running a company for
36 years, whatever it is, you know, it involves people. I find people interesting. How is this
consistent with a scientific and for years, I didn't really realize. And actually, I was kind
of clued in, I got to figure this out when somebody asked me in some, some interview, you know, how
can these two things be consistent? You know, somebody who actually knew me fairly well,
who was interviewing me and like was saying, you know, I know that you are sort of people-oriented
person. How is this consistent with what you do in science that you've ground it down into this
kind of, you know, these, and I then realized actually, actually surprisingly, sort of by a
circuitous route, the science actually turns out to very much sort of fulfill in a sense, you know,
even though that, and this is one of the challenges in doing science is to do it independent of one's
own ideology about what should happen. And this is something I think people sometimes,
and it gets even worse when there's sort of a whole political angle to the thing that comes in,
but it's like, can you just do the science and figure out where the chips fall without, and,
you know, I think somehow it's an important thing to have the confidence to be able to do that,
and to say, you know, the chips may fall in the way that I think I ideologically want them to fall,
or they may not. I'm just, you know, going to do what I do, and I'm more interested in sort of
having the science be coherent than I am in the fact that I happen to have sort of realized some
particular personal ideological goal. But I think, you know, I'm a little disappointed, and I've seen
that a bunch in the, you know, the time of the pandemic and other such things that there's a
certain tendency to sort of fall into these things where, where, you know, the science is in
service of the ideology, so to speak, rather than you just do the science and you see where the
chips fall, and you kind of might hope that it doesn't completely blow up your ideology, but,
you know, it depends what you're, it depends what you're in it for, so to speak. But I've always
found I think one of the, one of the bigger achievements, if you're doing science, is to
discover things that you didn't think were there, and that maybe at first you even don't think could
possibly be true, and that maybe disagree with things that you sort of ideologically or, or sort
of, you know, in your intuition about science thought were the case. All right, we've covered
lots of things. Anything else you wanted to make sure to, to, to kind of hit? So I had one,
one thing that came up, well, what you're talking is that we are observing the universe from
our vantage point, right? We're only seeing a slice of the universe, and all of our laws that
we're dictating are based on explaining that slice of the universe that we're seeing, since we can
never be fully isolated from the system, right? So, but we know that there are other things that
exist that we don't know of. So how do you deal with this concept of known unknown? Like, how can
you begin to comprehend them or? So here's a, here's a thing that has come out of sort of the
science that I've been doing, is you have this rule we add, it has a structure, we can scientifically
study that structure. But then the question is what do observers like us observe in this rule we add?
So the question is what do we need to know about us as observers to deduce that we will
observe certain physical laws as we know, as we, you know, write them down in textbooks?
And what we've discovered is that you actually don't need very many features of observers like us
to get pretty detailed laws of physics. So for example, the, you know, the, the fact that we
are computationally bounded, the universe is doing all these computationally irreducible things,
but to fit it in our minds, it has to be computationally bounded. We can only look at,
we can only analyze a slice that is sort of a computationally reducible slice of all the stuff
that's frothing around going on underneath. So that's first, first feature. Another feature
is that we believe we are persistent in time, which is kind of a weird thing, because at every
moment we're made from different atoms of space. So how could it be the case that, you know, we
all think, oh, we have a past, we have a memory of the past, it's still us. We, you know, we,
there's a thread of time, there's a thread of experience that is a single thread of experience.
And the, and we are persisting through time. So those two things turn out to be what need,
what you need to get general relativity and quantum mechanics, which is sort of two core theories,
two core pillars of physics, as it's known today. Now you ask yourself, well,
if we were not observers like us, how would we perceive the universe? This is a really difficult
thing to think about. And because, and I've been interested, you know, as we move outward in
real space, we are gradually being perceiver, being observers that weren't like the past of us,
so to speak. That is, we are, you know, an observer of today is different from an observer.
For example, even this thing about using programs as ways to study what happens in the world,
you know, 25 years ago, people were like, you know, they didn't have the idea of doing that.
And it was, that was an alien idea, no longer an alien idea. And so I think this question of sort
of what is the perception of the universe from a, from a point of view different from our own,
I find this really interesting. I'm really, really curious about this. I've been trying to poke
my science fiction author friends to kind of write about this and some of them have written
some things about it, actually. But it's like, you know, there are things, I think about it as
sort of what's the distance and rural space between different entities. So, you know, different human
minds are a certain distance apart. They are, you know, the way like different machine learning
systems will be a certain, they have different, they learn things in a different way. And so
they are perceiving the universe in a slightly different way. But we're able to communicate,
it's not so far away in rural spaces, you get people who have different sort of cultural
background or whatever else, it gets more and more difficult to communicate, you're sort of
further away in real space, the concepts that we have are not ones that map as well into concepts
that will have developed there. So then you go to, you know, pets, for example, there's certain
things you can communicate, the dog wags its tail, there's some emotional thing that we probably
have in common with dogs that allows us to understand what's going on. But the full light,
you know, the full worldview of the dog, we don't have a good idea what the worldview of the dog is
or the whale or whatever. And when you get further away than that, it's really difficult to know
what is the worldview, you know, of this, you know, what's the worldview of this thing in the
physical universe? What's the worldview of a computer even? I was actually trying to write
something recently, I finally get it done about what it's like to be a computer. As it turns out,
it's pretty similar to being, you know, and it's funny because, you know, you might think, well,
you need to make a whole AI and do all this kind of thing before it, before you can imagine what
it's like to be a computer. But you realize that between when the computer is booted and when the
computer crashes, it's pretty much like a human life. The computer accumulates a bunch of stuff
in its memory. It, you know, has certain experiences. It, you know, eventually, the thing is restarted
from sort of the same genetic material, so to speak. It's another, another set, another cycle,
you know, it's a before the operating system crashes or whatever. And, you know, during its life,
it has as many things that are surprisingly human-like in terms of sort of it's an internal
perception of what's going on. And it's a case where we can more or less, you know, we can
sort of, interesting because, you know, we have a hard time with human brains, you know, we don't
get to record from, from the, you know, 80, whatever it is, 86 million, billion neurons or whatever
people now say brains, typical brains have 100 billion neurons roughly. The, similarly with
computers in principle, we might be able to record every single thing that's happening
in the, in the computer, but that's actually not in practice very easy to do. But it's still kind
of, it's a thing where we, much more than with brains, we say we can point out what's going on
inside there. You know, for example, there's no free will to this computer. Look, we can see it's
got these, you know, transistors that are doing this and that and the other. Well, actually, you
can do that with brains too. We just don't happen to have the technology to do it at this time.
But anyway, this question of sort of what it's like to see the universe from an alien intelligence,
very interesting question. I mean, it's a, it's a fun thing I was wrote about a little while ago.
Some people were pitching me a company that, about a company that, well, then their concept of it,
then it's, it's now changed, thankfully, but the concept of it was we're going to make a bunch,
a million tiny interstellar spacecraft. We're going to have them go out and discover extraterrestrial
intelligence. We're going to bring back the technology from extraterrestrial intelligence
to Earth, forget all those extraterrestrial patent rights and so on. And we're going to
accelerate developments of technology on Earth by million years. Okay. So I was like, this is,
you cannot be serious, it's perfectly serious people. But you can't be serious. I mean, this is
just a pure, you know, it's a, it's an element for a script for the Silicon Valley TV show.
Because it's a, you know, but, but what's interesting is what's philosophically wrong
with this idea. So, you know, you kind of go off and you say, we're going to discover alien
intelligence. And then we're going to sort of, and then we're going to bring back its technology.
Well, alien intelligence, it's kind of like there's many computational things going on
in the universe, which we can think of as alien intelligence is, you know, the weather has a
mind of its own, whatever else. And, but now the question is, well, what's technology to the alien
intelligence? You know, what's technology to the weather? What's technology to us humans? Technology
to us humans is, we take stuff that exists in the world, and we use it for things that we have
purposes for. And so it's a thing where we're, it's not that there is an abstract concept of
technology. Technology is all tied up with kind of the human purposes that we're, you know, that
we're following. And so this idea, what you realize is in the end, the story of kind of go out and
find alien intelligence and bring back its technology is actually just the generic story of science.
What science is doing is taking sort of aspects of the universe and finding ways to turn them
into things that we humans can relate to, and then we can use them for our purposes and so on.
So it's kind of a, that's in a sense the communication with alien intelligence, abstract alien
intelligence is sort of what science is trying to do. Science is an attempt to find a language
which allows humans to understand and create narrative about what's happening in the world.
I mean, and you know, my main life work of building our computational language is sort of the same
thing. It's trying to make a language that bridges between what we humans think about, right, and
what is computationally possible. And that's, and you know, at any given time in history,
the things which we humans are going to think about and care about will change a bit. Even over
the 35, 36 years that I've been building Wolfman language, it's longer than that if you include
the precursor that I built in starting in 1979, it's 40 something years. You know, it's been
interesting because the ambient things that people understand have moved a bit. And so the things
that it makes sense to put into a language that caters to humans, I mean, as I pointed out a
few times when we do design reviews of some software engineering thing, our market is currently
humans. And so things that involve, you know, like we're doing, you know, the color, you know,
visualization or something, you know, the mantis shrimp, which has a lot more color receptors
than we do, would have a different, you know, would have a different view of how we should do,
you know, color for visualizations. But our market is humans. And, you know, it's, and you
sort of understand from that, that there's a certain, you know, the sort of humans at this
time in history, so to speak, who have a certain set of, you know, have a certain domain and
rural space, have a certain sort of set of paradigms. And that's kind of, that's what,
that's what they deal with. But interesting question. I mean, to me, it's just a super
interesting thing to try and think about what do, you know, how are different, what are really
different ways to think about how things work? I mean, I was just, I was pondering to myself the
following question a couple of days ago, which was, you know, the Neanderthals died out whatever,
50,000 years ago, whatever it is, right? They, you know, they have made some artifacts,
which, in my case, we don't really understand what they, what they were for, whatever it means
to say what they were for, because that's a, you know, involves sort of a thread of purpose
that has to be connected to what we're talking about today. I was wondering, what would happen if
suddenly we discovered, you know, a giant work of literature written by the Neanderthals?
And, you know, how would that change? Because it's kind of like the discovery of an alien
intelligence. You know, it happens to be a, you know, a species intermixed with ours, but it's
still something where, and you know, what would be understandable? I also, it reminds me of a
long ago kind of funny project of, of, you know, video games for pets. It's kind of like, if you
could have, you know, your cat create, you know, Minecraft or something for cats, and you see,
you know, what does the cat make? And, you know, maybe it makes something where you say,
that just looks like a random bunch of blocks. I don't know what that is. And, but to the cat,
it's an incredibly meaningful, you know, deep philosophical poetic kind of thing.
Just fraction.
Yes, right. But, but, you know, and that's this question of how do you, how do you merge kind
of what is the, the human view of things with, with something broader than the existing human
view? And in a sense, it is the goal of science to gradually expand that, that view. And it's the
goal of sort of intellectual development to sort of, sort of expand to paradigms which allow you to,
you know, sort of get further in the, in the space of everything that's possible.
And I think this like common link with this computational physics is, I think, critical
to understanding how the other species is thinking, right? Because it's, as you mentioned,
it's hard as humans to perceive or even begin to conceptualize.
Well, you know, this is the problem. We're all part of the same Rouliat. But, you know,
we're taking sufficiently different slices. There will be features. Okay, for observers like us,
with computational boundedness and persistence in time, all observers like us in that respect,
will have some version of general relativity and quantum mechanics. Although their description
of it will no doubt be utterly, utterly different from ours. But those kinds of
regularities in the world, they will perceive. And I mean, you know, if we did not have certain
regularities in the world, it will be hard for us to operate as observers like us. Now, you know,
so take away those features, like take away persistence and time, and imagine an existence
where you have no persistence in time. I don't know what this is like. I mean, I have no idea
what, you know, there is no memory. There's no, everything is different at every moment.
It's, it's, it's hard to imagine that. I mean, this is, this is why I'm trying to get my science
fiction author friends to write about this. So see whether they can find a way to bridge,
you know, writing about this in a sort of human understandable way, because it may be
profoundly not human understandable. I mean, this, this is, you know, as a language designer,
for example, one of the things, one of the bad case scenarios is you run into something that
just isn't human understandable. You know, you run into something where you, you cannot present
this, you can't figure out a way at this time in history to present this in a way where humans
will understand it, so to speak. And that's, you know, that sort of a bad case scenario for language
design. Anyway, we should probably wrap up and soon, but you've asked all kinds of interesting
things. We've chatted about a pretty broad range of different, different kinds of topics.
Do I sense that there's sort of a one last question here, or did we, did we already do the
one last question? There is your feeling is right. Yeah, so we, we, we, as at the end, we have a
section that we call overrated or underrated. So we give you a topic or a statement and you just
give us, you know, underrated or overrated is a fun, fun section. Okay. You mean you will give me
a topic? Yeah. Okay. Please go ahead. Yeah. First one, which I would like to know your
thoughts about is noble price. Do you consider it underrated? Yeah.
Anything for which there is a prize is a thing where the most interesting period of its history
is probably over. In other words, if there is a field where there's a prize for that field,
it means there's a well-defined field. And it means kind of the foundational things are already
laid. I mean, I think it's, it's, I mean, I have many friends who've won Nobel Prizes. Sometimes
sometimes it's, it's like they did a bunch of work when they were young, and it's kind of like,
yeah, you know, wait 40 years and then they'll win a Nobel Prize. And it's sometimes, sometimes
that should have been very negative for their careers, because they kind of, yes, because they
kind of like, you know, a checkmark, I did my science thing. Now, you know, I've got nothing
more I can do. I'm never going to top that thing. And I'm just going to wait around and then I'll
get this prize. And I have to say one friend of mine won a Nobel Prize, maybe he'd been waiting
around for years for this. I happen to see him in his office. He has a box that's labeled Nobel
shit. And I said, what is that? So it's all the stuff I got when I went to this Nobel Prize,
you know, ceremony type thing. And, and he kind of hated it. So it was sort of an interesting
dynamic. So I think it's a, you know, prizes, you have to understand prizes are usually more for
the giver than for the receiver. So, you know, Alfred Nobel had his reasons for setting up this
prize, you know, he's mostly dead by the time it really got going. But, but, you know, it's something
where the, you know, I'm always interested, you know, occasionally, actually, I'm, I'm,
I'm actually, I used to win more prizes when I was younger than I do now. And I'm actually
fearing the time when, when I'll start to win all kinds of prizes, because that means people
think kind of it's all over, right? It's kind of like the end of an era. It's all over as in,
as in, and sort of everything's become well defined enough. It's like, oh, there's a prize
for this, a prize for that. But I think it's, it's somehow, I'm not a big, you know, again,
it's been, it's been something, yeah, I'm, so I would, I would definitely say overrated on that
one. There was a period of time when, when these, which I sort of amused me, I, you know,
there was a period of time when the Ig Nobel Prize, which was this thing about sort of
goofy discoveries people have made, got more, got more press than the actual Nobel Prize. And for
good reason, because a lot of the actual Nobel Prizes and things like physics were pretty dull.
I mean, they were like, you know, I barely even heard of that discovery. I don't particularly care
about it. Now, you know, things have changed in different fields, like in biology, for example,
they're really interesting discoveries getting made all the time there. And that's a place where
there's a lot more sort of energy, I would say, I'm generated there. But, but yeah, so I'm not,
I'm not a big, you know, I think that the main statement is, by the time there's a prize for
something, it's kind of the thing as well, that I like, I had this friend named Ben Lamantl,
who's a guy invented fractals, who was just obsessed with winning prizes for things.
And, you know, he campaigned for years to win a Nobel Prize in physics and economics,
and whatever. And I was like, Ben, wow, why do you care? Like, the thing is, but the reason,
you know, if there was a prize for fractals, and there may be a prize for fractals now,
I don't know, that's kind of a sign that that field is is now well defined, and sort of the
foundational stuff is done. And, you know, it's more interesting, I think, you know, in my particular
things I find interesting to do the foundational stuff than to do the things once the once the
thing is on its on its track. Very long answer. Try another one, maybe it'll be a shorter answer.
Yes. You were friends with Steve Jobs, and, you know, he gave you the confidence to name
Mathematica, you know, you came up with the name, but he wrote it up again, he gave you this reason.
You know, Apple, do they have long, it's been almost more than 10 years since Steve Jobs died.
Apple, do they the technology, the products, what it stands for, overrated or underrated?
I don't know. Apple's a company, we've worked with a bunch, but it, you know, it's interesting. I mean,
Apple has taken a particular roadmap of sort of it's, it's in a sense, it's the UX company,
UX, industrial design, et cetera, and polish everything. They're doing a pretty good job
polishing things. I mean, I think it's disappointing that, that, you know, they're like, I found a
memory leak in the Apple Mail program. Okay, that's, that's disappointing, because you would think that
that the tooling would be good enough that that wouldn't be, at least I think it's a memory leak.
I'm not certain it's a memory leak. I think it's a memory leak. And, but, but, you know, it's,
it's interesting that that kind of roadmap that I don't know when Steve Jobs really kind of locked
into that roadmap of kind of UX, industrial design, kind of just make things smooth, so to speak.
But it's, you know, it's a pretty good roadmap and there's lots of useful things that come out of it.
You know, I think, you know, as a, as a company, to work with it's always a bit when, when Steve
Jobs was alive and there, you could send a mail and he would actually respond and, you know,
be pretty direct about things. It's, you know, people always used to say about Apple, that it
was this, it was this company full of, you know, secrecy, although it was a ship that leaked from
the top in the sense that Steve would talk about all kinds of things. But everybody else was like,
it's got to be secret, secret, secret. And the, and I think, you know, as, as a, you know,
working with Apple can sometimes be challenging because of that, because the kind of Steve,
I think, is a little bit of sort of control and a little bit of showmanship kind of was very much
into this kind of secrecy type thing. And I think that that makes it makes it more difficult to,
to work with a company like that. And, you know, I found it surprising that, you know,
Siri used Wolf from Alpha, too, which is, I, when, you know, when I read it, doing the some
research, it was, you know, it was really cool to see that. But yeah. And then the last one here,
we started with college, and I think it will be a good place to end with college as well.
And you wrote at one point that you were at a dinner with your son and Elon Musk happened to be
there. And your son went to talk to Elon Musk. And they were talking about college somehow. And
then your son, you know, learned from Elon Musk that he went to college. And he saw a reason
was to pick up girls. So that was what Elon said. Yeah. Gosh, did I write that somewhere? I thought
maybe I told that story, but I didn't think that was out there in the public arena. But yeah. So
that's the story. It's a true story. So the Elon Musk college theory, operator on the radar?
Gosh, it didn't work for me. I met my wife long after I was in college. So
you know, maybe because I went to college earlier than some people, that was, it was not,
college was not my primary social thing. But I certainly, it's funny, you know,
colleges select certain populations of people, companies select certain populations of people.
You know, if you want to find a mate, so to speak, being in a population of people,
maybe you want one who's like you, maybe you want one who's the opposite of you. I don't know,
depends on, but, but that's a, you know, so I don't know, I think that's a,
that seemed to be
observationally, it seems to be, I know this company, for example, that company, I'm a little bit
shocked at the number of kind of employee, you know, we end up having quite a number of these.
We've had many, actually, over the years of employees getting together like that. I think it's
it's, so I'm not, I'm probably not the expert on this. I'd be kind of, I would say that the,
I mean, it is true that one thing I will say is that, you know, in terms of just people one
meets and knows and so on, you know, one of the things that I've done is, you know, I've met
all kinds of interesting people in my life, and I stay in touch with them, you know, and in fact,
I just organized a, a 50th year reunion for my elementary school class,
virtual reunion, which makes it a lot easier. The interesting, many, most of these people,
I've sort of been vaguely in touch with at least once a decade since then, but I think one of
the things that I've noticed is that people, sometimes very bad at keeping in touch with
people that they have known, maybe it's easier, I don't know whether, I don't know in the Facebook
generation, well you guys are younger than the Facebook generation, but I don't know what the,
you know, that's old news at this point, but I mean, I don't know whether social media makes
it easier for people to feel like they stay connected and actually stay connected to people
that they've known in the past, but I would say that one of the things that's been a big positive
in my life is that, you know, I've, I've got met all kinds of interesting people in my life,
and I've stayed in touch with them, and sometimes the funny thing is, you know, I went to an event
with a bunch of people from my elementary school back in 2019, and they're people I hadn't seen
in 50 years, and what was so strange to me was, you know, start a conversation with them, and you'll
realize, you know, I have a decent memory, so I can more or less remember the story, and you'll
realize, oh my gosh, this is the same conversation that I had 50 years ago, I'm just picking up,
you know, the exact same interaction and conversation that I had 50 years ago, and it seems
like one of the things I have noticed is that people, you know, even over quite long periods
of time, people will say, oh, I lost touch with that person, I can't get in touch with them again.
It tends not to be true, it tends to be the case that you can, at least in my experience, and it's
really kind of bizarre, I mean, people that, you know, that you can have a 50-year gap, we'll see
what happens with my virtual reunion, maybe everybody will be like, they don't know what to
say to each other, but we'll see, I don't think that will happen. And then, have you actually
stayed in touch with people? Like, how do you follow up? I don't know, I send email every so
often, and usually, one thing I tend to do is, modern times, when I write stuff, you know,
I'll send it to people where I think they might be interested, and that gives me an excuse to kind
of have a, have some amount of interaction, but also, I suppose, yeah, you know, I keep a list of,
you know, when I'm in place X, go and see such and such a person, and you know, some places where
I probably will only be there once in my life, but you know, there's somebody I know who lives there,
and you know, so I'll, you know, do that, and you know, that's a pretty typical thing, but somehow,
I mean, I suppose, there's usually, yeah, maybe part of the thing for me is that I'm interested
in enough things intellectually and business-wise, that there'll be a reason why, you know, this
person who I knew 30 years ago, whatever, oh, there's some reason to interact with this person,
I've got some question I like to ask, or that person has a question they want to ask me,
or whatever else, and that gives a sort of excuse to stay in touch, I guess. I mean,
if it's just the kind of, hey, how are you doing type thing, maybe that doesn't really work. I think
I'm probably not great in the hey, how are you doing kind of small talk department, so it tends to
be, you know, it tends to be content very quickly, and those tends to be the people I know tend to
be people who are interested in that kind of interaction. I've done some more stuff where I
write essays, and as an excuse, hey, would you mind giving me feedback on this, and it's a way to
stay in touch, so yeah. Right, I'm not sure you should ask for feedback, I think it might be better
just, you might find this interesting, or this is a, because I think by the time you give people
homework, you're reducing the probability of response. Yeah, that's true. Okay, that's true.
Thank you for the suggestion. But yes, thank you so much for, you know,
spending some time with us and really sharing everything that has made you, you know, who you
are, you know, wait, so thank you for doing it. Yep, you guys have asked good questions, had good
comments, it's been fun, good stuff. Good work. I'm glad you enjoyed it, and thank you to everyone
for watching. I hope you enjoyed the conversation as much as we did, like because we started off
talking about institutions and colleges, and we ended up learning about some of the deepest
questions that the physics, like the physicists and people around the world are asking today,
and some of the puzzles that are still puzzling a lot of us today, and how the tools that we
create can help us get closer to the answer, and sometimes the answer might not be intuitive,
and something that will only make sense with the tools that get invented at maybe like 100 or 50,
after 50 or 150 years from now. So I think the crux is that the most important part of this
conversation was that to never stop asking questions. That's how these tools got created,
that's how you would find a way to get to the bottom of things. If you never asked the question in
the first place, you're not going to be inclined to solve them. So always keep asking questions.
I thank you once again for such an amazing opportunity and time with us, and I'll be
looking forward to the next conversation. Thanks for your questions. Keep asking them.
Always, always. Good. Thank you, and we'll see you next time.
