These lectures are titled, The Enlightenment Invention of the Modern Self, Part 2.
Lecture 13, Diderot, Jacques the Fatalist, Part 1.
During his many other talents, Diderot was a gifted novelist, and in this lecture and
the next will take up the most remarkable of his novels, it's called Jacques the Fatalist.
Like the works we looked at last time, it too was unpublished during his life.
Or rather, and this is interesting in itself, it did get printed right at the very end of
his life in 1778, but in an incredibly limited way.
One of the encyclopedia group, a French-speaking German named Grimm, edited a periodical to
report on cultural life in Paris, which had a total circulation of a dozen foreign princes.
And the idea was, an enlightened ruler would like to keep up with the very latest ideas,
but that official censorship in France wouldn't permit circulating them freely to the general
public. And remember what happened to Diderot himself when he went too far in that letter
on the blind? So Jacques the Fatalist wasn't publicly published at all until after the
French Revolution in 1796. And so once again, we're looking at a work of exceptional freedom
that gave Diderot the chance to fool around with it for years and years.
Probably one shouldn't call it a novel exactly, it's really an anti-novel, because it keeps
calling attention to its own artificiality. And it keeps reminding us that novels tend
to give us, and they certainly have tended to, right to the present day, a much more
coherent and intelligible picture of life than actual experience would warrant.
In connection with Boswell, we talked about art permitting the artist to escape the frustrations
of reality and recreate experience in a fantasy world. Well, art does that for readers too.
Even when it includes suffering and grief, which it often does, it puts them in a meaningful
framework. And needless to say, it's only vicarious suffering you're reading about
Anna Karenina or King Lear. As we saw in the last lecture, Diderot was very interested
in what he was one of the first people really to grasp, that the aesthetic realm pretends
to mirror life, but is actually potentially at least totally different from it. And in
Jacques, he puts that insight into practice. In this first lecture, I'm going to concentrate
on various ways that fiction can tell us about human beings. And I'll try to show, as I've
been implying since the beginning of this course, that how something is told is every
bit as important as what is told. And that becomes obvious when Diderot keeps refusing
to provide the coherent framework we normally expect in a novel. And that discussion will
lead to my second main topic in this lecture. Diderot's conviction that all of us, in our
own lives, are just like fiction writers. We're always telling stories about ourselves,
either to other people or inside our own heads. And he seems to believe that the way to think
about psychology is not through deep introspection. He's very much an empiricist in that way,
but paying attention to the competing stories that people tell. In conceiving Jacques the
fatalist in this way, what Diderot is doing really is dramatizing what Hume had been theorizing.
That the self only makes sense. You could almost say it only exists as it's experienced
in social contexts. So, first I'm going to talk about varieties of fiction and what they
might imply for our understanding. There seems to be a widespread view that point of view
is a more or less arbitrary choice that a writer would make. The idea seems to be you've
got a story to tell and then it's just a technical decision how you're going to tell it. But as
every novelist knows, these are actually decisions that utterly control the shape and meaning
of what we read. When Diderot began writing Jacques around 1765, it's exactly the same
time that he was working on Ramos's nephew, the novel had more or less developed into
the form that we understand today. And he had just recently read, however, a very quirky
bestseller from England that subverted all the normal expectations of a novel. It was
called Tristram Shandy by the Reverend Lawrence Stern. It ostentatiously refuses to do most
of the things the novel normally does. And I'll keep coming back to Tristram Shandy in
this lecture. It's a very useful point of comparison for what Diderot is doing. Because
in some ways it's extraordinarily experimental and you might say modern. In other ways he
sees things it doesn't do and goes beyond it. First it will be helpful to describe the
main types of fiction that were available when Diderot wrote. It's fair to say that
the impetus for the development of modern fiction, starting in the late 17th century, was an
appetite for realism on the part of the consuming public. Literacy was spreading. There was a
rapidly growing middle class audience for fiction. And these readers wanted to hear about people
like themselves with everyday names and real jobs and money problems and difficulty with
parents and so on. This new kind of fiction was totally different from the old idealized
romances about King Arthur or Tristan and his old. It was also totally different from
allegories like the Pilgrim's Progress. They were supposed to teach eternal truths. Now
by the time Diderot was writing, three main types of novels had developed and each of
them offered its own particular way of trying to convey this sense of realism. In a narrow
way we are talking about point of view, but really it's something much larger than that.
One type of novel and it's remained very popular ever since is the kind that has an omniscient
narrator. It has roots in classical epic. The Bard would tell a story of national or
cultural significance, the Trojan War in the Iliad or the founding of Rome in the Aeneid
or in Milton's Paradise Lost, the original sin that lay behind everything that ever happened
in this world. Unlike the epic, the novel brings its readers down to everyday life and
uses everyday language instead of exalted poetry. Henry Fielding, who wrote Tom Jones
in the 1740s, said his novels were comic, epics and prose. Now by definition an omniscient
narrator knows everything, can explain everything, sees all hidden connections between events,
can even go inside the mind of every single character. Of course the narrator might choose
to withhold information, the omniscient narrator of La Cliniceste de Cleve sometimes does, but
we never doubt she could reveal it if she wanted to. Well when you think about it novels
like this give the illusion of certainty in the way that real life never can. If we ask
did Boswell get venereal disease from Louisa or was she innocent? Well there is no way
we could ever know. If we ask did the princess sleep with Nemours when he snuck into her
estate, her husband thinks she did, we know she did not. So that's the kind of certainty
which seems extremely realistic but entails a godlike clarity of understanding that might
actually seem not very realistic at all. And in fact it seems to work best for comedy where
an author like Fielding can admit openly he's making it all up. But what if the illusion
of reality is the most important thing? Well to meet that demand two other types of novels
were quickly developed. One which also has survived into our own time is the first person
mode. The other which is almost completely vanished was the epistolary mode. The usefulness
of the first person mode for realism is obvious. It seems to be somebody just telling their
own story. Often an artless person with no particular training is a writer. So Daniel
Defoe's character is Maul Flanders and Robinson Crusoe are that kind of narrator. And it allows
them to put in all sorts of little details to make it seem like it must have really happened.
But there's one huge drawback to the first person mode a novelist ever since then have
had to deal with it. Now we're confined to whatever that individual person actually saw
with their own eyes or was able to figure out. And what if the author wants the reader
to see things that this first person narrator doesn't see? Defoe's novels are very good
examples. We're supposed to believe that both Maul Flanders and Robinson Crusoe have
an important conversion experience that teaches them deep moral insights. But then later on
they go right on behaving selfishly and thoughtlessly as if they had never had the experience. And
we have no way of telling whether Defoe is hinting that they're missing something we
should get or whether he's just been trapped in the difficulties of this first person narration.
To meet that difficulty a third mode was invented and for a time in the 18th century it had
enormous vogue, though it hasn't been used much since then. It was called the epistolary
novel and it purports to give us real letters written to each other by the various characters
in the book. So there's certainly an illusion of real time immediacy in reading these letters
and the author can pretend to be merely the editor who's collected them and put them between
covers but by presenting it this way can give us different angles and perspectives as the
different characters see things in different ways. This mode too could raise some very important
questions and we'll come back to those later on when we consider the greatest of all epistolary
novels and I think the greatest 18th century novel Le Liaison d'Angereuse. But right now we're
addressing Jacques the fatalist. An interesting thing is that Diderot, like Stern, rejected all
three of the available novel types and that's why it's certainly fair to say that Jacques is
deliberately an anti-novel but it has implications that are much more profound than just some kind
of literary game. It's raising fundamental questions about how we understand who we are and one of
the ways it does that is to refuse all the comforting kinds of narrative presentation that usually make
readers feel secure in their understanding. So by way of introduction I'll say a little bit about
Tristram Shandy. That was an ostentatiously jokey book. It was published in installments over a
period of years by a rather raffish English clergyman named Lawrence Stern. At the time it struck most
people as merely whimsical. A few years later Samuel Johnson said in his decisive way, nothing odd
will do long. Tristram Shandy did not last and in fact it was largely forgotten until the 20th
century and then it was rediscovered by modernist writers such as Virginia Woolf who were very
impressed by the way the narrator's consciousness drifts in unpredictable directions and also
interested in its overt recognition that a novel really is just a stack of printed pages. It's not
a window into reality. Tristram Shandy is full of embedded texts sometimes in weird typefaces
from out-of-the-way sources all jammed together and physical images too to remind us a book is only
a book. They used to put at the end of an 18th century volume a marbled page, a beautifully
decorative sheet with just sort of shapes like little marbles all over it and Stern sticks one
of those into the middle of his book where it doesn't belong to remind you this thing is not
reality. It's a book. He comes to describe the death of a character and quite wonderfully
he gives us a completely black page because you can't describe death. All you can do is think about
it. The most interesting thing that Tristram Shandy did from Diderot's point of view was overtly
dismissing plot. Most great works of fiction and drama for that matter are plotted. We want things
to hold together. Aristotle long ago said plot is the soul of the drama or the epic so that Homer
for example didn't try to tell everything that happened in 10 years in the Trojan War. He focused
on a few crucial relationships and events. Stern is doing just the opposite. His book is nothing
but digressions bouncing off each other wildly. You hit one and it bangs into two more and such
story as he's trying to tell never even gets started and here is what Stern says about it.
Degressions are the sunshine. They're the life, the soul of reading. The absolute reverse if
Aristotle said the plot was the soul. Take them out of this book for instance. You might as well
take the book along with them. One cold eternal winter would rain in every page of it. Restore
them to the writer. He steps forth like a bridegroom. Bids all hail. Brings in variety and
forbids the appetite to fail. Stern's emphasis on the writer is no accident. It's not a realistic
work. It's an expressivist work. It's about the feelings and opinions of the author himself,
not least of which is his very real fear of death. Stern suffered from advanced tuberculosis. He
used to cough up huge quantities of blood. His race against death is a constant theme in the
successive volumes of Tristram Shandy. So in a way his book is one long monologue but that's not
what Diderot wanted to do. He was a playwright. He was interested in dialogue. He wanted to think
about how people present themselves. What he did take from Tristram Shandy was two things. First,
he employs a narrator who's quite willing to interrupt the story anytime he likes and play
around with the reader's expectations. I'll give you some examples. Second, he makes it absolutely
clear it's a book not reality. As D. H. Lawrence said, books are not life. It points to life. It
makes us think about life but it's giving us the materials in a deliberately miscellaneous way,
not pre-digesting their significance for us. And you know that fits very well with the philosophy
of empiricism. Life is an endless stream of particulars. It's our minds that invent connections
among them. There's a modern term for what Stern and Diderot were doing. It's called meta fiction.
Fiction highlighting its own fictionality instead of concealing it the way realistic novels did then
and still do. The setup of Jacques the fatalist is a servant named Jacques and his master, who's
never even named. He's just the master, are on the road taking a trip somewhere and they
while away the time with conversation or with whoever shows up with themselves if it's nothing
bettered. Jacques used to be a soldier and he tells us he learned from his former captain
a philosophy of life called fatalism as the title indicates. He believes every single thing that
happens was foreordained and it is written in a great scroll up above. We never get to read the
scroll so we never know what's coming next but whatever it is it had to be that way. Well obviously
this is a version of the Enlightenment determinism that we've talked about before and in the next
lecture we'll go into that in more depth. For now the point is Jacques feels calmly relaxed about
whatever he does since he knows the outcome is already written in the great scroll up above
but nothing in the actual narration encourages us to believe that because Diderot constantly intrudes
in his own voice to emphasize the arbitrariness of what he's doing. Right at the start of the book
he taunts our normal expectation of a compelling plot by pointing out how conventional most plots
really are. He says you can see reader I'm well on my way and it's completely up to me to make you
wait a year, two years, three years for the story of Jacques's loves by separating him from his master
and putting him through all the dangers I like. What's to prevent me from having the master get
married and then cuckolded from shipping Jacques off to the Indies from sending his master there
after him for bringing them both back to France on the same ship how easy it is to make up stories.
Well Stern too poked fun at the conventionality of standard plots. One chapter in Tristram Shandy
begins like this. Oh there's a sweet era in the life of man when the brain being tender and more
like pap than anything else. We like to read a story of two fond lovers separated from each other
by cruel parents and by still more cruel destiny. Amanda's he Amanda she those are generic names.
Amanda's in Latin means he who ought to be loved so then Amanda is his perfect counterpart.
Well that could be the basis of a great work of art. Lovers separated by cruel parents in fate
you could say Romeo he Juliet she but Stern is right for every great work on that model there
must be 10,000 silly ones. Well in his little summary the two lovers finally do find each other
and then alas drop dead for joy and he concludes there is a soft era in every gentle mortal's life
where such a story affords more pabulum to the brain than all the crusts of antiquity.
That's the kind of metafictionality that Diderot exploits in Jacques the fatalist and here's a
perfect example of it. Jacques and his master have been staying in an inn but they're insulted by a
bunch of ruffians there and Jacques coolly produces a pistol locks them all up in a room and takes
their clothes away just in case they get out. He and his master then leave the inn safely enough
but the master is highly alarmed by what just happened and then this is what we read.
They heard uproar and shout some distance behind them they looked around and saw a band of men
armed with poles and pitchforks who were running full speed after them. You are going to believe
these were people from the inn you are going to believe this little army will fall upon Jacques
and his master there'll be a bloody fight blows struck pistols fired it's entirely up to me to
make these things happen but our travelers were not followed I have no idea what happened at the
inn after they left. So we've been giving the beginning of what looked like a conventional
story Jacques humiliates the bad guys and takes their clothes naturally the angry band will pursue
them it appears but the reason it appeared was the logic of stories and since Diderot never
hides the fact that he's making it all up he chooses to refuse to make up the story we thought we
were getting but he's not being merely frivolous he's trying to make us think about the unpredictability
of real experience instead of just settling back to enjoy a good read. After he challenges us with
that expectation of that pursuit that never happened he makes this very thought-provoking
remark it's obvious I'm not writing a novel because I neglect what a novelist wouldn't fail to use
someone who should take what I'm writing for the truth would perhaps be less wrong than someone
who took it for a fable would perhaps be less wrong than someone who took it for a fable.
There are at least two ways in which Diderot I believe thinks his kind of narration is closer to
the truth than conventional novels are. One way I've already touched on is trying to reflect the
incredible complexity of life the confused jumble of experiences that empiricism recognized in theory
but that well-plotted stories try to simplify the other is the subjectivity of the teller
because like Stern Diderot never lets us forget he's the one making this up talking to us
entertaining us and so on and he adds something important that Stern didn't have as the novel
continues or the anti novel different people take over and they start to tell their own stories
so it's not just his subjectivity the way it was Stern's it's inter subjectivity it's the overlapping
and competing self presentations of many people one final thought about plot. Stern was a clergyman
and although his private life was somewhat scandalous he really did believe in his faith he left a
volume of sermons that are very earnestly about leading a good christian life and this faith gives
Stern a sense of underlying coherence that Diderot is much more skeptical about right after the
account of digressions that I read from chris from shandy stern goes on to say this I've constructed
the main work and the adventitious parts of it with such intersections and have so complicated
and involved the digressive and progressive movements one wheel within another that the whole
machine in general has been kept going and what's more it shall be kept going these 40 years if it
pleases the fountain of health to bless me so long with life and good spirits well in only a few years
his fountain of health did stop flowing but you see the power of his metaphor the universe is
incredibly various but science has been able to detect general laws and we can make clockwork
miniatures of the solar system wheels within wheels where everything moves at its own pace but also
cooperates in the entire machine stern could feel good about this because he believed in a kindly
and providential god Diderot with his impersonal determinism is much less hopeful that those counter
rotating gears and wheels cooperate in a harmonious whole and as we've seen he was more interested
in the life sciences than in the sort of abstractions of physics that stern is thinking of now well
Jacques and his master are whiling away the time all sorts of stories keep turning up to hold our
interest as readers for a while and Diderot keeps challenging us to think about our need as human
beings to have stories we want life to make sense we tell ourselves stories as Boswell did to see it
make sense or to put it another way modern psychological research suggests the tendency
to see patterns is hardwired into our brains if you listen carefully to a clock it goes tick tick
tick tick tick or it did when clocks still ticked but in fact we can't help hearing tick talk tick
talk tick talk because the mind has to make patterns and as the 20th century modernist
discovered even when they were trying to be most experimental even if their message was that life
makes no sense at all you can't represent human experience without imposing form it's been very
well said that in waiting for Godot nothing happens twice and when they asked Beckett why there were
two acts he replied very accurately one would have been too few and three would have been too many
two is the principle of repetition that the human mind is calling for one of the most brilliant
passages of Jacques the fatalist Diderot plays out the paradox of a story that might be real
and imaginary at one in the same time and this is how it works Jacques tells about a friend of his
former captain another army captain who had a dear friend with whom however he fought repeated
duels over points of honor in which they always wounded each other badly and Jacques warns his
master he may he may find this story incredible and the reason is not that it couldn't happen
but it already did happen to another pair of guys there was a certain monsieur de Gershys and scholars
they found out really did exist so Jacques master replies to him in telling it you'll kill two birds
with one stone you'll be telling me the story of these two people which I don't know not two people
whom I don't know that would be the dualist but a story which I don't know an identical story that
can be replicated over and over again so Jacques launches into his narrative with constant reminders
the two separate stories are really one in the same of course we like to think everything that
happens to us is unique but Diderot is suggesting there's no reason to assume that and we can
distinguish I think two separate points here one is the repetitiveness of human life why shouldn't
identical events happen over and over again to different people the others what I've already
indicated our tendency to tell interesting stories storytelling cleans up loose ends it
arranges material in intelligible sequence it gives structure what we have in Jacques the
fatalist is a book that keeps emphasizing the conventionality of those stories whether we
make them up or I think this is Diderot's point whether we actually live them just as we saw
Boswell doing what if life is random and although there may be repetition it's not the source of
meaning what if it's our minds that finds the similarities and patterns because it's comforting
to think like that another point about these parallel stories of the two dualists or pairs of
dualists they keep bouncing back after every wound and refighting their battle just the same way
like cartoon figures or you know Tweedledum and Tweedledee and Alice in Wonderland strapping
on the pillows and the saucepans to have another bash before the monstrous crow appears as it always
does we're seeing people from outside in this book we hear what they say but we can never get
inside their heads the way many novels claim we can do and if we observe them from outside what we
see if they're not puppets exactly is more or less automatic beings subject to behaviorist stimuli
and exactly the way empiricist theory would expect Hume said we build up habits to regularize the
lessons we get from experience and that makes our lives predictable maybe we're all closer to cartoon
characters than we'd like to admit now why do the dualists keep resuming their stupid quarrel
Diderot has an answer and he gives it in a similar connection another story of the same kind
Jacques captain and his friend might have been tormented by a violent secret jealousy
it's a feeling that friendship doesn't always extinguish nothing is harder to forgive than merit
without suspecting it each one was trying to get rid of a dangerous rival
that might sound like a theory of the unconscious but it's not not in the modern sense the idea isn't
each of these men has a hidden core of self with repressed impulses emerging no it's that in very
behaviorist fashion they're responding to an outside influence that makes them behave irrationally
and Diderot says don't all of us sometimes behave in ways that seem crazy and then he draws this
conclusion the craziness of our two officers was for quite a few centuries the craziness of the
whole of europe it used to be called the spirit of chivalry so what does this mean that nothing
makes sense absolutely not but just as in Hume's philosophy we need to pay attention to people
interacting and not worry about some unknowable inner life human beings are tiny in the overall
picture of things these dueling officers are just two among thousands of similar guys and if Diderot
is right we understand them better by attending the larger forces like the spirit of chivalry that
tells them they have to fight duels to avenge their personal honor that's more help than trying to
analyze their personal psyches in the next lecture we'll go on further and shock the fatalist and
we'll follow out this line of thinking in two ways one will be to revisit the concept of determinism
and see what that philosophy is telling us about human behavior the other will be to
realize just because stories are conventional and artificial that doesn't make them any less
enjoyable Diderot knows they are but according to him we must stop thinking about them as pictures
of reality in the old classical view and start thinking of them as expressive instruments people
use to influence and impress each other that was what Ramon the nephew was doing superbly in that
dialogue with his inexhaustible stream of gossip and shocking tales and jock the fatalist we made a
whole series of people to do it one critic has proposed a hydraulic model for the narrative
flow of jock each character is like a reservoir of narration with a story they're trying to tell
competing for airtime until somebody else dams up the flow and diverts it in their own direction
and the narrator too of course is participating not the impersonal calm distant voice that told the
story of La Panceste to Cleve and with his very lively sense of humor he's telling us just as
Stern does in Tristan Shandy not to take ourselves too seriously and to see what people say as
performances not windows into some inner self. Diderot was a skeptic and I think it's true to
say that skeptics who can see all sides of any question tend to like wit and humor true believers
don't and for Diderot it's not the bitter wit of a satire like Candide it's an amused tolerant
humor that sees life as enjoyable on the whole whatever the limitations of human beings may be.
