Lecture 17, The Confessions, Part II
In the last lecture, we approached the Confessions by way of some notable incidents, and talked
about ways in which Rousseau's self-understanding anticipated modern psychological theories
by focusing on certain episodes that were felt to have exceptional significance, even
if it was hard for him to know how to interpret them.
We noted also that these tended to be episodes that revealed inconsistencies and conflicts
within a dynamic personality, rather than establishing the image of a stable character
as was usual in Rousseau's time.
In this lecture, I want to take a larger perspective and discuss the intellectual framework with
which Rousseau seeks to understand not just his own life, but life in general.
At the very beginning of the Confessions, he makes a strong claim that he is unique.
I am not made like anyone I've ever seen, and I dare to believe that I'm not made like
anyone who exists.
But he also makes clear that this book is exemplary.
We should follow his example.
Each of us is unique in our own way, and we should follow him in trying to grasp the shape
of our own unique psychological experience, not what makes us like everyone else, but
what makes us ourselves.
Still, Rousseau was inevitably a product of his own time, and he was stuck to some extent
with the concepts of empiricist psychology that were taken so much for granted.
It will be helpful, therefore, to begin by talking about his relationship to empiricism
and the ways in which he works to break free from it.
After that, we'll turn to his public career, which occupies many pages of the Confessions.
I'll talk about his own estimation of that career, both as it felt in the days of great
celebrity and in the very interesting repudiation of fame that he arrived at later, with all
that this implies for his understanding of the self.
The Confessions traces Rousseau's great conceptual theme, which was already fully worked out
in the Discourse on Inequality, traces it within the events of his own life, and implicitly
shows how his life experiences brought him to his intellectual views.
Back in Hume tell us absolutely nothing about their own lives.
They present their ideas as abstract truths, not emerging from personal experience and
emotional needs.
Diderot, even more, is impossible to pin down.
He was a chameleon kind of a person, infinitely adaptable.
He would take on the coloration of any group he was in.
He was a brilliant conversationalist.
Rousseau was awkward and clumsy in conversation, and he knew it.
Whereas ideas flowed from Diderot like a stream, Rousseau had to struggle to bring his thoughts
into focus and clarify what he wanted to say.
But he found he could do this much better in writing than in the confusion and embarrassment
of conversation, and as usual he finds a memorable way of putting it.
He says in the Confessions, I would enjoy society as much as anyone if I were not certain
to show myself not just to my disadvantage, but is completely different from what I am.
The choice I've made to write and hide myself is precisely the one that suited me best.
The contrast with empiricist assumptions is very clear.
For Hume, when you try to look within, all you find is a bewildering flux, so you need
to turn to social life.
For Diderot, all we are is the roles we play.
Conversation is where we assert ourselves, get airtime, make people listen to us.
For Rousseau, very differently, it's in writing he can express his true self, because then
he's at ease within himself, not jolted by the demands of other people.
He can take his time to find the right words, and also his words will be read slowly and
thoughtfully by readers he'll never even see.
They won't be batted back at him by aggressive conversationalists.
Now, as he worked to express himself in writing, Rousseau came to understand that a single,
great idea lay at the foundation of everything he had to say, whether it was about politics
or education or personal relationships, and the idea was this.
Man is naturally good, society has made him vicious.
Now, when he talks about society as we know it, Rousseau has no illusions at all about
selfishness and cruelty.
As I remarked in the lecture on the Discourse on Inequality, his view of life is a lot closer
to Hobbes than to Hume.
When he talks about the inner self, he's talking about the survival of natural man in each of
us, and he offers the hope that we can get back in touch with that true authentic self
at a deeper level than the distortions and deformations that social life has given it.
If we think now about the contrast between the central insight of Rousseau's and the
empiricist model of psychology within which he had to do his thinking, we can watch him
pushing back the boundaries to develop something new, to see why he would ground his psychological
understanding in personal experiences rather than the impersonal generic approach of Locke
and Hume.
We need to recall a contradiction in empiricism that I mentioned in an earlier lecture.
It was a basic axiom that the only thing that's real is particulars.
There's no such thing as treat.
That's just an artificial linguistic counter we push around in sentences.
The only thing that's real is this tree and that tree and so on.
But in that case, why should we keep looking for universal, constant, inhuman behavior?
It doesn't make sense.
Hume claims to be about the uniqueness of particulars and then it starts generalizing
about human understanding.
That was Locke's title or human nature.
That was Hume's title as if they could be defined once and for all.
And here's another begged question in empiricism.
It was an axiom that the self is founded on memory.
I am the sum total of everything I can remember about my own past and whatever I can't remember
is no longer part of me.
Rousseau sees that this assumption is totally inadequate.
It refuses to consider that our personality, to use the modern term, might be unified at
some deeper level than that data bank of memory bits and things we've forgotten might still
be extremely important to who we are.
Maybe indeed we want to forget some things because they're too painful to remember.
And another way the empiricist's concept is inadequate is this.
It assumes that all those memory bits add up to a single hole in our present day consciousness.
It takes no account of change of the ways in which we're gradually transformed by our
life experience in a process that never stops.
Empiricism regarded childhood as irrelevant because the child has just barely begun to
collect memory bits and anyway tends to forget most of them later on.
Rousseau, and I can't over stress how original this was, treats childhood as absolutely formative.
He sees that certain entirely individual events, like his father abandoning him when he was
10, or the spanking by Mums à l'Inversier, he sees that they've had permanent effects
on who he has become.
Rousseau was thinking a lot about these issues in the years when he was writing the Confessions.
Somebody never met, wrote to him and asked him to critique a philosophical treatise they'd
written.
And Rousseau wrote back, I find the abstract and generalizing method to be very suspect.
Our senses show us individuals only.
Judgment can compare them with one another, but that's all.
To hope to reunite them exceeds the power of our understanding.
It's wanting to push the boat you're in without touching anything outside it.
That's highly characteristic of Rousseau's writing.
First a clear statement of the problem, then a striking analogy.
He says that trying to get from general truths to get to those from specific experiences
inside our heads is like trying to push a boat without anything to shove against.
Now, just because Rousseau had no formal education whatsoever and had to teach himself from books
when he was in his 20s, he was able to see around the assumptions that the feel-of-suff
were all taking for granted, and he was able to perceive what they were failing to explain
or even just plain leaving out.
Of course, most self-taught people don't end up with brilliantly original thinking.
It helps to be a genius.
Rousseau unquestionably was one, but for a very long time no one suspected it.
He had to find himself first.
He had to find his voice to express what he had to say.
So Rousseau invents a new way of understanding the self, and it would be developed and extended
in the next couple of generations in the great movement known as Romanticism.
He wasn't the father of Romanticism, he was definitely its favorite uncle.
The romantic model of the self, as we see it for instance in the English poets Wordsworth
and Coleridge, goes sort of like this.
We understand the self best, not by tracing a coherent picture in the empiricist way,
but by exploring discontinuous moments of experience, uniquely significant turning points.
Wordsworth called them spots of time, particular moments that stand out above the rest.
And instead of looking for steady forward progress, what we encounter is constant restartings.
And we observe tensions and contradictions that generate psychic energy, but we don't
see them now as threats to the self as the older writers supposed.
These tensions are the self, and they're all connected by imagination working on memory.
That is, powerful memories that remain imaginatively real as we ponder them.
Empiricism, remember, denigrated the imagination, warned against it.
Romanticism would make imagination the absolute center of an understanding of life, and all
of this is implicit in Rousseau, even when he's obliged to use empiricist terminology.
And it's this that permits him to claim, as we saw in the last lecture, that even when
he's playing very different roles, like when he's absurdly passing him off as Mr. Dudding
and the stagecoach, he's the same self deep down.
What we have here then is not the present self objectively describing the past, it's
the past living on in the present.
Remember that right after he told about the broken comb, Rousseau said, these moments
would always be fresh in my mind, even if I lived for a thousand years.
In earlier lectures, we've seen the cultural situation that was crying out for this new
way of thinking.
We saw how painful it was for Boswell, for example, to try to fit himself into the old
unconventional mold of character, how much he needed to believe that his paradoxical,
even contradictory personality, was expressing a true self deep down, and that his feelings
or his heart, as Boswell calls it, express his most authentic self.
Rousseau, too, totally rejects the traditional idea of character as a standardized mold.
He said that right at the start of the Confessions, they broke the mold after they made him.
From that, he asserts his own integrity of self right at the beginning, and that's
an implicit contrast to the mode of religious autobiography that St. Augustine established
in the original Confessions.
Augustine prays to God to show him his sinfulness and forgive it.
Rousseau, at the very beginning of his Confessions, has something very different.
Let the trumpet of the last judgment sound when it likes.
I will present myself with this book in my hand before the sovereign judge.
I will loudly proclaim, here is what I have done, what I have thought, what I have been.
Eternal being, assemble around me the numberless throng of my fellows.
Let them hear my Confessions, let them groan at my disgraceful actions, let them blush
at my wretchedness, but let each one of them reveal his heart with the same sincerity at
the foot of your throne, and then let a single one of them say, if he dares, I was better
than that man.
And so far as God is present here, Rousseau confidently expects forgiveness, he even demands
it.
What he needs is not to repent, but simply tell the truth.
In the Geneva Calvinism in which Rousseau was raised, he was taught to deny the self because
of its sinfulness.
Now he counters by asserting the sense in which we feel were ultimately innocent.
For example, when he told that story of Marian in the stolen ribbon, he doesn't deny that
he is painfully guilty for years afterwards for having falsely accused her, but he also
shows he was driven by forces beyond his control.
They weren't symptoms of evil and sin, they were socialized attitudes.
It was his fear of humiliation and shame, if he did tell the truth.
In terms of the discourse on inequality, when Rousseau accused Marian falsely, he was succumbing
to amour propre, the self-regard that depends on the reactions of others, preserving the
image you want others to have of you.
What he needed to recover was the healthy amour de soie, concerned for his own fundamental
integrity that had been betrayed by socialization.
As I said before, the empiricists told us to see ourselves as others see us, Rousseau
tells us to stop seeing ourselves as others see us.
But it goes without saying that inventing a new psychology is far from easy, and much
of the time Rousseau can't help using familiar empiricist terms.
Listen to this sentence from the Confessions, but it could just as easily have been written
by Hume as by Rousseau, as I'll try to bring out, I'll emphasize or overemphasize the empiricist
lingo.
Rousseau says, since all my ideas are in images, the first that were engraved in my head has
stayed there, and those that were imprinted later on have combined with them rather than
erased them.
There is a certain succession of feelings and ideas that modifies the ones that follow.
But all of that could be by Hume.
Ideas are just bits of sense data imprinted in our minds, and then later on recombined
in memory.
But according to the empiricists, memory was just a filing cabinet full of those data bits.
And for them the original experience when the imprinting actually happens must always
be more vivid, more intense than its fading traces in memory.
That's why Hobbes said memory is decaying sense.
Rousseau is saying exactly the opposite, and his experience memory is an imaginative recovery
of what really matters in one's personal past.
In fact, he says some incidents become more vivid and real after the memories have germinated,
after they've grown in the mind.
And so Rousseau can say this, which Locke and Hume would never have said, of everything
that's said and done, of everything that goes on in my presence, I know nothing.
I don't enter into it at all.
The external sign is all that strikes me, but afterwards it all comes back to me.
I recall the place, the time, the tone of voice, the look, the gesture, the circumstance.
Nothing escapes me.
For the empiricists, experience was experience, pure and simple.
The stream of sense impressions keeps flowing in the memory registers each item as it arrives.
For Rousseau there's a big gap between the mind and the world outside.
When he's in the midst of an experience, too much is happening.
It's an overload.
He can't pay attention to it all.
But later, creative memory gets to work and recreates it with greater vividness.
And this big conceptual shift explains the newly positive role for the imagination.
You remember the empiricists were so suspicious of the imagination, they saw it as escapist
fantasizing.
Rousseau asks, in effect, what's so bad about escapist fantasizing?
If we have trouble connecting with the confusing world around us, and if much that happens
in the world, certainly was true in his own life, is painful or upsetting, why doesn't
it make sense to create an interior world more satisfying than the so-called real world?
Why isn't the world of our inner life, our imaginative life, real, too?
Very early in the Confessions, when he's describing a childhood that was clearly very
lonely, he gives an impressive account of the way fantasy can sustain an imaginative
person.
At this point in the story, he's in his very early teens, apprenticed to a brutal, hostile
master whom he hates, and he finds refuge in a motley collection of books in a little
lending library, which he reads compulsively, and he says, I recall the situations that
had interested me in my reading, I took possession of them so much that I would become one of
the characters I was imagining, and I always viewed myself in the most agreeable situations
after my own taste, so the fictional state I put myself in made me forget my real condition,
with which I was so discontented.
It's escapism, all right, Russo knows it, but he needed to escape, and it's no accident
that much later he became a best-selling novelist, and as he told us in the Confessions, very
consciously projected his own fantasies into his novel.
And now, writing the Confessions, he's describing actual events, but describing them imaginatively
as a novelist would.
He's recreating them in all their fullness.
Of course he did his best in the Confessions to tell the truth, he didn't invent things
that never happened, but the point is, for Russo, as for Romanticism after him, imagination
and truth aren't opposites.
Truth only becomes real when it's animated by imagination.
And in fact, recent psychological research suggests that Russo's account of our mental
life holds up a lot better than the empiricist one.
Our memories aren't objective data banks of everything that ever happened to us.
On the contrary, they center on privileged moments that remain vividly real, and we connect
these up in our heads in a sort of hypothetical way, these moments, with a quite generalized
picture of what we think we're like.
So in fact, hard-headed science today would agree with Russo, memory is never free from
imaginative reshaping.
And as we read the Confessions, this reshaping is particularly apparent when Russo describes
what was by far the most important relationship of his life, which we've touched on in the
last lecture, the period of more than 10 years that he spent with Madame de Veyron, the woman
he called Maman.
Stories have managed to unearth a good deal of information about her, some of which wasn't
known to Russo.
She was a high-spirited, intelligent, attractive woman who grew up near Lausanne on the eastern
shores of Lake Geneva.
To settle her down, her family married her off at the early age of 14, and for a while
she and her husband seemed very much in love, but in her mid-20s she unexpectedly deserted
him, moved to the Savoie, just west of Switzerland, converted to Catholicism, and lived on a government
pension.
One of her duties was to assist converts from Protestantism, like the 16-year-old Jean-Jacques.
So when he returned from his brief stay in Turin, she took him into her house, made him
her regular companion, first in the small city of Anisee and later on in Chambierie.
People have naturally concentrated on the romantic aspect of their relationship.
Russo adored her.
She was genuinely fond of him.
After a while she seduced him, but what was most important, as he fully understood, was
that she believed in him, and she helped him to believe in himself.
At the time when he came under her influence, he had run away from home, broken with his
family, had no skills to speak of, had never been able to hold a job.
She got him reading books.
She took him into a social circle that included kindly intelligent priests.
They stimulated his desire for knowledge, and they encouraged his love of music, which
he developed so well he had had no formal training whatsoever, that years later he actually
composed an opera that was performed a great applause in Paris before the king.
Now in my opinion, it's absolutely right to say, without Madame de Veyron, we would
never have heard of Jean-Jacques Russo.
And in the confessions he pays ample tribute to this crucial influence on his development.
Even more than that, he recreates the emotional security she gave him.
And as another illustration of his imaginative reshaping of the past, I want to read to you
his description of life with her at Les Charmettes, it was a little country house outside of
Chamberee, to which they sometimes retreated.
It's a longish passage, but an extraordinary one, and well worth hearing.
In addition, Russo is one of the great masters of French prose, and even in my very literal
English translation, I hope you can hear something of his eloquence.
Here begins the brief happiness of my life.
Here come the peaceful but rapid moments that have given me the right to say, I've lived.
Precious moments that I miss so much.
Ah, begin again for me, your pleasant course.
Flow more slowly in my memory, if that is possible, than you actually did in your fleeting
succession.
It's like a poem in prose.
He's creating the nostalgic mood with the very rhythm of his sentences, and he goes
on to describe a state of happiness that was so constant, it didn't really matter what
he might be doing at any given time.
If all of that consisted in doings and actions and words, I would be able to describe it
to some extent, but how can I say what was never said or done, or even thought, but was
tasted and felt.
So I can't name any object for my happiness except the feeling itself.
I got up with the sunrise and was happy.
I took a walk and was happy.
I saw my mountain was happy.
I left her and was happy.
I roamed in the woods and hills.
I read.
I was idle.
I worked in the garden.
I gathered fruit.
I helped around the house.
Happiness followed me everywhere.
It wasn't in any single thing.
It was entirely in myself, and it couldn't leave me for a single moment.
This passage about life at Lake Charmet is really astonishingly rich.
It's full of ideas that go right to the heart of Rousseau's vision of life.
You may remember the 17th century moralists saw pleasure and happiness as opposites.
Pleasure was keen but short-lived.
Happiness was gratifying but milder and weaker.
Rousseau here is saying something very similar.
In earlier days, he was romantically smitten with Madame de Veyron.
In those days, he couldn't bear to be away from her for a single instant.
Now he feels at peace and an atmosphere of happiness that owes everything to her but
doesn't require her to actually be there.
He tells us very clearly this feeling of happiness was inside himself.
It was a kind of tranquility of spirit.
It wasn't the result of any particular thing at all.
And it was just as complete when he was doing nothing as when he was active and busy.
Pretty much everybody in those days agreed that idleness was bad for you.
You needed to interact socially, find useful work to do.
That was the way to be fulfilled.
Rousseau once again is giving the opposite of the received wisdom.
For him, social interaction tends to be filled with self-promotion and rivalry.
And for him, work is always joyless and exasperating unless one has chosen it for oneself.
So he promotes an ideal of idleness or laziness, wasivité, is his word in French.
In the reveries of the solitary walker, which we'll take up in the next lecture, he uses
an Italian phrase to describe something the French language had no way of saying.
He believed in the dolce fariniente, sweet doing nothing.
And he coined his own phrase for what he had in mind, le sentiment de l'existence,
the feeling of existence.
In every one of these formulations, he was being true to his own insight in the discourse
on inequality.
To be fully ourselves rather than divided and conflicted, we need to break free from
the competitive rat race.
We need to learn to be completely at home in the present moment.
This is what he imagined natural man once had.
And this is what life at Les Charmettes gave him, though all too briefly as he acknowledges.
In fact, we know from surviving letters and other sources that most of the time at Les
Charmettes, he was there all by himself and painfully lonely.
That's when he did a lot of his intensive reading.
Madame de Veyron usually stayed in town.
She may well have been getting tired of this dependent who never wanted to grow up and
start a life of his own.
And toward the end, she took a new lover, which distressed and humiliated Rousseau far
more than he admits in the Confessions, especially since the new guy was a bustling loudmouth
who soon made himself indispensable in all sorts of ways that Rousseau couldn't.
But as recreated in imagination, his account of the time at Les Charmettes rings true.
That's what it meant to him at its best.
That was how it lived on in his imagination, and it gave him an intuition of what's really
important in life.
With this context in mind, it's possible to understand the surprising attitude he takes
in the Confessions toward his international theme.
There was an extremely heady time in the 1750s and early 60s when he suddenly went from being
a virtual nobody to a celebrated musician, political theorist, writer on education, and
novelist.
In the Confessions, he describes an unforgettable moment, really it was a thrilling conversion
experience, when he was going on foot in 1749 to visit Diderot in that brief stay that
he spent in a prison outside Paris, Rousseau stopped on a hot day to rest under a tree,
opened a newspaper he had with him, and that's where he read the announcement of the essay
competition on the progress of civilization.
Suddenly he felt almost drunk with excitement at the discovery he had something important
to say, and it worked more than anyone could have possibly imagined.
Eventually, he was getting hundreds of letters from people all over Europe, and they would
insist on coming to meet him and ask his advice, and whereas he'd always been diffident
and incompetent in conversation, now he was suddenly the lion of the salon.
He says in the Confessions, I used to crush their little bon-mose as I would crush an
insect between my fingers, and this lasted six years, but then he felt as if he'd waked
up from a dream.
It seemed real enough at the time, it didn't feel like putting on an act, but it was an
act.
When he turns himself into a great phyllis-suff and stern critic of modern civilization, he's
actually playing their game by their rules.
He's competing for fame, just as he literally competed for that essay prize, and so the more
he seemed to be successful, the more he's betraying his authentic self.
What Rousseau did, therefore, was drop out at the very height of his celebrity.
Of course, this was given a strong push by official persecution that his writings aroused,
and I'll say more about that in the next lecture.
In the final 15 years of his life, he settled down with his companion, Thérèse Levasseur,
with whom he'd been living for many years.
He met her when she was a semi-literate laundress in a Paris rooming house he lived in.
He makes it clear it was never a romantic relationship of the kind that stirred his emotions as when
he had that flirtation with Madame Doudetot.
He and Thérèse were affectionate, loyal, comfortable with each other, so they now settled
down to create a life that would come as close as possible to the life of natural man.
A life centering on the sentiment de l'existence, the feeling of existence, freed as far as
possible from self-promotion and from work carried out to satisfy the demands of others.
Now he did this, together with the obstacles to making it work, is the theme of his final
book, The Reveries of the Solitary Walker, and that will be the subject of the next lecture.
