Hello and welcome. It's August 16th, 2023. We're in the Collective Behavior Discussion
section of the Active Inference for the Social Sciences course in 2023. So perhaps let us
all go around and give an opening introduction and or reflection and see who joins and what
happens from there. But just so that everybody has said hello.
Hi everyone, I'm Bryn. I'm PM in South Africa and yeah, just excited to be here and see what
happens. Hi, I'm Andrew. I'm a graduate student in Indiana and I guess my field of interest
now is the knowledge management and I think that figuring out how we collectively learn
and can share information is a really interesting topic and I'd like to see how this would apply.
Hi, I'm Regina and I'm from Guatemala, but I'm living in Spain, studying and doing experiments
related to this topic and trying to learn a little bit of the theory that's behind it so we can, you know,
advance better. I'm excited. Hello, my name is Sasha. I'm calling in from California. I'm also a graduate
student. Yeah, just really enjoyed the spirited presentation last week. I'm looking forward to
discussion. All right, well, how about anyone can give a first reflection on collective behavior or
what was their thought or context before and where are they at as we kind of begin? Yeah, Regina.
Okay, so I just want to make sure that I understand because I took like two big lessons from your
lesson, right? And the first one is that, you know, this famous model of active inference that has
the agent and the environment and the mark of blanket in the middle, right, and just interacts
with everything, right? So I think what I got from what you discussed, maybe I didn't have a good
definition of an agent, but first that you can have that agent not be just an individual, but also
your definition of an individual changes, depending on what you want to study in the behavior, right?
So an agent can be an ant, it can be an ecosystem, it can be an eye looking at something, or it can
be as a society, for example. And I think that's a big take for me because it changes a lot the
concept of how to study things and use active inference just by changing how big the agent can
be. So I don't know if I got that right, right? So first that clarification.
So what is an agent?
Yeah, so I don't know if there's like a formal definition of an agent in active inference, right?
But if we, if we want to study whatever we want to study, because I'm not going to study because I
have to do that's like my goal, whatever I'm doing. So I want to study whatever I have to choose
what's going to be my agent and the environment it has. So choosing the agent, you can do it to
create a model or to make an experiment, whatever. But the choice you make, it will depend on your
and what you understand as an individual or as an agent, I think so, right?
Awesome. Anyone have a thought on that?
No, if I continue with just to add something else and this will be my mind. And then I'm thinking is that
also a big problem that we have or I think I have is that since I am part of the environment, you
know, you know, the perspective of whoever is studying whatever it is, it's also going to be an
effect in it. So maybe, maybe scientists already decided, but I don't know that we can never have an
objective way of studying something if you're part of the environment of the agent. So I don't know
we already forgot it, or we already decided that's it. We cannot have objective observations of
behavior in general. But you know, you always think about like the agent environment, and you
start in it as something else, but the something else is also affecting it. So I see that as a
problem, or maybe something that has to be said, like, we are not objective, because we're part of
what it's affecting our agents in the behavior collectively too. So those are the thoughts I
have to share.
Regina, I'm also new to all of this. So my preliminary understanding of what is an agent,
is anything that has any good reason to self evidence, and to itself, or to survive,
that doesn't want to dissipate, that might delineate the boundary of what an agent is that then
sets up the boundaries with which it will, as you described, start interacting with the world,
the environment. So if something, as I understand it, if something has a reason to go on being, to
survive, then it is an agent in the world.
Okay, but that agent could be anything, right? Like, is that what you're saying, right? Like, if he
wants to survive, can be an ant surviving individually, or a cell or a group? Okay, yeah,
that's a good, that's like a good definition.
Yeah, Sasha.
Great points, Regina. So much to say there. It's something that I have experienced with as a
researcher in biology is deciding the kind of the statistics or sampling approach to use,
whether we're taking, you know, one cell from one individual, or we're taking many cells from
many individuals, and how to do the statistics and kind of sampling approach on that. That is a,
you know, an evergreen question that we're always reevaluating to see how to think about the
independencies within biological systems. And then another thing that you mentioned was about
the individual being part of the ecosystem. And that makes me think a lot about complexity
science and something that is addressed there in thinking about the interplay of the scientists
and what they're studying. Yeah, thank you for those points.
Sasha, sorry, I'm not raising my hand. I'm just unmuting. That's okay. Can you say a bit more
about what you mean by complexity science? It is
maybe muted. Oh, can't speak at the moment.
Yeah, complexity science has looked at agent, agent based modeling as a fundamental tool,
John Holland signals and boundaries, focusing on what, from an active inference side, we might say
as like message passing or communication for the messages and then boundaries with the whole
discussion around the boundaries in the world, map territory, map territory fallacy, map territory
fallacy, fallacy, doing iterative modeling. Sasha brought up limited experimental resources in the
scientific setting. And that's kind of analogous to the limited energy budget or attentional
budget, ultimately, or just decision making budget of the kinds of active entities that
make sense to model the ones that kind of have those characteristics. This is really the question
of what makes something first principles or what are the first principles. One aspect of it as brought
up is the censoring of the persistence. So from the outside, that's kind of like an empiricist's
view of persistence, like is it measurable, but not saying that something is necessarily that,
which is the statistical tool. And then the sort of like inside out implementation type.
But there's a lot more to say in that who wants to bring in some new angle or
or how do they see collective behavior? Why do we talk about collective behavior?
Why not just behavior, recognize that behavior is multi scale or is social?
What's really being communicated with the collective?
I mean, I believe that we chose those levels so we can make it more simple for our brains to
understand it. Because if we talk about collective behavior, actually is the universe
behaving in the particles and everything, right? So I don't know if that's a little bit just based
on I don't know what's the word like just in the material world and how it physically moves.
And that's like deterministic or whatever, right? But I think we chose to have those limitations
so we could understand the world. But also we should acknowledge that are limited because we're
part of the system. I'm having a little trouble on my kind of understanding the
I guess where the schism lies between kind of the Markov blanket and the Umwelt in
semiotics of like the animals sensory experience.
Anyone have a maybe maybe someone could I mean, Daniel, do you know
like the difference between that two?
Can you be a little louder? Thank you though. Andrew, anyone have a thought on that?
I'll bring in a definition of Umwelt and then and then we can see. But meanwhile,
does anyone have a thought? Sorry, I was just muted on Zoom. Andrew, you're a little quiet,
but I'm going to bring in a definition of Umwelt and then meanwhile, does anyone have a thought?
I hope I'm not
the diluting Andrews question. But I think of collective behavior in kind of like a,
I don't know, football team or soccer team. And what that provides
is the the group who is
share some common ethos and what that does to the how that regulates the their collective or
individual and collective free energies during a match or throughout the season and how that
that gives some charge to some investment because it's my team against yours. And we have to try
and win. And so, you know, without without that collective behavior, it's it's might be far harder
to achieve groups goals if they aren't able to collaborate and share, you know, implicitly and
explicitly certain traits, behaviors, thoughts, feelings, ideals, ideologies, whatever they might be
and how that then allows us to compete in the world.
I see what you think it's it's been. Yes. Okay. Okay. I see what you're seeing,
especially because we're watching the World Cup, right? Women's World Cup.
Yeah. So it's very relevant. Yeah. But I see that in all the
these things you've said, it seems that for you behavior needs to have like a goal.
And I don't know if I if I agree with that, it's either survival or winning.
But for me, it's just something that happens. And maybe the consequence is surviving.
But it's not the goal to survive or to win the game. I mean, in the football, it is right.
But in general, maybe there's no goal to the behavior collectively.
It's just just a thought. It's interesting.
Yeah, a great comments. Well, the paper of Connor Heinz at all on the collective behavior as
surprise minimization that points the way towards using the act in fontology, these kinds of modeling
approaches for collective behavioral situations, and really just recognizing them as a certain type
of behavioral modeling. The simplest case might just be a single closed system.
All part of the composition that leads to the ability to describe at very least a lot of
different kinds of systems, just like a linear model can describe a lot of systems. So then
it's also really interesting, a topic that came up in one of the recent textbook groups
with what's normative about active inference. Because the term of the process theory, even
of active inference, being normative is mentioned multiple times. And that's definitely a topic
that connects to the social sciences. One can imagine the kind of niche normativity or niche
regularities in a broad sense, and then the real minute particulars of how they play out,
which kind of hints at the kind of descriptive or causal minimum to start making some
anything but toy specific generative models.
So it's been an interesting theme to see even already in Avel's and Ben's lectures and discussions.
This question between description, process of describing, which is what I associated with
Professor Gordon's approach to ant watching, how that descriptive process,
which is what we can say that we have for active inference, just like a linear modeling ecosystem
could say about their linear modeling in principle, and how to then articulate the
normativities of the framework, if that concept, if that separation can even exist
from the behavioral normativities that include the basis of social fabric in all different
kinds of communities.
Here's another question. So what is the role of any technical detail in the social sciences,
whether more on the statistical connecting with data or more category,
theoretic like just formal? What's the role of formal methods in
different kinds of academic or practical expressions about social systems?
Does it matter at all how we think about a framework at all?
Well, for formalizing aspects of a social system, I would say that the purpose is for
communication between individuals, because just we can't verify that.
Well, formalizing is just setting a system on top of what you're observing,
but there is no explicit guarantee that you're saying encompasses everything of the phenomena
you're observing. And just kind of going back to Taoism of the name that can be named is not
the true eternal name. And so it's just a way of, it's a slice of what we can observe,
and the way to, you know, maybe you can make predictions or maybe you can generate something
that acts like the phenomena you're observing, but it's just a way to kind of,
it's just a way to kind of approximate our understanding of some phenomena and you have
to slice it in a specific way, but also understanding that it is a slice or,
you know, it is a tangent line that you're approximating as opposed to
encompassing the whole system from verbalizing it.
I was at, maybe it's not the goal, but something that happened instead of
describing any system, like Andrew said, it's like the goal to modify it or to
or to co-opt it in some way to gain control or whatever. If you know the model,
you know how to play the game, kind of. So you write instructions and try to see if you can
outsmart someone else. I mean, it sounds kind of dark, right? But maybe it's one of the goals to
or something that just happens out of nulling the rules that nobody else's knows.
I mean, I guess when you talk about control, there is a
shade that can be gained from that specific wording, but control in terms of, you know,
control theory or, you know, that comes from electrical engineering. It's really just what
shapes the behavior or what are the inputs that drive the behavior. And when you're talking about
control, it's really just about, well, if you change these inputs, how does that change the
behavior? And so you can actually, you know, from electrical engineering of controlling some sort
of electromechanical system, but then you can make analogous statements on like control into
society, which doesn't necessarily mean like the dark negative control. But like, you know, maybe
there's some pathological behavior in a society or, you know, even pathological
pathological responses within the brain. And it's like, well, what is what is driving that?
And is it possible to change the drivers of that to have something that is more beneficial to the
system? Yeah, just to add to what Andrew's saying, because it matters sometimes how you manipulate
you know, a system or it matters how you affect a brain. So it cannot be random. I mean, you know,
we've come a long way, for example, from lobotomy, which had disastrous effects. And
it matters to a system how you affect it. And so to know more formally, the most effective way
to create a desired effect, whatever that might be, it's essential that it's not just kind of poking
and prodding. As much as that is part of the scientific method to update that method in
accordance with what you're learning. So it is important. No, I think you're both right. I
didn't have to be back. But also something that Andrew said about predicting, I think that's one
of also the big goals, trying to predict whether to be prepared to, or just to, I mean, couldn't be
to control, right? But if you can somehow predict how people respond to this or how a system will
behave in this other scenario, you can, you know, change what input is, or prepare for whatever comes,
I guess. Yeah, a lot of great points. Some of the commonly held, not equally by everyone, everyone,
but some of the tenants of science being to explain predict designing control,
where explanation and prediction are on the pathway towards systems designing and
and maintenance and other other words that people can add. But that's the pragmatic utility oriented
view, which doesn't have to be an absolutist view. But certainly there are regimes of attention
socially, now and seemingly for long, long times, where people were wanting to retain and to
constrain the variance distribution on what we would say is their generative model, some norm,
and then other times, engaging in these functions. And that instrumentalist usage of active inference
is like, we're going to be able to model it with a pretty minimum framework that's commonly used
in statistical systems, where some things we observe and some we don't. And at least we know
and how all the pieces are connected. And then that is an artifact in model based design,
as people develop that line through time socially, just like probably has been always
the case for complex projects and scientific collaboration.
There's a few other interesting pieces, but yeah, please, please.
I'm just, I'm just wondering if now that I'm thinking a lot, isn't that like a problem
for confirmation bias, right? Like, there's a paper in here here, because we create the
knowledge and we tell everyone the knowledge. This is the model, this is how everything behaves.
And then we update our knowledge about it. And then we look for everything to just,
you know, confirm it. And, and yeah, maybe there's another system that will not let us be
getting knowledge so slowly, because if everybody just agrees on something,
we teach it to everyone, and we confirm the model, and then we just try to look for evidence for
that model, then we go slowly if there's any better thing or better model that comes along.
Yeah, a lot to say about that, like, if we believe that trees exist or that people exist,
and then we come to see them. So there's kind of this sense where problem
confirmation bias, which I think it's a great term, a great topic to bring in with definitely also
what's called like the golden nail syndrome or something. If all you have is the hammer,
then everything's a nail. And there's definitely a tension there, because it's like,
how much of what you can do, are you supposed to do something that you can't do?
Or, but then at least you could do what you needed to do to get there. So that's actually
within your scope of what you can do. So it's not that there are things that you can do that you
can't do, if just from measurement perspective. So like, how does it look? Or how do we recognize
across systems? Or how do we have awareness in situations as limited individuals who do have
all of these cognitive phenomena, how to make decisions or sense making or infrastructure
or whatever it is, the socialness, the system of interest of the social sciences, make that
and then dot dot dot normatively what?
I think there's some protection built into the problem of confirmation bias because
all knowledge generation is happening in an open system. And so there's always going to be an
agent outside of your own mind and what it's perceiving that can then challenge or add to the
you know, like the LK-99 semiconductors that have been all the rage recently and how
other scientists have now kind of discredited it quite convincingly. And it's because of this open,
they might have had degrees of confirmation bias that they were egging each other on,
but it's ultimately been refuted, which is this built-in kind of protection because it's all
operating in an open system, fortunately. Yeah, a lot to say there. Monday morning, reviewer doing.
How do we again go from any given description of a communicative event like the kind of specific
unfolding of the LK-99 narrative as yet uncompleted in the minds of some, which is real enough
to be real socially. And so how do we go from any descriptive anything about that?
Total observation to core screening. Then how do we come to work with that interface with
what whatever that is hands that to us?
What is the social behavior or some some classic or some novel social behaviors?
Maybe ones that seem pretty obvious, due to recency bias.
I'll just mention one aspect that Andrew and I have also talked about is the auto-poetic
nature of information systems. Andrew, do you have any thought on this?
Or about where auto-poesis comes into like social sciences or these kinds of models?
Daniel, Andrew just left a note that he needs a... Okay, okay.
Oh, totally. He just wasn't looking at the time. Funny stuff.
Anyone else have a thought on that?
Okay, just to kind of carry forward then. Basically, the ability of social systems that
include written niche modification, cumulative culture, their increasing extent of control.
As discussed earlier, that definitely is a bit of an overloaded or at least doubly meant term
in different settings, because it can just simply mean modeling it with control theory,
which is a pretty limited philosophical statement relative to any statistical method,
or control like the kind that people are unhappy with and the kind that's described in
thinking like a state. A lot of other works that I know, Mao and Lorena and Avel are going to be
definitely going into more detail on... So when societies can model
and introspect or self-reflect formally, much better.
And that can happen through anything from free and open source,
better aided protocols. There's many limited formats of self-meaning making, but cryptography
definitely allows those explorations. And that doesn't necessarily mean computer cryptography.
That could also be like linguistic encoding and all these other ways of niche
sub-differentiation in multi-scale systems. You just do not see a system that is cookie cutter.
It's very rare in ecosystems. There are algal blooms and things like that.
So when we really think about the developmental and the cognitive and the selective niche,
which is a concept that Axel Constant and others have differentiated in some of their
like ecological active inference work, like that niche is very embodied, extended in culture,
et cetera, et cetera. It's just like a kind of cool direct way to open up to that challenge of
modeling and just bring some closures with different accounts or compatibilities with
different accounts. So like all, just to give one right of example, but maybe it'd be interesting
what other people think, all the expressions that people make in social settings can just simply
be their expressions or modeled as such. That is in one way implicitly what was always in play,
but now it's describable and legible and autonomous. So how do we take this active
inference collective behavior crossover and think about what it really means
in how we're going to be like thinking differently, even just this discussion forward
or like more locally are our understandings with collective behavior or with behavior.
Yeah, and you can you ask the question again. I didn't actually catch the
question. How do we start to adapt some of these general comments or frames that are
in some ways disconnected from descriptions of real systems? How do we think about that
and and what it means now?
Do you mean on the document in front of us? These disconnected things in front of us
there on the document? I don't know whatever you think or whatever you want to say.
Yeah, I think there's a lot and again I hope I'm not
fully understanding the question. I hope I'm not steering away too much, but I had a general
sense of what I think you were saying and I think it's an enormous problem with the amount of
information sharing just in a with let's just take the generative models of
social media and all of the platforms that are available to us. How much information we are
privy to in any given moment and I'm kind of forgetting the question that you asked.
It's almost as if there is such a high rate of information and data flow that it's really
hard to know what to do with all of it and at least as a human being I'm not saying from machines
but as a psychologist I'm certainly interested in how humans are able to tolerate and respond to
the amount and rate of information that's out there.
I mean this is not the first time this happens right? Like when we went from talking to writing
information then everyone wrote their information and then we have books and then we have libraries
and that's all available and again we have access if you can read right to all the information in
the world so we adapted to I don't know to get careers so we could specify in which type of
information you are going to know more so maybe we need some sort of new career types I don't know
more specification with more information. But is it not is the rate of information
uh flow and increases are not is it not exponential is it not um I don't know it's a crazy amount
on our brains cannot do anything about it so we have to do multidisciplinary things and work
together with others if we want to make something but yeah I don't know maybe we will die of excess
of information
how do people feel like active inference brings something to the discussion relative to
how they want to work towards
answer yeah well isn't that the provocative question too but like any system that's that
that's the question everyone is going to have their own memes and themes and and systems that they
have spent time with and did fieldwork with and all this other like
particularity because a system that doesn't have particularity is just not going to be
hosting a broad enough niche for for phenotypic diversity it's just riding on the edge of a
razor instead of more like a fabric that continues to unfold I think
there's a lot of work to do with the social sciences and active inference just from what I was
like reading trying to find things for this
um discussion and just I personally wondered what is is meaningful or interesting
or useful what's epistemic and pragmatic value for different audiences how does it go from kind of
bringing citations that were not linked together in some more theoretical or more
generative model oriented work in active inference like epistemic foraging or the
inference model or any other kind of specific model what what are these different kinds of
scientific artifacts do
for who
I guess I'm still learning very
very
kind of crudely ploddling along here Daniel with to try and answer that because it's
quickly realized that the field is it's so multi-nodal it has so much
and the free energy principle the Bayesian brain even just to psychology has so much
applicability and everyone seeing everyone I meet at these discussions is coming at it from
a different angle and it can be a bit confusing to hear how other people
are applying it how other people are making use of it
in all manner of ways and so I'm still learning how to apply to kind of ring fence the free energy
principle and connect it to psychological processes including collective behavior
and because there's a lot of psychopathology in group think in collective behavior but I'm also
very very interested in its application at the interface of
what happens between a a therapist and a patient and I'm often unlike other
professions who seem who are just by nature of the scientific method are able to extract
a lot more data to work with to analyze to you know in a that's very hard to do I feel very limited
other than just making kind of theoretical leaps and inferences about how to apply
the free energy principle to psychology. I can't have a session with my brain hooked up to
an FMRI machine to get data and to see when a patient says Google bar that's a spike on the
spike trains which represents you know surprising and we can then solve for that in some way and
I don't have access to that sort of data flow so it feels limited but I'm still learning how to
apply it and yeah and trying to collaborate with colleagues on that the influence group.
What are people wondering about collective behavior even if we're totally of course not
going to address it but just what what are the kinds of things that people
what makes you look up collective behavior instead of just behavior or individual behavior.
For me it's about safety and need to belong.
For me it's
I think that it depends where you come from and in the country you are but
there are places that are more collective and there are places that are more individualistic and I
think mostly non-western countries have a lot of collective behavioral knowledge and
spirits already right that they're already new these things that we think are new for us right how
the collective thing works for example I don't know you don't make a decision for yourself
you make a decision for the group like marrying you marry because you want an addition you want to
interact with someone or other group and that's something that affects the the collective not
just you so arranged marriage makes sense something like that right so for me making that
distinction about individual collective comes from understanding that I don't know there are
other places that are already ahead in what collective means in terms of human beings and
how to interact and the worst through all we have all this individualistic thing which is
very interesting because why do we have a same species and then we have very different approaches
of how to understand ourselves in terms of what the individual is and why it matters
yes there's so much loaded on different understandings among people including
even the the essence of the social which is who are people and what is the
the obligation and how do we view that that relationship that's a very very deep area and
and again the part that just kept returning to me in the lecture and when I was trying to think
about how to how to even reflect part of this very large area is like what is the adjective doing
and what what is what's the reference point by which this is being said in the speech acts
like people often will dismiss I don't mean to you know straw people but dismiss collective
behavior by saying well we are explaining individual behavior what are you explaining
beyond the estimates in the colony and then the exterior like that is it and so that can feel
like looking at the same thing from two different sides and there are different methods like some
methods blur over individuals a lot more like statistical methods that might correspond to
demographics and then on the other hand like more agent-based models
but how much variability in what shared variability in white general
synchronies amongst different quantum reference frames all these nested
if these possibilities that are grounded in wanting to explore mathematical and scientific
possibilities as as the literature of linear regression is full of so many incredible
extensions and and and similar and then that's I think what the course is even beginning to
to try to express and what what I understand in the works of the the other teachers and
like a lot of your backgrounds and and everything like that is where is that
moment where it is not only science because science is not simply the social
so science has an activity and then as there's a diffusion away from science
and and I think that or or at least that relationship between social and science is
right there in the title maybe that's kind of like a science major's take but but it is itself
in a way a um presenting a dilemma with what science means there and then that's the frame game
who's doing social science who's doing not social science and that's that's where
in in the culture I'm sitting in slash in the technical side of that it is related to statistics
and formality it's the xkcd comic and the way that formalisms and and details are taken as
under some regimes of attention basically definitive and yet there's like a yearning
and a counter balancing that's expressed also in many ways and so that's and science maybe
some people feel like certain social scientific methods that's like not far enough in this dimension
and then the others feel like they're too far in this direction but it's like just like any
like that academic field let alone any other community of diverse agents like of course
there's going to be distributions of perspectives at different times and and at takes rate of
uptake by those different perspectives and no yeah Daniel do you think uh these first principles
would be able to explain why uh an ant colony exists uh I know that was your um a kind of
area of interest of study uh why an ant colony exists uh in in the way that it is as a kind of
operating as a collective and why um another animal is able to survive and achieve its goals
as an individual only relying on the environment and its actions and sensations to get its needs
met and to no doubt minimize its free energy but could first principles explain why the one
has to survive as a group and the other has to survive or is able to survive um and the different
conditions yeah that's a super interesting question it's it's very core to this individual
individuation and multi-scale individuation concept like is the nest made the individual and
then the colony is the social because then for sure it's super collaborative or is the colony
the organism and the nest mates are tissues and then are they social across colony boundaries
not where I was in Arizona but they're often friendly across different species and they
avoided conflict more often than not so it's like well and then go it why does it even matter
what's happening on this plot of lands in this in this area from like a biomimic
perspective we might learn new algorithms it's a sandbox for learning new techniques and
observation all these other like richnesses so it's to say though like what comes away from that
science that makes it social science and I think there's a lot of disciplinary ways of
understanding that which which I'm definitely not expert in in in the um professional fields like
counseling but probably in in all the different humanities and histories and all these other
fields all these different maps the kind of social um the epistemic organizing question
and then the social organizing question yeah and and the way like technology is also in that
tangle and yeah someone pointed out like this is not a new problem and uh but then it's like well
what parts are new and then what's our model by which we're saying that it's like new or two
individualists or two collective on what scale what if they're like really collectivist at this
scale but not at this scale or another an example of an ambiguous or at least like um poly poly
submits phenotype of colonies is in some colonies there's partial reproductive activation
of like non reproductive nests and that has often been modeled from like a position of like
zero is the law and how are they cheating above this but it's also been approached from a
colony level strategic bed hedging so without super deep knowledge of really some of the specifics
of the regularities that that colony algorithm had to persist for so long and to have gotten swept
off the table if it was even it's like that's that's a very integrated problem so it helps you
approach collective systems and and learn about them but it's like there's a lot to say about
humidity loss in foraging and humidity loss isn't even the whole picture and human foraging is a
lot more sophisticated from just like a perception cognition influence perspective
so those are just some ant related thoughts but it's it just centers a lot of discussions that
really matter and I think the really interesting piece is not always in the way that they're
thought to by some yeah and it's and it's very hard to get any kind of
cross pollination or to see cross pollination uh studying one agent it's it's quite for at least
in my mind very difficult to kind of generalize things across different agents and it starts
getting a bit uh yeah tricky to infer one collectives and uh how and why and and how
they survive and how another agent does it's tricky so I'm almost just kind of an agent
human beings as hard as they are to study and just try and run with it as far as possible
yeah otherwise it's just information overload
body's a complex place too and digital technology virtuality these are such um
richly developed topics in the social sciences I only know the tiniest amount from
but I think that through participation and inclusion in collaboration and in conversations
and everything there's going to be a lot of interesting connections and paths um and
and it's being approached seemingly uh multiple layers like within the the two layers that just
we can focus most narrowly on it's like within the realm of science what is science which is
kind of like playing this other um role with inertia in some people's minds and in systems
what is science who gets to decide what social sciences I don't know I'm I'm not in social
science but it's system of interest in society and certainly I'm a part of that um so it's like
what is the what is good technically what is social scientific and then what is that social
scientific how does that going to interface into the the metaphysical questions and and the normative
ethical and um decision making with trade-offs and the real reflexive complex decisions that matter
also while recognizing this increasingly nuanced way of thinking about different social intelligences
what's any other random thought or curiosity about collective behavior
one point that I would have added into the uh lecture was just that in distributed systems
whether as modeled or as such all behavior is arising from interactions local to individuals
even if it's sent through some wireless mechanism it's like all about the local interactions
and so that is a an arising type process that gives the modeler like one hands-off layer
at least if not much more another nice feature about them um they are in a way
waiting to be composed because they intrinsically contain like at least two layers of consideration
now whether there's kind of like a forcing function of one layer and just sort of dangling
a bottom layer or whether there's a lot of what we would call emergence or discussive in in that way
like that more arising function can be modeled but in either way then you can kind of wrap
that two-layer system and then compose them so that's like what enables in certain situations
like parallelization or at least you know that's obviously a big area but that's what allows multi
agent simulation frameworks to do well on certain very challenging
sense making and action selection problems not by guarantee or default because any given
slicing and dicing of any given um prompting of information may not help you adapt
but there are paths that do and don't help persist or not and that's this kind of persistence
starting place that we began with Sasha um can I really resonate with what you mentioned about
the local interactions that even if information is transmitted over long distances then the agents
behave in a way that is locally relevant and integrates that information and it actually
makes me think a lot about the like psychology therapy angle that while you try to get information
about persons like um sort of local environment and behavior um or like perhaps you know demographics
and age that um their informational environment and like wealth of what kind of information they
consume might also be really telling about their uh psychological and like behavior interactions or
pathologies um and then to bring it kind of full circle back to um that the researcher is part of
the ecosystem that they are uh studying um yeah I I think it's just um such a difference in
perspective to see that as like a positive and a gift that um the way that you would design and
run an experiment today is not the way that you would do it two years from now with more experience
and so um that is a a a benefit and like a bonus in the system and not um like a negative
perspective of bias that it's detracting from some underlying uh truth or reality
so just a few thoughts
oh very interesting anyone want to add something
I think we didn't fully resolve this early question about the umvelte um term from ethology
behavioral research observation science uh using the term to describe the world as its experience
by a particular organism I think a few different pieces and there's a lot of discussion in discourse
or just just to give it like a super short overview the world we might connect to world
modeling and there's a lot of interesting work in all kinds of different like pros focus on
qualitative systems as well as some artificial or synthetic intelligence world modeling as it
experienced as it is experienced is one of the sticky and deep ones because this is the area
phenomenology and so this is like a kind of semi-eternal discussion point so whether whether
active inference delivers on world modeling is kind of empirical and just plain whereas as it
is experienced is going to be a philosophical question and then by a particular organism
that specificity we get by actually making the generative model even if we're just speculating
about it it's like talking about experience without an experiencer would be like talking about um
some agent's behavior without reference to its niche and then where there is like that complex
negotiation I think the humanities and a lot of the social sciences have identified a lot of the
structural top down and also the personal bottom up motifs of of things being
blurred and made complex and so I think part of the social and the scientific as
coming only from scientific side is like to to meet in a third space and or at least make it work
to have a mutual compromise where it's like
certain social science social oriented claims based upon this scientific measure
that is going to be a judgment call but understanding that conversation where is it a
mutual compromise and like what dimensions not simply along the kind of like rigor accessibility
or implications axis there's just very many things in play in these iterated relationships in ecosystems
like having a researcher as part of the ecosystem well what is it here's here's the forager question
you see the nested on the ground it's a forager but then we step back it's like okay well it's foraging
and then that's the allocation of the forager then it's foraging is still part of this sense
making is generative sense making with like process understanding even of a trace which is something
that Bruno Latour and others have have explored with like following a trace in a social setting
and using that to to trace networks so in our digital ecosystems though our information ecosystems
is not research happening and so what what does that really mean and then what what are those
social normativeities there's going to be like a meeting or a handoff with with where that really
is happening or maybe it's a knocking on the door that's ignored or it could be whatever
metaphor in that setting it actually is there's no general metaphor because that'd be like oh what's
the general metaphor on this experiment which experiment just the general action that we play
the sake oh hard to say
okay well in our last like actions I guess if anybody types a question live chat we'll look
at it otherwise what are any other thoughts or like what what can we learn more about about
collective behavior or what will it mean for our sense making decision making if we understand
collective behavior better
you
what else are people excited about for the rest of the course
like based upon the sections that we've done so far
and and how we can even even start to approach this in an acknowledged limited finite way
yeah Sasha then than anyone else
I just added a question to the very bottom of the notes and it makes me think about
how working on this document collaboratively throughout the last hour we're able to
kind of leave a stigmatic trace of things we've discussed and what sort of traits or practices
should individual humans I guess I should specify humans should be embodied in order to improve
cohesion in collective behavior it makes me think of certain psychology
traits or descriptions of like openness or conscientiousness
what will make individual humans better participants in collective behavior
yeah I think to to add to that to just emphasize the importance again only with human agents
specifically who have the capacity to think and reflect and the only ones that have that those
really advanced capabilities that we know of as yet but to really kind of leverage
in order to make the collective better there's a responsibility on the individual
despite being part of a collective and on many different on many different fronts to be able to
leverage and utilize their own internal states and what they have learned and to be able to think
to retain the individual the individual's mind and think about the collective I think is so
important if the collective is to become healthier Sasha to your point and to improve its
you have to become more conscientious and become more responsible or whatever that might be
so to always try and maintain a thinking
self is crucial in words you can very easily be usurped into the collective as is
if you just go on any social media media platform you will see
individuals rarely thinking
for themselves and seemingly kind of just purely in each other and that causes massive problems
so an individual mind is strikes me as being just the most important thing in the future going forward
yeah this dialectic with individuation and collectivization as these like ongoing
negotiated compromises that can be also viewed many ways however they are
cognitive science coming into play
maybe historical processes or philosophies were
used in many settings for
even approaching these kinds of social questions and now with computer science and technology
it even like is a discussion more about the capacities of measurement and action
not that those are new in and of themselves like but thinking like a state like the development
of the apparatus the development of the social social systems that can be run on on open source
hardware open source software things like that so I don't know if something's generalized across
all such groups but understanding what environments at least initially things are beginning at
is just a realist starting point probably no guarantee since most things slash all things
are swept off the table in their specifics anyway so and how to deal with that kind
of like skin on the line type of decision making is very interesting how it's pursued
in the in the sciences because often like many runs are presented or that kind of like like
catastrophic failure mode of models is is not considered just like part of the training starting
naive so just the way that different social considerations are converged upon it's never
it's not like reduced to one feature of the social because the social is such an open space
as a scientist always impressed by how that writing could kind of open up
the um situations which are like mundane but also of course very deep and meaningful
also though mundane
you
any other thoughts or otherwise uh on on collective behavior or on the social sciences
course or anything otherwise people can have any last words if they want
yeah awesome thank you all for participating David want to add anything
yeah well i look forward to uh more questions being asked on the course
website and everybody's um engagement with the course is very much appreciated
so keep up the collective thanks for my scale learning and it's it's a fun course really happy
that we could have done this session and very happy to have concluded the session
all right thank you bye bye bird ciao
you
