Lecture 19, The Skeptical Challenge to Optimism, David Hume
Welcome to lecture 19, The Skeptical Challenge to Optimism, David Hume.
As I promised I would throughout the series, it's time again for me to remind you that
nothing I say here is philosophical advocacy.
My goal is to make systems of thought come alive from within, to let you know how in
the 17th and 18th centuries the world could look to certain minds in ways that were of
historical significance to the debates and the conceptions of the future.
If you think back to the remarkable cultural response to Isaac Newton and the achievements
of the new philosophy, todayism and its profoundly optimistic natural theology, its natural religion,
and within Christian Europe to Bishop Joseph Butler, one of the leading Christian theologians
of the English speaking Protestant world and the providential natural optimism of his
sermons on humane nature, we see that the foundation of 18th century optimistic natural
philosophy and natural theology derived from two wonderfully confident conclusions that
the 18th century inherited from the intellectual revolution of the 17th century.
One the belief that we possessed natural faculties, the senses are natural reason that through
the medium of nature linked human beings to natural truth and to knowledge of God.
We saw through nature to nature's author and to the designs of that author of nature.
And two, that we now knew that nature and human beings interacted to the benefit of
humanity through the providential designs of God.
And we need not look merely to the dais for such a view who could have said that more profoundly
than Bishop Joseph Butler of the Church of England.
These are tidal movements in 18th century culture.
These are tidal shifts in the way the culture thinks about the world on which a large number
of thinkers are merely the waves atop that tidal movement.
But these movements of culture face severe countercurrents of skepticism about such optimistic
conclusions.
So before we turn to David Hume's dialogues concerning natural religion, let us examine
several other challenges to natural optimism.
First and obviously, there is the challenge posed by evangelical religious revival.
Such evangelical Christianity is a growing force throughout the 18th century.
Best illustrated, for example, by George Whitfield and John Wesley, both of them profoundly influential
throughout all of the British Isles, both of them profoundly influential in America as well.
Evangelical Christianity denounced the folly of those who told us to follow nature, and
worst of all, to follow human nature.
Such naturalism in the evangelical view ignored the reality of the fall, the reality of human
depravity, the sin and danger of this worldliness, the loss of the Christian message that we
must flee the things of this world, and ignored our absolute dependence upon the supernatural
for our ethics, for our goodness, and for our significant knowledge of God and the nature
of reality.
The world of 18th century new philosophy sought to marginalize the evangelicals as superstitious
enthusiasts.
John Wesley was a priest within the Church of England.
It would only be much, much later toward the end of the 18th century when Latitudinarian
new philosophical Christian bishops of the Church of England refused to ordain an adequate
number of priests sympathetic to Wesley's evangelical movement that Wesley broke with
the Church of England and founded the Methodist Church that one associates with his name.
When Wesley was a priest of the Church of England, itinerantly giving sermons throughout
England, he needed the permission of bishops to preach in their diocese.
When he came to Joseph Butler's diocese at Durham, Butler refused him that permission
and said, I will not have a madman speaking in my diocese.
Secondly, there is as a dramatic countercurrent to this philosophical and theological naturalism
and optimism, something we've alluded to several times, the skepticism that is inherent
in Lockean empiricism.
Not only as we have stressed that it makes knowledge limited and relative to experience,
but if you think of its theological implications, that it makes knowledge merely probable at
best.
It makes all knowledge merely probable.
Is probability a sufficient foundation for the eternal truths of religion?
Further, there are other skeptical problems emerging within empiricism, an empiricism that
so underlies the entire new philosophical and theological optimism.
Bishop George Barkley raised the issue of what are the actual objects and units of experience.
What's at the heart of the empirical claim?
Our knowledge is bound by our experience.
What is it that we actually know?
What are the units of experience?
The units of experience, Barkley argued, are all mental, their ideas of the world.
They are images of the world, representations of the world, their ideas.
Locke and others have made a wild leap beyond empiricism into the most speculative metaphysics
in assuming that in addition to what we know, the content of our own minds, ideas, there's
a world out there independent of them that not only corresponds to, but causes our ideas.
Turning the empiricist criterion, our knowledge is limited to and bound by our experience
against the claims of empiricism itself as they are manifested around him, Barkley argues
that all we know are immaterial things.
The world as we know it by empirical experience is ideal, not bodily, corporeal material.
Now Barkley's empirical immaterialism suffers an interesting fate.
When the three dialogues between Highless and Philanus are first published, they receive
scant attention, but something about them has gotten under people's skin.
A second edition sells quite well.
A later third edition is one of the philosophical bestsellers of the 18th century.
Everywhere in England and France, Germany, the Low Countries, new philosophers attempt
to dismiss Barkley as either mad or insincere if he doesn't think the world is real, why
doesn't he leave a building through the third story?
What danger crossing the street with a carriage coming?
Samuel Johnson says, I'll refute Barkley and kick a rock, but this doesn't refute Barkley.
Barkley has never said that we don't have images of a world that appears to us as material,
but that all we know are our images and ideas.
And just as there is an attempt to marginalize the evangelicals, there is an attempt to marginalize
Barkley and philosophical idealism, as it is called.
But that is not a confident philosophical response.
And the growing success of Barkley's publications reveal, at the very least, a growing unease
about and obsession with his conclusions.
And a nagging doubt is our system of knowledge as coherent and solid and stable as we believe.
But the two most dramatic challenges to optimistic natural philosophy and natural theology would
come from David Hume, the celebrated Scottish philosopher, metaphysician, epistemologist,
moral philosopher, and indeed historian, and from of all places, Voltaire, the most celebrated
daistic thinker of the 18th century.
In this lecture, we shall encounter Hume in the next Voltaire.
Hume's most revealing and pointed work on natural optimism as it relates to natural
religion or theology is a work unpublished until his death, but widely known among his
friends, his dialogues concerning natural religion.
His friends convince him it is too dangerous a work, and these friends are largely theologians.
It is too dangerous a work to publish during his lifetime.
In theory, it committed Hume to no particular view, since it was a dialogue among competing
analyses of natural theology, an advocate, a traditionalist critic of the new philosophy,
and a philosophical skeptic whom he names Philo.
And Hume gave it, at the very end, after a long delay, a relatively safe final chapter
that was added on as something of an afterthought on the advice of friends who were terribly
worried about the judgment of him by posterity.
But throughout the pages of Hume's dialogues, the voice of skeptical philosophy, Philo,
was able to challenge the fundamental premise of natural religion, that by inference, induction,
from the phenomena of nature.
We were obliged as reasonable, rational, inductive scientific minds to infer from that data of
nature a cause of nature, and that that cause had to be analogous to a human mind.
That is, from the order and benevolence of nature, we had to infer an intelligent creator
and designer, and that such a cause was God, intelligent, wise, omnipotent, and good.
That is the premise of natural theology, natural religion, that Philo is going to criticize
Scout, that such an argument, basing religion upon inference from experience, had four fatal
flaws of a general nature.
One, it left religion merely probable at best, since knowledge from experience was not logically
necessary, but was determined by ongoing experience, that in theory the believer in natural religion
would have to say, well, so far I believe in God, but I'm waiting to see what I learn
about nature tomorrow.
That's not very satisfying for a natural theology.
Secondly, for Philo, it precedes this argument on the basis of an extremely weak analogy,
because the dissimilarities between the universe and the work of an architect, or the work
of the designer of a machine, the similarities between the universe and the works of human
beings were far less striking than the dissimilarities, and the implications of that scientifically
were dramatic.
There is a certain similarity between the movement of sap in trees and the circulation
of blood in animals.
They are analogous, but they are profoundly dissimilar, and it would be foolish in the
extreme in an obvious source of error if one drew inferences about the causes of one from
the causes, from knowledge of the causes of the other.
One dissects a mammal and says, ah, that's the system of circulation, and I think doing
it on the basis of one, you say that's the system of circulation, trees must have hearts.
Where there are dissimilarities, they count profoundly in scientific inference.
Even more dramatically, the entire analogy was wholly vitiated by the fact that the universe
was the only one of its kind that we knew.
It was not as if we had had experience of the necessary causes of a large number of
universes, such that seeing yet another universe, we might infer something by analogy about
the causes of this universe.
In fact, we knew only one universe, and we knew that one to say the least, very, very
partially.
We knew almost none of it.
We had the most limited awareness of the most limited aspect of it.
How then scientifically, let alone with confidence, could one draw inferences about what
had to be the necessary or even probable cause of a universe?
Now it is very important to remember and understand that the issue here is not the existence or
non-existence of God.
The issue is not ontological.
The issue is epistemological.
Did we know the existence of God by the specific means of inference from natural phenomena?
Fourthly, Philo points out, in all scientific questions, in all matters of natural phenomena,
negative evidence counts even more than positive evidence in the confirmation or disconfirmation
of an hypothesis.
If you say that the cause of successful plant growth is proximity to a house, and you show
me one or two plants that grow well because they're near a house, and you ignore all the
plants near a house that don't grow well or plants that grow well far from a house, your
tendentious selective use of evidence is the very opposite of science.
When people talk about the necessary cause of this universe being a wise, designing,
intelligent, omnipotent, good being, all they do, Philo claims, is look for positive evidence.
And they show us order.
Look at this extraordinary day, we needed rain, we got the rain, and the plants grow.
What about drought?
What about flood?
What about storms that destroyed the patient work of human beings?
What about stars that collided?
What about catastrophe?
To cite order is not enough because there is evidence of disorder.
Both require explanation by the cause that one assigns to the universe.
What then convinces us that this universe could not have arranged itself by chance without
design such that we say some things will work, some things won't, some things will show signs
of order, some things of chaos and disorder.
But Jung wants to go yet further.
That's always true about David Jung.
Even if one granted the terms of this vitiated analogy, if one granted it to the natural
religionists and followed its principle that like causes, like effects, prove like causes,
that like effects prove like causes.
The world is like a machine designed by an intelligent man, therefore the cause of the
world must be like human intelligence only infinitely greater.
Even if one granted the analogy, Jung argues, we would not logically infer from the universe
by such an analogy the God of natural religion.
By analogy the evidence of the universe would conclude against the essential attributes
of God.
The cause of the world would not have the qualities of the God believed in by proponents
of natural or indeed other religions.
For example, God must be infinite, but the universe has only finite effects.
Everything we see in the universe is finite, so by analogy the cause of the universe should
be finite.
One looks at a human machine, one says it's finite, its cause is finite.
One looks at the universe, one says everything in it is finite, its cause is finite.
We would not infer perfection because there are so many flaws in the world.
Indeed looking at the astonishing number of flaws in the world it might be just as plausible
by analogy to say that this was a botched and rejected work by some child deity who
showed it and said, look I've created a world and a better God, you call this a world and
throw it away and we find ourselves in the midst of it, living in the midst of its failure.
Nor would we infer the essential theological attribute of the unity of God from the analogy
to the works of human beings.
If we see something so small in comparison to the universe as the most complex battleship
in the Royal Navy, what do we infer?
It couldn't have been done by one mind, by one hand, by one being.
This is the collective work of a large number of people specialized in different things.
From the size and diversity of the universe we would infer that many beings created the
world.
We would not infer the incorporeality, the spirituality of God because in all of our
experience we only know work to be made by material agencies, by hands, by bodies.
We have never seen the design of an architect become a building without physical agency
intervening.
So by analogy the cause of the universe must have body.
Nor must we infer intelligence on the assumption that this world is a machine requiring an
intelligent designer.
If we held to the analogy, in fact, we should proceed from the assumption that the world
resembles an organic vegetable with growth and decay much more than it does a watch or
a knitting loom.
Perhaps Philo argues ironically it comes from a supreme seed.
Or indeed much about the world resembles a living being, an animal more than a machine.
Perhaps it becomes from a supreme egg whom we ought to infer.
Now you is not arguing for any of these specific conclusions to say the least but seeking to
discredit the entire natural theological enterprise.
Nor would we infer supreme wisdom for the obvious reason that human beings improve on
the design of nature all the time.
What is medicine if not an improvement upon nature?
What is our care of the young and elderly if not such an improvement?
What is agriculture if not an animal husbandry if not an improvement upon the design of nature?
We make countless improvements and rearrangements of things.
Further even in nature change is constant.
Parts relate well for a while, then they don't, then things fall apart and die.
Is that like a machine made by a perfect and infinitely wise artisan?
Things work for a while, then fall apart, then die.
How infer a perfect creator from that?
Nor if one turns to the problem of evil can one infer the God of theology.
If nature proves the infinite goodness of its causes then why does a survey of all human
literature reveal to us a litany of the miseries, pains, and uncertainties of life?
If a good and wise parent could save children from disease, from earthquake, from plague,
from painful death, it would.
If it didn't we wouldn't call that parent good and wise.
What does that do to the analogy from nature?
The partisans of natural religion cite the survival of the species as the mark of the
infinite goodness of the creator.
But the species survive and negative evidence counts more by their mutual war by a kind
of brute and blind force that involves the misery, mutual slaughter, and mutual consummation
of countless individual beings.
To know that the world is not what we would expect or predict of a perfect infinite omnipotent
loving deity walk into any children's ward in a hospital, you say, look at the suffering
children in pain and would you say, ah, this is what I would predict from an infinitely
good, infinitely wise, infinitely powerful cause.
Why finite imperfect human beings could improve upon nature if consulted?
Now four for starters eliminate pain, proceed by particular not general law such that the
good live longer and the wicked die sooner, expand the powers and faculties of human life
and mind, and correct the inaccurate workmanship that gives us catastrophic floods from rain
and catastrophic drought from heat.
There are phylo reasons for and only for logical possibilities to be weighed in the light of
the evidence.
The world could be only as we observe it.
If one, its cause were infinitely good, two, if its cause were evil, three, if its cause
was composed of warring opposites of good and evil, or four, if the cause of the universe
was neither good nor evil.
Perfect goodness is disproven by pain, suffering and imperfection.
Perfect malice is disproven by pleasure and well-being.
Warring opposites are disproven by the uniformity of the general laws of nature which leaves
us only the final explanation that the cause of the universe was something indifferent to
good and evil.
In short, from phylo's arguments as offered by Hume, one might choose to believe in God,
but it would not be from the optimistic perspective that our natural faculties, through the medium
of nature, know God and God's goodness and should use the nature created by God as its
moral guide.
Thank you very much.
