Lecture 18, Bishop Joseph Butler and God's Providence
Welcome to Lecture 18, Bishop Joseph Butler and God's Providence.
As we have hinted all along in this course, the identification of the laws of nature with
the will of God as the locus where the human mind best understands what is intended by divine
choice and by design has implications of the utmost drama and importance for the way that
human beings come to think about themselves, their rights and their societies.
The revolution in 17th century natural philosophy radically transformed early modern European
cultures since both of nature and of its relationship to divine providence.
History revealed ordered laws of nature with God as the law giver.
Increasingly, thinkers came to see the laws of nature as the instruments of God's will,
his wisdom and his purpose.
The 17th century does not see itself nor does the 18th century see the 17th century as having
added this small bit or that small bit to human knowledge.
It doesn't see itself as having merely amended or corrected prior beliefs.
Early modern culture sees its natural philosophy as having discovered for the first time God's
ways in nature.
Kepler's belief that he was the first human being to gaze upon God's handiwork with proper
understanding bespeaks the attitude toward discovery of the age.
And it is the age as we have noted of Kepler, Galileo, Harvey, Gilbert, of Tauruslli, Boyle,
Huygens, of Isaac Newton.
Such natural philosophers and the whole community virtually of the new philosophers saw themselves
as profoundly pious minds who had chosen to learn God's designs and purposes, to learn
the purposeful intelligence of the divine mind from the study of what God actually had
created.
Far from in any way diminishing awe, the new science increases the religious awe of Europe.
But it locates God's providence in natural mechanisms themselves and that forces a reconceptualization
and revaluation of nature, including the providential mechanisms of ordinary human nature.
Following the empirically discernible laws of nature meant following the laws of God.
There is the heart of the equation that will transform so much of early modern understanding.
The laws of nature are the will of God.
They are the expression of his purposes for the creation and following the empirically
discernible laws of nature means following the will and choice of God.
In moral philosophy and moral theology, this has a profoundly dramatic and revolutionary
effect validating precisely physical and secular pleasure as the happiness that we had the
right from God to seek.
Christian moral theology had for centuries and centuries distinguished between two different
kinds of happiness.
In Latin, Beatituto, Beatitude, and Felicitas, earthly happiness.
In Christian moral theology, as taught in the schools of Europe for century upon century,
the happiness we truly seek is eternal Beatitude, blessed reunion with God, in life everlasting.
The pursuit of earthly happiness, the pursuit of Felicitas, long was taught to be a fallen
corrupted remnant of that highest calling.
In such a traditional Christian moral theological view, before the fall, we were created with
the inner longing, the inner desire for Beatitude.
In the corruption engendered by the fall, the pale shadow of that, the simulacrum of
that, was our desire for earthly happiness, which was not Beatitude, which was not God's
intention for our calling at all.
That view of Felicitas now changes.
In traditional Christian moral theology, the love of this world is a scandal of human
nature.
It always had been a common place of Western thought to say that human beings and indeed
all animals sought sensible pleasure and fled sensible pain.
In the distance between that goal, earthly pleasure, the flight from earthly pain, and
the goal of eternal union with God, the governance of mankind by the pursuit of natural secular
pleasure and the flight from natural secular pain was, if ever, a primary goal, the mark
of our sin and of our distance from God, and of our inability to fulfill the true, divinely
inspired calling of our being.
To the extent that the pursuit of pleasure and flight from pain governed our lives, it
indicated that we had not raised ourselves or been raised by God to a higher level of
being.
It is in that context that one has to understand the drama of the validation of earthly happiness.
In the light of the new philosophy of the 17th century, such an evaluation of Felicitas
of earthly pleasure was thoroughly rethought if the laws and mechanisms of nature were
the agencies of divine intention.
And if it were a law of nature and a governing mechanism that all living creatures including
human beings sought earthly pleasure and fled earthly pain, then it followed that the pursuit
of such pleasure was nothing less than the divinely ordained end of human life.
What could be more self-evident?
And thus the commonplace observation that we sought pleasure and fled pain now became
an understanding of the very mechanism whereby the will of God was fulfilled.
The pursuit of happiness was what God himself had chosen for us, and if God had chosen for
us the pursuit of happiness, then it was manifest and obvious that God had joined that pursuit
of happiness with the good, with virtue.
What that meant was, if we followed nature, we should at one and the same time seek and
secure our happiness, be virtuous and satisfy divine intention.
But there are few terms more equivocal, more ambiguous, that have more multiple meanings
than the term nature, and there are at least for our purposes three very different models
and locations of the nature that we are to judge as created providentially by God.
There is nature as anything that we observe by our senses, the empirical, whatever is
in the empirical world, and there nature simply means not supernatural.
There is nature as the common course of things, the statistical norm, and there is nature
as the nature of something, the created nature of something, its essence, that which makes
it uniquely what it is.
This ambiguity in the term nature can be a source of great confusion because the same
author may use the term in more than one way, and because these meanings may overlap, nonetheless
these distinctions allow us to understand the pious meaning that the 18th century will
adopt of following nature.
The first, we noted, is nature as anything empirically observed, and that is really without
moral content, that is a distinction between the natural and the supernatural.
From such a model, all things and phenomena that are not supernatural are natural.
So for example, if we take our person from the tropics who sees ice for the first time
and says, it's a miracle, it's a supernatural event, we say, oh no, no, no, ice is completely
natural.
If after drought someone says, oh, this rain is a supernatural blessing, we might respond,
no, no, no, this rain is a natural event, there's one meaning of nature.
Another nature as the statistical norm, and this meaning might have moral content, but
it would be dangerous for Christian moral theology if the statistical norm became the
ethical norm.
So from such a model, if we want to look at the virtue of such a model, it is natural
for parents to care for their children.
But all we mean there is, it is statistically the more common pattern, and it would be unnatural
even if empirically observed for parents to abandon their children or kill their children
because it is statistically so far from the norm.
So there if someone says, he killed his own son, and I say, that's unnatural.
And someone says, no, no, no, it wasn't a miracle, right?
You see how the meanings begin to blend.
When I say there it's unnatural, I mean it is statistically rare.
But look at our species, we can be so selfish, unthinking, impulsive, rash, self-destructive,
that well might be the statistical norm.
And it is not merely following the statistical norm whatever it is that most people do that
is deemed to be following nature.
Rather when the 18th century talks about following human nature in its quest for well-being,
pleasure, happiness, its flight from pain, it means following that nature that was given
to us by our Creator that distinguishes us from all other things.
From this model, it is natural for a human being to use reason and his or her interaction
with the world because reason distinguishes us from plants and other animals and unnatural
to live like a wild beast even if it is empirically observed and even if it is the statistical
norm.
Now almost all of you most certainly use this essentialistic meaning of nature.
Think of the kinds of questions we ask.
We hear that someone has done something and we say, are you a man or a wild animal?
We are using an essentialistic meaning.
We're not asking is that the statistical norm?
If we lived in a society where most people committed rape, the moral person would say,
what are you a society of wild beasts?
If someone doesn't have the courage to defend innocents or to defend children, we say, what
are you, a man or a mouse, a human being or a mouse?
We don't mean by that that most people necessarily have courage.
We say that there is a human nature there to be lived up to.
One must live up to the nature given to one by God.
Think of it this way also.
One is thirsty and one comes to a watering hole and there are skeletons lying all around
it.
And one thinks the way a wild animal thinks, thirst, water, satisfy my thirst.
One drinks and one dies of whatever the toxin was that killed everything else that accounted
for the skeleton.
Wild animals might live that way, but we as human beings pursue our happiness with reason.
We do not act rashly and impulsively when we live up to, when we follow our nature.
We are creatures of reason.
We are creatures of conscience.
We don't steal from the weak and helpless and fulfill our nature.
Someone who does that is asked the question, what are you?
A human being or a wild animal?
Meaning we have a nature to live up to.
In that sense, Bishop Joseph Butler, the leading moral theologian of the Church of England,
the leading moral theologian of the English-speaking Protestant world in the 18th century, a man
noted for his piety, Bishop in the English Church, confessor to the Queen, person who
gives the lectures at Oxford on moral theology, a man who has offered the primacy of the
Church of England, the position of Archbishop of Canterbury and turns it down to remain
in his diocese as Bishop of Durham.
Bishop Joseph Butler, the leading moral theologian of the Church of England, use the essentialistic
model of human nature in his celebrated 15 sermons on humane nature to argue that before
an independent of Christian revelation, our natural knowledge and the ordinary tendencies
of our human nature lead us to virtue.
Now to know what that nature is, one must engage in empirical analysis.
We must examine and analyze our purposeful design to know our nature.
Imagine that a box of watches falls off a cargo ship and floats ashore on an 18th century
South Pacific Island.
People think, oh, this is a good weapon, and use it that way, or this is a good medium
of exchange, and use it that way, or this is a good toy, and use it that way, but then
one day a wise man on that island opens the watch and says, look, there's an interrelationship
among the parts.
This watch is constructed in such a way that it can do something, record the passage of
time.
That's the real nature of the watch.
However people use it, that is the real created nature of the watch.
We can do the same with our human nature, because essence, what we really are, is independent
of use, what use we make of our nature.
An hour essence is to pursue happiness, but to pursue it as human beings.
That is to say, governed naturally by reason and by conscience.
When thirsty human beings living up to their nature, do not drink from the water hole near
which they observe skeletons, nor do they steal their drink from a child.
This does not lie that way.
In fact, God has so made the world that if one lived that way, one dies, or one becomes
an object of hatred and isolation in the world in which one finds oneself.
Given the reality of divine design, we know that the pursuit of secular happiness to which
our nature impels us will lead us when it is governed by reason and conscience to the
good for it is all under the governance of God.
Thus Butler explicitly and bitter rejects the gloomy view of human nature held by Calvin
and Hobbes.
Now you know where the name of the cartoon comes from.
The gloomy view of human nature held by Calvin and Hobbes, both of whom for Butler, denigrate
the wisdom, the beauty, the purposefulness of God's creation.
And Butler argues that self-love that motivates us, self-love is good, and that benevolence
and self-love are not in conflict.
Look at scripture, Butler says.
It tells us to love our neighbor as our self.
If it were true Christian doctrine that we were to hate ourselves, then the command to
love our neighbor as our self would be a command to hate our neighbor.
Nature and nature teach us the same lesson.
We are made to love ourselves.
Why else would we be invited to love our neighbor as ourselves?
And to say that we should not seek our happiness in this secular natural world was to criticize
the very design of God.
For Butler, the thing to be lamented, quote, the thing to be lamented, is not that men
have so great regard for their own good or interest in the present world, for they have
not enough, end quote.
There is no inconsistency whatsoever, Bishop Butler wrote, between moral duty on the one
hand and self-love or self-interest on the other.
That is not a deist, that is not an atheist writing, that is the leading moral theologian
of the English-speaking Christian world.
There is no inconsistency between moral duty and self-love or self-interest, quote, what
is really our present interest, meaning by interest, happiness and satisfaction.
For the eminent Christian bishop, quote, self-love then, though confined to the interests
of the present world, does in general perfectly coincide with virtue and leads us to one
and the same course of life under the conduct and administration of a perfect mind, end quote.
What an extraordinary system God had designed.
If it were a law of nature that we were creatures of self-love in pursuit of happiness, then
literally by God, happiness was our birthright and was coincident with virtue.
There remained a Christian dimension to this for Butler.
We were as Christians under a particular command of Christ to be virtuous, further the world
was not perfect in its rewards and punishments and an afterlife could make amends for the
failure of virtue to secure earthly happiness, but Bishop Butler's essential conclusion is
duty and interest coincide.
Self-love and virtue coincide almost always in this world, but absolutely if we take into
account the whole, God's providence is manifest in the very nature of things.
Deism and the new philosophical Christianity thus move on the same tidal current of conceptual
change.
Deism did not attack or alter new philosophical Christianity in its moral theology, but simply
naturalized it categorically, eliminating any supernatural component whatsoever, although
even here there were so many deists who believed that there must or might be a heaven to make
certain that the moral equation came out correctly at the end.
The best-selling deist author Matthew Tyndall made the universal laws of nature, including
the human pursuit of natural pleasure and secular happiness and the avoidance of natural
pain, the sole moral connection between human beings and God.
God required nothing, needed nothing, and thus had created for the well-being of the
creatures alone, and nothing Tyndall wrote can be of divine law that does not promote
human happiness.
For Tyndall, God not only wanted only our happiness, but God had defined that happiness
in the forms in which we seek it through our nature, bodily health, physical pleasures,
none of which could offend God, and all of which, experience and reason, could help us
to identify.
In this model of the neglect of secular happiness was not only not religious, it was offensive
to God.
God's creation of our nature to pursue happiness provided us with a full and complete assurance
that God himself equated the true causes of natural secular pleasure with virtue and the
true causes of natural secular pain with vice.
It is thus but a very brief step from Bishop Joseph Butler to the deist Thomas Jefferson.
We hold these truths to be self-evident that all men dot, dot, dot are endowed by their
Creator with certain inalienable rights, dot, dot, dot, and among these the pursuit of happiness.
And Jefferson drew the conclusion that it was to achieve those rights, including to
achieve the pursuit of happiness for which government was instituted among human beings,
in short that we could judge of government and its legitimacy by whether or not it created
the circumstances in which human beings could pursue successfully their happiness.
In such an assertion of an inalienable right to the pursuit of happiness, the deist was
not challenging 18th century Christian natural theology but reaffirming it, which is why
Jefferson's claim was simultaneously both revolutionary with reference to prior models
of government that stressed the primacy of the supernatural human relationship to God
and at the same time not at all provocative of essential dissent from the Christian, the
Protestant America around him.
By the 18th century, European civilization was changing its sense not only of nature
but of natural and divine morality and we live in the wake of that revolution.
Thank you.
