Welcome to lecture 22, Beccaria and Enlightened Reform.
If you think over the course of our past few lectures, the Enlightenment has moved to a focus on secular reform and the means of alleviating the
remediable causes of human suffering and increasing the causes of human well-being.
And that is very much tied to the sense that has derived from the intellectual revolution
of the 17th century of its model of ego psychology, that we know human beings to be creatures
who seek happiness and who flee pain.
But then one of the central problems of human society, indeed of human existence, is that
society is composed of individuals seeking individual pleasure and fleeing individual
pain who will be unhappy, indeed miserable, if they do not live in societies that have
reconciled the good of the individual with the good of society.
If we are to avoid the selfish struggle of all against all, there must be ways to reconcile
the individual pursuit of pleasure with the creation of a decent society in which people
leave each other free to pursue happiness in their individual ways.
While this is obviously true from a Hobbesian perspective, in which absent authority there
would be the war of all against all, it is true even if out of a hundred people there
are only one, two or three who would use other human beings as the instruments of their own
happiness or pleasure, whatever the cost or whatever the injustice to another individual.
So the great need of political and social and economic theory emerging in the Enlightenment
is the need to reconcile the particular and the general interest.
This places extraordinary ways upon the task and the role of the legislator, for it is
the legislator through law who reconciles individual and general interest.
This does not mean that the legislator must find means of making every individual happy.
The pursuit of happiness is an individual task, but it does mean that the legislator
must find means of preventing some subset of individuals from interfering with the ability
of other individuals to pursue happiness in their own ways, which puts a very particular
weight on the role of the criminal law.
And our subject today will be a book by Cesare Beccaria on crimes and punishments that represents
a rather dramatic moment of truth for the European intellectual world.
Beccaria's work published in the 1760s in Italy in Milan is within one year translated
into French where it becomes a bestseller.
It is translated into English where it influences the entire Anglo-Saxon tradition of legal
and institutional reform.
The great philosophical, radical and legal reformer Jeremy Bentham and the circle around
him said explicitly that Beccaria's on crimes and punishments was the work that inspired
them, that taught them and which they sought to apply.
Beccaria's work is quickly translated into almost every European language, where its
success is something quite phenomenal and its influence among lawyers, judges, ministers
of state in particular, but the reading public in general makes it one of the international
bestsellers of the 18th century.
It is that fact that makes us look at Beccaria's work as a certain kind of moment of truth.
For the 18th century looked at its institutions and codes as examined and criticized by Beccaria
and found those institutions and codes incompatible with the new philosophies analysis of the relationship
of humanity and nature, of the relationship of human life and social institutions.
The book on crimes and punishments emerges from a very specifically northern Italian
context.
Beccaria is a young aristocrat in Milan which is under the administrative authority of the
Austrian Habsburgs, and young progressive minds influenced by the Enlightenment and
the new philosophy find something potentially liberating and refreshing in Habsburg administration
in northern Italy.
They see their own local elites, the church, the great land owning aristocrats, the inherited
institutions as remnants of a past that stands between human beings and happiness and justice.
And they invest great hope in the ability of these Austrian administrators with whom
they cooperate, with whom they collaborate in administration, and whom they advise in
applying human knowledge to the needs of their own locality.
Beccaria is part of a group that is called the Académie d'Alpouni, the Academy of the
Fist in Milan.
They meet frequently to read and discuss the works of the French Enlightenment.
Montesquieu and Helvetius, who if you recall in the last lecture, argued strongly in favor
of environment over nature, environment over heredity as the critical variable in human
affairs.
The Academy of the Fist meets to discuss the works of the French Enlightenment and in particular
of Montesquieu and Helvetius.
And they are deeply influenced by notions of the possibility of enlightened rule by
temporary elites.
In this case, for them enlightened Austrian monarchy, whom they believe, will allow them
to create conditions in which people can become freer and eventually more self-governing.
Within the Academy of the Fist are two brilliant brothers, Pietro and Alessandro Verri, who
are learned in economics, administrative theory, theories of institutional behavior, and institutional
reform.
And the best evidence that we have is that they are the minds behind on crimes and punishments.
They have in their midst a bright man, Cesare Becaria, who among other things is a brilliant
writer.
He has a gift for rhetorical flourish.
And the best evidence we have is that Pietro and Alessandro Verri give to Becaria works
on legal reform and on the criminal law.
And Becaria adds the magic of his own prose, occasionally his own thought, his own rhetoric
to the Verri brothers' arguments.
It leads to an interesting situation later in Paris.
Becaria is invited to the Enlightenment salons of Paris.
And there is great excitement that people finally will get a chance to meet the mind
who wrote on crimes and punishments, such a beloved book.
And you look at people's correspondence and they say, oh, it was so disappointing.
He's scarcely seemed able to defend the book, to explain the book.
And then when the French meet the Verri brothers, you read in their correspondence, oh, what
brilliant minds, what subtle minds, but history is often not fair.
The Verri brothers, except in Italy, have remained largely obscure.
And Becaria is, in Italy, in France, throughout Europe, and indeed in America, one of the
most celebrated names of the 18th century.
So for purposes of convenience, we shall refer to Becaria as the author, the mind,
that produced the work on crimes and punishments.
The book on crimes and punishments both defines the criteria by which to judge institutions
and their reform, and sets out a bold plan of necessary reform that follows from those
criteria.
And the criteria are those of the intellectual revolution of the 17th and 18th centuries.
All issues of government must be based on natural judgment and evidence, not on tradition.
Becaria writes, if you want to criticize me, don't tell me I'm abandoning tradition.
Show me on the basis of evidence and reason where I am wrong.
Becaria looks at the criminal codes of Europe and says, what do we have here?
We have the ancient tribal customs of barbaric European tribes codified by despotic kings,
and that passes for a system of law in the 18th century, so much for the presumptive
authority of the past.
That inherited system must be judged, and the only just criterion in matters of society
for Becaria is the criterion of utility, and he takes the formulation of utility as
Helvetius had stated it in his own works, and bent them when he states the criterion
of utility that will so dominate late 18th and 19th century English reform, takes it
explicitly and with attribution from Becaria.
Utility is, quote, the greatest happiness of the greatest number.
The laws of Europe, the criminal justice system, the rules by which we in any way limit each
other's freedom, so that's the natural condition, freedom, and the only legitimate criteria for
rules by which we in any way limit each other's freedom is that those limitations produce the
greatest happiness of the greatest number.
That this is a system that always has benefited kings or church or aristocracy in this way,
or the great burgers of the great cities in this way, that is not an argument for Becaria.
If you are to limit freedom, if the legislator is to reconcile the individual and society
by attaching penalties to behavior, so that to be concerned for your individual happiness,
you now must say to yourself, well, what will happen if I don't honor my contract, or what
will happen if I steal from someone, or what will happen if I kill a competitor?
That law must be judged on the basis of does it benefit society, does it meet the criterion
of the greatest happiness of the greatest number, because we must think of society for
Becaria in a manner consistent with what we know about human nature.
What we know about human nature is that individuals seek pleasure and flee pain.
Therefore they would want to be free, except in so far as limitations of those freedoms
are essential to the pursuit of pleasure and flight from pain.
So society must be understood as a social contract.
The issue is not, did this happen historically?
The issue is what is a model of society consistent with what we know to be true about human nature,
and from that society must be understood as a social contract in which individuals exchange
the least necessary portion of their freedom for the greater happiness of safety and civil
order in which they can pursue their private visions of happiness.
No other model is consistent with our knowledge of human nature, and we may indeed, we must
reason from why human beings act as we know that from nature, why human beings act in
general to why they have formed the state, and what function that state is to perform.
This conclusion teaches us that the legitimate ends and limits of government are knowable
because individuals entered society.
To secure greater happiness with the least sacrifice of freedom, all authority is justified
by that alone.
That is the source of civil authority.
The rest is God's business, not the states or the societies or the laws.
God is perfectly capable, Bekariah will write, of providing his own justice in his own way,
but the legislator and the human magistrate has a function derived from the social contract
and the criterion of utility.
All law, therefore, all power, all restrictions upon the freedom of any individual must justify
themselves by demonstrating that they serve the greatest happiness of the greatest number
in a manner consistent with the social contract.
If they do not secure that, then they are unjust.
And Bekariah will look at, for example, the case of torture, the category of religious
crime, and cruel and harsh penalties from that regard, because only the minimal penalty
sufficient to deterrence is just.
Anything else, even if enshrined by received tradition, anything else is simply cruelty
and abuse of power.
Only the minimal penalty sufficient to deterrence is just.
What is torture doing in our legal system?
Think of it from a utilitarian perspective.
Who confesses under torture the person with the least resistance to pain?
It has nothing to do with the rational pursuit of innocence or guilt.
How did torture enter the legal system from the religious notion that pain is a purgative,
that pain purifies?
What are religious crimes, heresy, witchcraft, blasphemy, what are they doing in a legal
system, let alone what are they doing receiving the harshest penalties?
They have nothing to do with the function of the state.
God will see to God's justice human authority is derived from nature, human nature, the
social contract, the criterion of utility.
What are we doing with harsh penalties unto death and the infliction of pain?
We are measuring what we deem to be our moral response almost invariably from a religious
perspective about the gravity of a crime, or we make distinctions what is done against
the king as opposed to what is done against a neighbor.
But harsh penalties, anything beyond the minimum necessary to deterrence, violate that which
alone justifies any legitimate authority in a society.
Becarii's actual proposed reforms of belief and behavior show the radical potential of
rewriting social theory and social practice from the premises of the new philosophy and
the intellectual revolution of the early modern age.
One, Becarii calls for the elimination of theology from law, both in the definition
of crimes.
There should be no categories of religious crime in civil society whatsoever, and in
determination of the severity of a crime, for the function of the state is wholly secular
and natural, nor in the determination of the punishment of a crime, for the issue is always
minimal deterrence and maximal human freedom.
The least suffering never human beings putting themselves in the place of God and saying
my authority is not to act on behalf of the natural and the secular and the state, I am
a deputy of God in my judicial robes or in my legislator's role for Becarii that is intolerable.
Second, all punishment must be minimal and purposeful.
If brief imprisonment suffices to create enough unhappiness to deter a crime, then one has
succeeded and anything beyond that is cruelty.
Third and very dramatic in 18th century political theory and all 18th century theories of institutional
reform, to allow us to use our natural human faculties toward happiness, we must be able
to plan our lives rationally.
If you didn't know if tomorrow the law of gravity would obtain, how would you know what
to do?
The ability to plan for happiness, for successful outcomes, to be a rational creature is dependent
upon your knowledge of consequences.
And so Becarii writes, we need a government of laws, not a government of men.
It is a celebrated 18th century phrase.
It is unthinkable that people pass laws that do not apply to their kind, but apply to someone
else's kind.
It is unthinkable that authority is arbitrary, that for the same act you might on one day
and in one court receive one year's imprisonment in another day or court for the exact same
act 30 years imprisonment.
We must, Becarii urges, separate the role of the legislator from the role of the judge.
The legislator asks, what is the minimal deterrent, the penalty sufficient to secure the order
of society?
The judge does not make that decision.
The judge secures a fair trial.
This would require the elimination of anomalies and randomness in the law, the establishment
of a predictable government appropriate to rational human beings.
Thus Becarii argues insistently and passionately against judicial discretion.
Let the society determine for all of us what the penalty for a given act is.
If your fate then depends, does the judge like you, that he fight with his wife the
evening before?
Is his digestion good or is he dyspeptic today?
You are not a member of a free and rational society.
Fourth because citizens form society in order to gain liberty.
The primary function of a judicial system is the protection of the accused.
And Becarii looks around at the European judicial system and declares we have no rational rules
of evidence.
We must have judgment of peers.
We must determine the credibility of witnesses.
We must abolish secret accusations.
We must outlaw leading questions in which a powerful prosecutor says of a less powerful
witness, didn't you see Jacques Dupont stab that person with a knife on the night of
August 2nd?
Yes.
That is not a way of arriving at truth.
And we must eliminate the use of force in the questioning of witnesses and in all aspects
of a trial.
And finally, there must be equality before the law.
Society never will be rational unless the same penalties apply to all people of all
classes, of all birth.
Apply equally to them for if the legislator must say I or my wife or my son will receive
this penalty for this act.
Then the legislator must think rationally about deterrence.
Without equality before the law, you do not have any possibility of honoring the requirements
of utility and the social contract.
And we are governed by the arbitrary despotic power of other wills.
This model reflects the 18th century's dramatically increased sense of human possibility.
We want to be happy, which is God's law for us.
And we now possess a method by which to study nature unprecedentedly.
And we shall, unless prevented by tyranny, cumulatively seek to apply our knowledge to
the real causes of human suffering or well-being.
That is true of medicine, and that is true of agriculture, and it is also true of political
and economic and social organization, all of which are governed by the right to happiness
and by the positive role of knowledge.
Think again of the link to the intellectual revolution of the 17th century and the analogy
of political and intellectual authority.
We are freed from the presumptive authority of the past in matters intellectual.
And by analogy, we are freed from the presumptive authority of the past as embodied in the
institutions that surround us.
Think again on the links to the intellectual revolution of early modern Europe, the primacy
of the secular over the religious ends of human activity, and again the belief that
the human will, informed by natural knowledge, can rewrite so much of the sorry scheme of
things closer to the human heart's desire for happiness.
The legacies are dramatic.
For such a worldview changes the very way we argue for or against things in the medical
and in the political world, and raises the profoundest issues of the mastery and order
that human beings may or may not have over life.
The heirs of beccaria might well be mutually exclusive from laissez-faire doctrines to
Marxism to an evolutionary sense of gradual form, but the issue in the light of the Enlightenment's
legacy is learning from experience and reaching decisions based above all else on that learning.
And note well in thinking about a secular society of equality before the law, in which
the goal is to be as free as possible with minimal deterrence and maximal freedom from
the arbitrary will of power and other individuals, the accident of the foundation of the American
Republic, and its notions of the ends of government in the age of the Enlightenment.
Thank you so very much.
