Welcome! You have learned that for some ordinary differential equations you can determine equilibrium solutions.
But can we say more about these equilibrium solutions?
Yes, you can!
In this video you will learn about the stability of equilibrium solutions of autonomous differential equations.
Consider the following differential equation for some population of rainbowfish p.
If you set the rate of change of the population p to zero and solve for p, you obtain one equilibrium solution p equals approximately 28.6.
To analyze this equilibrium point further, you can use the direction field of the differential equation.
The direction field for this differential equation is shown here.
For clarity, I have also added the curve of the equilibrium solution in black.
So now let us take an initial population of 25 fish, so p at time zero equals 25, and sketch the solution curve in green.
As you can see, if time increases, the green curve goes down quickly.
If you sketch one more solution curve with an initial value of p between zero and the equilibrium, you get this graph.
This curve also goes quickly away from 28.6.
Now what would happen if you take a larger initial value, for example 30?
As you can see, the yellow curve goes away from the equilibrium as time increases.
If I sketch the solution curve for the initial value of 35, I get this second yellow curve.
Again, this curve goes away from the equilibrium as time increases.
You can continue to sketch some solution curve which should give you a graph like this.
Adding even more solution curves gives you this graph.
Looking at this graph, you see two regions in which the solution curves behave differently.
If the initial value is below the equilibrium, the solution curve moves away from the equilibrium and towards minus infinity as time increases.
And if the initial value is above the equilibrium, the solution curve moves away from the equilibrium and tends to infinity as time increases.
This is a lot to say, so maybe we can summarize this in a new type of graph.
Because you know only the initial value determines how the solution curve behaves, you could make a graph which only contains values of the dependent variable p.
Our previous conclusion shows that the important value is 28.6, so let us draw a vertical line containing this value indicated by the point.
If you would have an initial value smaller than 28.6, we concluded previously that the value would decrease.
You can indicate this in this graph by drawing an arrowhead on the line pointing away from 28.6.
In a similar fashion, you can draw an arrowhead above the equilibrium which points upwards,
because any initial value larger than 28.6 will give a solution curve that tends to infinity.
This graph is what is called a phase line of the ordinary differential equation.
Now let us take a closer look at the phase line and the population of 28.6 rainbowfish.
This point has above and below two arrows pointing away from 28.6.
This means that if you have a smaller or larger population, your solution curves would move away from this value.
The value of 28.6 fish is what is called an unstable equilibrium point of the differential equation.
In a phase line, an unstable equilibrium point is always surrounded by two arrows pointing away from the equilibrium point.
So you now have found that the population of 28.6 rainbowfish is unstable.
Of course, other types of equilibrium exist, but these you will encounter in a different part of this course.
In the next exercises, you will construct a phase line yourself and classify the equilibrium points.
