this short and nice introduction.
So my name indeed is Petro Fedichev,
and I had a decent job.
I've been doing theoretical physics.
And then something happened,
and more than 15 years ago,
somebody showed me that there are mammals
that do not age,
and I got really interested into this situation.
So when I was small,
I was reading about primitive creatures that are not aging,
but I didn't care because I had high esteem
of our mammalian ancestry.
But since then, I learned that in 21st century,
there appeared to be first experimental evidence
suggesting that certain mammals do not age,
and as we speak, more and more animals
of that kind showing up in databases.
So on this graph,
I mean, that's what brought me into the field.
So on the left, you have mortality,
not your usual log plot.
I mean, actual mortality is a function of age in humans.
So note the huge dynamic range here.
So humans exhibit a huge variation of mortality.
This is almost unprecedented among other animals.
And then on the right, you have naked mole rats.
So this is a picture from paper by Kalika, by Google.
So they published a new life
because I think they wanted to insist on the title
that says that these guys are defying the Gompert's law.
There is no log on the vertical scale.
You can see that over the long, very long time,
there is no appreciable change in mortality,
measurable mortality in these animals.
So my question was always like,
if I want to do something about aging,
I should be looking at the largest effects possible.
So to me, the difference between these two curves
is the largest effect possible.
So if we ever want to increase human life
by a large margin without doing trials and errors,
which I think is visible,
we should have a theoretical framework
to understand how the curve on the left
is different from the curve on the right.
And this is quite a multi-year journey
which I want to tell you about.
So my interest was two-fold.
So I learned about these creatures.
And at the same time, I was reading works
by Stuart Kaufman.
I was doing physics of strongly correlated systems.
And when I was a student, people were telling me
that young men study physics
because there are physicists turning biologists,
but there are no medics or biologists turning to physics.
This is the counter examples.
So Stuart Kaufman is the guy who was trained as a medical doctor
who turned out to be a very decent theoretical physicist.
So when this guy is writing something,
he's very old right now, but I'm reading.
So the work that essentially started Jira is this.
So the guy in 2008, I believe,
the guy took kind of first transcriptomic data
that was available en masse.
And he tried to reconstruct regulatory networks
from transcriptomics.
And to his surprise, he found that with experimental accuracy,
he couldn't see if those regulatory networks are stable
or not.
So it looks like almost all living creatures
operate at the boundary between stability and instability.
And when I learned about that and when
I learned about naked mole rats, at least as a guide to eye,
I started thinking that maybe those guys who are unstable,
close to the boundary, and unstable
are those who are, let's put that in quotes, normally aging.
And those guys who are stable are presumably
those guys who do not age.
So I have never presented this talk in the way I'm doing now.
So please don't look at these questions too carefully.
These are kind of metaphorical ideas.
So usually, if you want to approach these kind of things,
you can do it formally, but I like model problems.
So the first model problem that I tried to solve was this.
So I presumed that every living creature
is a very sophisticated soup of things
that are there in the right time, in the right place.
So assume that there are certain number of errors,
for example, missing or overpresent proteins,
like EE with the index P. And there
are certain genes that are working correctly or dysregulated.
So these are errors in the proteome and in genome.
So I simply asked myself a question.
So if I have an error somewhere in the protein,
probably this missing or overpresent protein
is deregulating a certain gene.
So if it's not removed, it will deregulate a bunch of genes.
At the same time, if there is any deregulated gene,
it would produce a bunch of misregulated proteins.
And if it's not removed, it will produce a bunch of proteins.
So you can, in fact, write those equations.
And they are so simple that you can actually solve them.
So you would find that depending on the parameters like this C
is the rate how errors in proteome are removed.
Delta is the rate how the errors in the genome are removed.
This beta is the rate how quickly proteins are translated.
And G is the number of genes, whatever.
So if you solve this very simple problem,
you would find that depending on the parameters of this very
simple network, this is what's called a mean field solution,
you would find that if the repair systems are working very well,
if C and delta are very large, then you are in the stable mode.
If any error appears, it's extinguished before it
manages to produce more errors.
So error amplification rate is below 1.
And if your rates, extinguishing rates of your errors
in proteome and in genome are not large enough,
then you are in the unstable mode.
So what's interesting is the number of regulatory errors
in the unstable mode is going up exponentially,
which is what is looking like aging in this system.
And if you are in the stable mode,
and the number of errors doesn't grow,
which means that you can live forever in these situations.
So probably that corresponds to non-aging individuals.
It's very simple, but it simply gives you an idea
that without inventing any superstructure,
normal biological mechanisms, just by changing parameters
of this system in a continuous way,
you can actually cross between stable and unstable regime.
And that's what evolution is probably doing all the time.
So just for fun and scientific curiosity,
let me just give you the flavor of the language
that could be used if you want to solve the actual problem.
So, well, actually we have lots of variables.
We have much more variables in living systems
that we can ever measure, which means
that we always look at subsets of variables.
Let's call them X.
It could be dynamic relation, protein level, protein levels,
transcript levels, whatever you want.
So obviously they satisfy some kind of dynamic equations.
So if one is changing, then other things
are changing at a certain rate.
And it's not unreasonable to believe
that there is some kind of a steady state, X naught,
and you can actually expand all these equations
in linear regime.
So they're there where you would have this connect
on whatever metrics that tells you how changing
one transcript or in one protein level
changes all the other.
In the language of dynamics system theory,
that's called Jacobian.
So this Jacobian is one of the most important objects
for any dynamic system.
And depending on the spectrum of this Jacobian,
you can have totally different dynamic properties.
So on the left, I wrote, I actually
plotted in a schematic way, the eigenvalues of this Jacobian.
So it's a huge matrix.
Nobody can even write this matrix.
Nobody can measure all the matrix elements of this matrix.
So we should think about it in the language
of statistical mechanics of matrices here.
So definitely somewhere on the left,
on this eigenvalue complex plane,
you have lots of eigenvalues with large real eigenvalue.
These things correspond to over-damped stress
responses, right?
So you distort the system, and it's going back to the node.
And then close to 0, as I have just shown you in a model
example, and that's what Kaufman has demonstrated a while ago,
there would be a few eigenvalues of this matrix
that are very close to 0.
They correspond to long responses or slow dynamics
of the system.
And the agent is definitely one of them.
Now, if you know the spectrum of the matrix,
if you know all the left and right
eigenvectors of this matrix, you can always
expand the solution in the right eigenvectors of this matrix,
as it is called, as it is written below.
And then you can write the effective solution for the,
so once again, these are multidimensional vectors,
lots of variables to measure, but they
are moving due to a finite number of mode variables.
So the eigenmodes, eigenvectors that are close to the 0,
close to 0, are called critical.
They're also called central manifold, whatever,
there is a lot of nasty language there.
But what's most important is that all the motions that
are quick to relax, you don't see them in the data, right?
Because you distort the system, and the system is going back.
You don't have even time to measure them.
So you always measure very few that dominate the motion.
That's, by the way, the reason why the dimensionality reduction
works in systems biology very well.
So for those very few, you can generate these very few mode
functions like this ZA, and the slow dynamics of very complex
systems is actually dominated by very few of them.
So let's think about one for simplicity.
So this mode function undergoes dynamics,
stochastic dynamics, and an effective potential,
and a regulator potential, that can have actually just two
forms.
It could be stable, close to 0, or unstable, close to 0,
depending on the sign of the leading hydrogen value
of the Jacobian matrix of this system.
And believe me, this is probably the most complex slide here.
So what's most important is that by small variation
in the systems' parameters, without inventing any systems,
you can actually cross, remember by Kaufman,
you are close to stability in stability range,
which means that you can cross from stable to unstable.
And as I said, that's what evolution is apparently doing.
So for example, if this small variable belongs
to the unstable regime, then you simply exponentially
disintegrate.
That's what most probably small creatures are doing.
And if on the other side, the dynamics of the system
belongs to the stable regime, then you
can oscillate in this stable, near the stable basin
of attraction for a very long time,
unless fluctuations would throw you away
over the protective barrier.
And that would correspond to H, independent mortality
in this system.
So well, very simple approach actually gives you
the description, at least theoretically,
how the same system, the same mammal,
can be evolutionary driven from aging to non-aging regime.
What's most important is that when this hydrogen value is
very close to 0, which means that the aging is very slow,
much smaller than any molecular scales,
then the motion is dominated just by exactly one mode.
And this mode variable is approximately given
by the principal component.
So that's the reason why principal components
is very successful in generating biomarkers of aging.
So this idea of small central manifold
of these dynamic systems is very well suited
for modern machine learning.
So as I said, close to this criticality,
so this regime where this hydrogen value is
crossing between stability and instability,
it's called critical regime.
Close to criticality, there are very few important variables
that are described in long term dynamics of systems.
And that's what we can exactly study
with modern generative AI very well.
So here is the example what we've done in mice recently.
We took longitudinal medical, let's call it medical data
from mice, these were readouts from blood variables.
So we used a network in order to predict
very few latent variables, central manifold of this animal,
and then use them in order to predict
the future state of health of this animal.
And if you train the simplest model,
that trains just one critical variable,
it's shown on the right,
you see that this variable is going exponentially up with age
and the red dots here are the animals of all ages
that are scheduled to be killed in the lab.
So you can literally see that in a lab,
mice die of let's call it advanced biological age, right?
So we really discovered the variable
that controls the health of these animals
that is exponential in age.
The exponent is by the way is the same
as the mortality rate, doubling exponent
from the Gombert's law,
which kind of bridges what I've been telling you theoretically
with what I can see practically,
because in mice, you can literally measure variables
like molecular factors that are exponential
with the same exponent as the mortality rate acceleration.
Just to give you a flavor, in this model,
in the model of this kind, there is no chronological time.
So mice generate biological time
due to dynamic instability, right?
So they develop exponential amplification
of regulatory errors.
There is no chronological time.
I mean, the errors simplify errors.
That's how you get exponent.
And on the right, you can see the actual experimental data,
how the total number of senescent cell measured
in the animal by Lucifer's reporting model
is actually better correlating
to the machine learning conferred critical variable.
It's also called the parameter in physics.
Then to chronological age,
we really can get biological time
from longitudinal measurements
with a little bit of physics
and not to sophisticated network.
Now, in practical terms,
if you don't have stability, if you are unstable,
that means that if I take you out of equilibrium,
you will never get away.
You wouldn't know what is the equilibrium situation.
You will never relax back to the equilibrium,
which means on the left,
if I track this biological age,
whatever they saw the parameter in mice,
and if I apply in intervention, a short intervention,
hit and run intervention at some point in time
that reduces this biological age,
by nature of not having stability,
these mice will always be below.
I mean, they will keep aging at the same rate,
but from a lower base.
They wouldn't know how to catch up with the control
because there is no stability,
which means that in unstable systems,
you can produce rejuvenation.
And that's what exactly we see in experiments.
So on the right, these are our experiments.
You can see the biological age on the vertical axis.
You can see the horizontal axis,
that is the age of animals in weeks.
And you can see that the first two points on the left
are untreated animals.
And then we have an experimental intervention
that reduces this order parameter
that acts against aging in mice.
And you can see that for the rest of their lives,
in situation where there is no therapeutic intervention
present in these animals anymore,
the treated group is always below the control.
So this is very,
to my taste, powerful demonstration
of dynamic instability.
Dynamic instability means that there is no equilibrium,
no kind of static equilibrium,
which means that you can rejuvenate.
You wouldn't be able to do that in dynamically stable animals.
Now, I think there is a very interesting,
you know, formal mathematical,
but also experimental information of this theory,
because it turns out that in animals
that are dynamically unstable,
there is no Gompert's law.
So in fact, you can solve this non-linear
Alangevian equation to obtain analytically
the mortality in these model animals.
So on the left, this is the theoretical curve.
So you can see that the mortality is first exponential
up to the average lifespan.
And then after average lifespan, the mortality saturates.
It saturates at the same level as the Gompert's exponent.
So on the right, I have actually the analytical solution
for the survival curve in these animals,
which is remarkably can be confirmed in experiments.
We've done these experiments ourselves
just to test the theory.
So on the left, you have C elegans.
These are worms.
This is from our paper.
As you can see, these are the survival curves.
You have lots of mutants here.
The range of lifespan is huge.
This is 10 times variation in lifespan.
And on the right, you have on the vertical axis,
you have the plateau, the mortality at the plateau.
And at the horizontal axis,
you have the exponential feed of the mortality
before the plateau.
So remember the theory was promising
that these two quantities will be the same.
So the level at the plateau is the same
as the mortality Gompers exponent before the plateau.
And you can see that in experiments
that are engaging worms
with one order of magnitude difference in lifespan,
there is a pretty strong correlation
between these two things,
which is kind of a good validation
that at least worms are dying
because of a simple dynamic instability.
Not only worms have this problem.
So on the left, this is also,
I mean, we are checking this
because we want to be sure
that these models are not just metaphorically correct.
They also should be quantitatively correct.
So on the left, you can see the data
from a mouse testing program.
These are controls from mouse testing programs.
These are thousands of venomous.
Of course, to look at such small effects,
you should be looking at very large number of animals.
You can see on the left that the dashed line
is the Gompers law,
assuming that mortality accelerates up to infinity.
You can see that there is a deficit in mortality
late in life in mice.
So the mortality is going to the plateau
instead of going exponentially.
In humans, and that's now the biggest point,
what's wrong with humans?
In humans, there is no any sign of saturation of mortality
at the average lifespan.
In humans, mortality is well exponential.
It was established in 1825, I believe, by Gompers.
Already in his times,
when people started living for a long time,
the exponent is going up to more than 100 years of age.
There is no any sign of saturation of mortality
at average lifespan.
So that tells you that human aging is something else.
And that's pretty disturbing, I would say,
because we're using mice as a preclinical model of aging.
So what's wrong with humans?
So I will try to list you first all the things
that are wrong with humans.
First, if you do principle component analysis
of all any signal you like,
it could be a signal from variable devices,
it could be DNA mutilation,
it could be transcriptomics, whatever.
You would find that if you plot every dot here
is an average for a certain age group,
you wouldn't find a straight line.
Remember that for dynamically unstable animals,
the first principle component
always gives you the biomarker of aging.
It's not at all like that in humans.
In humans, you can see different live staging.
So if you project it to one axis, like on the right,
you would find that there is definitely growth,
I don't know, 25 years.
There is, by the way, a theory by Jeffrey West,
so we checked it in humans.
There is this universal theory of growth in animals.
So they trajectory how markers like body weight
or blood markers are going up or down with age
at the time of growth.
There is an analytical equation for that.
So we checked it, but it's not ours.
So we just make sure that we understand
the left part of this curve.
Then, definitely, something is going on
after, let's say, 50 years old in humans on average.
That's important that this is on average.
But this is not exponential.
Think about it, think about your faces.
Think about faces of people you saw aging.
There are two kinds of features.
I mean, face is a great omic.
I don't know, face, omic, signal.
There are two kinds of features on your face.
So first, there are features that are only changing one way.
For example, size of your nose,
distance between your eyes, size of your ears,
they're only growing.
Then there are features that are changing all the time.
For example, the aspect ratio of your face.
If you are tired or sick, you look older.
If you sleep over, you look younger.
So there are features that are associated with aging
but reversible.
And there are features that are associated with aging
but apparently irreversible.
What's most important is that there are no exponents there.
If you fit, I mean, think about face features.
Mortality rate doubling time in humans is eight years.
Imagine what would happen to your face
if, let's say, a distance between your eyes
would go up exponentially and double every eight years.
This would never work.
I mean, our faces are much more stable than that.
So trust me that if you look at other signals
like proteomics, transcriptomics, mutilation,
you would not find any molecular level feature
that has exponential dynamics
at the exponent that is matching mortality rate doubling time.
Think about that.
It's a huge problem because in biotech,
we are acting at molecular level or at cellular level.
If we don't, I mean, we have a problem.
We have exponential mortality.
We have an exponential risk of diseases
but we don't have molecular level handles
that follow the same dynamics,
which means that we're in trouble
if we are trying to actually intercept this dynamic.
So we need to find an explanation
how exponential dynamics of risks of diseases and death
comes out from sub exponential.
Let's put it like this,
dynamics of measurable factors or actionable factors.
So I cannot show it
because there is no longitudinal data of that size
but since we do have longitudinal data,
for example, we acquired longitudinal datasets
from lab diagnostic companies.
So we were acquiring the readouts from their blood tests
for tens of thousands of people over 25 years
for the whole duration of life of that company.
So what we found, remember in mice,
I was showing you that there are factors
that are going up exponentially
with the right exponent in humans.
That is not the case.
If you measure anything, remember your weight.
I think everyone,
almost everyone has an idea about the trajectory of weight.
You should remember that when you were younger,
you had some equilibrium weight
and there were fluctuations of that weight
and if you were dieting or if you went to a gym,
you would be going down,
but once you stopped doing that,
you would go back to the norm
and once upon a while,
this equilibrium position of your weight
would be changing most of the time
or the bigger or the larger weight.
It's like an earthquake.
So it's like a reorganization in your body.
Something happens and then your equilibrium position is new.
Now, whatever you do, if you diet,
if you go to a gym,
you go down with your weight,
but you never go back to the previous equilibrium position.
So humans actually exhibit stable fluctuations
and then once in a while,
you have earthquakes
and you change your hemostatic equilibrium level,
all people at different time points.
So that's why cross-sectionally,
you have these smooth, nice curves,
but longitudinally, there is nothing like that.
You have equilibrium, quasi-equilibrium fluctuations
that are damped
and then you have this kind of catastrophic events.
So if you can do, I mean, if you have,
if you are metastable, if you have fluctuations,
what you can do is that
you can try to measure your recovery rate.
So what is the recovery rate?
So when you have a variable like your body weight,
if you overeat, you will get larger,
but if you stop eating,
you will get back to your norm and that will take time.
So you can actually measure
by observing out-of-the-care relation times
of your fluctuations of your body weight
or selective protein level, whatever you want.
You can actually measure the recovery rate.
So this is on the vertical axis on the left.
So the recovery rate that you measure
from longitudinal fluctuations
of your organism state variables,
the rate is inverse time, right?
So when the rate is going down with age,
the inverse time is going up.
So you can see that the recovery rate
is going down linearly as we age.
And it doesn't matter what you measure.
So one of these set of points
was generated from variable devices
and another was generated from blood markers.
I mean, how do I know that this recovery rate
is actually recovery rate?
This is just the out-of-the-care relation time.
So on the right, you have a result
of less human experiment.
This is the ultimate measure of your recovery time.
This is inverse hospital state.
So this is direct measure of recovery time
after a catastrophic event.
And you can see that the recovery rate measured,
let's say, legally in a hospital
like your inverse hospital state,
is also going down as we age.
And it crosses zero at about the same 120, 150 years old,
meaning that due to aging,
we are about to lose our dynamic stability
at about 120 years old due to aging.
We are born, we are born,
naked more rats, we are born dynamically stable.
There is something else that is aging in humans
that is not dynamic in stability like in mice
that destroys our ability to recover.
And once this ability is destroyed,
we start disintegrating like mice,
generating lots of, whole much of aging
contributing to diseases and all.
So the metaphoric representation
of this process is on the left.
And once again, this is not just a metaphor
because every piece of this animation
is actually tracked in the data.
So you could have seen that our recovery time
is going longer.
That means that our regulatory potentials
are becoming shallower, right?
If this is a continuous function,
most probably it means also that the height
of the protective barrier that protects us
from disintegration is also going down.
In the linear approximation,
if we are linearly shallower,
it means that we are also linearly less protected,
which if you read any textbook on physical kinetics
would tell you that if your protective barrier
is going down linearly,
your probability to get activated over this barrier
is going up exponentially.
So that's why this coupling between regulatory potentials
or dynamically stable modes in humans
with something else that is linear aging
is actually the mechanism
that generates exponential mortality
and morbidity in humans.
And just to tell you that I'm not totally wrong
with this idea, on the right, you have graph.
This is actually from variable devices.
You cannot get this kind of data anywhere else.
That's why we actually put up a Gerasen's app
that has zero user value,
but it collects data of people
that are happy to help aging research.
So we measured on the right,
we measured the fraction of people
who have long autocrelation times,
meaning that they cannot recover quickly.
And you can see that the fraction of people
in the population, in the actual population
having a long autocrelation time larger than six months
is going up exponentially with age,
with the exponent that is exactly
the mortality rate doubling time.
So actually any population of people
is actually a mixture of two populations.
There are stable people, make it more red-like people.
And there are people who cross the barrier,
activated into unstable state
and start in developing disease.
That, by the way, maybe explains why, for example,
the chances to die from COVID
are the same as to die from surgery.
They are going up exponentially in double every eight years.
Probably those people who are dynamically unstable,
they had just very less, much less chances to survive.
So that's a catastrophic event.
So now, what I have presented to you was phenomenology.
Phenomenology is the funny science
that is telling you how things go without telling why.
You may know that from history of science, for example,
that the phenomenology of superconductivity
was discovered immediately
and was given a Nobel Prize or given for that late, actually.
And then it took more than 20 years
to find out how superconductivity works mechanistically.
So there was another Nobel Prize given to a bunch of people
who actually discovered the theory,
explained the mechanism, how superconductivity works.
So what is important is that phenomenology
is a very harsh science.
I mean, once established,
it doesn't care about the mechanisms.
So it tells you there could be multiple examples in nature
where these different mechanisms
are producing the same phenomenology.
So now I'm trying to cross from how things happen
in humans from phenomenology to mechanistic explanations.
And for that, I'm going to molecular level signals.
So remember, my quest was to explain
how molecular level changes that are not exponential at all,
generate exponential morbidity and mortality,
because that's the thing that we need to find out
if we want to live much longer than we're living right now.
So here on the left, I present you an example
of a simple principle component analysis
of DNA mutilation in human samples.
So the first principle component on the top left
is linear in time, very interesting, linear in time.
So the variance of the first principle component
is also linear in time.
I mean, think quickly,
what kind of processes generate linear mean
and linear variance?
And that's a Poissonian noise, right?
This is a pretty good indication that this linear feature
is actually a contribution of infinite number
of microscopic insults, independent events
of all probability that occur independent of each other
and mounting up as a linear heap with increasing variance.
Then the next principle component is not linear,
not exponential, I can fit exponent there,
but the exponent would be one order of magnitude smaller
than it's required to explain mortality.
And what's most important, the inverse variance
of this principle component is actually going down
linearly to zero and diverges at the same 120 years old,
now in DNA mutilation.
Remember, I told you about the regulatory potential.
If your regulatory potential is becoming shallower,
your variance is going up.
So that's exactly what we see here.
So the second principle component is now
as stress response is a dynamic process
that has less and less recovery force as we age.
The weak nonlinear shape of this potential
is a good indication of nonlinear coupling.
So most probably the linear feature
is the driving force of human aging
and it mounts the stress.
I think I have a picture.
Yeah, well, I'm sorry for that complicated picture,
but I'll try to, this is really the thing.
So think about human body as many, many, many systems
that are interacting with each other.
So imagine that these systems could be in kind of healthy
and pathological state each.
It could be mutation, no mutation,
epimutation, no epimutation,
diabetic state, non-diabetic state,
innate immunity activated state,
innate immunity deactivated state.
This is a very sophisticated nonlinear system.
So imagine that I could try to classify
all these systems in our body by putting the soft systems,
the systems that can change a lot on top
and the hard systems that are not changing much on the bottom.
So what would happen is that those soft features
are changing all the time.
As we speak, for example, they are changing, right?
Because for me to generate sounds,
I have to activate lots of pathways.
All these things are just moving back and forth
all the time, right?
And then there are things that are not allowed to change.
So on the bottom of this slide,
I have things that are protecting me
from mutations that would kill me, right?
Maybe those cancerous mutations
that come together would kill me.
So what happens is that I have one trillion cells
and even those things that are not very probable
still happen, which means that those rare events
are happening all the time
and I have a linear increasing heap of those rare events.
Those rare events are mounting.
They go up linearly with age.
They increase in variance with age
because this is a Poissonian noise.
But what most important is that
since all of them are essentially benign,
but since there are too many of them,
they produce this heap of micro-insults
that are destroying the regulatory potentials
for the soft systems, right?
So by central limiting theorem,
the net effect of those independent events
is a linear stress that is linearly affecting
any regulatory potential in your body.
And that's what exactly we have seen
in blood samples and DNA mutilation everywhere.
So biological processes are stressed
by the compound effect of these rare events
that appear in microscopic numbers.
So you can actually, you can frame it
in machine learning language as usual.
So on the left, we have systems that are training
in tens of millions of electronic medical records.
So we slice electronic medical records.
We use encoders in order to produce
a bunch of observable states.
We also track biological age as a quantity
that is keeping track of non-observable entities, right?
We can never see all the damage that is in the body.
We train these systems along life histories of humans
across tens of millions of people.
The systems are generating on the left
a nice poissonian biological age.
So this is the distribution of the biological age
in these systems in subsequent time frames, right?
So each two time frames are separated by 10 years.
And they also produce probabilities of failures
in individual systems that are affected
by this biological age variable.
And these systems are clustered in unsupervised ways
into ICD-10 chapters, right?
It's called in physics, it's called in fields.
So you have a bunch of systems
that are almost unrelated to each other.
They vote.
If one such system fails, it increases biological age.
And the biological age helps other systems fail, right?
So they are talking to each other.
The effect of one failure on biological age is negligible.
But together they produce an emergent variable
that is biological age.
That is a total damage in the system.
And that damage helps to flip other systems.
And this is a very nice description of human health.
These phenotypes can be used
for whatever molecular level association studies,
if you like.
You can study, for example,
everyone now is mad about metabolic diseases.
You can find lots of targets for metabolic diseases.
We're working with Pfizer and other companies.
So I'm actually using these models.
But once again, these models were created
for one reason only.
I didn't care about metabolic health.
I cared to produce this Poissonian noise biological age.
And we are looking for factors that are controlling the rate
of the accumulation of biological age in human systems.
Now, if biological age in humans is a result
of many independent events,
it's time to read statistical mechanics.
This is the best statistical mechanics introduction
that I have ever seen.
That's, let's say, people talk a lot about quantum mechanics,
about general relativity.
There is a kind of public discourse about that.
But I think that thermodynamics as a second law
of thermodynamics is the best probably a piece of science
that has happened over the last maybe 200 years.
Remember, people who invented thermodynamics
didn't know about atoms and molecules.
So the power, the universality of that science is so huge
that if you see features of entropy
or thermodynamics in systems, most probably you,
I mean, you have very good priors
and you have very good textbooks.
So let me show, I mean, that will be the last part
that will kind of, hopefully will be the last piece
of the puzzle.
So look, remember, we have this linear feature
Poissonian feature.
So what is that?
I try to convince you that this is a result
of multiple independent, individually rare,
but microscopically present insults.
I mean, how do I know that?
Of course, I can either think that it's true
or I can try to prove that this is true.
Unfortunately, we have what people didn't have
when they built this team engine.
We have single cell omics,
which means that I can literally track
that the entropy is going up
and the linear feature is indeed a Poissonian noise feature.
So this will have written lasting implications.
So let's switch back now to the language of thermodynamics.
So what living systems do?
So obviously living systems, what do they do?
They burn fuel, they produce heat
and that heat is used to produce work.
And in this kind of systems work is activation of pathways.
We have all these correlated dynamic systems
within our bodies that are stress responses
that are required for us to respond to whatever stresses
just to survive.
The problem is that we want our pathways
to operate like heat engine,
meaning that the pathway is activated when it is required
and then it has to go back.
And we know that if we want to make it like a steam engine,
like a reversible steam engine,
we have to wait, there is no way
to use all the heat that is produced.
Some heat will be dissipated in a useful form
that is entropy.
And these high entropy products will be either excreted
or some of them will stick.
So the high entropy products that stick are called damage.
So let's have a look at the damage in single cells.
So I'll try to be quick.
And this we have just put online because we had to prove.
So let me think about aging
and regulation of pathways has been pure epigenetics.
It's not, but for simplicity,
let's think about the epigenetics here.
So we know that in order to activate a certain pathway
to do work, what they call in thermodynamics,
you have to activate a certain pathway.
So certain ventilation sites have to change their states
and this is now yellow changes.
So that produces heat.
And by law of thermodynamics,
it means that this heat cannot be zero.
So this heat now as noise comes back into the system
and tries to activate your DNA in indiscriminate way.
So when you pump this pathway many times,
as the time goes, you will find that your DNA ventilation sites
in some unpredictable places will change their states
in unpredictable manner.
So your pathways will go back and forth
but those low probability events
in the rest of your DNA will just keep mounting up.
So we predicted a while ago
that those stress responses like regular motions
like your piston in your steam engine or pathways
that are going back and forth are the yellow states
would be highly correlated low entropy
because you have lots of control there.
You can go up and down, up and down.
You can do whatever you want.
And we predicted that there will be a bunch of features
that are showing up as you live, as you work, as you progress
and they will be accumulating linearly with age.
So we were thinking that the yellow features
would be those hyperbolic nonlinear coupled stress responses
and the red features would be entropic
and linear Poissonian noise and that was the idea.
So first, we were, I mean,
if just go to DNA ventilation in mice,
why mice?
Because we have got a simple cell ventilation
dataset from mice.
You will have the same situation as with humans.
So in mice, if you do just principle components
on DNA ventilation, you will find that there will be one feature
that is exponential.
So we believe that this is a pathway
and there will be another feature that is linear with age.
So we were hoping that this thing will be
Poissonian noise populated,
bunch of DNA mutilated sites.
So now, if our prediction is correct,
then the sites that are involved in exponential dynamics
in the pathway should have high mutual information
about each other, right?
Because they're changing together,
they are part of the pathway.
If one of them is activated, others are also activated.
Normally the pathway have all the information
about how to switch it on and off if required.
It's just a problem that mice cannot switch it off
and that's why they're exponentially unstable.
But technically, this is a low entropy state,
no matter how large is the range of the dynamic variation.
And then if we were correct, then the linear feature,
the sites that are involved in the linear feature
should be the sites that have low mutual information
about themselves.
So what I have now on the bottom of this graph
is that we took the DNA mutilation sites
and now in single cells,
we computed mutual information metrics,
one side to all the other sites.
Then it's a noisy data, we averaged it
over all the other sites.
So we've got just one number that is telling
how much this site knows about other sites,
about the change of states of other sites.
And all these sites are now average, sorry,
ordered from left to right,
from low mutual information states
to the high mutual information states.
And now the barcode, I mean, the black lines
are all the states that participate
in the exponential motion.
So you can see that even with the terrible noise
that we get from dynamic relation,
all the sites that are exponential, that are dynamic,
are the high mutual information states.
So the states that are co-regulated
and the states that are likely to belong
to the linear feature are the states
that are changing independently,
which means that they're just spending
an exponentially increasing volume
in the configurational state,
which means that this is pure entropy.
And you can actually go to experiments
and show that the dynamic features, the yellow features,
respond to caloric restriction, I'm not showing it,
respond to parabiosis, these are the results
from Vadim Gladyshev's lab.
You can see here, for example,
that the young animals have low pathway,
exponential pathway activation than the older animals,
but once you do the parabiosis,
on the left, right after the procedure,
the biological age, the exponential feature is lower.
And two months after parabiosis, it's still lower.
Remember, germination, if you are unstable,
there is no way to catch up with the control,
which means that you will be always below the control.
And that's what this thing is showing.
And as nasty as it sounds, the entropic feature,
the linear feature doesn't care about parabiosis
or caloric restriction, why?
Because you cannot revert it,
you can only slow it down if it's indeed
the entropic process.
I'm going to finish now, maybe I have a few slides,
I'll just want to put you in a general context of science now,
because, well, second law of thermodynamics
is a very interesting fundamental physics question.
It's a foundation of physics question.
People are testing it all the time,
so we have now since a few years
in gravitational observatories
that are observing collisions of black holes.
With black holes, it's simple.
The entropy is area.
And what people are doing,
they are comparing the area of black holes
before the collision and after the collision.
So before the collision is black, after collision is red.
And you can see that for all collisions observed,
the entropy after the collision is larger
than the entropy below, before the collision.
I believe that we should make this same graph
for aging experiments.
Our predictions are such that the linear feature,
the entropic feature will always go up.
I mean, if we don't see it's going up,
it's just because we don't have statistical power,
but it's not going to get down.
That's important.
So that brings us to a very nasty conclusion.
We believe that well, aging in mice and humans
is kind of not very different.
You have the entropic feature
and you have the dynamic feature.
The problem is that the dynamic feature
in mice is exponential,
so that's why you only see the dynamic feature in mice.
And you test interventions against the dynamic feature.
And they work in mice.
They can even rejuvenate mice.
And we also produced a bunch of experiments.
I've shown you some results or rejuvenation works.
We do time-resolved experiments always
because this is the right way to prove
that a certain intervention acts against aging.
Unfortunately, the, oh, fortunately,
actually we are very successful ages.
We don't have exponential features, humans.
We are stable.
Which means that now we have a linear link.
We have a linear entropic feature that dominates aging,
that destroys our ability to recover,
destroys our resilience and kills us eventually
over a very long time.
So we don't have an exponential problem.
And this thing is unfortunately entropic.
Which means that over the few next years,
there will be infinite number of papers rejuvenating mice.
This will lead to development of drugs
that will help people late in life
when people are already unstable.
This is, of course, a huge,
most humanitarian achievement and lots of money will be earned.
Lots of money are going there, by the way, right now.
Lots of people are working on those drugs.
But that's not the way to extend human lifespan
by two falls, let's say.
That's a way how to extend last 10 years of life
into last 20 years of life.
I mean, that's cool, but that's not what I was thinking about
when I came to the field.
There will be another bunch of therapeutics
that will be working to reduce rate of aging.
Remember, naked more rats.
These guys managed to stop their rate of aging.
They are not destroying their regulatory potential
at the rate that we have in humans.
Which basically puts me two slides and I'm finished.
It puts me into my understanding
of the current longevity biotech situation.
So basically everyone is separated by ambitions
and by beliefs.
So on the horizontal axis, I see beliefs.
So everyone on the right believes
that aging is not reversible.
Pharma believes that aging is not reversible
and they don't care because it's not reversible.
They regress it out and do drugs against diseases.
And by the way, they extend human lifespan.
They also longevity biotech, right?
And then on the left, you have guys,
let's say, less ambitious guys
who are doing incremental things
like hallmarks of aging, things like that.
And then there are dinosaurs,
people who believe that aging is reversible
and they're channeling billions of dollars
in order to revert it in humans.
So as one gentleman from Texas said that physics is the law
and everything else is recommendation,
which means that most of these guys will become pharma
because aging is not entirely reversible.
There will be very few people, I believe standing
in a few years from now,
still thinking about radical life extension in humans
with some sort of scientific rationale.
And I believe stopping human aging is a hefty goal
that has to be achieved.
And I'll thank you for your attention.
