Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy. I'm Inyash Brotsky. I'm Steven Zuber. I'm Jay Sticky.
We are here to give you another episode that's for the first time in like what two months that all
three of us have been in the same room? Maybe three. Has it been? Huh. Well, it's been a while.
Time is weird. It's nice to be back together again. Oh my god, yeah. It's so nice to be able to interact
with human beings. Yesterday I went out to a restaurant and I was able to sit down in the
restaurant. Oh, they're letting people in? And they were letting people in. They were like doing,
you know, people had to wear masks at certain points and then they spaced everybody the correct
amount. So they're good. Even the people waiting outside, they had placed chairs in the correct
a distance apart that people needed to wait for their table. But at one point this like older
man got up and just like, I was like, you're all beautiful. It's so wonderful to see human beings
again. Everybody was just this really like sweet moment because everybody was like, oh, thank you.
And they're like, yeah. Have they increased prices in the restaurants? No, seems the seems
like it's the same prices. They got to be running at a loss. Oh, you know what happened?
They did replace menus. I don't know if this is anything across the board, but
they're starting to I think replace menus that you could get your hands all over and stuff with.
They had a QR code on the table. You scan it and it pops their menu up. Huh. That should have
been a thing already. I know. That's kind of one of the things that I mean, I hate to say there's
things I like about coronavirus, but it's forcing people to like adopt optimization
things that they should have been doing already anyway, like wearing masks when you're sick.
They do that in Asia. I don't know why in the Western world it's like you could just cough
all over everybody because I've got I've got my rights, my rights to infect all of your children
in my preschool by bringing my like kid with the stomach virus. We want to breed strong kids.
So yeah, I guess. Shall we jump in then? Yeah, we're doing our sequences. Yes, we are. And the
first one is semantic stop signs. Very sneaky. It's sneaky. It's just got lots of s's in it. Oh,
oh, okay. Oh, sneaky. Yeah, I think I guess that came out of sneaky. Well, you don't know
Semantic stops up. Semantic stop signs are kind of sneaky.
Who wants to kick us out? I realize I've not said this out loud. I probably shouldn't have
practiced. So, and the child asked, where did this rat come from? I chipped it off the big
boulder at the center of the village. Where'd the boulder come from? Probably roll off the huge
mountain that towers over our village. Where'd the mountain come from? The same place as all stone.
It is the bones of emir, the primordial giant. Where did the primordial giant emir come from?
From the great abyss kingdom gap. I can't say that word breaks character for a moment.
That thing. Where did the great abyss that word come from? Never ask that question.
Funny thing about that is something very similar happened to me when I was a child.
Yes, me too. Yeah. Well, if God made everything, who made God? And I was told, don't ask that.
Yep, I was in a catechism because I was Catholic. I was the little asshole kid that was like,
well, the evolution's not true. How come we've got bones from Aeohippus, the dawn horse?
Good lord! What age were you in? I was a little nerd kid. I liked, okay, I loved dinosaurs. I
loved horses. I'm just curious what age you were. I discovered Aeohippus and all the early
horse morphs before horses started looking like horses. And I was like, it's a dinosaur horse!
And then I was really happy about the fact that it existed and would talk to everybody
that I knew. Did you know that there's this horse that existed that was the size of a pig
and it had toes in it? But couldn't the answer just be God made it? No, they didn't believe. Well,
I think that hasn't the Catholic church actually come back on its views about evolution? Now,
they're like, yeah, evolution happened, but God did it. I mean, that is one of the things. I don't
know if the Catholic church specifically has grabbed that one probably. I think they have,
because they have like a Vatican and they have people in authority who are able to say the
new official belief is that purgatory does not exist. They did that recently too. You can only
deny, you know, the existence of evolution for so long. You know how we kept saying that purgatory
exists and that like you have to pay people money in order to get your loved ones out of that?
Actually, those guys were wrong. Wait, wait, wait, purgatory isn't the thing anymore?
It hasn't been for decades. Yeah, you're talking about limbo.
Hitch talked about how they got rid of purgatory. I think there's some distinction between limbo
and purgatory, but I don't actually know what it is. Do people just go to hell for a period of time
then? I don't know. I don't think they do. Like, it's all bullshit. Well, I know, but the official
Catholic doctrine was that no one goes straight to heaven because no one's good enough to that.
You can tell if someone's made it to heaven or not when they can start appearing and doing
miracles. I don't know. I haven't been in the Catholic Church since I was little.
Like, that's what a saying goes for saying to someone who has gotten out of purgatory and into
heaven and now they have access to the Jesus power so they can, you know, grant miracles and shit.
My parents used to bribe me to go to church by buying me a box of cracker jacks and they would
have these little resin animals, you know, like the cracker jack prize. So I would like
grumpily shove myself into this horrible dress that I had to wear,
made of curtains and horrible stockings and shoes that don't bend.
Made of curtains? My grandmother made me church dresses out of some old curtains.
That's awesome. That's like a total sand of music thing.
It is, but it wasn't good. Kernelin is scratchy.
Or like the Avengers when Tony meets, or when Iron Man meets Thor and he's like,
what is this, Shakespeare in the park? And he's like, Dothma, mother no, you wear with her drapes.
So anyway, I used to eat the cracker jacks and then Neil on the floor in front of my chair at
the church and like play with the little animals on the seat of the chair while completely tuning
out whatever was going on in the church, except occasionally singing one of the songs that I liked.
So, semantic stop signs is basically says why ask, it asks why would anyone accept God as an
uncaused first cause? Because as any child will tell you, it doesn't make the paradox seem any
less paradoxical even if it's true. Right? Right. Yeah. That's the conundrum that every child stumbles
upon at some point. It's like, yeah, okay. So why does it stop there? So this was just an example
of a semantic stop sign, which he used to make it make the point valent. Valent? Is that the
right word? I think so. Okay. For us, because he's using, I believe that's Norse mythology.
And so we don't have like, in case Christians are reading it, and they have personal experience
with this, they're not reading themselves into it, personalizing it until he mentions that,
and this is also what we do with God. And then the, you know, mysterious answers that comes after
this. Yeah. But his main point is that there are semantic stop signs in the world, which is,
I guess, not at all controversial, which are just there to stop questioning and not really
serve much other purpose. Yeah. It seems like most, maybe all cultures have this sort of thing,
because we as humans just, we don't know everything. We don't know everything now.
We knew much less back then. And maybe it's just a shut up annoying kids. My parents called me
Jesse YY when I was little. And that served as my semantic stop sign to shut up. Oh,
I'm annoying people. I guess I shouldn't ask questions.
Well, and I think it's like, not just even a cultural thing. I think people do this all the
time without thinking about it. That's the broader point. Like, just a few days ago, I was talking
with somebody about, we mentioned the protests at the beginning of the episode. And I was,
someone had brought up the point, like, I wonder if like, this will lead to a big spike in corona
infections. And like, it almost certainly will. And, and then I was thinking, well, you know,
if you think conspiratorially, this might be why they're being so liberal with their use with
why the police are being so liberal with the use of tear gas and other like things that make you
cough. So they, you know, like, they could be just standing, you know, you watch videos of
people standing on the sides of roads with signs and then just like cops roll wind down and just
spray mace at the crowd. Oh, my God. Yeah. And so it's like, why would, so if you're being
conspiratorial about it, it's like, oh, it's this way, they'll cough on everybody and get,
then they'll all get sick. And the, and then so I was mentioning that to somebody that like,
oh, I think it's just a cab. And so then I got to Google an acronym, which is just short for
all cops are bad. And I'm like, that doesn't actually explain it though. Like, so in this
particular case, a cab was a semantic stop sign for over as talking with. I was perfect example.
And it, it's the, the general rule is that it's, it's, it's very common to find people who will
use whether it's, and he uses like the example of like liberal democracy, that's the answer or
whatever, but pretty similar to that. Yeah. But I mean, all the time people will just be like,
oh, well, what about this? Or social justice people? It's a systemic inequality. Yeah,
the patriarchy or whatever. But that doesn't actually get in this will tie nicely into mysterious
answers to mysterious questions, but that doesn't actually give you an explanation. And so certainly
not for a particular behavior. In the case of like, you know, cops macing people standing there.
And I don't, I think it's probably, there's probably better reasons than probably less
well thought out reasons than let's see if we can get them to spread COVID among themselves.
That's why they're macing random crowds. But like the, the general thing of you've got it,
you've got an answer that's cashed somewhere that you just, you toss out and like, yep,
that sounds like an explanation I'm done. And it doesn't actually give you any new information.
I think in those two cases, particularly the all cops are bad and the, what was it, social democracy?
Liberal democracy. Liberal democracy. It's also sort of serving as like,
those sound like somebody's sacred cow or somebody, you know, like somebody's pet theory.
Maybe it's just a kind of a combination of let's stop this line of inquiry because it makes me
uncomfortable and also say it's like, Jesus did it. I mean, Christians want to bring up Jesus as
many times as possible. And it seems like serving some kind of dual purpose there. First of all,
inserting your pet theory anytime this kind of thing comes up. And secondly, like stopping those
frustrating children who just want to understand how things work.
He does end it by saying be careful not to create a generic counter argument against things like,
oh, that's just a stop sign. And what distinguishes a semantic stop sign is a failure to consider
the obvious next question. Like why all are, why are all cops bad or why would being bad make you
do this particular action? Yeah. Yeah. And of course, you know, you can question the
the assumption behind that too, like, is this even true? But the the semantic stop sign,
in particular, is like, like it just said, it's it's the failure to consider the next obvious
question. And so well, why would liberal democracy solve that problem? Not like, why is that the
solution? You know, well, why? Why don't women's pants have pockets, the patriarchy? Well, like,
that's not why would the patriarchy not want you to have pockets, right? Well, big purse market,
I get, you know, whatever, right? So it's all big purse. Exactly. So it's this this is less.
And we chose a lot of charged examples. But it's those are the easiest ones to think of. But
I'm noticing like the urge to explain the whole history behind why women have
no pockets, because it's interesting. But it's also total sidetrack. I've got mainly because
it fucks up the silhouette. If you put bulky things in, yeah, okay. Yeah. And that would be
my guess. I mean, it's funny, because I've talked to the women who have both said, I wish I could
put my phone in my pocket. And oh, I can't wear those pants. They're they're too baggy. And I'm
like, you don't get it both ways. Like the reason I can fit my phone, the reason why it used to be
I could ride my bike to blockbuster, which is a very old sentence. And ride home with a DVD in my
pocket was because my my pants, my pants were huge. And I could put a whole DVD in my pants
pocket and still ride my bike. And the reason I could fit them is because my pants are big. Like,
like that, that you can't have, since we don't have, you know, what are they called hammer
space where I can put big things in small places hammer pants, which have hammer space.
Exactly. So in the 90s, I was totally wearing those like UFO pants, like the the rave kids are
all wearing got to make your own hammer space in today's fashion. That was the first time I had
realized how pathetic the pockets of every leg garment I owned were because those are just
pockets like that. They're just like, I think they called them parachute pants or something.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah, they were just covered in like, unnecessary amounts of like cording and
almost like cargo pants or utility pants for like the military or EMT's would wear, but
they were just fashionable. And I'm with a final fantasy throws belts on everything.
What are those belts holding up? More belts.
Bells really weigh you down. I mean, if you think about the fact that you do have to like put
crystals and a bunch of accessories in order to get your abilities. But anyway,
moving on to the next post. Let's see, did we say everything we wanted to say about this?
I think so. The main thing I think it was doing was setting up the next post.
I was going to say like my my go to for what's this less wrong website about what it what is
the the sequences you guys talk about. This is the one I sent to people who asked me that I
was serious. No, mysterious, mysterious answers to mysterious questions to me is the
it you know, there's there's more to the volumes of the sequences than just like the main point of
this. But I feel like this is the easiest way to get stepping stone. Yeah, I feel like it it's
my favorite stepping stone to be show people like if this is what it's talking about. And if this
kind of captivates you at all or speaks to anything that you've noticed. And you know,
if you enjoyed reading this and it got your brain engine going, you will enjoy the rest of this
stuff. Excellent. Yeah, this is this is the real meat of these three posts. So I'm assuming we're
going to spend the most time on this one. It starts out with a quote from Lord Kelvin, was it? Okay,
who obviously the guy behind the Kelvin scale for temperature and a bunch of other things.
He did thermodynamics, right? That's a bunch of stuff. Yeah, it was a polymath. Also, I don't
know if we said the title mysterious answers to mysterious questions. Yes. Yes. But it starts
out with a relatively long quote, not relatively long, with a quote from him about the Alon Vital
stuff. Because back in the day, people didn't know why, when you moved, you could move. Like,
they could see there's muscles attached to bones and stuff. But why do the muscles contract when
you want them to contract? It is nobody knows. It's a long quote. I want to just read the last
sentence. Modern biologists are coming once more to affirm acceptance of something beyond
mere gravitational chemical and physical forces. And that unknown thing is a vital principle.
I want to I want to quote a few things from from the here that he said just to like,
point out the this this line of thinking. He said, life's power, well,
life's power of directing the motions of moving particles in the demonstrated daily miracle of
our human free will, and in the growth in generation after generation of plants from a single seed,
are infinitely different from any possible result of the fortuitous concourse of atoms.
And also later, animated creatures have the power of immediately applying to certain moving
particles of matter within their bodies, forces by which the motions of these particles are directed
to produce desired mechanical effects. So like, DLDR, they got livers. What the hell is that?
Livers are weird, though, you can cut them up and then you can put a small part of someone's
liver into someone else's liver transplant, it'll grow back into a full liver.
Yeah, but no, the I mean, the really interesting thing about that quote is like,
it really points out just how fucking mysterious this thing was, he was like,
to him, yeah, like, apparently, living things can just move particles,
as long as those particles are inside their body at will. Can I tell you a hilarious thought that
I had? If you say it into the microphone, yes. Can I tell you a hilarious thought that I had?
Indeed. When I was in the shower, so of course, this makes it a shower thought,
the beginning of this sequence is, imagine looking at your hand and knowing nothing of cells,
nothing of biochemistry, nothing of DNA. And I was just thinking, imagine being really high on
weed and looking at your hand and going, whoa, and then turning it over and going, whoa. But like,
actually, yeah, I mean, it's kind of like one of the cool features of weed,
awkward, is that it does kind of create that child wonder about everything again.
And I think that psychedelics in general do that, weed is a psychedelic.
They kind of turn off your, you know, how the decor of your house just becomes invisible to you
because you don't see it anymore, because you see it every day, you know where it is,
you don't look at it anymore. But it like, sort of turns off that familiarity feeling.
So like you can be on psychedelics and look at a blade of grass and be just like
brought to tears by how amazing it is. I think that's like a cool and important
thing to feel and to remember. And it doesn't have to be if you're on psychedelics. I was
totally sober just like riding a motorcycle through the mountains yesterday. And
which you should only do totally sober. Yes. Yes, indeed.
And I think we're getting way off top. We are, we are. I don't know. I just, I like that about this
this sequence though. Yeah. Where it's like, or rather the idea of the semantic stop signs and
the idea of mysterious answers is actually kind of bullshit though. Why is that? I mean,
you know, the Richard Dawkins book. I haven't even gotten to what mysterious answers are, but
yeah. Well, maybe I'll save this. I want to talk about Richard Dawkins book,
Richard Dawkins book, Unweaving the Rainbow. Shout out.
So it's like fist bumping. Okay, let's, let's talk about that after we describe what this is.
Okay. Well, as per the last line that you quoted, they came up with this theory of vitalism,
which I guess theory is a bit of a stretch here. This was the eldest days of science.
Yes. That the mysterious difference between living matter and non-living matter was explained
by Elan Vital. It infused living matter and caused it to move as consciously directed.
And, you know, as, as you pointed out, the secret of life was infinitely beyond the reach of science.
All we knew was that there was this Elan Vital that did things. But he points out that that,
that really isn't an answer at all. Yeah, I like that he says calling Elan Vital an explanation,
even a fake explanation like flogistan is probably giving it too much credit.
Yeah, I like that. And this is the line that I'll never, that I always remember.
It's the secret of life was infinitely beyond the reach of science. Not just a little beyond,
mind you, but infinitely beyond. What does that even mean?
I think, I think the next line was Lord Kelvin sure got a big kick, emotional kick out of not
understanding something. And it's the, the, just the idea that I don't understand this. And therefore,
it must be infinitely beyond the capacity of all human understanding. Yeah. But like you said,
it's not even as bad as a, as a flogistan explanation. This is just like pure magic.
The cool thing about vitalism is that like, if, if you think, oh yeah, well, if the whole thing,
it just needs to be like, you know, some of a magically organically imbued or whatever,
the idea of like controlling a golem with your mind makes kind of perfect sense. You just give
it whatever Elan Vital juice. Yeah. And you can control it with your brain,
which is how we control our golem bodies, right? So why can't I just control a human shaped golem?
That sounds like the kind of thing that would have been in theory.
Wait, so when you like put your blood into the
Yeah, you could squirt your blood into it to try it. That'd be a good test. You could
fuck it. That's another way to put DNA into it. I was thinking to get more morbid. I mean,
you could like, I don't know, cut off an arm and take the skin off of it.
I'm thinking just peel the skin off and then put that over like the glove,
like the hand part of a golem. A really cool idea for like a really morbid fantasy.
Magic system. But in those limited senses, it is in theory testable.
Yeah, kind of. I mean, I wouldn't want to be the first in running these tests,
or at least the guinea pig. But yeah, right. Eliazer does say that. And this is one of the
things that I am. I have really internalized. I don't know. He probably has to repeat this
other places in the sequences for me to remember it as well. Or maybe I've just read this post a
lot, but that if I am ignorant about a phenomenon, that is a fact about my own state of mind,
not a fact about the phenomenon itself. Yeah, I said the same thing when I was actually like
reading these a lot with Phoenix this morning. And I said that exact thing. I was like, for some
reason, this phrase always sticks with me. In fact, I've used it on people when like they've
said, man, this is a really mysterious thing. And I was like, it doesn't have a mysteriousness
property. You just don't understand it. Like, that doesn't make sense. It's your brain that's like
currently not understanding the thing. The thing itself is not mysterious.
Yeah. Yeah. It has this quote, A, I find it very vulnerable as well and B is often repeated throughout
the sequences. Okay. Yeah. Cool. He also mentions that to worship a phenomenon because it seems
so wonderfully mysterious is to worship your own ignorance. Yep. It's sick burn, man.
Okay, so he says vitalism shared with fly just on the error of encapsulating the mystery as a
substance. Fire was mysterious and the flogiston theory encapsulated that mystery in a mysterious
substance called flogiston. Life was a sacred mystery and vitalism encapsulated them sacred
mystery in a mysterious substance called along the tall, neither answer helped make some outcomes
easier to explain than others. So yeah, just took the mystery and kind of made people not
notice it's a mystery anymore by saying that it's the answer. I kind of brainstormed on
a way to check if something is a semantic stop sign is like why does this work? If you can say
it in this voice magic or aliens or along the tall that it's probably like it has a higher
probability of being a semantic stop sign if it's like gravitational forces, it doesn't sound right
though like gravity. But you can't say it for that like you can't give a long winded explanation
at that voice to run with the idea. So like, oh man, why does this happen? Why do when I
whatever insert chemistry here, I was going to give out some lame example. If the answer is like
why did that happen? If someone asks why did that happen and you say chemistry, that's not really
an answer. Right, yeah. So like you're on the right track. Although it is a really funny like
snark. Yes. We used to have a joke at work where like, we'd be discussing a problem.
And then we'd be like, oh, yeah, you just got to code it. That was our go to like mysterious
answer to mysterious question. Have you tried coding it yet? That might help.
Yeah, he says the deeper failure behind all this was supposing that an answer can be mysterious.
If a phenomenon feels mysterious, that's a fact about our state of knowledge,
not about the phenomenon itself. The vitalists saw a mysterious gap in their knowledge
and postulated a mysterious stuff that plugged that gap. And that is ultimately that is the
ultimate and fully general explanation for why again and again in humans, humanities history,
people are shocked, shocked to discover that an incredibly mysterious question has a non
mysterious answer. I added that second shock there. It wasn't in the original text. Should
have been I liked it yet. Mystery is a property of questions, not answers. Good. Very good. Yeah.
And that's why he says that these these things are the mysterious answers to mysterious questions
things that we got to watch out for because they they can hijack our thinking stop it too early.
Yeah, did you read the signs of the mysterious? Yeah, should we go over the signs? Yeah, let's
there's let's see four things that are signs of mysterious answers.
If the explanation acts as a curiosity stopper rather than an anticipation controller,
by which he means a if you couldn't guess a bunch of answers. And but like some of that
you're like, Oh, but that one couldn't be true because this or if you're if you make a theory
falsifiable, you are controlling your anticipation in some way. Well, just to keep like, you know,
the the whatever politically charged train rolling that that doesn't explain, you know,
like a cab doesn't explain why cops are shooting tear gas people and not beanbags, right? So it
doesn't it doesn't it's not doesn't contraint if I if I say, Hey, what do you think will happen here?
The like the the quote answer, all cops are bad might say, Oh, they'll do something bad,
but it doesn't give you like a way to constrain your your your guesses, right? I think very
importantly, it also doesn't tell you why some bad people shoot pepper spray. Well, some bad
people who aren't cops don't shoot pepper spray at people. There's lots of bad people out there,
but most of them are not going down lines protesters shooting pepper spray at them. So
what the hell did that label help you anticipate differently? Nothing.
Disagree that people are bad. I think there's definitely some bad people out there. I think
there are people who do bad actions. I don't think from the inside anybody is actually twirling
their mustache going, Well, haha, no, pour this chemical into their water supply. No, no, no,
of course not. Nobody thinks that they are a monster. Very, very few people think that they
are a monster. But that doesn't matter to me. I don't care what people think about themselves.
I care about whether their actions are negatively impacting me and my loved ones. And that sounds
like a conversation more suited for the rest of the conversation, actually. So let's put it on.
Yeah. Second, the hypothesis has no moving parts. The model is not a specific complex mechanism,
but a blankly solid substance or force. The mysterious substance or mysterious force
may be said to be here or there to cause this or that. But the reason why the mysterious force
behaves thus is wrapped in a blank unity. Chemistry did it. Yeah. Third, those who prefer
proffer the explanation cherish their ignorance. They speak proudly of how the phenomenon defeats
ordinary science or is unlike merely mundane phenomena. Crystals did it. Yeah. Science can't
explain the vibrations of my crystals, man. Man, we were just talking about those Himalayan salt
lamps that people think purify negative energy. Yeah. I kind of want to get one just because like
they're pretty. I got one. Well, I got one as a gift, but it's pretty and it looks great.
There's a little alcove in my kitchen like wall. I keep wondering if you can lick it though. You
probably can't lick it. You can lick anything, but it doesn't taste like salt. That's going to say.
Yeah. Like they probably put some kind of like coating on it. Yeah, enamel or something. It does
not taste like salt. So I kind of just want to get a big chunk of Himalayan salt that's a salt
lick that like looks pretty as a lamp that I can occasionally also just break a piece off of and
put in my mouth. Ew. Ew. Why would you just put raw salt in your mouth? Because it's delicious.
No, it's not. It's salty. Well, that means you're not salt deficient. Oh, wait. Real quick.
Life hack. If how to know if you're salt deficient, put a little bit of salt on your
finger and lick it. And if it tastes delicious, you probably need more salt in your diet.
If you're eating ash, you're probably good. Anyway, I do eat a lot of salt. So yeah, you're
probably good. Okay. Fourth, even after the answer is given, the phenomenon is still a mystery and
possesses the same quality of wonderful inexplicability that it had at the start.
So, yeah, if you're thinking something might be a mysterious answer rather than a real answer,
run these criteria by it. So you had a bunch pick with mysterious answers?
Oh, no, the thing I was saying before was just that I was agreeing with the premise of the
sequence, which is that answers are not mysterious or questions are not mysterious. The
property of mysteriousness is the property of the fact that you don't understand something.
I think a good candidate that's not politically charged, and I make a joke about this, I think
I must have read it somewhere because it's too funny to have come from me, where this was in
the one of the, we want more discussion threads I was on or discussion channels. Someone was
talking about consciousness and etc. And I was like, oh, you're using the C word.
In philosophy, I use the C word as consciousness. And it's like, that can't be your answer.
Consciousness isn't an answer. And not because it's a mysterious phenomena, because we don't
have a good distinct explanation for it. We've got a volume of like, yeah, this is basically
kind of what we're talking about. It's kind of like what people say, maybe it's string theory. And I'm
like, don't talk to me about string theory. Yeah, I kind of feel that way about all the
fundamental physical forces. But I strongly suspect this is just because I don't know enough physics.
Maybe I don't know why gravity makes things move things with mass move towards each other
or exert forces upon each other at all times. And it just like,
the answer gravity tells me that and I guess that does drastically change what I expect to
happen in the universe. But it's still, I still want to know like, why, why do they do that? And
I feel like there is an answer and I just there is I recommend reading a brief history of time
by Stephen Hawking. I've read a number of things about gravity and some of the other fundamental
forces, but it never quite sticks. I don't think I really grok it. Maybe I'll try it again someday.
Oh, man, the word grok is such an interesting history. And I'll post it in the show notes,
if I remember, because I will not, I will talk about it for a long time.
It was invented by Heinlein and Stranger and a stranger. Yes. And then it became like the
programmers who had who were nerds and had read Heinlein when the internet happened made made
it a word again and brought it into the common lexicon because they love that word. Yeah. Well,
and it made all it was a really good word to use for programming things. I think it's a good word
in general to have because it's like, it really highlights the difference between like really
understanding something right knowing a fact and really understanding all the components of that
fact. Yeah. Being able to reverse engineer like having a model in your head that has moving parts,
I think because I forget if that was how you described it in here, but that's a really good
way to kind of visualize what it feels like to know a fact as like something I read in a textbook.
And I trust science, which you should trust, and textbooks are generally like a pretty good
source of info. But versus like, I can actually imagine every step of the process of tectonic
plates like separating and and how that causes mountains to form and see fishers and affects
the migration of animals and early humans. And yeah, there's like nothing mysterious about it
anymore. Yeah, which is good. Yeah. Oh, can we real quick rant about unweaving the rainbow, Steven?
Yes, but I'm going to plug instead of a brief history of time, we should do a
briefer history of time the most recent edition because I found it much more accessible and
actually just a better read. So if you're going to read one or the other read read the newest.
I think they're both very good. They I think they are but a briefer history has more new stuff in it
and I think it's just for me it was just more succinct. Is it actually briefer? Yeah,
there's more stuff and it's briefer. No, no, did I say more? I think that I mean it's shorter.
No, you said newer. No, they added a few updates to models that had since been like
new discoveries. Right. Okay. So it had some what is it called addendums? Not the word addendums.
It was addendums it was it was adjustments and just like
like I said as far as briefer I just if you're going at it from like a
I want to know about this. And I want it now. Yeah, and I want it now and not in three hours.
I don't know. Anyway, yes. So I've talked about unweaving the rainbow before so I'll let you
give yourselves pitch or your whatever you're going to do. No, just my response really is that
a wait who wrote unweaving the rainbow the original Richard Dawkins. Oh, the poem Keats.
Okay. Yeah, that's it. Keats. So this dude Keats writes a policy.
This dude Keats writes a poem about rainbows being. Yeah, it's like science is like
taking apart beautiful natural phenomenon like the rainbow separating into its base
components and then like making it boring. Newton destroyed the beauty of the rainbow
by reducing it to prismatic colors. Yeah. And like yeah. So like the book on weaving the rainbow
is just a rebuttal to this this guy this guy this poem specifically but that concept in general of
understanding things makes them ugly and boring and not like you know like no longer inspiring
and majestic and beautiful like Richard Dawkins takes apart a bunch of things in this book and
down to like and screams about like isn't this cool. Look if you can keep you can keep going down
more and then there's quarks and quarks are cool too and then oh my god look at this evolutionary
biology things that did you know that it's just every every time you start to understand something
then it becomes more complex and then that then you want to understand each of these new phenomena
and then they all become more complex it makes everything like more I don't know more of a
moving a model in your head with moving parts and more often than not the real explanation
well more often than not I think every time the real explanation is
more satisfying not just like intellectually but more interesting than the fake explanation
you know more about how the world works now if you know how prismatic colors work then
now you can create eyeglasses you can um I don't know you can do you can make an led you can start
like because we invented all this shit from knowing about colored wavelengths and and how that works
and I think just on a it gives us more power I think just on an aesthetic level I find things
more beautiful and I appreciate the more when I understand just how crazy complex
they are and I have more understanding like just just looking at a tree is like you know it's a
cool tree it's a pretty tree I've evolved to like trees but like thinking about the whole evolution
of of plant life on earth and how we got from thinking about the fact that this tree will be
here when my grandkills and are dead yeah yeah it all the advanced knowledge I think makes things
even more beautiful and more filling me with awe and wonder than if I hadn't had that knowledge
absolutely I don't know so Keith's as full as shit is what we're saying fuck that guy
delir my other sales pitch for this book is glad he died young I think many people's exposure to
Richard Dawkins is him like angrily ranting at anti evolutionists or twitter um like anti
evolutionists or anti scientists or religious people or whatever um and so like the god delusion
I think was the first book I read by him and it's a very like uh annoyed tone doesn't make it annoying
to read it was very fun to read but unmoving the rainbow is just pure passion yeah like it's full
of his like it's full of this I love when he evangelizes about science because I love just
watching somebody love something so much yeah he's got the same sort of passion and and uh poetry
the poetic way to illustrate that passion that like Carl Sagan had yeah and it's it's contagious
even in his writing for some reason I like that there was a passage that stuck in my head I forget
what book it was from might have been god delusion I think it was in a different one but anyway uh
he's like Richard Dawkins is writing about the Pleistocene era and like some a fossil and then
suddenly he just like is he just breaks into poetry and starts writing a poem about like
oh poor Pleistocene mother wailing as like her child is being taken away by a hawk oh yeah the uh
the ton child who they found its skeleton and its eyes had characteristic claw marks of an eagle
and so like Richard Dawkins just writes a poem about this yeah and was it any good this poem
I thought it was good it was just a few lines but it was yeah it was memorable but it's just the
idea that you know he's moved to think about it poor ton mother weeping in the savannah or
something like that like yeah it was it was just you know all things like that it's clear that this
is from an interested place rather than like a let me smash the keyboard angrily griping at these
people on the internet who are wrong kind of vibe which again I'm not shooting on it I think that can
be uh fun to read too but I really wish we didn't have a third post now because that is a perfect
segue into our main topic well we'll bring to the third post real fast okay yeah the third post
honestly is so uh short and fast that I have almost can we summarize it to lull emergence
yeah yeah so the third post is the futility of emergence and the two quotes I pulled from it
are emergence has become very popular just as saying magic used to be very popular
and its usage fits all the checklist items that we just read not just read but that we earlier read
for a mysterious answer to a mysterious question uh that's all I pulled from it I would this one
really funny I just want to like kind of say some of the best lines from it for example
take literally that description taken literally that description fits every phenomenon in our
universe above the level of individual quarks which is part of the problem imagine pointing to a
market crash and saying it's not a quark does that feel like an explanation no then neither should
say it's a it's an emergent phenomenon I I find this post very interesting because at the time
that it was posted uh saying things are emergent properties or emergent systems was in fact very
popular oh my god it was like a meme all the time yeah it was like oh my god look at the emergent
properties of this embryo turning into a look at the emergent properties of the brain creating
consciousness and this is an emergent problem I was like stuffy like that word stop it and now
that isn't done anymore right uh I haven't seen it very much I haven't seen it at all I think for
a number of years I've seen it used and I've seen it used in ways that I don't protest because for
example Eliezer writes it's the noun emergence that I protest rather than the verb emerges from
yeah yeah and so I've seen that I've seen the word emergent used but then the then it goes on
to explain what it emerges from so I was like oh okay I'm not pissed off by this word anymore
because it's not being used this is my is a semantic stop sign anymore yeah or as a mysterious
answer or yeah yeah how how much do you think like this sort of thing could be attributed to uh
Eliezer and his circle of you know people that we're all talking about this sort of stuff
I don't know I also wonder that about um people started really focusing on um skewed data in
science like replication crisis that was it and it was right after the rationality community
was bitching about people not replicating studies yeah a lot yeah and I was like that's weird timing
but uh yeah who knows I mean a lot of people so like I mean obviously he's always been kind of on
the the leading edge of this intellectual field right he talks with other people in that area
and he's probably not the only one who's making these sort of observations I'm just I always wondered
like how much of it is direct influence of this stuff and how much is it like talking to other
people and also knowing what's going on I wonder if someone in the Berkeley community might know
these things oh there's gotta be some kind of lorekeeper if I had to guess I would say
that this was probably one voice in a chorus of people complaining about the use of the word
emergence and that it added to the noise that finally shut it down it's interesting I think
the fact that he doesn't have any sort of degree makes things uh popularly not be attributed to him
like for example I saw the paperclip maximizer a couple years ago attributed to Nick Bostrom
and uh while like Nick and Eliezer were on the same forums and talking about these sorts of things
and he you know says specifically yes this originated on the SL4 forums it could have been Nick
it could have been any one of us I think it was basically him that came up with the paperclip
maximizer as a literal uh concept when he was on like with paperclips when he was on
Sam Harris's podcast uh Harris brings up the paperclip maximizer and he's like now I think
that was Bostrom and he's like uh as far as I know it was me but like it because you know it
wasn't archived there's no way to to demonstrate but he's like I think I remember that was that
might have been me right um and that's the weird thing like people are like okay which one of
these people in this circle is the Oxford professor Nick Bostrom okay we're attributing it to him
because if we you know it makes the quote seem more prestigious if you can put after it Nick
Bostrom University professor at Harvard right or at Oxford or whatever it is like people are more
likely to believe the quote just by seeing the name after it I don't think that's too bad over
heuristic I don't know I don't think it's a bad heuristic at all but I also think it's unfortunate
that people will misattribute things to other people that have higher credentials yeah in this
case at least there's like some plausible explanation for the fact that it's not like no look my book
came out two years before yours and it's like no we we we actually can't prove it and I don't he
he said that he thinks it's him he and maybe he just doesn't want to like stand up and take
credit too loud because you can't prove it yeah no have you Eliezer wants to stand up and take
credit for things well like maybe not at the expense of I this was just a read um inadequate
equilibrium that part of that book is very much about bragging about things yeah I think that
in this particular case maybe it was just because like there's no way to prove it and it doesn't
like I think and I'm putting my I'm gonna google it right now who invented the concept of the
paperclip maximizer well I mean uh whatever Google says it was somewhere in one of those
chains probably yeah my my guess my guess for a thought experiment described by Swedish philosopher
Nick Bostrom in 2003 in instrumental convergence so huh yeah my my I was only making that the
my guess on like specifically not wanting to do real Harris's show and also not wanting to say
you know no no forget Boston was me who did it right and like when there's when there's no way
to prove that it was him and it's like what's the point the the real the really important
thing is that this idea is out there and it it gains traction in outside of FAI community
friendly artificial intelligence research communities right yeah so like it's it's
this one's less about like no no it's me I want the points and it's more it's like
I'm glad people have this idea in their head you don't want to start all the stupid controversy
when what you're really here for is saving the world from AI right I also think there might be
an argument to be made that Bostrom coined it and Eleazar popularized it I think if anything
would be the opposite because Bostrom is the one that has a book where he explains it whereas Eleazar
and him were just you know chatting on the SL4 forums when the supposedly was originally first
going oh interesting but interesting but ultimately uh maybe we should get back to right the podcast
topic yes so our posts for next not week next fortnight are going to be positive bias look
into the dark and say not complexity I love all of these I think this is the sequence I read the
most yeah this is like the big I don't know important chunk of sequence that I also tend to
direct people to if I'm trying to you know give them somewhere to start and I forget it's very
intimidating if it's like oh I'm interested in this rational stuff where do I start and it's like
here read this Bible of rationality instead you read this book of rationality and I forget if
it's part of the map and territory sequence or if it's its own thing that are mysterious answers
to mysterious questions um but in any case yeah great stuff I'm looking forward to these next posts
too and you know in on a meta level I'm glad where we like where we began including these sections
it's a good excuse to go back through these and they're fun yeah yeah I agree uh so for our main
topic so we have a discord and there's chat that goes on on the discord sometimes and uh like any
you know public place there's varying um people want different norms uh to you know match their
own personal styles because everyone's more comfortable with their own style and mainly what
it was was that some people were saying that it seems that there is too much like confrontationalism
and not enough uh niceness and I don't know there wasn't like one big thing that happened there were
a couple people that left uh and at least one of those cases I was just like wow did someone
need to just have a slightly thicker skin here uh but you know that person was still a he was a
cool person and I I okay both these people that left were cool people and I really like them and
I miss having them in the community but it's okay as a brief sidetrack I as you guys are probably
very aware have been having this long lifelong battle with depression kind of thing as as many
rationalists do um and one of the things I do to combat that specifically is to seek out uh joyous
positive things uh and indulge in them like Steven universe for example is one of my you
unweave a bunch of rainbows the what I said you go and you unweave a bunch of rainbows every rainbow
I find I tear to shreds but no I I specifically seek out wholesome awesome happy things uh because
that helps me uh to be more of a normal person and it affects people around you really positively
too it's like it's it's a good life hack to just be the kind of person you want to see in the world
and then you'll attract the kind of people that you want to be around and like their lives better
yeah and I just think in general you can do the opposite I right I would like to have in general
in the rationalist community a norm of anti-synicism and of uh just being jollier
like Christmas is my favorite holiday for a reason and I think it's uh that's basically kind of what
I want to talk about uh today like how to um be more charitable and uh friendly online
I have a lot of thoughts so many thoughts me too can I jump in with one quick one
oh you you may and then I want to jump in with one quick one after you totally or you take as much
time as you want but I would just I remembered when there was a discussion the one we mentioned
where people left and uh somebody was like well people just need thicker skin or something I was
gonna also talk about this and I and I really disagree with that sentiment and I had this
image of like you shouldn't have to like be jumped into the to the rationality community
we're like jumping in in the gang sense of we're like all right we're gonna all kick the
shit out of you for a minute and then you're in the club like you shouldn't need uh and you know
there's a difference between like in a uh pejorative colloquial sense of being a snowflake that can't
handle anything and you need to you know keep everything safe I'm using quotes on all of those
I think that there's value there's a valuable uh conversation to have there but like I'm saying
there doesn't need to be like a safe space for everybody in that you know there can't be challenging
ideas that's different but it shouldn't be a place where it's like oh no I get to call you a dick or
an asshole or a piece of shit that because I disagree with you like no there doesn't need to be
like literal name calling and it like I said the idea that you should need thick skin to enter the
community I think what you need is a there's difference in skin thickness and mind thickness
maybe that's I'm torturing the analogy but the idea that like what I would say is um that I've
never mind you're still go ahead okay um let me see if this sounds right I think um rather than
thick skin is what you need to join the community is the ability to be ready to be wrong um or be
open to ideas like don't yell at somebody for suggesting something like oh that's stupid
just be like I think that's wrong for these reasons but like I'm open to being wrong too what do you
think uh maybe just not personalizing stuff like that yeah I I I agree but also being willing to be
critiqued but not like and not take that personally right and so that that was what I was trying to
just differentiate with my bad analogy of mind thickness like you can't uh if if being uh thin
skinned means that like no I can't have my ideas challenged and obviously this isn't the community
for you I would say yeah but that's not what anybody comes in looking for to my understanding
not people that've joined the discord anyway the people who came and left came and left because
they thought it would be like oh cool this can be a collaborative space where people have uh you
know this uh an interesting uh take on something or a project they're working on and they positively
collaborate to make their I want that community I want that too and uh if I'm allowed to plug
another discord I although I don't have a link so I'll have to find a way to get this out there
I'll find out if you can get it to them I can't but I'm not sure if they want it public or not
there is one called University of Bays that is essentially that thing where there's different
channels for different things if you're if you've got a side project like hey I've got this you know
you're you jokingly perhaps jokingly perhaps not had the idea of making a an absent distillery
deadass so if you if you want a place for advice and you know if you post it to the wrong place
it'd be like that's a stupid idea that's you know business will never get off the ground
why do I waste your time there's already absent out there that's not the answer you're looking for
you want to know how do I do this how do I get small business going and so if or or if it is a
bad idea I want somebody to say not you're an idiot but that idea is not a good idea for these
reasons right and so there's it's part of presentation um and I'm not saying that you have to
like there's also the failure mode of that where it's like oh so now I need to couch everything I
say in this two paragraphs on either side of like you're great I like let me list all my triggers
like or all the triggers that are possibly like part of this idea first and then caveat it again
and again right and then the person responding before like if what you really want to hear is
like is this a good idea they shouldn't have to give like two paragraphs disclaimer at the top
of like you're a great person your idea is generally good but I think this idea's weaknesses for this
and this it would be nice to just get a no and here's why and so like directness is fine it's
hard to differentiate the difference between like being direct and being way blunter than necessary
it is really hard to read tone I recently um had a conflict between some friends uh that was just
because they were texting to each other and both of them had a paranoia that one was talking down
to the other or that one was kind of I don't know like they were they had these assumptions coming
into this discussion that like oh this person doesn't really want to do this with me they just
they're they just um are suggesting they they're saying they want to do it because they're doing
it out of pity and this this person isn't doesn't even really want to do this they're just I don't
know it was like they both had these preconceptions coming in and then they were just able to
interpret every sentence that was exchanged and this it was on discord as oh well that they said
I will take you doesn't that sound kind of aggressive it sounds like they're mad and they're like no I
think they're saying I will take you you absolutely have to link that key and peel sketch I already
put it my notes to send you excellent I think we put this in before but well without even talking
about I'll just there's a three minute youtube video key and peel comedy sketch that's totally
worth watching and hits this point right on the head but like it hits it the absurd and that's
why it's funny but like in the real I'm wondering I guess how to cultivate that norm especially
in a in a way where it's like you know I have suggestions I'm trying to keep this like general
so it's not me complaining about the discord that like we started um but like that's also the one
I'm thinking about the most like I also don't want to spend 10 hours a week talking with you guys
about how to moderate stuff um because I don't want to do that frankly I won't I was like the
whole thing before I spend an hour a week moderating it I have suggestions one of those
suggestions involves letting other people volunteer to be mods yes but with the agreement that like
all of the conspirators or and the people that are most active maybe on the discord who want to be
the mods can kind of get together to talk about what we think the norm should be what things should
be punishable by what like stern warning or no I don't I hate that idea because that I mean I'm
not just saying flat out no I'm just saying like uh I dislike that idea because like I don't want to
have a list a list of rules that like you aren't being nice enough and cheery enough and now the
the neighborhood um scold is going to come to you and be like hey I noticed you weren't being happy
enough for our discord maybe you should listen to general like suggestions for the norm somewhere
on the discord though and then having them there that people can see and letting enough people
know that these are the norms that if somebody comes in and just starts like spewing racist
like words and yeah well like using Nazi signs and saying that like Scott Alexander is clearly
a Nazi because he thinks that Austrian Jews are the superior race which is actually a thing that
happened that I saw happen but he's a Nazi because he I mean no uh it's so bad I'll tell you this
whole story later this is one of the stressful things that happened that like led to me not being
on the last episode uh I was talking about this before we started recording but yeah I'm like
I'm torn on having a mod team like that at all because I don't think maybe not even I wouldn't
even maybe give them the title of mods but I would just say hey like whoever wants to you know like
whoever cares about these values we're gonna stick them up here in the discord like hey we
prefer this to be a non-cynical place where people are collaborative and where people can
can also but I think that's more of a give criticism and accept criticism without personalizing it
I think that's more of a community effort yeah like everyone has to be like this is who we are
and if if someone and I think so far this has worked out pretty well on the discord server
where it's still small though I can see if it gets bigger it could start getting more out of control
yeah but if people do find that people are being too cynical or too nasty someone brings it up and
then there's you know an afternoon where that is the topic for the day where everyone's like
are we too mean are we uh too nice like whatever um but but I like the fact that the community does
kind of hash it out and I don't want there to be you know cops walking around with uh you know the
niceness cops with their niceness their niceness nightsticks right that they can use to ban people
if anyone hasn't isn't familiar with the game we happy few this fits perfectly with that everyone
takes a drug called joy and it basically puts them like on happy lsd trips and then it's great
you've got the the cops who run around basically hitting people who aren't taking enough joy or
the or they get kicked out of town so like we don't want that I I don't I really don't want any
moderation like I feel like the community as a whole honestly doesn't really need it I don't know
what like for example say that you get a troll that is just being a total dick in order to disrupt
things repeatedly people ask them to stop and they don't I think that's beyond the scope of the
discussion though because trolls are easy to handle you ban the troll you're like yeah go away
this is more like the general atmosphere of how people interact yeah like and yeah I agree if
someone comes on and is being trolly or or deliberately provocative in the sense of I don't
know posting uh fucking I don't know I'll kind of beheadings or something and they won't stop
then it's like all right cool we're not I'm not going to try and explain to you the norms of the
community you're just out but um I like maybe that's a good norm actually the the point at which
like basically everybody else agrees like wow fuck that person is the point where you should ban
somebody yeah yeah but the thing is like I find myself and I think you may have mentioned this
too uh Steven like I find myself even on the discord in general being a grumpier nastier
person than I am and it's not just on the discord it's anytime I'm online like there's something
about the keyboard that I I stop maybe it's because I can't see the people and they're
yourself to outrage porn too I wonder about that not anymore the uh used to I was so much
angrier and more depressed and upset when I was part of the social justice community and
they just constantly are broadcasting outrage porn all the time here's the thing that everybody's
upset about today you need to be upset about it too find out here yeah no it's it's been years for
me since I've been into that and it has been a huge quality of life improvement to cut out the
outrage porn entirely also sorry if I keep posting on social justice in particular a thing happened
okay well and and there's an obvious like uh I'm bitter about it no no I mean I think that's
fine I would like in general we're all we're all in favor of the goal of like yes everyone should
be treated humanely and and respected but that's I mean uh social justice I think as you're using
it as I use it doesn't mean that right no I mean well it used to mean that because social justice
warriors kind of turned into a different thing but anyway um I think I did want to bring up
before we lose track of this any ash was originally saying like someone did leave and it seemed like
maybe that person needed a thicker skin and I was well what I meant specifically by that was the person
left because they had a personal disagreement with uh someone who has slightly more power on the
discord they they have the channel boffin roll which means they can uh set emojis for the channel
they can move the server channels around basically doing the the kind of the the emoji lord yeah
you have upset the emoji lord they get to do some of the uh maintenance work of a discord server
which takes the load off of me and steven and you so that we don't have to do that right and I
really appreciate David if you're listening I really appreciate your work in this and doing this
uh but anyways they had Wes too helps the what Wes helps too as Wes is now also channel boffin
he wasn't at the time that this happened okay uh at the time David was the only channel boffin and
we just like what they actually call it channel boffin that's the name that's amazing yeah
and um so uh the this person thought that uh David was like the owner of the discord or something
and they had a personal falling out with David and left because of that because like
I I don't like this person it's their discord I'm out of here yeah and in my opinion that's like
if you have to be friends with a discord owner that's like there's a lot of people on my discord
or not my discord god I'm sorry our discord it doesn't matter yeah there's a lot of people
comment it's our it's everyone's discord on the basing conspiracy discord there's a bunch of people
who I uh I think my line was they have weird alien values that are different from my own and I don't
know um they're not people that normally I would strike up a friendship with but I don't have to
be friends with everyone on the discord right can I can just coexist on the discord can I finish
my thought yeah it was I just wanted to point out um that there is actually at like clinically
proven uh there's a range of people's tolerability for social uh distress there's they call them like
very sensitive people vsps they exist as a discrete group um there's also add in particular
has this but a lot of non-neurotypical uh neurotypes have much more uh rejection sensitivity
which just means you are more likely to interpret things as social rejection and
get really upset about it and it's important to know that people have they do have different
levels of skin thickness but it's just genetic I mean like using scare quotes with skin thickness
I'm talking about emotional skin thickness some people are genetically born with thinner
skins than others and it's just like it's important to know that yeah some people
are going to get really uh they're going to take things really personally and
I think it's perfectly within that person's like rights to have just decided this is personally
upsetting enough for me that I feel the need to leave oh yeah totally everyone has the right
text at any time like I think I don't even know how much this is I think having a thick skin can
be a learned skill but for example um one of my partners is borderline and we're working on trying
to thicken their proverbial emotional skin with exposure therapy and it's hard it it hurts
it's like it's not something that I would say oh it's easy to like you know just just grow a
thicker skin is actually like pretty insensitive thing to tell us it's almost as hard as literally
growing a thicker skin yeah um it's like go go cure your like genetic mental illness right right
it's easy it's not I mean part of that is like you know we shouldn't make every community that we
are a part of or that we make ourselves like have to curtail to the most delicate of the entire
population right I think there's an importance just to acknowledge that people like that are out
there and know how to interact with them I completely agree with what I think you're saying
which is we don't need to go the social justice route of making everything accessible and safe
yeah and I think you know maybe the difference in how this play out in in uh in the community would
be more like if someone says all right you know what this isn't the place I thought it wasn't
getting out when they leave they you know instead of people saying man what a pussy they say um
no one said that well not in so many words no no one said that at all okay uh well so good
it sounded like Steven was just kind of exaggerating the thing that people said yeah so like like
grow a thicker skin could be exaggerated too man what a pussy that that's sort of what I meant
okay I'm sorry it came off that way I didn't mean it that way no no you I don't think I don't
think it was even your thing that I was thinking of um well because the only thing I remember seeing
was people saying man that sucks maybe we should like look at who we are as people and make make
things you know yeah that was actually a really like uh I like the fact that that was the response
yeah like the person who said that I think makes me like the community is a thicker skin was me
because I don't know what to do when someone is like I have a personal you know gripe with
someone I think is in power and therefore I'm gonna leave and I let them leave yeah I'm honestly
forgetting almost every detail here because this happened almost two weeks ago and I didn't see the
whole thing oh that was no this was uh way longer before that oh okay then yeah then I then I certainly
have no idea um about the specifics of all of this then like I guess um and this was actually
shameless plug for the other podcast I do called we want more the last episode or the one that
came out two days ago uh upon the airing of this episode uh has Inyash Brotsky on as our guest
and we we talk about this with Brian about uh it was funny because Brian pointed out exactly he's
like you know it's funny is if I was reading these words I would feel like you're being an asshole
but because it's you and I could see your face I don't feel like you're being an asshole and that's
that's part of the the challenge of of online discourse and as a whole I think that's what
you were getting at a minute ago yeah that like it's so much easier to a read in more negativity
and be maybe even be more negative online than you are in real life because you're not interacting
with a person you're interacting with letters yeah and I want to focus not on the situation that
happened on our specific discordant specific people because first of all I don't think that's
that big a thing in the grand scheme of things same here small kerfuffle it was more the thing that
like caused our attention to turn to this issue yeah and also um saying it's two separate people
said uh when people started saying you know I think maybe we should be nicer I feel personally
called out by this and I don't want those people to feel personally called out by this partly because
I like those people and I don't want them to be uncomfortable but also because again I don't think
it's a this is not a personal calling out coming to Jesus moment for any any individual person that
we're airing public laundry now to try to shame them everything it is nothing like that so I want
to move very far away from specifics like that and just to general like how to do internetting and
text communications better as a people because this is more and more of our lives especially as
we're locked up inside and and it's uh there's ways to be more cordial online there's also ways to
uh do you want to go ahead uh Stephen oh I was just gonna say that that's what I've been trying
to gear it at the whole time like because it's not just like our our discord I don't really I mean
I care about it I like that it's there but this is this is a general phenomena yes and it's general
community stuff yeah and but it's it's observable across anything that involves people not talking
face to face and so you know what I meant more specifically like the rationalist community kind
of is at the point where it's going to be what we make it it's still in its infancy and especially
the Denver rationalist community like we can choose the norms like we can choose what founder
effects we want to have like you know filter down to the descendants of our community here well I
think one of those founder effects that we should try to introduce is the concept of charity not in
terms of giving money to things but in terms of not just that's a good one I mean yeah okay but uh
the more important one is the one where when you read what people say you always try to interpret
it in the way that is uh the least aggressive and the least mean as possible from that person
even if you suspect that may be giving them too much credit because uh generally generally people
overcompensate especially um online towards this person is attacking me and I don't know why that
is but I think it's wonderful practice to at any point in time you're reading something that maybe
angers you a little bit is to look at it like you know what if someone was saying that line with a
smile on their face like is it possible that this is some kind of jokey thing or just trying to point
something out in a uh light-hearted manner that uh rather than a you know you suck I hate you manner
more than like ah isn't this kind of silly we can joke about this kind of thing yeah um the reason
that that does tend to happen online is negativity bias first of all humans tend tend to focus on
negatives especially when social interactions social distress is involved it's like social
distress in your community is very hard to ignore um again I recently went through like a couple a
different community that I'm involved in went through um a weird stressful thing um and they
were there was a bunch of like did social discord in not the it was on the discord but there was
discord on the discord uh and I was like at the time trying to work and trying to I had already
planned some like social obligation I was like I can't pay attention to this right now I couldn't
not pay attention to it I was just like oh my god I need to know what's happening I needed it was
horrible um and then there's the catastrophization um of if you don't know if you don't know like
okay you hear something terrible happened and your brain immediately jumps to something probably
much more terrible than what actually happened but um man there's something else I was gonna say uh
wow there goes that thought I'll it'll come back um yeah I think that the the perceived negativity
online like I mean I don't know exactly how to combat it like part of it if you if you assume
that somebody's being nicer than your initial assumption like so if you check that and say
okay maybe they're meaning this nicely um like I have a technique for doing that and this has
actually been I think basically since texting started being a thing which is like okay if I
read that and with people that I knew and like if I read that and it makes me like upset I'm going
to assume that I misunderstood it or that they misconvaded and like in in my life it's easy as
saying wait did you mean this and like whatever the hurtful thing or something like oh hell no no I
meant it like this it's like oh yeah see that makes much more sense and so that sounds doable um you
know if someone says yeah I meant it the mean way you dumbass then like then then at least you've
got your answer then you send them back an emoji of like a middle finger right and you're like we'll
get out of my life then yeah so part of what I do is I I generally avoid sarcasm when I'm talking
online unless I'm making it very clear unless you follow everything with the winky emoji yeah or I
mean I even use that non-sarcastically so like I use that's the only thing I do is I use emojis
heavily yeah um like I throw in a heart emoji throw in like a thumbs up or a smiley like whatever
it is then it's like they can at least um like unless they're reading sarcasm into everything
then they can say okay that's the emotion he was meaning when he typed that so I was laughing
about emojis earlier but actually I think that we should we as a society especially the business
world and like the politics what showed norm the use of emojis maybe we can make ones that are less
silly so people will feel less dumb using them but the thing is we as humans get the majority of our
like contextual clues about what people mean by body language facial expression and tone of voice
and when you cut that all out you lose a lot of information I think we've
I know I'm going to get shit for this because I'm using uh evo psych here but I think that
there has been a lot of evolutionary pressure on humans to uh when there is or maybe cultural
evolution or as opposed to biological evolution because this is more of a cultural thing to um
to when there is a social conflict there's ways to diffuse the tension around them and to help
people get through the conflict without strangling each other and we have things like you know
nervousness in general uh showing that hey I'm not here trying to flex on you I'm kind of nervous
bringing this up and uh joking and like you said tone of voice right even smiling at people and
being like ha ha you know here's this thing and like most of the time when people laugh especially
in in more fraught situations it has nothing to do with humor at all like if you were to go back
and read that's what humor is uh laughter is a way of diffusing tension it is yeah it's one of the
uses of it one of the big ones and so there are all these things that we use both to signal that
we are not here trying to string each other uh that just don't translate you can't put them online
really and so when you read something that someone says you aren't getting all those cues from them
instead all you're seeing is the words that are not couched with all all this armor and it's like
oh shit I'm being attacked fuck this guy and and I think that's a huge issue which is why we
need to really overcompensate in the other direction that you know start taking this
shirtably that was my thought there okay it's back um I have some strategies that I personally use
such as uh tit for two tats uh from game theory basically uh and some of these are just like
kind of um interventions if I notice I'm really upset about something I like having a basic
role that I come back to so one is a tit for two tats um somebody can screw up twice and I will
forgive them twice because it was probably a misunderstanding um and I also you know I'll
point it out like oh it was really hurtful when you said that I was stupid for having that idea
I don't mind if you said the idea was stupid but like calling me a stupid person I think was kind
of mean and they're like oh okay and like maybe do it again if they do it a third time then I'm like
then I'm gonna get mad but the first two times I'm going to explain why that upset me and then
say be like but I figure you probably didn't mean to do that is that like we're still friends
then we might start having a problem after the third time um tit for two tats by the way just is a
strategy that tends to win when you uh it depends on the different models different
social situations for example they'll use game theory to simulate wars or to simulate
negotiations and so forth and so on but cross the board tit for two tats tends to be one of the
ones that wins in the end I'll post a link to there's a visual explanation of this uh
made by somebody who likes to animate ideas uh cool person cool video helps really uh
explain some game theory concepts in the form of cute cartoons and fun little interactive flash
games um I think one of the most important concepts behind charity is the idea that your
interlocutor is first of all not stupid they are trying to be legible to you and this is a project
both of you are working on together to be you know legible to each other and figure out what
meaning is being sent across and also that they are um just just try to assume people are being
misunderstood as much as possible rather than being actively aggressive yeah I like the thought of
steelmaning people but steelman the thing that they say like make try to if you see something
and you're reading it as like say the word I will take you and you notice you're noticing like oh that
sounds angry that sounds like they're resentful of me be like okay I'm gonna again I'm gonna think
of the steelman version of that which is I will take you like I will I'm saying right now that uh
this is something that's important to me and I'll do it read it try reading it that way um
there's a CBT there's a CBT skill of reframing if you use a reframing like this regularly enough
you'll start to do it automatically um I still haven't perfected it I still go back into my pit
of anxiety sometimes and we'll read messages from friends it's like oh no they hate me I've
messed up the relationship they think I'm dumb in a night but like much less than I used to um
I think another thing a second skill that you can do which is um probably more palatable to
some people than this charitable thing because you can only be charitable for so long is uh
just asking like you if you took someone if you read something and it seems to be aggressive
be like that seems a bit aggressive did is this what you meant by it like just just ask is is this
what you meant because I'm getting tones that I don't like there's simple tools like I did for
two tats or the uh the charitable principle whatever there's more complicated tools that are
very effective again partner of a borderline person here we go uh there's Gottman Rappapur
the Gottman Rappapur intervention uh is I think it was developed for marital counseling but it's a
really good um format for two people to resolve a discussion one of the things is one person
takes the role of speaker and one of listener and the the person who's speaker has to completely
finish their thought or like explain the reason that they're upset before the listener is allowed
to interject anything except clarifying questions or things like oh I see or oh I get it or like oh
how did that feel that sounds horrible aside from the most formal settings it is it's bad but like
it works it works so well well I the thing is you I'm usually not trying to negotiate a marriage
with people online no but I mean it works it could work for two best friends having a fight about
whether batman or spider-man is better oh we talked about this a couple episodes ago
actually and you laid that out okay so yeah you know that one there's also um the rationalist
version which is uh double crooks and it's it's basically very similar both of them you're encouraged
to use i statements you say when this when this thing happened I felt like this um when you said
this I it made me feel like diminished um and I would prefer in the future if this and so first
of all you're taking responsibility for your own emotions is that cruxing no that I'm talking about
gotman rap or but uh sorry yeah and in both of them though what you're trying to do is um I think
the goal to both cruxing and gotman rap or is to get to the point where you understand the person's
argument well enough that sort of the same thing is still meaning you could describe that their
argument in a way that they would kind of nod and go oh yeah no that's what I meant actually
that that was phrased better than what like than I had put it I don't yeah I don't even think that
people need to go that far that's why I said this is an intense tool yeah if you have a really bad
disagreement yes that you need to resolve use one of these but in general causal conversation is
being like did I hear you right when you said this nonviolent communication uh is another good
tactic in general that's where I get i statements from yeah I the rap of horror rules makes me think
of this uh den den article where he lays out it's it's less stringent than like the metal
counseling one counseling one but the the short version is like you should be able to restate
your opponent this is more for like intellectual disagreements which sounds a little more applicable
and it was like you should be able to restate your opponent's position in terms that make them say
man I wish I thought to put it that way that's right that was what I was thinking of actually
yeah and I um it's uh and you might have said that sorry I was making a note to include that
Dennett link in the in the show notes no I'm glad that you um explained where it came from
because I was like somebody at some point said it like this and then I said it wrong so oh no
you're good clarifying um what was funny about that is when uh Sam Harris and Dan Dennett had
their like spat about free will back and forth on the internet um Harris wrote back he's like I feel
like your your your beloved rapper for his rules failed you because the most charitable thing you
could say about my book is that at least it exists to show everyone how wrong it is and it's like
and what's great about that is because Dennett is like in my perception of him from watching his
talks he's a very he's a fairly like warm and fuzzy dude and so that does sound uncharacteristically
harsh of him and so that you know when when they had I think two two podcast episodes on this they
were super chill about it and there was none of this like oh yeah no I'm glad that that your
bullshit's out there to show everyone how dumb dumb this is that nothing like that came out during a
conversation it's just so easy for that to happen on again on two people who are on very friendly
terms about a subject that neither of them really have like any skin in the game on really right
like other than their own uh it's an intellectual disagreement it's not like I don't know somebody
criticizing your religion or like saying that your wife is dumb or something exactly yeah so like
over something this this esoteric it's kind of abstract it was able to get charged enough between
two guys that are on decent terms and are professional adults and professionals yeah with
like degrees and I found it really funny sorry I love watching like people get salty totally
and then you can watch them be unsalty when they're talking yeah I mean I for what it's worth the
like and this is more specific but well and you can do this we do this all the time at work too
you know and it's rarely to solve like a a saltiness disagreement more to resolve a confusion
disagreement um or confusion altercation uh text or voice chat is an option on a lot of platforms
and there are voice channels they can jump into on on our discord there's one I use all the time
at work on our and what that's what's better about slack is it's easy to call people um I like slack
more than discord but yeah it's like it's good and there's there's definitely there's definitely perks
to discord that slack doesn't have but uh the like hey you know what we're not getting anywhere
let's jump on a chat and then a five minute chat solves a 30 minute text exchange yeah that can
happen and just then that way it's somewhat easier to lay out where you're coming from and like yes
this is why this this is this I'm thinking of work stuff rather than than life stuff
and it's like oh okay see I thought you were saying this this and this and it's like ah see
that's why we were talking circles past each other now yeah now I've solved that I think really
frequently people have what seem like disagreements that are really just misunderstanding what the
other person's trying to say or what they're upset about and I do think the responsibilities kind of
like on both sides it's the person listening has to also know that they switch and um got been
wrapped up or okay you switch roles okay no well I've just meant like the person who is who feels
like they're being offended can also there's a lot of cultures uh across the US and a whole bunch of
them are you know in any online gathering because you know you can log in from anywhere in the US
there's places on the US where one of the most loving things you can do is you know give people
a ribbing call them a dumbass you know like aye a dumbass and the these sorts of cultures where
you show affection by being a bit abrasive at each other because you wouldn't do that with
strangers to exist and sometimes just think you know maybe the person who's talking with me is
just from one of those cultures where being a little bit aggressive is a sign that we are on
good terms with each other I yeah I was actually going to say uh we don't have to pussyfoot around
and put on airs and pretend to be these you know polite little um aristocrats we can just be real
with each other yeah um I was going to say actually we weren't trying to name names but
I know that one of the people who was involved in this thing and who is more on the abrasive
and like is absolutely doing that uh I've been around this person and their friend group and they
like kind of punch each other in the shoulder be like man you dumbass what how do you how could
you possibly think that Iron Man's better than Spider-Man like you offend me with this opinion
everybody is doing this and they're all doing it with a tone of voice that
that you lose on discord but like it's not like you know are you fucking idiot how could you
possibly think that it's it's like lol you know like ribbing elbow poke uh and then like and you're
supposed to go like to use you're supposed to drop into that same persona and and fight back
but in a like it's a joking like I don't know imagine like the the thing bros do where they
punch each other and they're like man bro and like yeah basically it's not supposed to be actually
like aggressive a lot of the time it's supposed to be that that sort of cultural thing you're
talking about in ash where where you're showing respect for another person by being like I know
you can like roll with this well and I think that's the general phenomenon of like counter signalling
which you can do all it in in this context where like um if I called you know if you had some
idea you know and I was like oh yeah good one dumbass like you know I'm joking and you laugh
because I said it right yeah if you proposed it to a a colleague at work who we've shared three
sentences with and they said that you'd be like the fuck and like a good example uh anecdote for
my life that doesn't come from the internet was um my uncle doesn't have a right arm from the elbow
down it got wrecked in a in a train accident thing um so he's got like a one of those thing
contraptions where like you flex your shoulders and opens up the hook and other bands close the hook
and he was over for Thanksgiving and I could see him like holding his plate and trying to do stuff
and I was like need a hand and I kind of like not doing my elbow yeah and that then that's a joke
right disabled people joke about their disabilities so much and they're so hilarious and the reason
they do it first of all is kind of a as a community of disabled people it'd be like I don't know
two blind people being like do you see what I'm saying I I haven't seen anything in eight years
I'm like laugh and then like all of their non-disabled friends hanging out with them get so uncomfortable
right and I guess what I was getting at though is that I could make that joke with my uncle I
wouldn't make that joke with like somebody at the supermarket who I saw struggling to load their
cart or something right yeah I'd be like can I you know can I give you some help or something I
don't know what I how I'd phrase it without using the word hand but whatever um like so and then
the person will be like oh yeah I don't you as you can see I'm missing one you got two I'll take
I'll take one they may they may well I this is a maybe not the the perfect example but you see
what I'm getting at like there's there's a level that they might react that way or if they might
react with kind of like I'm fine I can do this myself God I hate when people just like there's
an acknowledgement that we don't have to wear these uh polite masks because we know each other
yeah and even like the level beyond that like it's okay like we can make these kind of abrasive
jokes because we have rapport yeah um like the rapport and then you also understand what they mean
um something that was really there's a while where I thought that there's a hard and fast
rule like don't make rape jokes um but then I realized that sometimes for example like
two women who maybe have a backstory of both having been raped or have having like experienced
something in their lives that it's actually like going out to a bar and then occasionally like
make it oh man like that sounds kind of rape culture or like I don't know like saying the same
joke that would have been fucked up coming from somebody else but like the joke is like I don't
know you do a peter griffin voice from family guy and you say like a woman can't drive or something
like that and like the joke is that you're making fun of the people who say that sort of thing but
the thing is if you if if these two people who you didn't know had these background experiences
like they they I don't know if you as a bystander came by and sat down next to them at the bar
and were listening and tried to also just start making rape jokes because you're like oh oh these
two women are making rape jokes awesome yeah I would not fly yeah there's there's very much like
knowing a person knowing the context like it's a it's a bit of a balance because I I don't want to
be in a server that's all just cynicism and people being like no that would never work then you know
like the the the quarrel type of cynicism where you can't argue with it because it certainly
seems to be true based on the world but on the other hand just makes things terrible and gloomy
all the time but I also don't want to be in a community where everyone is constantly pussy
footing around walking on eggshells to make sure no one is ever offended by anything and I've been
oh won't you think of the children you know like I would like something in between that I've been
in a dystopian community um on it was a Facebook group it was it might still be around if you
want to look for it it was called um polyamorous atheist or something like that uh it got taken
over by social justice to the point where there was this message that you had to read before
you were allowed to enter that was like it was paragraphs and paragraphs talking about systemic
oppression oh god talking about the fact that oh yeah um the word polyamorous people use the word
poly shorthand generally and this you were supposed to use poly-a for polyamorous because
poly some people use that for polynesian and they used it first um that you were not allowed to use
any ableist language whatsoever uh including the word stupid and dumb uh because that that that's
making fun of people with intellectual disabilities um I like how you describe this culture as dystopian
this is no absolutely it gets worse I don't know if we have to I'm already getting annoyed hearing
about it but if you want to if it if the annoyance helps illustrate your points please continue yeah I
mean just I'm not saying stop I'm just saying I feel I feel it already yeah so the ableism uh got
to the point where we need to make this uh we need to also keep in mind people who have like lower
socioeconomic um or like maybe they I don't know depending on what device they're looking at they
might not be able to see pictures so you're not allowed to post a picture unless you post a caption
describing what the picture is oh god okay see and this is you're not allowed to post an emoji
without describing winky face if it's a text-to-speech thing it says it already yeah I know I'm just
saying that they went like so above and and the thing was that the then the moderators were so
draconian that sometimes a new person would join like I saw this somebody's like I'm hi um I'm new
here and uh you know I'm having a really big problem uh and I was really hoping that I could
talk to somebody about like my relationship because right now it's leaving me really depressed and then
like posts an emoji and then three mods will descend upon this person being like you messed up in
these particular ways you didn't you didn't tag your emoji like I don't know uh say I'm having
a really stupid problem like you use the word stupid like I will see people like that join
immediately leave I think and like the people who sometimes uh I think it's been mentioned um
someone said like I have a right to be an asshole I don't think when people make that claim they
aren't saying I want you know to be a troll and make the things terrible what they're saying is
I do not want to turn into that sort of a dystopian hellscape of politeness and I've seen this happen
before and so I reserve the right to not participate in that sort of thing you know I think there's a
happy medium to be struck though where yeah so I can see both both sides I think you have a right
to be an asshole like if you're if you're jokingly being an asshole also just insert some linky
emojis or something like that you know a lot of um the ways that I have found I've I've done
some amount of uh emotional distress like conflict resolution things over text and
one of the things you do is you use some kind of like Gobin Rappaport intervention or like some
janky version of it where maybe you're just just doing um uh nonviolent communication
using your eye statements making sure that it's not like you're a bad person but like this was
this was an action that maybe you feel bad uh or like you always do whatever and it's like
this one time uh like last week this happened and that like I noticed this has happened a
few other times and the yeah and the thing about you know the right to be an asshole the problem
is that who gets to define what's an asshole right right if that's the same reason I'm against
against people saying it's okay to punch nazis because then right away very quickly
Nazi turns into whatever this person is against right I think there was a anyone who eats meat
as a Nazi so it's okay to physically assault people who eat meat well not even that but then
there's there's a case of mistaken identity I remember a story about somebody who got punched
because somebody thought that they had a swastika tattoo but it was actually something else
I think they got stabbed or stabbed stabbed wasn't this in like Washington like right around
that whole thing when we had that episode yeah yeah so yeah that's that's another reason you know
why you could push back and say well you know your definition of asshole is not the same as mine so
I think the server should have a everyone's ability to be however they want to be oh yeah but I'm
glad you circled back to cynicism because that's I think that the the difference that makes oh I
wanted to talk about that really I wanted to hit on and I kind of lost sight of it like there's
difference between like pointing out why an idea is bad and doing it in a constructive way that
lets someone better the idea or at least maybe if it's one that is completely empty that there's
not there's no way to better it at least to illustrate what is missing right this your idea
is not complete we can't save it here's the things it would need to actually work I always consider
that like I feel like I'm being asked to do free labor for other people's dumb ideas so
basically I just ignore things like that well so then you ignore but you don't you don't try
mean to say that's a bad idea yeah you don't have to do that much labor either you could just say
like oh I think I disagree with that um I think I saw something there's some study they saw a while
ago but anyway I have like low confidence in that but um I don't have the time to check that right
now but just just you know that's my two cents yeah I mean I mean if this was me I wouldn't even
jump in have to say like well here's the 10 things I think it's missing and here's here's your 50
point plan to get there I might just say I feel like that's missing a few crucial steps and right
now isn't executable or you could say like my understanding is this thing but uh I might be
wrong I don't know but uh here's how I don't know or you could just ignore it yeah or you're gonna
know it's depending on how little you want to interact with it at all yeah and maybe it's zero
percent there's there's no rule saying you have to comment on everything right so um but there's
so there's the the version that is like actually helpful and the one that's not where all you're
doing is just propping yourself up by by making another idea or another person feel smaller
and stupid right and that that's not constructive to anybody and as far as like my my vision for
what I imagine a rationalist community to be like I picture it way closer to the first thing than
the second you don't walk into a room uh and we don't have this problem in meet space meetups and
I think that's part of why like online stuff is just different um if someone came into some half
baked idea there'd be a fun talk about it right if you know someone wanted to talk about it it
wouldn't just be like uh oh that's dumb and moving that's dumb and you're dumb for thinking it
but there's the anonymity of the internet but there's also the fact that you're not in the room
with the person so say like um Kevin who's a fictional member of our Denver community came in
and said uh man like uh I don't know uh communism is awesome you know brand new to the meetup is
just like hey guys like wow you're all rationalists I want to talk to you about why communism is awesome
and and better than capitalism I think people would probably argue about that but they would
do it in such a way as like we'd be sitting in a circle Kevin would be there too and then like
or like you know it would never like nobody would go to Kevin and be like you're an idiot get out of
here I know or like or they wouldn't go up and like just be like here's the reasons your ideas are
wrong one two three four and then walk away and then Kevin's left standing there somebody would
come up to him be like wow that person was just a dick to you you know like the thing is the person
there I know I talked about uh in the we want more uh recording that we did a few days ago
I talked about uh how much I love coral because I really do love coral he's a great character
and he's a very good character yeah and I have a lot of sympathy for him and I think a lot of
rationalists love that sort of coral thing just as much as I do but I think it's always pretty damn
important to um not always but often check in and maybe think to yourself what would coral do
and if or what would coral say and if you're typing something that coral would say maybe
just delete it because coral is never a good thing to have in a community he's always just
going to make things bad I think it's good to have people that have outlier opinions to keep
everybody sane but um I don't want that to be I don't because Stephen was talking about um we
should have exactly one person like that in his name should be Robin Hansen yeah I think like
you don't you don't want to you don't want a friend as you don't want coral as a friend you
want Harry as a friend Harry will be the same person who'll point out why your idea is bad
but he won't do it in a way that says and everyone believes it is stupid he won't do the full coral
you know rail on how on cynicism right I think every community could use one coral but no community
should be just quarrels or even half quarrels or even two quarrels one coral is the perfect amount
of coral for any community if you guys remember my review of talking to strangers they both talk
about the holy fool who is the person outside of the community by you know nature of maybe having
down syndrome or something but the quote unquote person that used to be called the village idiot
but the thing is that the holy fool glorifies the village idiot because that there was this
acknowledgement that this is the person who can come in and point out something that everybody
else is overlooking uh or like the emperor's new clothes uh the little child who says he's not wearing
anything like there needs to be that person in the community there also needs to be there's another
thing from uh darkness strangers the whole community would be like that of the incredibly paranoid
person who was totally like all about bernie madoff is doing this stuff and trying to tell
everybody but doing it while by going to his superior wearing a trench coat in a hat with
like a secret document box and depositing on his desk and doing all kind because he's so
fucking paranoid it was his boss he could have just walked up and would say hey i think bernie
madoff is doing x y like incredibly paranoid people sometimes are really useful to have around but
you don't want everybody to be basically like paranoid schizophrenic level because that would be
awful so like i love or shak or something i don't know i love what you help put my head in yasha
relating this all to harry potter and that the rationality characters uh moody would not work
well in a room full of four other moody's oh my god like they wouldn't get anywhere they'd be
distrusting about everything each other saying that's the schizophrenic paranoid like level person
that you want one of exactly having a moody is perfect having three out of four moody's would be
out of a group would be a nightmare they would just be suspicious of each other yes exactly
wouldn't get nothing done and i i know we do have a hard stop time so i think it's time oh yeah
we're past it one more thing all right as long as it's fast yeah steve was talking about cynicism
i just want to say that i in particular i agree with this and i how i talk about this is that i
hate haters i i hate hater culture and community like there's some people that think it's cool to
sit around and like just make fun of things or to trash things and i've been in friend groups or
like communities where the thing to do is to trash talk stuff and like it's this weird insecurity
thing i think this is unfortunately like uh my experience of this is all male friend groups
often tend to have this thing where it's like it's uncool to like something
that just makes you like a nerd or sap or something so like oh man like let's all get together and
play this stupid fucking video game oh my god like this this game is so bad like or i don't know like
oh man you like that band that band is so gay like just like people getting together and just
shitting on everything and like the only way you can also be cool is by also being like maximally
cynical and hating everything and making fun of it and it's just like i hate being in communities
it feels like everybody is having these incredible insecurity responses to things all
the time and need validation from everybody else like just please be vulnerable just somebody go
i love that show shut the fuck up steven university is fucking great like or whatever that's a hill
i'm ready to fight on hard that and this can be a nice final note never shit on something somebody
likes you know like don't go wrong like unless like they like is really shitty i disagree man
oh you said that okay yeah like i mean life you hate the thing you can say i personally
dislike this thing but like that's what you that's what you say i love how much you love it yeah and
i can say that about literally anything man like i like and just the general thing is like life in
general sucks a bit for most people some other time at the very least life is suffering as the
Buddha would say all right so and and so if someone finds something that they enjoy in it don't tell
them they're stupid for enjoying no no well so i would never like tell someone they're bad for
enjoying something and like try to mock them for that because i think that's bullshit that's
that's all i'm saying okay if if something does suck and you're like oh man if if you want a
version of that that i think is better check this out or something right specifically my hate on the
uh star trek the card that aired uh this year like you were there for that that was just a
couple days ago was that was that wrong i think you were expressing your opinion yeah and like you
did it in a tongue-in-cheek hard way that says no one should watch it or something but you didn't
say you're an idiot if you like it right that's the difference and like if someone liked it who
cares man like they're they might have the reasons like there's a lot of things that just i don't
like because um quite a few people i know liked it my my ex-girlfriend loved the scooby-doo cartoon
and would watch it endlessly and i would kind of make fun of her for it she would make fun of
herself for it but it was like the thing is she's like i don't know it's just it's got this nostalgia
factor uh i love the animation i love the i don't know it's like she had perfectly good
reasons for loving this thing i had perfectly good reasons for not and this didn't need to be a
conflict between us and i wasn't but sometimes people will do like oh you have bad tastes and
then they get offended by that and you're like yeah that band sucks let me like and they'll argue
to you trying to get you to stop liking this band or or to agree that you're stupid for liking
this band and it's just what is why are you doing this stop i know that some things are subjective
dude in fucking junior high at one point uh i was humming the white stuff because i'm a huge
weird ale nerd i love all of weird stuff yeah and like i saw him in i saw him live and someone was
like so good are you singing the right stuff and uh which was uh one of those boy bands right uh
and i was like no i'm singing the white stuff by weird ale they're like no you fag you're singing
the white stuff the right stuff and i was like no and i'm like i quoted them the lyrics of the
white stuff because i'm a weird ale nerd i had them memorized they're like oh okay that's cool then
which first of all why the fuck did i feel the need to defend myself i like i could have been like
yeah man i like what i was being attacked yeah but instead i was like no man i'm not one of those
lamers that likes the the the backstreet boys whoever it was i'm singing weird ale which i don't
i say what you're saying yeah i feel bad that i felt the need to defend myself at all instead of
just flipping in the bird there's like an idealized version of you that would have been but like also
you were being attacked and you were just responding kind of with like a panic response probably yeah
but more than anything faulted against guys for being a douche totally seriously all right that's
a good that's a good uh stop point we gotta think of patreon thank you yes okay uh this week we are
thinking luke hanks luke i hope this wasn't yeah too terrible of an episode for you because it was
mainly about community norms but you know um maybe you'd like hearing about how to talk online more
community norms are super like special interests of mine so maybe maybe luke is like maybe cool
or if not luke um tell us what you do on here yeah yeah thanks luke we really appreciate it
we do uh it's awesome you help keep this thing running you do i was going to say that before
you wrap up i would have liked to have time to talk about the protests all the fun stuff around
that but that takes 30 minutes and we didn't have it today so maybe we'll get to it in a couple weeks
okay well we may have someone on who disagrees with us on this particular thing and they can
explain why they hate civility and want the world to be terrible maybe we will be convinced
all right now on that note uh we got a roll so see you guys in a couple weeks thanks for listening
bye bye stay safe
i think black liquor is just what you get when like you scrub the devils taint with a cotton swab
taint liquor
