In this video, we discuss how to treat Lorentz forces in quantum mechanics.
We start with understanding minimal coupling, and then we move to fields and gauge transformations,
and then in variance under the gauge transformation of the Hamiltonian.
And finally, we talk about the Coulomb and Lorentz gauges.
So in quantum mechanics, we don't deal with forces, and the classical interaction of the
Lorentz force, that is, the charged particle with electromagnetic fields, cannot be described
in the form of a potential gradient, which is the only way we can treat forces, so-called
forces, in quantum mechanics.
So in order to deal with this kind of interaction, we have to reformulate the Hamiltonian to
account for electromagnetic fields.
So basically, we don't treat this as a potential, but we have to rewrite the Hamiltonian, part
of the other parts of the Hamiltonian, to include the forces in the form of potentials.
So the good thing is, we can use classical electrodynamics to help.
If you look at the classical Hamiltonian for a particle in the presence of electromagnetic
field, it's written as 1 over 2m times the quantity p minus q times a quantity squared
plus q phi, where a is the vector potential, and phi is the scalar potential.
And the electric magnetic fields are derived from the scalar and vector potentials, such
that e is equal to minus the gradient of phi minus the time derivative of a, and b, the
magnetic field, is equal to the curl of a.
Now we can use this Hamiltonian, convert it using operators, using the momentum operator,
and get a quantum mechanical Hamiltonian that we can apply to the use of these interactions
with electromagnetic fields.
And that becomes the Hamiltonian, quantum mechanical Hamiltonian is 1 over 2m times minus i h bar
gradient minus q times vector potential quantity squared plus q times the scalar potential.
And these are operators that are then applied to the wave function of interest.
And therefore the time-dependent sugar equation becomes i h bar partial psi of r and t dt is
equal to 1 over 2m minus i h bar gradient minus q a quantity squared plus q phi applied
to psi.
Now these potentials in classical electrodynamics are not measurable, but they're used to describe
the fields which are.
So that, as we wrote before, the field is something that's measurable, the potentials
are not measurable.
Similarly with the magnetic field, the field is measurable, the potentials that we use
for classical electrodynamics are not measurable.
And the potentials can arbitrarily be changed via gauge transformation, which we'll talk
about more in detail later, without altering resulting fields.
And the gauge transformation typically looks like phi being replaced with phi prime is
equal to phi minus the time derivative of the gauge transformation lambda.
And a, with that same gauge transformation, you have a goes to a prime, which is a plus
the gradient of the gauge transformation.
Now in classical electrodynamics, the fields are what count, the potentials can't be measured.
In quantum mechanics, however, the potentials are exactly what we need to have.
And they're integral part of the Hamiltonian, while the fields are not really in the picture
at all.
So the Hamiltonian, as we wrote before, was 1 over 2m h bar over i gradient minus q times
a quantity squared plus q phi.
So you see what we've done here is we've replaced the momentum, the kinetic energy term, which
was simply these two, this first term, we've added the effect of the vector potential in
here into this term, and we sort of mixed it all together.
And then of course we have the scalar potential, which acts like a potential.
So the Hamiltonian itself is also invariant under gauge transformation, as it turns out.
So not only are the fields invariant in classical mechanics, but the Hamiltonian in quantum
mechanics is also invariant.
So in classical physics, we don't expect to see an effect on a charged particle unless
your field is non-zero.
However, in quantum mechanics, this is not necessarily the case.
The vector potential can affect quantum behavior, even though the field is zero.
So you can imagine that there is a field which is zero, because the vector potential has
no curl, but the vector potential still folds into the Hamiltonian and will affect the wave
function and the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions.
And so we're going to see how this works.
We'll start by looking at the invariance.
We want to understand how the electric and magnetic fields can be invariant under the
gauge transformation, and then how the Hamiltonian can be invariant under the gauge transformation.
So we'll start with the electric and magnetic fields.
And the gauge transformations are here.
This lambda is the gauge transformation, and you have the replacement of phi with phi prime
and A with A prime.
So we'll start with the electric field.
E is now going to be minus the gradient of phi prime minus the time derivative of A prime.
So we're going to assume that we have the same form, but now we've replaced the gauge
transformed potentials.
And we want to see if the electric field remains the same.
Well, the first thing we want to do is substitute in the phi.
So if we substitute in the phi here, and then we substitute in A prime as well, we get for
the first term, the gradient of phi prime minus the gradient of phi prime gives you
minus the gradient of phi, and then plus the gradient of the time derivative of the gauge
transformation.
And the second term, which is the minus the time derivative of A prime, we get minus the
time derivative of A minus the time derivative of the gradient of the gauge transformation.
Now because the time and spatial derivatives don't really talk to each other, we can interchange
them without any penalty, and you can see that these two terms will then cancel.
And so we're left with minus the gradient of phi minus the time derivative of the vector
potential A, and that's exactly the field.
So the electric field, when you make gauge transformation of this kind, does not change.
The magnetic field similarly can be seen not to change as well.
So we have the curl of A prime, so that means we're going to take the curl of these two
components, that gives us the curl of A plus the curl of the gradient of the gauge transformation.
But the curl of the gradient is simply equal to zero by definition, and so this gives us
then the curl of A, which again goes back to the original magnetic field.
So we can also show that the solution to the Schrodinger equation is also invariant to
another gauge transformation with the addition of a phase factor.
And we can show that the Schrodinger equation written like this, where instead of psi and
A and phi, we replace it with all the gauge transformed terms, that is we replace it with
phi prime, psi prime, A prime, and phi prime.
This also holds when the Schrodinger equation with everything unprimed also holds as well.
And the only change we have to make is we have to replace the original wave function psi
with psi prime, which is psi times a phase constant, a phase factor, and the phase factor
is e to the i q lambda, which is a gauge transformation divided by h bar.
So we treat q lambda as sort of an energy, a phase, this becomes a phase factor, it becomes
dimensionless.
Alright, in order to do this, we have to first find out what the initial term in the Hamiltonian
h bar over i gradient minus q times A prime applied to psi prime will give us, well we're
going to substitute in for our expected value of psi prime, and we're going to substitute
in for A prime as well.
So remember A prime is A plus the gradient of lambda, and so this then becomes h bar
over i gradient minus q A minus q gradient lambda times all applied to e to the i q lambda
over h bar times psi.
Well, if we take this term here, we're taking the gradient of the first term, the exponential,
that gives us q times i divided by h bar, so the h bar and i cancel.
We get q times the gradient of what's up here, which is the lambda, so we get q times the
gradient of lambda times e to the i q lambda over h bar lambda, psi, and then we have to
take the term where we take the gradient of the second part, which means that we have
h bar over i e to the i q lambda over h bar and times the gradient of psi.
So that comes from the first term.
The second term gives us minus q A times e to the i q lambda over h bar psi, and the
third term gives us minus q gradient of lambda e to the i q lambda over h bar psi.
So we have four terms to deal with.
The first and the last term are exactly the same, and they cancel because of the minus
psi.
We're left then with two terms, h bar over i e to the i q lambda over h bar gradient
of psi minus q A e to the i q lambda over h bar psi.
So that's this term applied to psi prime.
We now want to apply it again because that's what's in the Hamiltonian, this term squared.
And so we've got to apply it again, and we've got to apply it to the result of our first
calculation, which is this, and we've ported that over here.
And we're going to apply the same terms here, where we replace the A prime by A plus the
gradient of lambda.
And so we get these three terms applied to this result from the first time we applied
the same thing to psi prime.
So now we're going to do the same thing here.
We have to apply it to this term and to this term, and we have to multiply this and multiply
that.
And here we have to apply the gradient again to both terms.
So the first term, that is the h bar over i times the gradient applied to this term
gives us two terms.
One is when we apply it to the e to the i q lambda over h bar, we're going to get a gradient
of lambda dotted into the gradient of psi, and then we get a i q h bar out from the top
and we get i q lambda over h bar psi.
And then we have the second term, which is where we just apply this to the gradient of
psi, and that gives us the Laplacian of psi, del squared.
And then the i's cancel, give you a minus sign, the h bar becomes h bar squared, and
you have h bar squared e to the i q lambda over h bar times the Laplacian of psi.
So that's this applied to the first term, now we've got to apply it to the second term.
Well, that gives us, first of all, when we apply the gradient here, we're going to get
minus h bar q over i del dot a, because it's of both vectors, to the dot product.
And then you have e to the i q lambda over h bar psi.
The second term, over here, gives you minus q squared, because you pull down, the second
term here, when you take the gradient of this term, you get an i q over h bar pulled down
that cancels the i, cancels the h bar from here, and gives you a q squared.
And then you have a dotted into the gradient of lambda, e to the i q lambda over h bar
psi.
Then you have a third term, when you take the gradient of the psi, and you get minus
q h bar over i e to the i q lambda over h bar, a dotted into the gradient of psi.
And then you have four terms from these two multiplied times these two.
The first term gives you minus q h bar over i e to the i q lambda over h bar, a dot gradient
of psi.
Then you get plus q squared, a squared, e to the i q lambda over h bar psi.
And finally, you get minus q h bar over i e to the i q lambda over h bar, gradient of
lambda dotted into gradient of psi, plus q squared, a dotted into gradient of lambda
e to the i q lambda h bar psi.
So we've now got all the terms here, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 terms.
Again, we can find some cancellations, because this term and this term are identical and
they cancel.
This term, the first term and the penultimate term, also are identical and they cancel.
And we're left then pulling out the common term, which is e to the i q lambda over h
bar.
We get minus h bar squared with a plus sign of psi, plus i q h bar del dot a psi.
Then we have 2 i q h bar, a dot, the gradient of psi, plus q squared, a squared psi.
That's what we're after.
So that's one term in the Schrodinger equation.
Now if you look at this, this is exactly the same terms that you get in the untransformed
Schrodinger equation, right?
And let's show that.
Let's take this term applied to psi without transformation.
We get h bar over i del psi minus q a psi.
Then we take and apply it again to the same terms.
We get h bar over i applied to this and this, and then we have minus q a times this and
this.
When we do that, we get minus h bar squared del squared psi, that's for the first term.
Then we get a second term, which is minus h bar over i q del dot a psi, that's when
we apply to here.
Then we get a third term, which is minus 2 h bar over i q a dot del psi and we're combining
this applied to psi with this times this term here.
It gives us 2.
And then finally, we have this term applied to this, which gives us plus q squared a squared
psi.
And so this term here with the gauge transform a and the gauge transform wave function gives
you exactly the same result as when you have the original untransformed psi, untransformed
a.
All these terms match up exactly.
Because of that, we can then write that h bar over i del minus q a prime quantity squared
applied to psi prime is equal to the same term without the primes times e to the i q
lambda over h bar.
We can now recast the Schrodinger equation using this transformation.
We've now figured out what this gives you and now we have to apply it over on this side.
So you have i h bar d psi dt, but its gauge transform psi prime gives you an additional
term which is minus q partial of lambda with respect to t applied to psi times e to the
i q lambda over h bar and that is equal to then, this has no time dependence I guess.
So then you have e to the i q lambda over h bar times the quantity 1 over 2m and then
we have h bar over i del minus q a quantity squared and we just showed that this term
is identical to this term with the addition or the multiplication of e to the i q lambda
over h bar.
So we can make that substitution directly.
Then we have to replace phi prime and we replace it with its equivalent which is q phi minus
q times d lambda dt psi.
And so from the left side we had to take the derivative of psi and then we have the derivative
of that second term times psi because it's e to the minus i q lambda over h bar that's
this derivative here that gives us the cancellation of h bar, it gives us the cancellation of
the i and we get a q in partial with respect to time of lambda applied to psi.
And so we can cancel the two exponentials and we're left with this term which is exactly
the same as this term over here, it's q d lambda dt psi and so they cancel.
And now we're left with i h bar d psi dt equals 1 over 2m times this quantity h bar over i
gradient or del minus q a quantity squared plus q phi all applied to psi and we recover
the original Schrodinger equation.
So that shows us that the Schrodinger equation is invariant as long as you add a phase factor
to the solution and so we can show therefore that under gauge transformation there's an
invariance of electric field, magnetic field as well as the Schrodinger equation.
Now we've talked about these gauges but we haven't really said anything specific about
them.
So Maxwell's equations in potential form are given as follows, this is from electrodynamics,
del squared v plus partial with respect to t of del dot a equals minus rho over epsilon
dot v is now what I was saying was phi before.
And the second Maxwell's equation is del squared a minus mu dot epsilon dot times the second
partial of a with respect to time minus del dot a times the quantity del dot or applied
to the quantity del dot a plus mu dot epsilon dot partial of the potential with respect
to time is equal to minus mu dot times the current density J.
The two most common gauges that are used to transform electromagnetic fields are those
with simplified these equations and so the idea of a gauge transformation is to make
it easier to solve an electrodynamics problem.
So one of the gauges is called the Coulomb gauge.
The Coulomb gauge is one where the del dot a is equal to zero.
Now if del dot a is equal to zero this term goes to zero and the first equation becomes
the Laplacian of the potential, the scalar potential is equal to minus rho over epsilon
dot, very simple.
And the second equation simplifies also a little bit because you removed this term that's
gone.
So now you just have del of mu dot epsilon dot partial of v with respect to t.
And so you've removed one term out of that as well.
The second potential that is commonly used is the Lorenz gauge.
Lorenz gauge states that del dot a is equal to minus mu dot epsilon dot partial of v with
respect to t.
So if it's equal to exactly this then this whole second, third term in the second equation
goes away.
And now you're left with something rather simple which is the Laplacian of a is equal
to mu dot epsilon, minus mu dot epsilon dot, second derivative of a with respect to time
is equal to minus mu dot J.
This one does not simplify under those circumstances, but that's okay because it's already relatively
more simple.
