Okay everybody, it's Michael Schirmer and it's time for another reminder to sign up for the Skeptic Society, Skeptic Magazine public event we're having this year, December 1st, 2nd and 3rd, Friday night, all day Saturday, Saturday night fundraising dinner, Sunday with Jared Diamond.
And so I just wanted to say just in kind of reflection, we have not had a public event in many many years.
The last big conference was at Caltech in back in 2015 timeframe and since then of course as you know with the pandemic that shut everything down we moved our offices from Altadena up to Santa Barbara where I now live.
And so we've had kind of a restructuring and I want to share all that with you by showing you the office you can just come on in we've got thousands of books in my private library here, as well as you'll be able to pick up back issues of Skeptic they're right there on the wall.
Most of which we keep in print copies of my books and other books by people like Richard Dawkins and Jared Diamond and and so forth it's going to be an epic weekend I'm really looking forward to it.
We really depend on your support. The Skeptic Society is a 501c3 nonprofit science education organization that depends on donations and fundraising events like this.
So much of this event much much of the money for this event goes to the Skeptic Society well none of it goes to me or anyone personally but to the Skeptic Society.
That's what that Saturday night fundraising dinner is all about.
And if you support the magazine or work in the media or pod the podcast and so on and so forth everything we've been doing for 31 years now.
Then you can show your support by by coming just coming and why would you not want to come to Santa Barbara in December.
Believe me it's gorgeous here and the hotel where we're holding it at the Hilton is right on the beach right on Cabrillo you will be you know I don't know 30 feet from the sand.
It's great.
It's a wonderful facility and I've talked them into some great low prices like half the price you'd pay to stay there.
If you just walked in up the street so check it out go to Skeptic.com click on the banner for our conference sign up sign up for the event sign up for the Saturday night fundraising dinner.
I'll see you here that Friday night or Sunday afternoon at the office where I'm sitting now and and at the events at the Hilton it's going to be epic.
All right.
See you soon.
Okay let's start the basics cancel culture what is it how do you define it.
Sure.
We define it we we want to kind of establish it as a historical era basically the same way people talk about other mass censorship incidents you know in history like the Red Scare or one end to we link it we basically say it's the uptick after
2014 of attempts of campaigns sorry to get people de-platformed punished expelled fired etc for opinions that would be otherwise protected by the First Amendment if it were happening like in a public setting and also the climate of fear and conformity that resulted from that.
Right.
Ricky you want to add anything to that.
Yeah I would say in terms of our definition and is a little bit technical but I would I mean at least for me it was something that I just grew up so steeped in that it was a strange exercise to even really define it in such a specific way because 2014 is
our cutoff point of where I think it really took on a new tone but I mean I was born in 2000 and so as far as my like contextual chronological awareness that's pretty much all I've known is this Graceless society in which any any little
misstep or faux pas could cost you a friendship or a college admissions letter I mean it's it's definitely it's it's strange because that cutoff point is very very much in line with when I came into political awareness myself.
Well what's funny about this Ricky is it makes perfect sense that you're like well I live with this my whole life and what what why did we notice it to change in 2015 or 2014 it's because Gen Z started to think college because there was a little bit
blip and cancel culture that that's measurable around 2011 that's kind of like the social media effect like all over like that.
So that's kind of like the precursors like Martin Gurrey's whole point but it you grew up with it but then it started reaching the whole country when Gen Z started hitting campus and large numbers unfortunately.
Yeah let me introduce you to what I call the Henny Youngman principle Henny Youngman was a 1950s comedian he used to joke around one of his lines was when he was asked how's your wife he said compared to what.
So cancel culture is much worse really compared to what how do you know.
We have a lot of data in the book and particularly you know I've been working on campuses now for 22 years and to be clear it wasn't great when I started in 2001 but for example.
We compared historical data on the number of professors who've been targeted and we talk about more than a thousand examples of professors being targeted since 2014.
You know two thirds of those have been punished in some way and about you know a fifth of those almost 200 of them have been fired and that includes like 40 tenured professors so it's a big number.
Now to put that in historical perspective I started it during 9-11 and there was major threats to academic freedom in the years after 9-11 and there were about over a dozen professors targeted and three of them lost their jobs
and that was considered really bad even though the three professors who lost their jobs you know one was War Churchill who ultimately lost it because of academic misconduct which was serious.
Another one for taking too much time out of class to talk about in that case the Iraq war and another one who was fired Samuel Arian because of they were like OK he does seem to actually have ties to terrorism.
And that was really like since the law was established between 1957 and 1973 you know there's nothing even close to the number of professors that we see.
We even compare it back to the Red Scare even though the law wasn't clear yet it's like people in the 50s actually thought you could fire communists because they were too politically doctrinaire not good teachers was basically the rationale.
And at the time there was actually a massive study going on of the Red Scare and they estimated about 62-63 professors were fired for communist beliefs about 90 professors for beliefs overall during that period which is usually rounded up to 100.
And we're talking about twice that number except in a time where there's almost no viewpoint diversity on campus.
There's a million different ways people get cancelled without anybody even be able to see it because there are literally secret hearings and you're still able to find this many heretics to burn is insane.
Right.
And I think we were so fortunate that I mean I think I speak for myself and a lot of other people where I felt like I had so much.
Anic data to say like oh I know a ton of people who've been torn down and attacked but we were super fortunate to have.
The fire team behind us and all of these amazing statistics that they were able to distill for us and they've have decades of caseloads to demonstrate that there truly is an explosion first.
Like around the 2016 election and then again all like unprecedented numbers in 2020 which I think.
Really like what one thing I keep hearing is people saying like oh isn't this kind of behind us and in the rear view mirror but it seems like.
I'd probably be likely to say that in 2018 not knowing that the pandemic and this next level of unrest and this next contentious point in history was right around the corner and I wouldn't be surprised.
If the 2024 election doesn't become another cycle of at this point in time it seems like if we have a cultural tension point our reflexive responses to just indulge in a liberalism in this in this really frightening way.
Yeah.
Yeah so anecdotal data versus actual data.
And I guess it just depends on what the context is.
The story I like to tell is you know what the toggling between CNN and Fox News and who was at Hannity or whoever had the campus craziness segment every week.
And you know if you watch that it just think well every college campus must be completely nuts.
And before COVID I was doing maybe a dozen to two dozen public talks at universities and colleges through an agency that would book me.
And you go to these colleges campuses and you don't say anything.
I mean it's just these kind of quiet buccalic places where students are mostly just hold up in their dorms or at the Starbucks and you know you don't see these you know kind of campus riots and craziness.
So and a Chapman where I taught for 12 years you almost never say anything like that.
So is it that even if the actual raw numbers are low it doesn't take that many incidences to get a spiral of silence going where everybody has to feel like they need to keep their mouth shut.
Well and to be clear historically speaking the numbers aren't low.
And when you actually ask professors whether or not they've been punished or threatened with punishment we did a big study on this 16 percent.
I thought it would be like 2 percent would say.
Because 2 percent would be really bad.
So we know that we're like even that the thousand which is a terrible number and we can't find any comparison in the last 50 years that that's just a tip of the iceberg.
But it is also really clear and I have to explain this very nicely at a presentation I did in Boston with someone being skeptical that you know it couldn't possibly be that the elite colleges are really that much worse.
And I'm like I almost want to be like oh no dear I'm so sorry.
Yes they are they are a lot worse.
They're a lot more professors losing their job.
I mean Harvard was horrified that it finished dead last in our campus free speech ranking.
And they were kind of like this can't be you know like basically this must be ridiculous.
And I'm like no no you have to understand you got a negative 10.69.
The next closest school was University of Pennsylvania which has been terrible for free speech also an Ivy League school that got like 11.
And some of the criticisms of our ranking of Harvard.
They got so Harvard about it like one of them was kind of like well the methodologies is not good.
We know the best statisticians in the world.
I'm like well you should know that Sam Abrams a Harvard PhD in statistics who's brilliant is one of the main people who constructed the study.
It's the largest survey of student attitudes ever conducted and that we base it on four databases the biggest one of professor cancellations of student cancellations of deep platforming and of speech codes.
It's on a bigger scale than ever has been done.
And one of the other arguments that Harvard was making was that some of the professors we were holding against them for firing or otherwise disciplining weren't that prestigious of professors.
And it's like oh dude OK that's ridiculous.
That's just snobbery talking.
But by the way even if we took away those professors which we shouldn't because they matter you would still be dead last.
Yeah I remember seeing Pinker posted from Harvard.
We're number one.
Pinker is great.
Pinker has been a real champion on his campus too.
He started up a whole movement to improve the environment there.
Just for listeners the references to your appendix here where you have the data that you actually present here of your college rankings from one to whatever it is 203 Columbia University at 9.91 University of Chicago at 77.92.
So these are self report data from students and professors of how they're treated on college campuses.
Greg you're muted.
We do 13 different factors and with the with the students you know we ask a number of questions you know and we evaluate them.
You know so if you have a school where all of the liberals think it's great for free speech and none of the conservatives do that that's a bigger penalty because it basically means that like there's there's definitely viewpoint discrimination going on there.
We also factor in things like whether or not they say that the faculty will have their back whether or not they think the environment is good.
So it's been interesting to see you know like I live in D.C. and Howard University actually came out as the best school in D.C.
It's still like in the 80s out of 200 and the survey you're talking about was actually last year's because we couldn't.
The new survey was just too new.
There was no way we could actually get it in the new book.
So we wanted people to have some perspective by seeing the previous years but they came they came off like number four four in terms of comfort expressing ideas which was really interesting to see.
So we evaluate the student rank the students on all different sorts of things.
The most disturbing stuff though is tolerance for violence.
And at Oberlin for example only around half of the students said violence is never OK in response to speech.
And we've noticed that a really weirdly high percentage of former women's colleges have populations that actually you know think blocking a speaker is OK.
Shouting down a speaker is OK or even violence in response to speech which is some of the most disturbing stuff I've seen in my career.
Yeah for sure.
OK so I was an undergraduate 72 to 76.
You must have been about 10 years behind me Greg and Ricky you are what 2010s for college.
I was I just showed up in 2018.
Yeah.
OK.
1992.
OK.
OK boy I'm really old.
All right.
Well so I do I do remember the concept of political correctness and some of my more conservative professors complaining about this.
Is what we're going through now qualitatively different than the political correctness movement or is it is it just more of the same.
It's definitely a much more intense version of it.
The I wrote a long piece for reason last year called the second grade age of political correctness.
And I talk about how you know you went from the speech code movement of 64 to the anti free speech movement of Herbert Herbert Marcus in 1965.
And even though free speech kind of won the day on campus or so we thought by 1985 major campuses including Wisconsin Stanford University of Michigan started passing speech codes to clamp down on racist sexes speech.
But then of course you know many of these schools the first people to get in trouble were actually minorities themselves.
So you know it worked out exactly the way a free speech person would tell you.
And at the time though this was kind of off campus the right and the left thought that PC was ridiculous.
It was worthy of being made fun of speech codes or an abomination and they were all defeated from 89 to 95.
But a big point of my of that article is that I started working around 2001 and it actually turns out that there were more speech codes on campus in 2001 that there were even in 1995.
They just kind of ignored the rulings and that even though the students were less enamored with PC and the professors were less enamored with PC the administration which kept on growing the administrators were definitely much more hostile to freedom of speech.
And it took a wave of students also being comparatively hostile to freedom of speech showing up around 2013 2014 to create something that is a much bigger you know calamity in terms of academic freedom conformity free speech in a university with much lower viewpoint diversity than it had back in the 80s.
And with things like bias related incident programs that didn't exist back then which have replaced speech codes to a large degree where you can call and report your professors or your friends for offensive speech.
Yeah, give us some examples of yeah give us some examples for your experience.
Yeah, absolutely. I this is a story that I tell often because I think it's just the first moment of me on campus that's pretty illustrative of my experience while at NYU.
I showed up I just moved to the city and they have you go to a like campus police building to get your ID card so that you can get into all the buildings.
And they hand it to you and they say this gets you into the cafeteria and here and there and then on the back you'll find all the really important phone numbers for for being an NYU student and it's of course 911s on the top the campus safety hotline is there in case there's a crime unit it's lower Manhattan.
The student health center there was I think there's a phone number for a like psychological help hotline which frankly is very necessary for Jen's ears.
And then after that, there's the bias response hotline on the back of your ID card so I mean it can never stray from your person because just in case you need to report a transgression it's there that we had posters all over campus they were on the back of the bathroom stalls oftentimes like in the library and stuff and so
institutionalized in a way of like I had come from a boarding school where I was used to a lot of the arguments against free speech and I was aware that there was an issue in terms of self censorship.
I mean I already had experienced that in high school but then arriving in college and saying like oh yeah first day better make sure that you know there's a hotline to to report any transgressors.
I mean I was very very nervous as a more heterodox thinking person on NYU's campus and I was hiding.
This is embarrassing to say in retrospect but I'm in this dorm with randomly assigned NYU students who I just assume were hostile to my viewpoint or could be and I wanted to have friends living in the city alone.
So I had hid my Thomas Soul books and my Jordan Peterson books under my bed which is so embarrassing in retrospect and now they're on wide open display behind me as we speak but that was the kind of place that it was.
Thomas Soul books in a brown paper bag.
Exactly God forbid anyone knew that I believe that there were some economic fallacies out there in the world but.
You know on that just as a sidebar you know identity politics where identity is just everything your race is everything but Thomas Soul is black so apparently that's not enough right there's some.
It's a race trader we talk about this in the we talk about one thing that I think is cool about the book is we try to situate cancel culture as a only the most extreme way of winning arguments about winning arguments.
And we take on what we call rhetorical fortresses on the right and the left the left the right one we call the efficient because it's just very simple it's like you don't have those in the liberals experts journalists or people in like Trump.
But on the on the left it's since it grew up in academia it's like it's like it's just like level after level of ways to not ever have to address someone's argument.
And step number one that I confess and with with profound embarrassment that when I started Stanford in 97.
You know if you could if you could do the game of claiming that someone some author or thinker was conservative that very quickly did lead to a sort of like well I guess I don't have to take them that seriously.
And so I took me a long time to read Thomas soul for example who I was like oh wow like this this guy's freaking brilliant.
And he does his most controversial thing is he oftentimes will do an international comparison of problem facing the United States with other countries.
And then of course like the funniest one was Camille Paglia.
I had somehow been persuaded that she was some kind of crazy right winger when she's more of a crazy left winger but she's a bad ass and she's a totally interesting thinker.
And it's not just that the 36% of people that are actually concerned to call themselves conservatives can be dismissed.
It's like what pink pinkers point about the left pole that a higher education is so uniformly left that everything to them looks like it's to the right.
Is there a right pole for everything to the left looks everything the way he looks left far left.
I think that when it comes to some of the stuff that we point out where the problems are with the liberalism it's been in some of the state legislatures.
But given that there is that when you look at political the breakdown of the country that more densely populated places tend to be more left leaning and more sparsely populated people tend to be the right.
I think that outside of you know some very religious colleges like I'm not sure you could find like a place that would actually be as bad as having like a right pole.
I mean perhaps not like a geographical location but I mean I definitely see as someone like I'm a center right libertarian and I write for more conservative outlets and I'll get comments and feedback calling me woke often and I'm like.
I mean in my context in Lower Manhattan I'm hardly woke but I think that's one of those words that people use to just point out any sort of like if you are in a really purest area of the right wing.
Ideologically that's that's a word that you can just kind of throw at anyone to dismiss them in a similarly dismissive way which I mean I guess on the online sense that is a right pole.
Right since you mentioned Jordan Peterson actually one comment on Thomas soul.
He just has a new book out social justice.
Yes.
Yeah.
And he's right.
I know he's not doing any podcast so I didn't get them.
But he makes like one point of this.
You know compared to what my young man example.
You know that there's the black white income difference.
Largely disappears if you control for marriage and call it you know college education and so on so he makes it kind of snarky remark.
So I guess the races are just targeting single black people and uneducated black people or something.
In other words you know thinking like a social scientist where you have like a dozen variables at work that may account for some discrepancy.
And your people that you're writing about the cancer culture people they're just looking at the one variable maybe to race and gender.
Yeah race and gender.
And we do take on cancer culture from the right as well.
Yeah.
We have multiple chapters on that and we're concerned about it.
But it has been it has been interesting you know debating this in public.
And when it comes to you know I feel like there are people who want me to say it's it's all worse on the right.
I'm like that would be lying.
Like looking at what's going on in academia.
So for example even the data I just cited about one third of those cases of professors being targeted they actually initially come from the right.
But and then sometimes turning point USA sometimes Fox News and some of those professors really do get punished.
But there is a caveat there.
Almost all of those campuses are still dominated by the left.
So the ultimate person who decided to fire that professor oftentimes is someone who would be considered on the left.
And so I did a debate many years ago.
If the left and I still consider myself left of center liberal that if the left was still as good on free speech as it was in say the 1970s.
None of this stuff would be possible because even if it was a liberal or conservative professor getting in trouble they would just answer.
No we're not punishing this person for their expression or academic freedom.
That's insane.
That's funny.
Yeah Chapman University we it's pretty liberal.
The faculty is pretty liberal.
But we have statues around campus of like Ayn Rand and Margaret Thatcher and Martin Luther King and just a variety of people.
And at one point I don't know maybe two years ago there was a demand that these statues be taken down.
I mean Ayn Rand.
Oh my gosh Margaret Thatcher.
She's practically a war criminal and so on.
Anyway so but our president handled this just perfectly.
He waited a few days and then issued a statement.
You know I listened to what you said.
I respect your opinions.
But no we're not taking the statues down.
And it was like and then they just went away.
They just like oh so if you just stand up to them then they go off in search of somebody else.
You're so right.
And that's one of the things that we do do try to stress in terms of solutions.
One like if you're a corporation have a policy like you know we don't we have a we have due process in place like as long as you slow the process down the the the social media mob won't last.
And when it comes to campuses a university president who comes out early and says no how quickly that can make a incident dissolve.
And that's one of the things that the good schools actually have in common.
The ones who do well on our campus free speech ranking and including University of Chicago generally has been quite good on it.
UVA is probably are the most like the most elite.
But then a lot of technical colleges make it on the top of the list because they can fall back on.
You know some things are true and some things aren't and it's not always going to be nice.
Hey Ricky let me because I get asked about Jordan Peterson a lot since I know and I've written a little bit about him.
What is the appeal of his message.
Is he so huge.
I mean I he was appealing to me I always hear that he's the king of the incels and all all his followers are young sad pathetic men and I don't feel that that really is a descriptor of myself.
I've always found his 12 rules for life.
I think I read it like late high school.
I would say and it just it it's funny because I remember at one point I recommended it to my mom who's a very common sense thinker and she read it and she was like Ricky like this is pretty like.
I thought that I taught you this stuff like this is pretty basically pull yourself up by the bootstraps clean your room.
Get your life in order sort of thing but I think for someone in as a member of Gen Z was like it really an antidote to this pervasive message of like you are a victim and if something goes wrong.
Your locus of control is outside of you it's because you're a woman or it's because of whatever a mutable characteristic.
You might be able to clean your being targeted by that the world is working against you and I really felt that that was like the victimhood complex that a lot of Gen Zers grew up steeped in that was so pervasive on places like Tumblr and social media that all my friends and I basically grew up on and
derived our social philosophy from unfortunately in retrospect like just having a that very clear voice of wisdom saying get your get your shit together you know get get your ducks in a row and then take on the world was to me something that I just it wasn't a message that I ever really heard and it was it was funny to me when
my mom was like I thought that I taught you this I'm like I don't know Tumblr taught me that everything I want is out to get me and if someone doesn't hold the door for me it's got to be because I'm a woman or something like that.
All right maybe there's a good point to introduce Ricky the three great untruths from the previous book Kotlin in the American mind and then your new fourth great untruth that you talk about in this book.
So the great untruths come from actually the way my family tends to give advice that essentially we we recognize that you know we're independent minded the kind of people you know who would end up at the head of a free speech organization.
We like to think for ourselves but so we don't think that people often respond to positive advice saying you should do the following five things.
All we're trying to do usually is like but don't do the following don't do this dumb thing can we all agree on that.
So we the setup for Kotlin of the American mind the book that actually is why Ricky and I know each other in the first place.
We had three great untruths which is what doesn't kill you makes you weaker to always trust your feelings and life is a battle between good people and evil people.
And we make the point that if you believe these things your life will not be as happy.
It goes against modern psychology and ancient wisdom and it's just terrible advice to give to anyone.
The one that sounds the nicest is always trust your feelings but most of like actual you know moral teaching is about no goodness.
Don't always trust your feelings their information not instructions as I can't remember her name but that's one of my favorite quotes on that.
And in this book we added a fourth great untruth which is no bad person has any good opinion that essentially so much of the debate seems to be trying to establish whether or not that someone is morally good or bad.
And that's actually where the conservative part comes in because like really what they're trying to say is like the spirits conservative and therefore immoral because they're all bad.
And therefore you don't have to listen to them and there's something really childish about this.
Now I always think of like you know Jean-Jacques Rousseau all the biographies of Rousseau show him to be a pretty awful human being.
That doesn't mean he's wrong about everything and actually I'd say that there's a you know maybe 40% of Rousseau that I actually quite agree with.
You shouldn't actually be evaluating thinkers on whether or not you think they're good people you should be evaluating them on their argument.
But there's also a huge double standard they don't tend to apply this to Rousseau because there's some affection for Rousseau still on the left.
There's the great David Hume which I say with you know such great reference because every science person and every First Amendment person loves him so.
He has a he had a footnote and I think 1752 that was by modern standards racist.
He also had a footnote in 1752 and there's an attempt to completely dismiss him.
Whereas Douglas Murray points out it's like by the way they don't do this with Marx you know like who was racist like anti-Semitic like all the kind of horrible stuff.
There's a huge double standard with who they apply the you know no bad people can have any good opinion.
What's that that you call that a offense archaeology where you go digging digging around.
To be clear that that's not our term I don't know I don't remember who originally came up with it.
I know I should learn to give credit where it's due.
But my favorite example of offense archaeology was a he was like on the board of directors I think of a major corporation.
And he had written against women being in the military in like 1986 or somewhere around there.
And he got canceled he got kicked off the board because of something he had written in the 80s which by the way he no longer even believed in and he was very clear about that.
So you and that's and that's the thing what we're trying to say is and one of the reasons why I got so frankly depressed and anxious when I was writing this book is as soon as you're a target the thing they're going to get you on isn't necessarily
the thing you're saying on the podcast. It's something that you might have tweeted you know 15 years ago it might be a column you wrote in high school.
The ability to try to find something on you is is one of the M. O.'s of cancel culture.
Yeah.
Ricky you talked about in the book you guys talk about the difference between the First Amendment as legal precedence and then just cultural free speech norms.
What's wrong with well OK let's put it this way I can't just say anything I want walking around the world telling people you're fat and uglier or whatever I mean we all silence ourselves out of politeness or whatever.
Isn't that different from whatever the First Amendment protects us and shouldn't corporations and universities have something like polite speech codes or you know don't be a dick and just say nasty things to people.
What's wrong with that.
Yeah I mean I think obviously there's the First Amendment that protects you in the public sphere and then it's certainly up to private corporations and private universities to create their own contours and I think I mean there is I would I in my
opinion I think there's a great deal of mistrust in people's ability to just filter on their own like I don't think a corporation necessarily needs to say Michael can't call his co-worker fat.
I think that most people can kind of do that on their own without their corporation stepping in and doing that.
But one one delineation that we do make is that we don't think that First Amendment law in on its own is adequate and protecting free speech in a culture because you have examples of actually contrasting examples of the French enlightenment
which was able to flourish in a context in which the legal the laws in the books were actually quite hostile to free speech and yet that was an enormous moment of intellectual flourishing versus if you go to a country like Turkey or North Korea or Russia
in a legal sense you actually have a perfectly fine standard of having free expression but that just doesn't actually happen in in in actuality.
And I think that the reason that we delineate between free speech culture and just free speech laws in the books is because it's truly you can't have a society where free speech is is thriving and healthy and well and discourses is robust
It's a principle that is drilled into every citizen's head and something that they truly believe in that knowing what other people really believe and have to say is is a something worth worth knowing.
And I mean I would say even just from my own personal perspective coming from Gen Z being a philosophy major doing I did a two year liberal arts condensed philosophy program at NYU at a great school I was at the top of my class.
And yet it took the pandemic and taking a leap of absence to decide on my own that I wanted to read John Stuart Mills on Liberty.
And I had this like, I mean, it's hard for me to even like, it's like learning to ride a bicycle like now I can't really think about what the world is like without the realization of what classical liberalism is but at that moment in time it was like,
whoa, like it just like hit me like, I've been taking for taking for granted all this time what free speech means to a society how I do actually have these, these amazing rights that are so historically and chronologically unlikely in the scheme of human history.
But it took actually learning about like why that principle matters and not just taking it for granted and saying like, oh maybe like some offensive speech should just be curved because like I don't want to hurt people's feelings like you need it you need people to be aware of
why we've all bought into this classical liberal ideal and just having a law on the books is certainly not enough to guarantee that.
Yeah, and I'd like to, you know, chime in.
Because I we actually put some of the more in the weeds arguments back in the appendix partially because since most people kind of know cancel culture is going we didn't want to have the in the weeds arguments break up the flow of the main argument so we put them a little bit in the back.
But I make the point that one of the reasons why we include the First Amendment about the First Amendment standards in the definition of cancel culture is to import a tremendous amount of thoughtfulness and nuance that actually exists in First Amendment law.
And so for example when you talk about the employment setting I tend to think of it as a analog or comparison to public employee status.
Now, what that means, at least in theory, is that, yeah, you call your your coworker fat, you know, in the office that's considered, you know, unprofessional and any employer government or not could probably fire you for that.
They might also be kind of like, okay, that's rude, stop being rude, you know, I don't like the fact that the first thing people seem to do is get fired these days but that's a totally different issue.
But if you express your opinion off off the job on a matter of public concern, there is some law saying that you that a public employee shouldn't be fired for having an opinion and when you're talking about things like free speech culture versus free speech law, you're really talking about
thumbs on the scale and different levels of balancing. And at the end, we give, we point out that there already are like sayings that we all grew up with or at least not so much Ricky, but me and you grew up with, like to each their own, everyone's entitled to their opinion.
All of these things that kind of put a little bit of a thumb on the scale of, okay, do I really want to fire this person for cracking a body joke on Twitter, you know, for example, which which really does happen.
Or should I be kind of like, well, you know, if everyone did that, if every corporation did that, that would be bad for democracy, right?
Right. Yeah, Ricky, so you grew up in the social media world.
And so I'm curious what a how a libertarian like you thinks about the regulation of social media companies. Should they shouldn't they I mean, if you if you're a free mark pro free market, shouldn't Twitter be able to do whatever they want operation?
Well, they used to have shareholders, but I guess not anymore.
But something like that, Facebook or whatever, that's their prerogative they can ban whoever they want.
Even though maybe normalize, you don't think they should, but shouldn't they be able to do that?
Yep, absolutely. I mean, I think that they they certainly should be able to I think there's some important nuances that have come out of like J.
Recently having a pretty, I think landmark victory in in now to court challenges of the Biden administration and several other federal agencies in which he and several other complainants were able to pretty
persuasively demonstrate that that federal agencies were reaching out to companies like social media companies like Twitter and saying, you know, here's a body of misinformation on on your on your platform and effectively job owning them into
answering on their behalf because, you know, these these large social media companies do have some favorable regulations and it's like, well, really nice company that you have there with all of your favorable policy is be ashamed if you didn't get rid of a little bit of this information
misinformation for us. So I think that's a very important nuance of defining the the boundaries between these companies which are increasingly just standing in for the public forum and also allowing for some free market alternatives to flourish,
which, I mean, there's been a tremendous amount of disruption with Elon Musk buying Twitter and all these different offshoots of now threads is an option I don't really think that went anywhere but and there was there were a few
I don't think any of them are going to I don't think any of them are going to go anywhere and there's something about the free market that doesn't solve these kinds of problems, just because of market momentum.
I mean, why aren't there a dozen Twitter there aren't they got there first and that's it they got they captured 99% of the audience. And you know you can start you can go to threads but no one's at on threads.
You gotta be on threads.
You are.
Okay.
I post a threads sub stack.
X, you know, Facebook, LinkedIn and Instagram because there's something wrong with me.
But here I'm giving you the argument, particularly to Ricky libertarian.
You know the free market is not solving this problem so government needs to step in and regulate.
I mean, which problem specifically.
Well, I guess censorship I mean people should not be free to say whatever they want.
I mean, ISIS should not be free to recruit members on Twitter, something like that.
So, so the argument would be I mean I agree with you but I also don't think that there's a large swath of social media companies that have just been like warm hosts to ISIS.
I do think that the free market has done a pretty good job of, of stepping up and creating the contours and experimenting rather than the government coming in and saying, here's, here's what is dangerous speech or here's what's not allowed.
And I would much rather allow for that experimentation, and which I think Twitter, Twitter did and Elon is trying to tinker with the different nuances there.
And I mean, I do, I also would push back a little bit on the idea that the free market has not created some alternatives.
I mean, for better or for worse, a place like it might not be a place that you and I would want to go to but like gab and truth social and all these other little crevices of the internet that are very much alive and unfortunately very polarized.
But like, there, there has been a free market alternative that it might be a little bit more of a niche market but those are pretty dedicated users.
We have a chapter actually on on what we think is kind of like primitive thinking on social media.
And one thing that's really cool is that we have, we got to work with NCRI National Contagion Research Institute to point to look at data indicating that people who were kicked off of Twitter in 2016 and 2017 and 2020.
Tended to go to places like gab where from the, you know, research they did seem to seem to indicate and unsurprisingly got much more radicalized.
And what people miss is that there's value in knowing what people really think.
So for example, like when you give the example of terrorists being, you know, kicked off different platforms, I get sympathy for it, but keep kicking them off.
But at the same time, they all move to WhatsApp.
They all move to things that were much better protected.
Meanwhile, it's kind of like, you're going to tell us what you're planning.
Great.
You know, like way to create a way to create a record way to do this out in the open.
And this is something I have to repeat a lot.
Like it's not, you don't defend freedom of speech because you think everything people say is good.
What you defend freedom of speech because you're saying that everything people say is information that might be valuable.
They might be announcing, hey, by the way, Nazi over here.
Great.
Don't go on a date with me that they might actually otherwise be hiding.
That's funny.
Yeah.
When there's all those calls to kick Trump off of Twitter, it's like, why?
I want to know what he's thinking at one in the morning.
It's important to know what he's thinking.
He's president.
Okay.
Let's look at the big picture of censorship.
What is it about human nature?
Do you think that the default seems to be always to censor other people, whether it's individuals or corporations or government agency.
It's just the long history of humanity.
Censorship is the norm.
Why?
Well, I mean, I call my substack the eternally radical idea because and that's it's a reference to freedom of speech because I think in every generation, people rise up.
And I always expect I'm going to say to defend free speech.
I'm like, no, no, no.
Every generation, people rise up to fight freedom of speech.
And they're usually historically speaking on the on the on the the sensors are on the winning side.
It's very like it's a comparative rare window of human history that free speech has been at all protected.
And I think that there's lots of different, you know, reasons for that.
I think that certainly tribalism is part of it.
I think that we crave certainty.
I think that we crave a more rational world.
I think we crave, like as Carl Popper points out, we crave a more permanent and rational world.
But we also like the idea of there being eternal, perfect truths that are unchanging, which is one of the reasons why I'm such a critic of Plato.
They don't give a whole speech, you know, get get a little cranky about Plato.
So I think this runs really deep with us.
And I think one of the reasons why freedom of speech is the eternally radical idea is because it goes against some of our intuition to say, you know, like, of course, the heavier thing falls faster than the than the lighter thing.
And it actually turns out, wait, my intuition was wrong.
I bet if you test it, that opened up the enlightenment was this incredible period of being like, what if we test all this stuff?
What if we actually look at it and go like, is this actually true?
And we found time and time again, oh, wow, no, no, we were totally wrong about a million different things when you actually when you actually test them.
But it's uncomfortable for a lot of people.
I think like temperaments like me, you and Ricky, we have a little bit of like, we're more comfortable with awe.
We like the idea that there's a massive ocean of stuff that we will never and can never know.
But for other people, that's profoundly unsettling.
Yeah, Ricky, what is your answer that based on like, say, your fellow students and when you were in college, what was it that they were driven to censor people?
Yeah, I mean, I think that there's definitely been different iterations.
And one thing that the coddling of the American mind did such a great job of was describing for me something that I felt like I was living through as like a test, like study subject, maybe, but like couldn't really see the larger zoomed out version.
And so to have Greg and John explain a lot of the safety ism of Gen Z was really clarifying for me because I could see all the symptoms of it.
But I couldn't quite grasp the cause of it or how it was different from times in the past.
But I would say in the most recent couple of years, it's been the tying of like psychological well-being and safety towards in a way that I think really appeals to some people's more sympathetic interest in saying like, oh, my gosh, I wouldn't want to harm somebody
or allow them to be hurt or wounded by words and those words could literally be violence.
And it sounds very hyperbolic, but that's discourse that I heard all the time at NYU and feeling as though you need to protect another.
And I would say at least from my vantage point, I mean, I went to a very diverse college, but almost every single time I heard that sort of discourse invoked.
It was by somebody who was saying, oh, we can't let like this other group, like we can't let these words wound this group.
And very, I can't come up with a single time when someone said like as a person of color or as a woman, I'm wounded by those words.
It's always to protect some other group abstraction.
But I would say at least in terms of the censorship inclination in my generation, it was totally just hijacking our genuine sympathy and empathy for people.
And convincing us that insulating people or stopping certain ideas from coming out of people's mouths was something that would actually legitimately stop harm for others.
You mean so you're saying it's a mistaken belief that words are the equivalent of violence?
Because if you really believe that, then there's kind of a rationality behind silence.
You don't want to let somebody physically pound on somebody else, you would intervene.
Yeah, I mean, it's quite literally you would hear that like those are violent words or you're harming me or I need a safe space, which is an ideological safe space.
But I almost feel like there's a physical element to that as well, obviously, in a very literal sense.
But yeah, I mean, words are tantamount to violence in the minds of a lot of people that I encountered in academia.
And I think that an outgrowth of that is if you if you really embrace that that mistake in my in my view, then it becomes perfectly acceptable to shout down a speaker or to like threaten somebody who's trying to go to a campus event
or to assault somebody who's espousing dangerous words because if words are tantamount to violence and that's a completely acceptable response to them.
Yeah, and I always try to point out that this is an ancient idea.
And I watch, you know, professors, most embarrassingly, but sometimes students think of think that almost like pat themselves on the back for thinking of like that.
Well, we now know words are violence.
It's kind of like, no, we knew words were violence back in the 13th century, kind of like there was not a major distinction made between the two.
And it was more or less a societal decision to make a bright line decision, a distinction between words and violence.
You know, it's embodied in the First Amendment, for example, took a took a while to realize, you know, the full extent of it wasn't really realized into the 20th century.
But at the same time, like this.
But and Jonathan Rauch, who's a good friend and, you know, one of my intellectual heroes, you know, he makes the point that it's underappreciated how much a bright line distinction between speech and violence has been a tool for
peace, because basically the way that the traditional way that we resolve disputes in human history is violence or the threat of violence or ostracism, like really coercive means.
And to move from not just we're going to tolerate dissenters, but we might actually even listen to them engage them and take seriously the possibility they might be right is uncomfortable.
It is also like a radical idea, but it's one of the best inventions the species has ever come up with.
So the canceling of the American mind is something of a sequel to the coddling of the American mind.
Is it that the coddling of parents be people like me of people like Ricky is what made them fragile and that's why they are suffering to have more anxiety, depression, suicidal ideation, cutting all this fear of missing out and fear of being left out and all that stuff is.
Is that thesis held up?
We, you know, to be clear in coddling, we actually identified six different causal threads of why this happened and parenting is definitely a part of it, like anxious parenting is part of it.
We actually even added at a seventh that essentially the ability to sort of fall out of the upper classes, you know, has people and particularly in the upper classes kind of like in a perpetual state of sort of mild panic.
But we also talk about how social media sped all the stuff up, how the polarization made things much more intense.
So there's a technological influence here that not only sped some of these existing trends like polarization and paranoid parenting up.
I also created some new ones like God forbid Tumblr, you know, where the social dynamic became very much about earning some amount of prestige by going in deep at the worst aspects of your of your own thought.
So we think that actually this environment is created by a number of factors.
And but it is weird that the parenting and I think that partially the actual when I mentioned that the, you know, conservatives tend to live out in the country and liberals tend to live, you know, more densely packed.
I think a lot of what we're seeing is this divorce between the between sort of traditional thinking and progressive thinking.
Whereas those two work really well if they balance each other out that essentially like someone pointing out, you know, who really wants to be very, very forward thinking how they raise their kids having the grandparent there saying,
actually, some of that seems like a pretty bad idea, you know, from my grandparents told me that's actually a pretty good balance.
But now that we actually live in in communities that are much more politically isolated and much more homogenous, we kind of spiral off in our own particular idiosyncratic craziness.
Ricky, how come you're not a fragile snowflake?
What happened to you?
And she certainly is not.
She like I got depressed and anxious while writing the book and she was a rock.
I mean, I would say looking back a lot of the Gen Z isms were things that it was it was helpful to have Greg and John kind of identifying some of the cognitive distortions of my generation because I was guilty of a lot of them myself.
But I think having that awareness and having, you know, intellectual authorities like Greg and John who described that to me in a way that I took very seriously was something that allowed me to actually reflect in on myself and I've met a lot of young people who've read that
book and had the same experience to their credit, which is why I feel so fortunate to be able to play a role in in this next book with Greg.
But I would say another part that was of my upbringing that's very important to me is I've been very fortunate in the combination of parents that I was blessed with with a mother who is of Eastern European background and a lot of sensibility and no nonsense.
And I think that's part of that kind of cultural inheritance and a father who's actually 86 years old.
So I've got the most unbelievable span of generations in one household.
I mean, he's he was 63 when I was born and I think coming home with a lot of the the kind of generational tides of things that impacted me at school and I'd come home and I'd police his speech about whatever word was perfectly acceptable the day before.
But now I've been told by someone was unacceptable.
He'd be like, I don't give a shit.
Like, I'm sorry.
I don't care.
And I saw your dad was six, your dad was 63 when he had you.
Yeah, so I was I was a late addition.
And I think, you know, growing up with someone who could tell me, I mean, I've always been a history nerd too.
And growing up with someone who could tell me what it was like to see Nazi POWs with his own eyes being shipped to a camp in upstate New York and who had lived through a lot of social tides and and a lot of trends and fads that had died out.
I mean, just having that, I feel so fortunate to have been able to to ground my own conception of the world beyond just like social media or this moment here and now because it was like almost like an anchor against some of the generational tides, I would say, in retrospect, for sure.
I mean, I was like the only kid in I remember one time in like second grade, a teacher had come to my mom and been like, what's up with Ricky?
She said son of a gun.
And I've never heard anyone say that.
Well, and something really did my dad's actually was 50 when I was born, which is very unusual for people my age. And, you know, like, our family fled the Bolsheviks, you know, like we were originally serfs, you know, like so we have a long, long family history of that.
But particularly if you grew up in a first generation environment with other or also with other immigrant kids.
Like the rest of the world, particularly when they come here, they have, I think they have like a better understanding of some of the aspects of what they make America different and free speech is always right at the top of the list.
And how often Michael, I have to tell you, like, I'll have someone from I went to law school with talk about being concerned about political correctness.
And they'll and they'll mention or cancel culture or just ideology gone wrong.
And even if they're otherwise very lefty, they'll be kind of like, oh yeah, my mother was born in Slovakia.
You know, like they have some connection or, you know, my parents grew up in China.
Like they have some experience with authoritarianism in their family history or personally that makes them aware of the how precious freedom of speech is.
But that's one of the things that's so great about working with like a brilliant young woman like like Ricky is that, you know, she but partially by having, you know, a little bit of a lifeline to the more distant past through her dad.
You know, she she definitely maintained tremendous historical perspective on on how bad it could be without freedom of speech.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, Ricky, your dad's got me beat. I had my son at 62. He's now seven.
Yeah. And I have a 31 year old. I had a 31 year old daughter and I had her I was 37 and that was kind of old. So
I've been a great aunt since I was 10. So it's got to be like some sort of record.
That's really funny.
That's amazing.
Okay, let's talk about these generational differences. I've been thinking a lot about this.
I just read Jean Twangy's latest book Generations Highly Recommended.
Massive data set. So her thesis just to review it for the listeners is that technology has driven a lot of social change, mainly say vaccines, public health measures and so on double the lifespan.
If you lived in a time when you were likely to be half the population would be dead by age 35 on average, you know, you got to have 10 kids because half of them are going to die before they get to reproductive age and so on.
So we were a more what's called an R selected species. That is, we have lots of offspring and hope to get a few into breeding age like salmon versus elephants that have one or two.
I mean, we're more like elephants on average, but her argument is that when life gets safer and longer, it can slow down.
You don't have to have as many kids. You don't have to have them as early.
Her startling statistic was that women of my age on average got pregnant the first time at age 19.
Now it's 29 for your generation, Ricky. That's 10 years and they don't have four or five kids.
They have one, 1.5 or whatever.
And so her argument is the coddling part. Coddling is not the right word. They're more risk averse because you're only going to have one.
This is it. I'm putting all my resources into this one and that translates into things like play dates that we do.
You know, like, okay, I got a call set up the time. We're going to drop them off.
We're going to make sure everything is safe and protected and everything is good.
You know, whereas my generation, you know, you have four or five kids just come home by the time of dinner and that's it.
So the safetyism, she argues, comes from this kind of overprotecting and risk aversion because you have all your resources into just the one or maybe two.
I don't know. What are your thoughts on that?
I mean, I think that that makes sense even in the ways that I do think I was coddled.
It was by my mom and being an only child because she, you know, I was the kid that they poured all the resources into.
And I would go to all the right tutors and, you know, she'll admit herself to have been a helicopter parent a little bit.
And I think, you know, my dad's first family, he had four boys and it was like, I don't know which one's which at a certain point.
They were four and four years. So it was definitely a difference in that sense.
And I would also say, like, I think that the internet plays a role in that too, because of all this, like, I mean, such a wealth of a constant stream of information on like all these different theories about parenting and how you should be
parenting and all these different methods and, and there's this like constant stream of telling you what you what you're doing wrong with your kid or what you should be doing.
I mean, I think that that also puts so much pressure on parents to be giving their kids the best foot forward.
And that often does mean helicoptering over them or coddling them or, or doing things that are historically just negligible to the well-being of a child going forward.
So I think that that probably makes sense because if you have less kids and, and more time and a much louder bullhorn in your ear telling you how you're doing everything wrong as a parent,
then certainly that would make you coddle your kids.
Yeah. And in freedom from speech, at first I called this problems of comfort, which unfortunately I realized would be the initials would be POC and I realized I might get canceled for that.
So in coddling the American mind, we changed it to problems of progress that essentially, and so I was trying to sort of split the difference about trying to explain why I agree, you know, with pinker on things getting better in a lot of ways.
But also that I expect things to get worse for freedom of speech.
And particularly if you have environments where you're, you know, more isolated from people disagree with you and a more therapeutic culture and that has fewer larger problems and can actually has a higher expectation of comfort, frankly,
that you're going to get less and less comfortable with free speech over time, not despite other things getting better, but actually precisely because other things are getting better.
So I think that the decay of freedom of speech is a side effect of what should be considered progress.
I do think that if things turn awful, like if we end up in a nuclear war or something like that, some of that will go away because it tends to give people like a sense of perspective.
But I would rather have the problems of progress than not have them.
Yeah, I've often wondered if a lot of these big protests over small things are just the result of that's what's left to protest.
You know, the big things have been to Vietnam War and civil rights, women's rights, gay rights, these are all done largely.
And so what's next in the next generation? Well, I want to get out there and do something to help human progress.
What's left? Oh, the trans rights or whatever, and our BLM movement and, you know, and then also, you know, when you watch something like the George Floyd video,
I mean, it's really hard to watch and not just be curated.
Yeah. And then you think, well, what can I do? You know, I'm not a mayor, I'm not a politician, I'm not a police chief.
You know, what can I do? Well, I can go down there and protest.
Yes, tomorrow afternoon, we're going down to City Hall and we're going to have our signs or you go on Twitter and complain.
Because at least you feel like you're doing something.
And I would also add to that, like, in my generation, having been at a boarding school, like our school would, I think we were activated quite young politically and we, you know,
they would have buses to certain protests and rallies if you wanted to go down to DC for whatever the most recent, like a climate protest or something like that.
And then I also think you combine that with the fact that teenagers are not doing any of the normal teenager things that they have done for the entire span of human history.
Like they're not socializing, they're not getting outside, they're staying on their phones, they're not getting licenses, they're not dating, they're not getting summer jobs anymore.
And so they have a bunch of kids that are on their phones and on their devices with a 24 hour news cycle who are kind of taking on the weight of the world on their shoulders from day one.
As soon as they plug in online and they don't actually have healthy outlets to use their time.
So of course they're going to want to put that energy and that activism and that passion that they have somewhere.
And oftentimes I think it just ends up going into the political white noise.
Well, and let's be clear here.
And this is something that I do.
There's a tendency particularly for those of us who are more left leaning to never want to blame anybody.
You know, like I never want to say like anything was really anyone's fault.
It's impersonal factors taking over and that's the cause of everything.
It's just you're a victim of circumstance.
But we do try to be pretty clear in the book that there really was, for example, an anti free speech movement.
You know, there really were thinkers including Richard Delgado and Herbert Marcuse and actually what gets labeled now is CRT that really the first thing they did was try to pass speech codes and restrict freedom of speech.
And it's the same thing that comes to like the theory of cobbling in the American mind is that we're teaching young people to think in cognitive distortions, exaggerated mental habits that will make them anxious and depressed if they have them.
But to be clear, like some of that comes from, you know, just parents being extra anxious as there's less to worry about.
Some of it comes from a very intentional, you know, movement among K through 12 teachers, parents believing that if if you're absolutely terrified and depressed about global warming that will somehow make you more of an activist about it.
And again, to go back to Pinker, Pinker points out, no, that actually is likely to make you hopeless or come up with solutions that can't possibly work.
What you need to actually fix things like George Floyd absolutely horrifying and immediately, you know, there were like eight different reforms that would have made common sense to pass it would make an event like this less less likely.
But instead it became sort of a national consciousness raising thing and it really, you know, went after professors and students who tweeted things that were mildly, you know, insensitive, even some cases like that are just utterly ridiculous.
So I think that we shouldn't underestimate how much the mental health harm that we're doing to young people comes from a faulty belief that if we make them sufficiently miserable, it will somehow produce positive social change.
Yeah, sometimes you guys all hear pushback like you're just perpetuating a moral panic over much do about nothing. This isn't a big deal.
I mean, I heard since you mentioned the critical race theory, I heard Chomsky on a podcast the other day saying, Oh, this is just this tiny little legal theory in law schools, you know, grammar school teachers, middle school.
They don't have any idea what this they're not teaching us the kids.
That's a I have respect for Chomsky. He should know better.
The thing is, it's not like they're not literally teaching, you know, they're not handing out Derek Bell's books.
But I mean, there's some of the books that have been in controversial. There's one I think it's literally called intersectional baby, like anti racist baby, you know, like is absolutely that CRT.
A lot of these a lot of these ideas, there's so much in the culture that that people don't recognize that they're originally where they came from.
I'm Mark Kimberly Crenshaw.
Like even though like and Crenshaw has been critical of how they've turned out to a credit.
But yeah, it's it's omnipresent in our society. It's it's it's so taken for granted people forget where it initially came from.
Interesting books on different sides, even though Chris Ruffo isn't a big fan of ours because we we posed rightfully the stop will act in Florida because it was laughably unconstitutional.
You actually wrote a pretty good book about, you know, the origins of CRT that points out that, you know, things that people should know like Mark is actually still in the 70s thought Mao was terrific, you know, which is worth knowing.
And but also Yasha Monk on the other side wrote a book called The Identity Trap pointing out a lot a lot of this stuff and how much it actually has filtered filtered in everywhere.
You know, it includes aspects of everything from postmodernism to CRT. And it's yeah, it's everywhere now.
On this topic of identity, Ricky, maybe you know some people your fellow students.
This kind of sudden spike in in trans by gender identity fluidity and so on. What is going on with that? Do you think?
Yeah, I mean, this is definitely a contentious issue. But I mean, it's one that I have I have no problem talking about because I've seen it like, I mean, I think I think I draw a line between like I truly don't care.
I have a ton of bisexual friends. I think that there is a crazy uptick in people that identify as non straight.
I it's not something that I'm really worried about pontificating about because, you know, they're not hurting anybody.
They're if they want to experiment or end up one way or another, sure, fine, whatever. Like I'm very libertarian in my disposition on that front.
I do draw a line on on feeling as though I'm much more comfortable having a conversation about like when it comes to medicalization and permanent decisions that are being made,
especially when someone is not yet 18 when you can't get a tattoo or even have a beer yet.
And I think, at least from my vantage point, the people that I know who have who have gone down a gender non conforming route or who have decided to or have ended up deciding that their trans have consistently been people who have been very online and
like Tumblr. And I think, you know, there's a huge swath of historical data to demonstrate that young women are especially susceptible to social contagion.
And I think that that that that's a large portion of it, for sure.
And I think, you know, it's just incubated in in, it's like a ready made community that on a place like Tumblr, if you're a kid who's kind of a drift in your social world.
You're welcomed with open arms. I've interviewed a lot of detransitioners and that's something that I consistently hear is that they felt when they were in middle school that they were kind of on the outskirts and then all of a sudden here's this this warm welcoming
community with a solution to all their problems.
And that tells them that this is kind of the panacea to everything and and you get built in friends to and and a whole world that embraces you and then all of a sudden all your friends in school and real life are celebrating you because you've done something so brave or
having assemblies in school and suddenly you're the kid that was in the back corner and you're you're really at the center of everything.
And so I think that there's a lot of complex social things going on on that front.
But I would definitely say that the the social contagion aspect like I I saw in just from afar in my age cohort that there were I was definitely a propensity of friend groups like coming to that conclusion at the same time together.
And I don't think that that is a coincidence. Yeah.
Yeah. And I mean and I want to bring us back to cancel culture and how it relates to this.
So let's take Carol Hoeven, you know, absolutely brilliant, you know, wrote a wonderful like a really top notch book called testosterone called T.
And you know the dangerous time to be writing about it.
She's an evolutionary biologist and she's over been essentially forced out of Harvard because she won on Fox News and explained very compassionately, very sweetly that we should be respectful towards trans people.
We should use their pronouns, all of the stuff, but biological sex is real and that it's important and we can't lose sight of the importance of biological sex.
And immediately a DEI administrator, you know, started, you know, complaining about it very publicly and people students got together and wrote petitions, you know, together fired the or otherwise punished.
And they wouldn't work in her class, it wouldn't be TAs and she got really depressed and she she dropped out came back again to work for Steve Pinker's lab.
And given that she dropped out, we actually count that as a cancellation attempt in our database, but we don't actually count that as successful cancellation, which because she did it, you know, of her own accord.
But this happens all the time and it's hard to, you know, know what it doesn't happen as a school is high profile as Harvard.
But here's how this relates to the trans discussion.
People aren't stupid. And when they see that someone got absolutely, you know, pulled over raked over the coals for just saying biological sex is real.
When the next expert comes out and says, actually biological sex is on a spectrum, it's not really real is blah, blah, blah.
They're just going to say, why should I trust you? Because if you said anything else, your life would be totally messed up, you might be fired, you might actually lose your entire career and all your friends.
So that's one of the reasons why one of the subtler themes of the book is how cancel culture destroys trust and expertise.
Yeah. Yeah, just a final point on that because I had a trans student a few years ago, a Chapman who, 18, these are first year students and she decided in the midstream, I'm now I want to be a boy or a man or whatever.
But it was obvious in a few weeks, she didn't want to change sex or whatever she wanted to be trans.
The trans was the identity, not the other thing.
And that's by sense of what might be going on.
I think there's definitely also, I mean, there's so much pressure. It's, it was really bizarre. I was in humanities classes at NYU and there was so much pressure to attach your personal immutable characteristics to any point that you make as a preface in,
in especially philosophical conversations where you'd hear all the time, like, as a queer person, blah, blah, blah.
And it would be like talking about some philosopher from the 17th century and it's like, what is your, your identity have to do with that?
Or as a woman or as a person of color, because it was almost like, if you felt like you might be saying something a little bit controversial or your idea might be pushed back on a little bit, then you had to attach it to some sort of group that would shield you from it,
which is almost the inverse of the perfect rhetorical fortress of what Greg and I discussed with cancel culture.
It's like protecting yourself by saying, I actually am part of this class.
And so, you know, if you can, if you can adopt one of those classes too, then, then there might be social benefit to that in a world where people get torn down for not being the right identity and having a certain idea.
I remember talking to an Uber liberal mother whose daughter I think just turned 15 and she was bragging how she's bi bisexual.
I said, well, how do you know?
I mean, if she had sex with boys and had sex with girls and she said, I like them both equally.
And she said, no, she hasn't had sex with anybody.
It's like, then how do you know?
I mean, so it's the identity itself.
The word has captured this meaning.
It's interesting when you look at the data, how many women say that they're bisexual, but when you actually ask them, do they, who they have sex with, a large percentage of them only have sex with men.
And it's kind of like, OK, so what exactly does that mean?
Well, that does flip pretty considerably with Gen Z women.
Jean Twenge has some data on that in her book where actually a lot of the self-identified bisexual young women are engaging in sexual activity with both genders.
Interesting.
OK, let's, before we run out of time, let's make sure we cover the conservative cancel culture.
What's wrong with Ron DeSantis wanting to protect Floridian children and protect children going to Disney because they're going to be exposed to all this.
Crazy woke stuff.
Oh, don't get me started on this.
The laws coming out of Florida have just completely derailed some of the discussion.
Some of the very legitimate discussion about higher education reform, which, you know, badly needs to happen.
We need a lot of work to protect academic freedom and viewpoint diversity.
And that overwhelmingly got derailed by the Stop Woke Act, which, you know, literally when they're arguing in court, I believe they said it's kind of like, well, you could have someone being anti-affirmative action in class,
but they can't be pro-affirmative action.
It's like, no, that's laughably unconstitutional.
And we warned them about this.
And now, because that was a, and fire, bought it in court, by the way, and we won, that there's now a version of it, part two, that they're, that will, I think is just as unconstitutional.
And I think we'll be able to, we will be able to defeat it again.
But it was bad because it's unconstitutional.
You can't engage in viewpoint discrimination in higher ed.
And it very much said you can't, you know, talk about these topics, you know, whether race, sex, gender, but also really, you can't have these points of view.
It seemed to be very, it was baked into the law.
And meanwhile, this has turned into, oh, it's the new McCarthyism.
There's all of these laws across the country threatening academic freedom.
And I'm concerned about the bad laws coming out of a lot of these legislatures, but there really was, as best we can tell, one law that came out, and that's the Stop Woke Act, and we defeated it in court.
But the other bad things coming out of Florida, you know, like going after Disney for having a political position is just silly theater, but also, you know, abuse of power.
The one that I think people should be more worried about is the attempt to go after New York Times v. Sullivan, which is the case that really strongly makes it very hard to defame public figures and well-known people.
And it's funny because there's a little bit on the right that kind of like, oh, we'd be so much better officers, there's no New York Times v. Sullivan.
I'm like, guys, think this through. Who do you think would be the most likely to get in trouble without New York Times v. Sullivan?
The conservatives are crazy to think that somehow protects them more than anybody else.
Just explain that log in.
So New York Times v. Sullivan is a seminal First Amendment case from the 1960s, in which there was an ad run in the New York Times that talked about some of the racial justice protests going on, and it had a couple of minor factual mistakes in it.
And there was a lawsuit against the people who bought the ad and claiming that it was defamatory.
And in that case, the Supreme Court came up with a standard called actual malice, that essentially you have to, if you publish something that you know was false or you showed reckless disregard for the truth,
you have to meet that high level in order to defame a public official.
And this has been very good at protecting us, protecting the U.S. from the very real problem of people in power using defamation law to silence their critics.
So this is like when Megyn Kelly had around DeSantis on, she pushed back against this, that this is not good for conservatives because once you set that precedent, that it's okay for the government to go after corporations' attitudes politically.
Well, that's just going to turn around and bite liberals.
Yeah, and I think it's something that unfortunately is it appeals to like the baser instincts of people who may have been in the camp that I was in before I really sat down with like classical liberal texts and theory where like you see liberalism on the left and people fighting in a really mighty way to try to
and then it seems perfectly logical if you're not really steeped in the philosophy of free speech and pluralism and classical liberalism to say, well, we should be stamping it out too because we're fighting might with might and they're bringing their fists and we should fight back.
And I think it's a really unfortunate reality that that's something that has allowed someone like DeSantis to get so much attention and so much popular support because it actually feels like he's fighting the battles.
And there's not enough, at least in my opinion, in my view as someone more on the right, there's not enough truly principled people with solutions that are genuinely pluralistic and genuinely foster a diverse democracy that are coming up and saying like actually if the left is going to abdicate freedom of speech as a fundamental principle, why don't we just take that up and like that would actually be appealing to quite a lot of people.
But unfortunately, it's not quite as sexy as stopping woke.
Yeah. Well, right, stopping woke. I mean, there was a viral tweet last week of a page, photograph of a page from a children's but maybe middle school was hard to tell about anal sex, rimming, you know, how to stimulate somebody, make sure you use open water, got to be careful in this and that.
And this was just being passed around like this is what the left is trying to do.
Yeah, that's a book called Let's Talk About It.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah, what's the backstory there?
The backstory there is it's a book that, you know, I don't think is appropriate for kids but by a long shot and this is something that is frustrating where fire is coming out with a frequently asked question on, you know, book banning and I put that in quotes because a lot of what's called book banning is not book banning, but there is actual
book banning. We took some heat in the Wall Street Journal for talking about book banning in the book, but book banning is when you completely remove a book from a library that not not reclassified as for adults, you just completely take it out.
Book banning is when someone gets arrested for forgiving, you know, for suggesting the book. What is it? This book is gay, you know, which has some racy stuff in it, but at the same time, it's not a crime to distribute it.
And a lot of the way the media has been covering this is people are arguing that something is age inappropriate. And if you're saying, if you have a process and they decide that, you know, this book is not age appropriate, that's always what K-12 libraries and public libraries have done.
And so there is a problem of book banning. But the way it's actually being handled currently in the media is really deceptive. The one that bothers me the most, frankly, is when you have these laws saying, you know, we will not teach the following books in our curriculum.
Well, and that could call a book ban. And like, you can think these are stupid, and some of them I think are stupid. But at the same time, do you live in a world where decisions on curriculum were at some point in human history, not political?
They've always been political. And what scares me the most with some of this stuff is that there's a movement among some nonprofits that are essentially like just like the the governor, the former Democratic governor of Virginia, just right before he lost, was
really kind of saying that we should leave all decisions related to K-12 education just to graduates of education schools. And it's like, no, there are there, I have, you know, five and seven year old, there are kids, we pay the taxes on it, and this is a mandatory institution.
And therefore, there needs to be democratic oversight. So, so when it comes to curricular stuff, that's always been politically decided and should have some democratic oversight.
So I think there's been some, even though we we object to the problem of book banning, I also think the debate has been held at a very low and sometimes frankly, deceptive level.
Right. So you distinguish between public schools and private schools, for example.
Oh, of course, yeah.
Yeah, can do what they want, something like that. Yeah. Okay, before we run out of time here, because I know you guys got interviews lined up. Solutions, what should we, what should the average person listening to this do? What can I do?
Well, the third, the whole third of the book is about solution, but Ricky go first.
Yeah, I was going to say one thing that we do emphasize is on parenting. I think that this, we need to be very mindful to raise anti-cancelers and that's something that sounds very like hopeful and wishful thinking, but actually the vast majority of Gen Z actually has a negative view of cancel culture more so than any generation.
It's a small number of very loud and very vicious people who are tearing down fellow young people and a whole lot of young people that are sitting on their hands and are afraid to speak up for their friends and to put themselves out there.
And so I think that that parenting the next generation to be mindful of the fact that like everyone is going to screw up and everyone needs some grace at a certain point of time is certainly something that gives me hope that there are more parents being aware of instilling those values.
And a lot of young people who have come up like raise their hands when I started speaking out in NYU and said like, actually, I agree with you. Just don't tell anyone.
Right. Don't tell anyone. Right. So this is called pluralistic ignorance or the spiral of silence where everybody thinks everybody else thinks something. And in fact, they don't.
With collective illusion.
Yeah.
Yeah. And when it comes to, I mean, for me, I think we need to be thinking about big, bold other ways for the hardest working, smartest students out there to show that because I think that's how kind of pessimistic I am about some aspects, particularly of elite higher.
But first, I think people should hire it less often from elite higher ed, because a lot of these problems are much more intense in elite higher ed.
And I, but I also think that we need avenues, you know, that someone can show that they're because right now take Harvard and I'll pick on Harvard all day.
45% of students, I believe of white students are either kids of professors, kids of legacies or sports people and the average average GPA at Harvard is 3.8.
So you might have someone who just kind of waltzed in there because they're a legacy that they don't have to work hard. They'll get they'll get there and make it a 3.6. And I know this from Stanford as well.
Like, you know, it's hard to be the top of your class, of course, but it's all the most impossible to fail out. You can you can get away with doing very little in elite higher ed.
So right now, we have this product that's supposed to give us the hardest working best and brightest, and it's not. And it's also giving employer employers and often cases, people who show up and want to cancel anyone they disagree with and have, you know, forums about, you know,
someone said something conservative, you know, in my organization, let's let's have a giant meeting. I think that if we had some other alternate avenues, and I'm talking about University of Texas at Austin, for example, but even way beyond that, we need to have other ways of showing that that completely
circle that really go around elite higher education, because that's how serious I think some of these ideological problems are you need to find other avenues.
Okay.
Yeah, I mean, to Greg, to Greg's credit, he changed fires, hiring requirements to hire me because I ended up just being so like disgusted with the state of my education and the nerve of my school to charge full tuition for zoom.
And so now, so now fire will hire non grads he's walking the walk. And I think I think definitely challenging the the grip that elite higher ed, which is inculcated all these ideas has on on our society and our institutions of leadership is definitely a really important thing to chip away at.
Yeah, by the way, I think those kind of pressures will actually help encourage elite higher ed to reform itself because you know, let's face it, Harvard has a one, I crunched the numbers the other night, $1 trillion.
It's endowment. They're going to be they're going to be around for a while. So you also have to put pressure on elite higher ed to reform itself but I would but I would love to start seeing, you know, people figuring out ways that people can show, you know, how many books they've read on a particular topic because those are the kind of people
that at fire more. Basically, when we're hiring people were trying to figure out, would you defend freedom of speech, even if it wasn't your job, and do you live and breathe this stuff, because then you're one of us.
Mm hmm. Yeah. Yeah, so Ricky, is it enough to say, I disagree with cancel culture, maybe just saying it other people go hey me too and then all of a sudden you get a cascade of shifting of opinions.
I certainly believe the courage is contagious. And yeah, it's just a matter of, of, I think, you know, an example that I think is really gives me a ton of hope is in Harvard their free speech council had 100 professors on it who all at the same time step forward and said yes, this is a problem.
And I think the safety in numbers is a really important thing because they've not been castigated in a way that I think if it was just one of them they almost definitely would have been.
And so, you know, the more people can actually put together that there are those around them that think the same way which was my experience at NYU having professors and deans and students that I knew and classmates that I never would have known agreed with me that free speech was an issue on campus,
and I think that's a really helpful path forward. There's my 230.
Okay.
I'll say goodbye and just make a few more comments with with Greg. Thank you, Ricky. Thank you so much. Congratulations on getting a major book deal with a major publisher at such a young age. You're just getting started. You're rolling.
Ricky is the best. I feel very lucky to get to work with her.
Thank you both so much. It's been a pleasure.
Thank you, Ricky. I'll just a few more comments with you, Greg. I'm glad you guys took on The Bachelor and Chris Harrison.
Oh, yeah. Yeah.
My wife and I have, you know, we have a little junk TV we like to watch, which used to be The Bachelor and The Bachelor.
It's great.
Yeah. And I always thought that was a stupidest show until I started watching it. Then you get attached to the characters and, you know, like, oh, she should have picked him or whatever.
But then that last season where the white woman picks the black guy is the man she wants to marry, and then they do some offense archaeology and they find when she was in high school, she went to like an antebellum, like a...
Scarlett O'Hara dance.
Yeah, Scarlett O'Hara. Yeah, something like that. And they, oh my God. And those final episodes were just painful to watch.
Yeah.
And they were like, you know, why did you pick him? It's like, well, because I'm in love with him. No, no, that's not it. You know, and it's like, you got to do the work. They kept telling her she has to do the work.
Ah, do the work.
And that's the first time I had heard that phrase. Like, what does that mean, do the work?
It means I'm superior to you and there's some knowledge that I have that you have. And Chris Harrison, what he came out and said in that was, let's have some grace.
But the people are being absolutely awful. Like, it was something that was perfectly reasonable to say. And he got forced out after, what was it? I don't remember exactly, 18 years?
Yeah, 19 years. Yeah, it was astonishing. And he comes off as the nicest guy, probably Uber liberal, just everyone.
Yeah.
And tolerate differences and so on. I mean, he deals with all that. And to be run out of town like that, it was just shameful.
Yeah.
And then they brought in that new host, a black guy, Ocho, I think, A-C-H-O or something like that, Emmanuel Ocho. He was a professional, I think, football player.
And sort of making, trying to make the transition into television.
So I read his book, which is basically, it's a little bit like the anti-racism type theme.
Oh.
Where everybody is a racist and, oh, I think the title was, you know, difficult conversations with white people, something like that.
Yeah.
That usually means lectures too.
Yes, yeah. So I said, all right, I'm a white guy. I have difficult conversations on my show with lots of people. So let's get them on. And the publisher, my publisher, is McMillan.
And they're like, nah, he doesn't want to do it.
Yeah. It was just like, yeah, I'll lecture to you, Sharma, but I don't want to talk to you about this because there's no conversation to be had.
Yeah.
Yeah. And that's one thing that we do in the book. We talk about, you know, we talk about things, cancellations related to COVID. We talk about journalism, publishing.
We talk about corporations, because to make the point that this is really, you know, escaped the lab.
And fire, the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression, where I'm CEO, we change from being the Foundation for Individual Rights in education focused overwhelmingly on higher ed to expression in just last year because the situation has gotten so bad off campus as well.
Yeah.
Can people who work in a corporation or at a university stand up and say, I'm not doing the DEI training? That's pretty risky to lose their job, right?
If you're in a private corporation, it's especially risky because they probably can, you know, fire you for that. However, if you're in a university setting, and you say that I'm not attending this, there's a very particularly given the way some of these are formed,
there's a very strong compelled speech argument, because a lot of times what they don't just want you to come to this thing, they want you to confess your evil or your oppression, which brings up serious issues of conscience and compelled speech.
So one thing that fire is challenging right now, and I love this about fire, we fought and defeated the Stop Woke Act. We're also suing in California going after this absolutely outrageous DEI policy that they have that requires professors no matter what they teach to work in ideas like intersectionality,
anti-racism, all of the approved DEI type stuff into their classes. And it's like, and I watch some people kind of explode on threads, for example, where I am, you know, someone yelled in a response,
read a book looking out off and I'm like, I have friends. But the, and I have to point out, listen, if you understood why it was a threat in the Stop Woke Act, this is actually even worse. This is telling professors what they must to say, and it makes it basically categorically eliminates the possibility that you come out and say, oh, by the way, I actually think some of this is BS.
It's actually requiring you to have a point of view on some of these topics. So we're suing it in court there.
So the constitutional legal precedence on that goes back to the saying of the Pledge of Allegiance for some Jehovah Witnesses, right?
Yes, 1943, very good. Yeah, the Barnett case, which is probably my all-time favorite Supreme Court decision.
You can't make people say things.
And it's something that, and I say this, as bad as it is to tell people what they can't say, it's even worse to tell them what they must say and downright totalitarian to tell them what they have to say.
And that would apply to public schools, right? I mean, if I go to a Christian school and I want a Christian education and I'm supposed to believe in Jesus, you know, they have a right to not hire me, Michael Schirmer, the atheist, right?
It depends on what they promise. You know, like, we definitely do recognize that, like, particularly like a public, like a private Christian college, if it wants to not promise freedom of speech or academic freedom,
they have the right to do that. We'll list them as a school. We call them warning schools. But what we mean by that is, like, well, if you want freedom of speech, it's not actually promised by these schools.
So just be warned. That doesn't necessarily mean the environment there is terrible for free speech, but it could be. And they can do that.
But what's interesting is a lot of these nominally religious schools have profoundly, you know, strong commitments to freedom of speech in their policies, like Georgetown.
And I almost wonder if Georgetown should just eliminate them because they were third from last in our most recent free speech rankings because they...
And it's not like they're firing people for being contradicting Catholic teaching, although they are punishing students for that to some degree.
In a lot of cases, you know, like going after Ilya Shapiro is because he made the left mad because he talked about how he was critical of Joe Biden's decision to say that he's going to hire a black woman to be the next Supreme Court.
And something like 59% or some percentage of the American public was like, yeah, that wasn't appropriate. The person's always going to be...
It makes it seem like whoever gets the job didn't get it on the basis of merit.
Well, there you can just apply a Rawlsian original position where you don't know what the person's skin color or gender is.
And therefore you wouldn't want a rule that says I can hire a nominated Supreme Court justice who is X-Race and Y-Gender because everybody will know that in principle that can't be right.
Yeah, I agree.
But if you fill it in with the correct race and gender, correct for the wrongs of the past, I guess that's what's really going on.
But I do apologize because I actually also have to go.
Yeah, you've got to go too. Okay, yeah, I'll let you go. All right, Greg. Yeah, no worries. I know you guys are busy. Thanks so much.
Always a pleasure, Michael. And everyone should know that Michael also appears in the book talking about some of the stuff that's been going on with Scientific American, which breaks my heart as well as a former subscriber.
All right. Take care.
