Hello everyone, it's Michael Schirmer. This is my friendly reminder to sign up for our December 1st
through 3rd weekend conference here and event at the Skeptic Society, open house Friday night here
at the offices, as well as Sunday afternoon for those of you who can't make it Friday night,
Saturday night fundraising dinner for the Skeptic Society. If you support us, it would be great
to see you there. But most interestingly, we're doing a couple of podcast live recorded episodes.
I'll be in conversation with not only Jared Diamond Sunday morning, but Michael Schellenberger
on Saturday. Now, he's an interesting figure, very controversial. I've already gotten some
mail from people saying, how could you have this guy? Because he's one of the most interesting
people working out there today. He's worked in environmentalism, on nuclear power, on homelessness.
He lives in San Francisco area, so he knows that well. Drug addiction, what we can do about it.
And especially journalism, independent journalism versus mainstream media, alternative media,
what we should trust as truth, which is the theme of the conference. In journalism, when you read
something, should you believe it or not? This is what Michael has been not only studying, but also
working in. So we'll be having a nice long podcast conversation on Saturday, which is recorded live
in the hotel at the Hilton, Santa Barbara Hilton there, in which you will participate. That is
to say, he and I will talk for a little while, and then when it's time, we'll go to you. And you
can ask questions, you can even dialogue with him. I mean, it's going to be one of those kind of
interesting podcast episodes, which we'll then post on my show afterwards. Alright, so check it out.
Go to skeptic.com and just click on the banner for the conference. And I hope to see you there.
Thanks for your support. So it's good to see you again, Robert. I think the last time we saw
each other maybe was at that City of Ideas conference in Pueblo, Mexico.
Like in the hallway behind the lecture hall or whatever. But what a totally weird place that
was. It certainly was. Yeah. You know, I've noticed a lot of people have tried to do the TED
model. And, you know, it's hard to replicate that. It's one of those things that happens maybe
only once. I just did this conference in England called How the Light Gets In, which was very popular.
It was great. And it was a little bit like Ted and Burning Man. It was outdoors, intense and music
and, you know, food trucks and stuff like that, but also lectures by professional, whatever. Anyway,
so. Well, food trucks are always good, but were there billionaires helicoptering in to get into
there? No, not like that. No. Not like that. Yeah. Robert, let me give you a proper introduction
here, my guest today. If you haven't figured it out already is Robert Sapulski, the author of
several works of nonfiction, including A Primate's Memoir, The Trouble with Testosterone,
and Why Zebras Don't Get Ulcers, his most recent book before. The new one here is Behave,
New York Times bestseller, which was named Best Book of the Year by The Washington Post and
The Wall Street Journal. He's a professor of biology and neurology at Stanford University
and the recipient of a MacArthur Foundation Genius Grant. He and his wife live in San Francisco.
Here's the new book Determined, A Science of Life Without Free Will. All right. Robert,
this is my favorite book of yours. I've read everything you've written. And let me tell you
why. Wow. Well, it's technically just as good as, you know, your other books in terms of presenting
the science, but there's something different about this one. Tell me if I get this right.
I was just trying to think like on my bike ride today is like, what is it? I feel like
he's having a conversation with me informally. And then I realize, no, that's not it. It's like,
you're having a conversation with yourself and I get to listen in on this.
It's, well, I think a punchline that goes throughout the whole book is I'm like so far out
in left field or right field in terms of lunatic fringe opinions about this.
But the majority of the time, I can't follow through on the way I think the world should work.
So no one said it's easy, blah, blah. So I think a lot of the book is exactly that. What do you do
when you turn out to be unable to follow through with your prescription for what is like intellectually
legit? Yes. In other words, you're wrestling with yourself about a very difficult
issue, free will and determinism. It's one of these things. Here's how I think about it,
that we've had, I don't know, what 3,000 years of the greatest minds of all time arguing about this.
And if we still don't have a consensus, then there's something different about this than some other
theory. If we were still arguing about the steady state theory versus the big bang theory and there
was no clear consensus, I would think, okay, after 50 years, come on, these guys, they got to try
something new, like maybe string theories like that or something like that. Maybe conceptually,
it's just the language or not thinking about it right or I don't know what it is. I mean,
you wrestle with this throughout the book. Well, it's a moving target. It's one of those where
everyone has a very, very strong folk intuition about what free will is. What I discovered when
having to read philosophers for the first time in my life when preparing for the book is an awful
lot of philosophers between the lines of the philosophizing have very, very strong folk
intuitions about what free will is. And it's hard to get at. And what I'm also convinced is a major
fault line in that is, what are the implications of there being no free will when we're thinking
about criminality and all that? And what are the implications when we're talking about somebody's
amazing resume? Psychologically, there's a big fault line between those two categories of wrestling
with it. Yeah, I like to cite that study. Let me see if I have those numbers. I think it was
David Chalmers actually conducted this study in 2009 of what philosophers, it was like their
position. Yeah, here it is. A 2009 survey of 3226 philosophy professors and grad students
were asked to weigh in on 30 different subjects of concern in their field from a priori knowledge,
aesthetic value, God, knowledge, mind, moral realism, and then this one, free will,
compatibilism, libertarianism, or no free will. The survey found the following results,
59% compatibilism at 15% other, 13.7% libertarianism and 12.2% no free will. So that's you,
you're in the 12%. Yes, I'm actually surprised it's that high. I've been spouting 90 to 95% of
free will acceptance. I don't know about the 13% libertarianism because that,
just for our listeners, that's nothing to do with the political party,
that there's something like a little homunculus in your head, a mini-me that's making the decisions.
But somehow, yes, it's completely, well, it's somehow fitting in. You kind of admit the world
is made of like material things, but then you grant yourself a homunculus and give it complete
power over the material things. I decided early on in trying to do this book that I wasn't going
anywhere near the libertarian philosophers because it's just a little bit too squishy for
me to make sense of. So I mostly ignore them and just deal with the compatibilists.
Yeah, it seems like a resurrection of dualism. There's a ghost in the machine up there still
floating around, but that doesn't solve anything because if there's a mini-me,
then who's inside mini-me? They have to be a mini-me. All the way in.
Yeah, one more thing before we get into the meat of that. I want to read a passage from your book
to us again. I like how you're writing this so beautiful, but because I think there's
something else going on in this book. So this is your discussing on page 16 and 17,
what you mean by determinism. Imagine a university graduation ceremony, almost always moving despite
the platitudes, the boilerplate, the kish, the happiness, the pride, the families who sacrifices
now all seem worth it, the graduates who were the first in their family to finish high school,
the ones whose immigrant parents sit there glowing, their saris, the sheikahs, our aongs,
broadcasting their pride in the present isn't at the cost of pride in their past.
And then you notice someone amid the family clusters post-ceremony, the new graduates posing
for pictures with grandma in her wheelchair, the burst of hugs and laughter. You see the person
way in the back, the person who is part of the grounds crew, collecting the garbage from the
cans on the perimeter of the event. Randomly pick any of the graduates, do some magic so this
that this garbage collector started life with the graduate's genes. Likewise for getting the womb
in which nine months were spent and the lifelong epigenetic consequences of that,
get the graduate's childhood as well, one filled with say piano lessons and family game nights
instead of say threats of going to bed hungry, becoming homeless, or being deported for lack
of papers. Let's go all the way so that in addition to the garbage collector having gotten all of that,
the graduates passed, the graduate would have gotten the garbage collectors passed.
Trade every factor over which they had no control and you will switch who would be in the graduation
robe and who would still be hauling garbage cans. This is what I mean by determinism. Okay.
Evolutionary theories have this distinction between proximate and ultimate causes.
I'm going to say, go out in the lame here and say this book is not really about determinism
and free will and your beef with Dan Dennett or anything like that. This book is about the garbage
collector. Yeah. This was my son's Stanford graduation of just seeing this guy and
what the hell is he thinking and how did this and knowing,
you know, all these graduates worked incredibly hard and they're great kids and they care about
the planet with almost no exceptions and all that. But nonetheless, wow, that's this world that
things turn out that way. And we all know it. We all if you really pin somebody down, they'll say
they would have switched. Yeah, that's very interesting that you honed in on that. Yeah,
this book is about that. I mean, life is not fair. How do lives turn out? It's mostly luck.
It's mostly stuff you don't control. And so what you're after here is why is it not fair
like that? And what can we do about it? I mean, we have been trying to do things about it,
you know, the civil rights and women's rights and gay rights and animal rights and
children's rights and workers rights and all the stuff that we've been working at,
abolition of slavery and torture and whatnot. And we've made made progress, but it's still not fair.
And what can we do to level the playing field as it were?
Yeah, that's that's our problem. And hooray, redistribution of wealth and getting over all
these biases and implicit biases and the that whole song and dance. But for me, and what's at
the heart of the book is kind of the starting point is this is a world that runs on the myth
that some people deserve the praise and rewards they receive, and some people deserve the blame
and punishment, and that that is rational and even more so ethically acceptable.
And where that makes no sense whatsoever. And in a in a bizarre way, just kind of given my
training or whatever, this is a book that's mostly about neurons and hormones and gene
environment interactions and all that stuff. But it's, you know, ultimately, a book about
social justice. It's a very screwed world that runs on a myth that things are just
when they're not and they're not because it is a deterministic world.
Could it ever be a just world, given the variation, the natural variation in genes and
epigenetics and social environments and so forth? Or are we just going to just aim for an
approximate not utopia, but protopia, protopia, just a little bit. But that's Kevin, Kevin Kelly's
phrase, by which he means just trying to make tomorrow a little bit better than today.
Well, you know, I come from my my my sociopolitical rants are along the lines of all reform,
undercut revolution, blah, blah, that sort of thing. And this book is obviously an extreme,
extreme stance, because it's not about how there's less free will than we think it's about how there's
no free will whatsoever. What do we do about it? Though you ask, and like the pathetic thing that
I come up with is like a gradual list, little incremental reformist thing of like, try every
day to like, deal with this concept when you interact with somebody or feel like pleased with
yourself, you know, do a little bit at a time. Just because a big theme of the book is, oh my
God, how are we supposed to function if people actually believe there's no free will? We've been
spending centuries crawling in that direction, at point after point, you know, getting enlightened
about how the world actually works and where we subtract responsibility out of domains where we
previously meted out major punishments and major rewards. And you know, it's a good thing that 400
years ago or so, most people figured out that hailstorms are not caused by witches. They're not
caused by the old woman with no teeth who has no family living alone at the edge of the hamlet.
Oh, it doesn't work that way. It doesn't work that way that someone who has an epileptic seizure
is possessed by Satan, let alone that they chose to sort of mess around with him. And here's what
he got now. All of this are cases where we've slowly learned there's not free will there.
So, you know, all I do is sit out way out there saying there's none whatsoever, but
you know, we got to do it stepwise to get less and less of that attribution because, you know,
a huge amount of the world's misery is due to the fact that people who had bad luck
are treated as if they had something to do with it. And that we all then congratulates ourselves
on the notion that the world is just in that regard, because we can be the agents of our own
actions when we're not. Yeah. Yeah, so this even has a name, just world theory, largely supported
more by conservatives than liberals. That is to say, yeah, the world used to be unjust,
but we've fixed most of that now. Still have a little ways to go, but, you know, if you're rich,
you probably got there because you're hardworking and smart and creative. And if you're poor, well,
you know, you just, you should have gotten up earlier, you should have worked harder.
It's like that Seinfeld episode where he has to go back into coach and the flight attendant closes
the curtain and looks at you like, I'm sorry, you didn't work harder. You don't get to come into
class. There you have it. There you have it. Somehow I propose that there's a wonderful study
some years ago on not road rage, but airline passenger rage during flights of like unruly
hostile behavior, looking for what the variables were that predicted it. And the study had two
killer findings, which is the more likely or if it's one of those flights where when you're
getting into coach, you've got to walk through first class, that increases the odds of air flight.
But, but even more interestingly, if it's one of those flights where the Hoy Paloy coach passengers
have to walk through first class, there's even more of a boost of anti social behavior among
the first class passengers. Oh really? We don't want to see these people.
Exactly. One is about resentment, but the other is about like reification of entitlement.
God, it's bad enough they had to walk through here. Now what? I've got to wait a few minutes for
my drink. So that's some sort of metaphor for everything out there. But wow, what a great finding.
Yeah, that's incredible. Okay, another passage from your book.
One compatibilist philosopher after another reassuringly proclaims their belief in material
deterministic modernity, yet somehow there's still room for free will. As might be kind of clear by
now, I think that this doesn't work. See chapters one, two, three, four, five, six, etc. I suspect
that most of them know this as well. When you read between the lines or sometimes even the lines
themselves and they're writing, a lot of these compatibilists, and I know you're speaking about
Diane Dennett along with others who's been on this show, are actually saying that there has to be
free will because it would be a total downer otherwise doing contortions to make an emotional
stance seem like an intellectual one. Humans descended from the apes, let us hope it's not
true, but if it is, let us pray that it not become generally known. Said the wife of an Anglican bishop
in 1860 when told about Darwin's novel theory of evolution. 156 years later, Stephen Cave titled a
much-discussed June 2016 article in The Atlantic. There's no such thing as free will, but we're
better off believing in it anyway. I think that's a lot of what's happening.
But I was going to counter that with a quote from Noam Chomsky who I listened to periodically on
various podcasts because he's always interesting to listen to even if I don't agree with him.
He basically said when asked about free will and determinism, he said,
no one really believes in determinism, nor do they act like it, not even determinists.
So why bother to even talk about it? Great. And what I wrestle with is I'm a total determinist and
just a little bit of the time I'm able to actually function as if that's the case.
It's hard. It's hard because we're people of our place and time. I've got no trouble at all
with the notion that there's no such thing as witches, but no matter how much I believe in this
stuff, it's still kind of nice when someone says to me, good job about something that I've done,
or when I'm appalled or irritated or pissed off at someone who's getting on my nerves to really,
truly step out from some notion of agency going on there. It's really hard, but we got to do it
because it's a much more humane world each time we get a little bit closer to that.
Okay. So you define one of your definitions of determinism, the shorter one.
We are nothing more or less than the cumulative biological and environmental luck
over which we had no control that has brought us to any moment. And then I'll quote from Sam
Harris in his book titled Free Will. Interesting. You both had the exact same position. His book
is called Free Will and your book is called Determined. Let's see who gets more sales.
So here's what Sam writes. Our wills are simply not of our own making. Thoughts and intentions
emerge from background causes of which we are unaware and over which we exert no conscious
control. We do not have the freedom we think we have. Okay. Now, remember the exact wording of
both of those definitions. I'm going to give you a thought experiment here because as you know,
philosophers love thought experiments. Okay. I'll use John Doe and Jane Doe, but it could
be you and your wife. Okay. John Doe is an exceptionally moral person who's happily married
to Jane. The chances of John ever cheating on Jane is close to zero, but the odds are not zero
because John is human. So let's say for the sake of argument that John has a one-night
stand while on the road and Jane finds out, how does John account for his actions? Does he
pace the standard deterministic explanation for human behavior as in
Sapolsky's and Harris's descriptors above? Say something like this to Jane. Honey,
my will is simply not of my own making. My thoughts and intentions emerge from background
causes of which I'm unaware, over which I exert no conscious control. I do not have the freedom
you think I have. I could not have done otherwise because I'm nothing more or less than the cumulative
biological and environmental luck over which I had no control that brought me to that moment of
infidelity. Could you even finish the thought before your wife would just slap you across the face?
Well, I think what we have here is a very, very pointed and effective thought experiment showing
the gigantic gap between like accepting the reality about how both the little itty-bitty parts of
the universe work and how when they get put together into us work and actually being able to
live each day because pain hurts. And that is a very painful discovery. And we've got a major
problem in there, which it's very hard to hold on to our machineness. And I sure be infuriated in
that circumstance, no matter how many like damn time times I read this book that I wrote and
actually began to believe some of it. This is very difficult because we're going against very deep
intuitions of agency. And it's not for nothing that an awful lot about what makes for psychological
stress are circumstances that rob you of a sense of agency. And it's pretty appalling in many ways.
Insofar as we are functioning on self-deception most of the time, one of the wisest definitions
I've heard out there of what major depression is, it's a pathological failure of the ability to
rationalize away reality. So yeah, we got an uphill battle in doing this sort of thing and our
well-being really hinges a lot of the time on a sense of agency and ability to wave away the evidence
that it isn't there. But nonetheless, this is how the world works. And there's some domains where
we should do the hard lifting to really work through that in our heads.
Okay, it's often defined as the question turns on, could you have done otherwise?
Okay, now in my little thought experiment, I assuming your wife would say, you got damn well
better never do that again if you find yourself in similar circumstances. Now, let's take Steve
Gould's metaphor of the rewinding the tape. As he said, if you rewound the tape of life and played
it back, something like Homo sapiens would not appear again because of all the contingent steps
and billions of years of evolution. Okay, as Dan Dennett pointed out, if it's a read-only memory
tape, you'd get exactly what we have because it's just a replay of what happened, like if you had
a recording of everything that happened, that would be fixed. The question is, is that the
universe we live in? Is it something like the, what's that called, the block universe where
everything that can happen has happened already past, present, future, and we're just in the
middle of the movie. We don't know how it turns out, but it does have a fixed outcome. Or are we
in a universe that is not predetermined in that sense? The past is determined, so determinism is
true. But this idea that could you have done otherwise? So let's say you're on the road,
again, your wife lets you go travel still and says you better, okay, I promise. And you find
yourself in similar circumstances, but not exactly the same. It's not a recording of what you did.
And you think, well, you know, I did that the last time. I really shouldn't do that again. I've
learned from my past. I'm not going to do that in the future. In other words, when the person says,
should you find yourself in that circumstance again? It's not going to be the same circumstance again.
Okay, let me see if I can reason with the dog for a moment. Sorry to resume when she says,
if you find yourself in that circumstance again, but it's not going to be the same circumstance,
you have just had at least one moment's worth and hopefully a whole lot of moments worth of
remorse of empathy of feeling a loved one's pain. You have hopefully had moments in there
where you have reflected on why am I so damn unself-disciplined to junctures like,
it's not the same. But going back to sort of the rewinding the tape deal,
will it be the exact same world? From our perspective, absolutely not because it's
unpredictable, which sort of leads us into the grass on some of these free will questions.
Wait, what about chaoticism? What about sort of the fundamental unpredictability of the universe
as soon as you're getting, you know, three body problems happening and things of that sort?
Hey, maybe that's where we can find free will. And I devote two chapters in there to saying,
here's what chaoticism is about. And this coolest thing ever. And it is so exciting. And I love it
and not just for the great fractal calendars, but it's not the basis of free will for a very simple
reason, because they make the same mistake every time, which is confusing, unpredictable with
undetermined. Chaoticism guarantees this is an unpredictable world. And that's why we're never
going to have like Tom Cruise sort of pre crime insights into sort of things. But
it's unpredictable. It's still deterministic. You take an incredibly complex like cellular
automata, and you start off at the beginning, and it could be mathematically proven that you
cannot predict what it is going to look like. Nobody can do that. It is the only way to figure
out what, you know, you started a what Z is going to look like is you got to first see what B looks
like. And then C and then D, you've got to march through, there's no ability to extract. But you
start with the exact same condition again, and you will get the exact same outcome, which like
was just as a priori unpredictable, unpredictability is not the same thing as undetermined. And the
non linearities in the universe mean that it's unpredictable in all sorts of interesting ways.
But that sure doesn't mean that we had any control over those steps.
Sure. That's just a kind of randomness, I guess, that you don't control either.
So that's not giving you volition. But in my scenario there, you've learned something new
about yourself and how to engage with your environment. It's not going to be quite the
same. And you're not the same. And even though all that learning that happened, you grew new
neural synaptic connections and all that stuff, that's determined. But
you are self determining the future as you go into the future from the past,
you're part of the causal net of the universe. And by learning, you can change what your future
behavior does. Maybe this turns on what you mean by determined, and what I mean by self determined.
I guess I'm looking for what is it you think happens when you learn something and change
your future behaviors based on your past? You have now changed the way you were going to process
new experiences. You were going to change the way that you retrospectively evaluate things in the
past. And as a result of what you found out, on this ridiculously mechanistic level, your brain
is going to respond differently to it. An example I use in the book is you see the movie Hotel Rwanda
which was about like one little spot of hope and heroism amid the Rwandan genocide in the early
90s. And you watch it and you come away with both the sense of the horror and also inspiration that
one guy appeared to have made a difference saving about a thousand people. It's been controversial
since then, but you come away and you say that was incredibly inspiring. What does that sentence
mean neurobiologically? The circuits in your brain that mediate senses of helplessness
were just weakened. They were weakened and there's even like fancy terms for it. Your synapses
underwent long-term depression there. They became less excitable and synapses having to do with
efficacy and maybe even a sense of self-efficacy got strengthened there. And somehow your basic
temperament as to whether or not this is a world in which we are helpless got pushed a little bit
of the other direction and realizing it was one person who had absolutely no prior history of
heroism makes you think, well, you know, I'm not Mother Teresa. I'm not special. Like I put my
pants on one leg at a time like it. Wow. Maybe I could be that and you ever so slightly that
knowledge has tilted aspects of your brain. So the next time you're at a position where that might
be called upon for you to be a little bit more in that way, you're a little bit more that way.
So that's great. That's identifiable in a mechanistic way. And then you take somebody
who sees Hotel Rwanda and it does absolutely nothing to them along those lines. Why is it?
Because they have a level of skepticism that got sort of pounded into them from their early
environment or whatever so that they are irritated and feel emotionally manipulated by the movie.
And thus the last thing they're going to do is feel inspired by it and instead is going to say,
yeah, well, that was pretty trickly and manipulative. And okay, it wasn't quite like the blind side or
whatever in terms of like feel good. But okay, so screw that. But yeah, they had some good
cinematography. It's not by chance that that would have been your response. Or all you have to do
is look at every single person who decides, yeah, the drinking is getting a little bit out of control.
And only some of them will order ginger ale the next time. Where did that come from? How
did they turn out to be that sort of person? And the way you turned out to be that sort of person
is going to determine what this new piece of information in there is going to do to your
subsequent behaviors. And that in turn is going to determine what other people's behaviors changed
by the fact that you come out and now you talk about like how great the cinematography was.
But damn, that was manipulative versus whoa, you should hear about this guy. That's going to have
ripples of effects there as well. And on this like ridiculously like narrow view, like somebody
next to you belches, and there's one and a half neurons that are going to work differently as a
result. The odds are they're going to work differently only for about 35 seconds. But
every one of these things causes a mechanistic trace in the biology of what makes us us.
Okay, let's take something like addiction. Now, in my personal case, my father was an alcoholic.
His father was an alcoholic. One of his two brothers were one of my two half sisters is I'm
not I can have a few drinks. I don't really care. I don't need to have more or whatever.
And I don't feel like I have super willpower. I don't think it has anything to do with that at
all. I just feel lucky. I didn't get whatever the physiology is that leads to alcoholism.
But how would you then describe the difference between me and say my father? He just really
had little control. So what he's more determined and I'm less determined or I have more degrees
of freedom or how would you even describe it? Just in different ways. Somebody influenced you
at some point along the way so that you got more of a sense of efficacy. The genes that helped
construct your frontal cortex gave you one that's better at doing the harder thing when it's the
right thing to do. Maybe amid that family proclivity, whatever it is that makes alcohol
taste good or something. I don't drink, but some alcohol receptors. I know they don't exist,
but whatever it is that makes for a good experience. You have a biology where that was
a little bit less irresistible. You know, someone on a diet, like I desperately need to I've got
diabetes. The doctor is saying if I don't etc. But here I am eating ice cream again.
Part of it is the genetic makeup of my gustatory receptors in my tongue and just how good it's
going to be. Part of it is my upbringing and just how much my Mesolympic dopamine system in my brain
releases dopamine in this circumstance versus in other circumstances. All of that has come from
somewhere and you're not your father. And among other things, perhaps you had the makeup where
you watched him doing that and instead of saying, well, I love him and he's like a good guy. So
maybe this is not so bad. Maybe somewhere in there, there was a switch that went in the opposite
direction. But God damn it, I am not going to be like him in that regard. And that's a funny,
if you grow up and you're just like your parents, you know, that's kind of a deterministic
picture. If you grow up and you're exactly the opposite of your parents because you're so horrified
by that, that's equally deterministic. Or if you grow up and you're a lot like them,
but you're different in this way because that influential teacher or because the crowd you're
that's just as deterministic as well. Those are not examples of like breaking your destiny. It's
just another version of how you wound up being who you are. And yours was a different route clearly
and and very consequentially. Yes, but when I'm become self aware of these impinging influences,
let's say my case, ice cream and chocolate chip cookies. I know I just shouldn't go to the store
or this particular store that has this like plate size chocolate chip cookie with the almonds and
the cashews and oh my God, it's like 1000 calories. It's just the best. You know, I just make sure I
don't go near there when I'm hungry or I don't have ice cream in the house because I know between
six and eight o'clock after dinner, I'm going to want ice cream. So what what's happening there
when I'm self aware and I'm saying, you know what, you know, my future self doesn't want to have this
issue of a little extra weight tomorrow. So today I'm going to set up the conditions in my home. So
I'm not tempted later when this happens. Isn't that me kind of self determining my future?
No, we're at the self we're at the self awareness come from. Where did where did the ability to
reflect on your behaviors? I love dogs. But yes, they can be a big presence. You know,
once I was like lecturing about our lack of free will to one of the most like
implicitly unreceptive audiences on earth out there, a bunch of judges who like wanted to
learn what's new with the brain. And I went through all these studies that are out there
about extraneous factors that influence judicial decisions. And one that's very sort of well
known and much debated. But I believe in fully because of the rebuttals the authors have come up
with, which is as judges get hungrier, they become less open to giving a an understanding
decision with respect to a defendant. But then there's studies showing that if you're very hungry,
you become much nicer to defendants. If you're Muslim, and it's Ramadan, because you're hungry
because you're fasting, then there's another one that shows that judges are slightly less punitive
if they find out it's the defendant's birthday. Whoa, how cool is that? Because that's some sort of
like compromise between two principles. Dangerous people in society should pay for what they've done.
And like, wow, we should be nice to people on their birthdays. So like judges unconsciously
on the average balance it out. So you know, half a year less on the sentencing kind of thing.
So I'm going through that. And this judge says, you know, that's fascinating. But let me tell you
last week I had a case where like it seemed cut and dried. It's obvious what I was going to decide
the next day and it was totally clear. And it's funny that night, I wondered if I'm getting a
little bit sort of stuck in my ways. And wow, I used to be very different when I was younger. And
like, maybe I'm not as on solid ground as I think. And I really stopped and and thought about it and
thought through. I thought about how this guy wound up the way he was. And and I also thought
about the circumstance. And, you know, I kind of surprised myself, I made a different decision
the next day. Are you telling me? And I say, where the hell did you get that self reflection?
Where did you get a view of your younger self, where some of your flexibility then is something
you might feel nostalgic about? Where did you get the ability to view changing your opinion as a good
thing rather than as a challenge? Where did you get the sense that if everybody the next day
starting with a bailiff is expecting you to do the usual thing, and you come and you say the opposite,
they're going to say, oh, God, what's happened with him is he but where did all of those things come
from? And why would like maybe the judge sitting next to you in the seminar room not have done
the same thing? That didn't happen by chance. Most people would not have been self reflective at that
point. Most people would that didn't happen by chance that that's who you wound up being.
Right. Let me give you I had a Christian list on the show a couple years ago with his book.
Was it called self? I think self determined. Anyway, he lists three capacities for free will.
One, the capacity to consider several possibilities for action. Two, the capacity to form an intention
to pursue one of those possibilities. And three, the capacity to take action to move
toward that possibility. What's wrong with that as a definition of freedom or volition or whatever
the right word is? Oh, I'm going to try to be sort of polite and a good house guest here and
merely say that that that's 100 percent wrong. Okay, it's totally wrong. Okay. And, you know,
he's a very influential thinker. His is writing about free will, all of that. But here's where we
run into sort of the fuzzy squishy domain of we all mean something different when we say free will.
And what he is falling into is the most everyday conventional sense. And it is a very proximal
notion of free will. It's one, for example, that plays out every single day in a courtroom,
where essentially it's the same three questions that are asked. Did the person intend to do what
they did? Did they understand what the consequences had a good chance of being? And did they realize
they were alternative behaviors? And the way every court works is if the answer is yes to all three
of those, the person can now be held culpable for what they did. And, you know, that's responsibility
because they exert free will. And this is where I have apoplexy, because this is completely missing
the point. This is metaphorically what I say in the book. This is writing a movie review based on
only seeing the last three minutes of the movie. Because none of this involves asking the only
possible question at this point, which is, yeah, so where did that intent come from?
Because if you're not asking that, and if you don't have insights into that, you have zero
notion as to how this wound up being this person's actions. And when you ask instead,
where did the intent come from? It's from what happened a second before and a minute before
and a year before and a million years before. And, you know, that sounds like philosophically
great. So we're back at the Big Bang. And I guess it kind of, but biologically, what went on in that
person one second before had something to do with informing that intent. And what went on with that
morning's hormone levels had something to do with it. And what went on, whether in the previous
year they underwent horrible trauma or found love or found their God would have caused structural
changes in their brain and their childhood and their fetal life and their genes and the culture
their ancestors came up with because that influenced how mom was raising them within minutes of birth
and what ecology had to do with what sort of culture those ancestors came up with.
And if you're not asking, where did that intent come from? Like the proximal notion of,
did they intend to do that they knew they could have done something else and they knew that
something bad might happen if they were to go and do that is beyond irrelevant because the only
question is, where did that intent come from? Did you read Adrian Reigns book, The Anatomy of
Violence? This was a real eye-opener for me. Here I'm going to recount two stories he tells that
will support your position. One is Mr. Offt, OFT, is a guy who had an oral frontal cortex
who one day all of a sudden finds himself attracted to children and approaches his step
daughter inappropriately and the wife turns him in to child protection services and he's in big
trouble and then he's talking to a psychiatrist in the hallway, wherever at court or something and
he pees his pants and the psychiatrist is like, there's something wrong with this guy, let's get
a brain scan. So they do and he's got a tumor, they take the tumor out, his impulses are gone,
he doesn't have these desires anymore and then six months later the wife finds some kitty porn on
his computer, up then take him back in, scan the brain, the tumor's back and Adrian makes the point,
well we don't think of him as a criminal, he's a pedophile, he's a medical patient, he's got a
tumor, he's got a problem here, we got to fix it and then he contrasts that with a young man named
Dante Page, an African-American man who raped and murdered a woman, this was in Colorado, Adrian
was on the defense attorney, the defense side to argue for life sentence rather than the death
penalty and basically he recounts then this young man's history, this Dante Page and this goes off
for like three pages, this is like the worst background you can possibly imagine, you know,
the mother was a crack cocaine addict and no father in the home and you know, multiple
boyfriends in and out of the house who would beat little Dante Page when he was a child,
dropped him on his head, multiple emergency room visits due to, you know, just being beaten
and so forth and you know, just horrible environment, the neighborhood, you know,
the running with gangs, horrible schools, food, the air, everything, you know, this is like the
worst background you can possibly imagine and then by the time you finish this you kind of feel
sorry for this guy and then he says, but I should remind you of what he did to this woman and then
you go, oh god, it's just terrible what he did to her and it's like, oh, you know, so what's the
difference between Mr. Off, who we think, well, poor guy, he's got a tumor and Dante Page, you
just don't see it in the brain scan where there's like obviously a tumor, there's just, you don't
see anything and so you don't know that background. So, but what, so then let me then give my
response, which is Dan Dennett's degrees of freedom. You and I don't have the tumor or that horrible
background. What's the difference between Dante Page and Mr. Off and me and you that don't have that
and so Dan would say degrees of freedom, they have fewer degrees of freedom, we have more
degrees of freedom, the court accounts for this, oh, he's got a tumor, okay, then we're going to
give him a lesser sentence or whatever. Yeah, there's nothing different between the two of them.
All that differs is we have trouble thinking in terms of distributed causality.
Somebody comes in and they get a whopping great tumor and yeah, we're pretty good at saying,
oh, that's the cause. Somebody comes in and I've done a lot of the same song and dance working
with defense teams. Somebody comes in and they had a major concussive head trauma when they were
little and it took out half of their frontal cortex and in my experience, about 20% of juries
are capable of seeing that as causative and mitigating and as one of those greatest sides
that should stop one in their tracks, depending on the study, 25 to 75% of men on death row in
this country have a history of concussive head trauma to their frontal cortexes.
Okay, so we're getting there and we've got an edge case, which is yeah, if the guy comes in with a
massive tumor and if you've lucked out and it's a liberal jury and a nice sort of middle-class
place, if the guy had a bad head injury somewhere along the way, that's going to count also of,
yeah, there's, there's involitional components and enough that that's going to change how we
assess him. But then you get the guy growing up in sheer hell and what you see is he is just as
mechanistically prone towards antisocial behavior as the guy with the brain tumor.
It's just hard to see that it's due to every little baby step of misfortune that he had
along the way because we have a lot of trouble with like statistical guilt. Oh, if the mom had
not been a crack addict, would he have done the same thing? I don't know. If he had not been stabbed
in the schoolyard when he was in middle school, would he have done the same thing? Would he have,
could you have predicted just from that? No, absolutely not. And what you see is like in
this incrementalism, people who, who study this, there's even a jargony term for it. What is your
your ACE score? ACE, your adverse childhood experiences, which is a way of formalizing
just how much of a hellhole or a privileged like land of opportunity, your childhood wasn't. There's
like even a checklist, you can get your ACE score from zero to 10. Were you witness to physical
abuse, to psychological abuse, to sexual abuse? Were you a victim of A, B or C? Was there somebody
incarcerated in the family? Was there unstable finance? And you get your score and people study
ACE scores, but you could just as readily do it with your, your RLCE score, your ridiculously lucky
childhood experience score. And what you see with ACE scores is for every additional step you get,
there's an approximately 35% increase likelihood that you will have been involved in anti-social
violence by the time you are a young adult. If you are a woman down the line that you will have
had an unplanned pregnancy as a teenager, that you will have issues of substance abuse, that you
will have issues with mood disorders for every step 35% increase. And what you get is, you know,
not all brain tumors in the orbital frontal cortex would have produced that. Some of that would
produce somebody who would be outrageously inappropriate during somebody's eulogy. It would
have produced, you know, there's other contingent mediating factors, but it's a whole lot easier
to see where you get wildly shocking behavior from this middle class accountant who all of a
sudden is doing this. It's because of a brain tumor, rather than why is this well prenatal
alcohol exposure. And you know, when they were a child and exactly the long list of things you see,
and no single one of them, but anytime you can look across a million kids and see that for every
step higher in this index, there's a 35% increased chance. And every time you can do the inverse
and see every step higher in your, did your parents read books to you? Did you have hobbies
that they encouraged all of that? With every step higher, there's a 35% increased chance
that they're going to be a student of mine at Stanford University. Like, all we're seeing there
is it takes more work to figure out that there were 11 different causes that combined here,
instead of one big whopping one. And it's much easier for us to deal with singular causality.
And very rarely are we the end products of anything as dramatic as a single cause.
So you would say that my background, which was much better than Dante Pages, is not due to
anything I did. That's just luck. It's all luck. It's it's tumors all the way down. I just didn't
happen to have one. Yeah, yours were more subtle. And in your case, all versions of good luck,
because look at how you turned out, your mother must be so proud of you, and you're not sitting
in prison. And you were not a, you know, all of these things. I mean, here's here's one study
that should stop you in your tracks, or so that should stop a a radical compatibilist in their
tracks. You know, there's a whole literature by now on how stress has atrophying effects on
the frontal cortex. If you don't know about the frontal cortex, it's the coolest part of the brain.
It is so interesting. I so regret having wasted 30 years of my life studying a different part of
the brain. Frontal cortex, we've got more of it than any other species. It's the most recently
evolved. It's the last part of our brain that fully matures. The frontal cortex is about
self control and impulse control and gratification, postponement and doing the harder thing when it's
the right thing to do. And what does stress do? Stress and stress hormones on a very nuts and
bolts level cause neurons in the frontal cortex to atrophy. And what do you know? Afterward,
you're not very good at that emotional regulation stuff. This is why during periods of enormous
stress, we make terrible and pulsive decisions because your frontal cortex doesn't work very well
with that. And it turns out chronic stress does the same thing to your frontal cortex,
but even more permanently. And it turns out childhood chronic stress does it even more
dramatically because that's when they're still like laying the foundations of your frontal cortex
in terms of brain development. But then this newest study, all of these are neuroimaging studies.
So by the time you look at kindergartners, their resting stress hormone levels are significantly
influenced by their mother's socioeconomic status. Already by age five, if you are growing up poor,
on the average, you have higher levels of stress hormones when you show up for kindergarten each
morning. And on the average, your frontal cortex is already developing to be thinner, thinner layers,
a lower metabolic rate and less capacity to do the sort of self control stuff as a five-year-old
that takes a good frontal cortex. And this is already a predictor of what you're going to
look like as a six-year-old. Okay, that's outrageous. But then here's this newest study,
because brain imaging techniques have gotten good enough that you can start brain imaging fetuses.
Already in a fetus, the rate of brain development is influenced significantly by the mother's
socioeconomic status, because that's influencing how stressed she is and her stress hormone levels,
which get across the placenta and get into the brain. You're a fetus, and already this stuff
is beginning to act out. Go tell me this guy sitting there at the defendant's table had control
over it if that was his first step. And every step after that just added to his stunningly
awful A score, but it's hard to see. Wait, when they were a fetus, that had something to do with it?
Wait, their hormone levels this morning? Wait, that they were stabbed when they were there?
Wait, all of those things had something? Yeah, collectively. And you'll find somebody who went
through all of those things and didn't turn out that way. In the same way that this guy with his
orbital frontal tumor, his disambition could have taken a completely different form, and you could
work through that. Oh, it's because it was this upbringing or because of that, and that's why it
took that form in him. But in all those cases, there's just this little control, but it's way
easier to see it when it's a single sledgehammer of a cause. Yeah, Rain talks about those portable
MRI machines they take to these prisons where they scan the brains of these serial killers and
rapists and so on. Basically, to a man, and they're pretty much all men, they just have no
frontal cortex, or it's just what we as it. They just have no self-control. So the urge is bubbling
up from beneath the amygdala or whatever, just have no break on them. But you know, I was thinking
about this. I don't have these urges bubbling up that I need a break. Why did they have the urges
to be violent and rape or whatever that most of us don't have, that they need a break and we don't
need a break? What's the frontal cortex doing there? I guess you would probably say they just
had a different background that led to those impulses in the first place. Yeah, and sort of
a great example of this, like I've done some of the same court work that Rain has done,
and I get put up in front of a jury, and I teach them about the brain, and I teach them about
stress and early life adversity and regulation or behavior, and finish with this whole song
and dance, that if this had been what you had gone through starting with when you were a second
trimester fetus as this guy, you would have done the exact same thing. And then as is the case,
the prosecuting attorney gets to cross-examine me, and if the person's good, they shred me in the
first minute because they say, okay, so are you saying that any person on earth who had had the
same concussive head trauma that this guy had when he was eight along with everything else,
that if they had had the same, they would have done the exact same thing? And I say, of course not,
of course not, this guy had frontal damage, and as a result, he like remorselessly killed nine
people, and some other guy has the same amount of frontal damage, and what he does at family holiday
get-togethers is he plays the piano way longer than anybody wants to listen to because, hey,
the turkey's ready, come on everyone, let's say, whoa, they are both unconstrained by the rules
of society with slightly different versions of unconstrained. And I say, no, we can't predict
that, but comparing those two people, I'd be willing to bet some money that the one playing
the piano for too long grew up in a loving middle-class household, and this guy did not. I'd be
willing to bet that there's four or five genes that this guy has this variant and that guy doesn't.
I'm willing to bet that circumstances early in childhood gave this guy a bigger amygdala
than that guy and more reactive to perceive threat. Yeah, give me enough pieces there, and
we're going to get some mileage here as to figuring out why this guy did what he did,
and for the same damage that guy did that. And 50 years ago, we couldn't have told you a word
about this. Now, we can list the first few things, stable middle-class upbringing versus
childhood abuse, a few other factors, history of alcoholism. Okay, so we've gone up to 50%
predictability from 25% just from knowing about the brain damage. Yeah, with each individual piece.
But if you carried that out, I mean, you were kind of critical of the minority report idea.
But if you carry out what you just said for another century or two, could we not get to,
say, account for 99% of the variants in people that have these, I don't know,
25 different factors in their background? Probably not 99% because, again, all those
like chaotic non-linearities in there. And every time you get the, like, Wilmer Rudolph,
Wilmer Rudolph in 1960, she was the fastest woman alive. She got gold medals all over the place,
and she was totally amazing and totally amazing because she grew up in a sharecropper shack,
one of 22 kids, and she had polio as a kid. She grew up with leg braces, and at some point decided
I say, oh my God, the degrees of freedom that lurk in us. I don't know why she wound up being
the fastest, what gave her the tenacity to just go back over and over and over again and work
against the pain or who knows what. Mario Capecci got the Nobel Prize University of Utah some years
ago for working out this technique called site-directed mutagenesis, and he was a homeless kid
in Italy after the end of World War II before he got brought in by the right family and like,
yeah, these were these amazing, none of those happened by chance either. And a lot of those
things that, like, caused that to happen was some random non-linear fluke of the chaotic world.
Yeah, we're not going to have complete predictability, but we've got statistical predictability.
We know which kids are statistically far more likely to be in trouble with the law,
and which ones are going to be going to law school. So we won't have the individual predictability,
but I don't know, there's a fair degree of predictability in those cases, and one then says at
that point, okay, okay, so you've just said we're never going to have complete predictability.
You're not going to be able to tell which of those street kids is going to turn out to be,
and all that stuff. Yeah, we don't have predictability on the individual level,
we've got to statistically with populations, but any time, populationally, with each additional
piece of crappy luck during childhood, you're 35% more likely to be a violent, dangerous adult,
we know enough already. We know enough already to know that a system that will then convict
this guy on a premise of culpability and free will isn't right, and isn't right intellectually or
morally. Okay, here at this point, you'll hear compatibilists say something like,
I agree with everything you just said, but free will or volition is not to be found down at the
neuronal level or molecular DNA or anything, you're going the wrong direction, it's a higher order
emergent phenomenon, it's emergent property of all these convergent neural networks and everything
else that's going on there. And by higher order, I mean, again, back to my self-determination. So
you teach somebody, here are all the things that are influencing you, and this is what you can do
about it. So there are clinical psychologists that deal with people with addiction or violence,
issues or whatever. And okay, here is your crappy background, you have a 35% chance of being violent
because of these and so, what are you going to do about it? So you cite Roy Bymeister in your book,
he has that book called Willpower, he and John Tierney wrote about all the different things you
can do to overcome these various factors. And this is at this higher level where like, yeah, yeah,
okay, I don't want to do that. I was just watching that movie the other night, The Big George Foreman
about the history, you know, is a drama, you know, but they show, you know, one of these contingent
turns where, you know, he was had this violent youth in Houston, just horrible background.
And at some point, he just randomly by luck ran into this boxing, you know, a little coach or
trainer or whatever and said, okay, we're going to channel your violence into sports. Okay, so and
then he kind of makes that transition. It's like, okay, so there's a little bit of luck there,
but also at some point, he's making that decision, yeah, I'm going to do this instead of this other
thing. And then, you know, he gets beat by Muhammad Ali and his life kind of spirals down.
And then at some point, he's like 150 pounds overweight, and he's out of money. And, you
know, he's just like, what am I going to do? I'm going to make a comeback. And he calls the trainer,
I want to make my comeback. And we know what happens. Exactly. Yeah. And then after that,
he discovers barbecuing for a whole new chapter of his career. Right. And it's so inspirational,
because it's like, you know, can you change personality? Yeah. I mean, he went from this
kind of badass motherfucker, mean guy to just sitting next to Johnny Carson, yucking it up,
talking about, you know, this guy he's going to fight is any good. I hope not.
Where do they get these boxes? You're funny. Oh, they find them in bars.
It's just hilarious. So how is it that he did that? And why is that not some form of higher
order volition? I am going to turn my horrible life around and become something different.
Because lots and lots of people at some juncture will say the exact same thing. And they don't.
How come? Well, let's start dissecting how they got there. And none of that happened by chance,
that sort of thing. Ironically, Baumeister and I are scheduled to have a debate a month
from now on NPR about exactly this stuff, which is going to be total fun because he's like an
amazing scientist. And we disagree on that one. But, you know, you bring up something like a
merchant complexity, which like chaoticism is the coolest thing in the entire world. Like one aunt
makes no sense and you put a thousand of them together. And they all they make societies that
do these incredible things. And you like all of this emergent, incredible stuff like aunts through
this very simple algorithm can solve the traveling salesman problem in terms of minimizing how much
they have to walk going from one food source to another. And then you look in the developing
cortex and it solves the traveling salesman problem, the exact same way of minimizing the
amount of axons you have to grow to hook up these stuff. Whoa, because of emergent stuff. And
exactly as with chaos, that turns into like this irresistible playground to say, ah,
free will is an emergent thing. Of course, you can't find it in individual neurons because
it's emergent. It's a property that and what you get there is there's a very fundamental
mistake there as well, which is the thing that's amazing about emergent systems is you have these
stupid simple little building blocks, one aunt, one cell, one person in a marching band or whatever
that has very simple rules as to how you interact with the world immediately around you.
And you put all of them together and out comes a brain. And not only that, you out comes a brain
where everybody has roughly the same brain anatomy, but nobody has identical because
emergence meets chaoticism and unpredictability there. This is so amazing. And every single
person who at that point decides that there's free will that can now be pulled out of this
makes the same mistake, which is they decide that somehow little bitty building blocks are working
differently now. They've gotten smarter. They've got more degrees of freedom in their actions.
They're doing something differently. And the really sort of, you know, Hail Mary desperate
versions of pulling free will out of it is that somehow when the upper level emergent property
comes out there, it allows you to reach down and now futz with those little building blocks and
manipulate them so that they work differently. And they don't. And the whole point of what's
amazing about it is when like all of your neurons are together and they're inventing aesthetics,
the building blocks are just as simple and stupid and have the same number of small
number of limited rules. And like saying this is where free will comes from is like saying,
okay, great emergent thing, one water molecule cannot have the property of wetness. Wetness
is an emergent property. But it's like saying what comes with wetness is as enough water
molecules come together. We all know, you know, water molecule is made of two hydrogens and one
oxygen and when enough of them come together, it's suddenly two oxygens and one hydrogen.
And that's where the wetness comes from. That's not how it works. All of the theories about
emergence, it's so I love emergence. I torture my students teaching them about this,
but it's not will where free will comes from. And it's something like, you know,
if you gave chimps as many neurons as we have, it is an emergent inevitability that they would
come up with religion. But they would come up with a religion like nothing we have ever seen
before on earth, because the chaoticism that and somehow theirs is going to be
featuring much more about, you know, bananas, even though real chimps in the wild don't readily
eat bananas, I say as a primatologist. Yeah, emergent stuff is amazing, but you can't get free
will by saying that in chaotic systems, unpredictable equals indeterministic, and you
can't get free will out of emergent systems, because every single version of like how that
happens requires the building parts to suddenly get a lot fancier. And it can't work that way.
So you're saying like that Sidney Harris cartoon with the two mathematicians at the chalkboard
and in the middle, it says America and then a miracle happens. I think you need to be more
explicit here in step two. Is that what you're saying by saying, oh, free well is an emergent
property. It's like saying and then magic happens. Yeah, exactly. Magic can't happen there. And it
doesn't happen spontaneously. The water molecules suddenly don't get a new image of what they want
to be in their lives. And they two oxygens now team up kind of thing. And it can't work that way
in terms of having like this emergent macro level ability to reach down and make neurons
suddenly like have action potentials go in the opposite direction. Doesn't work that way.
All of those models depend on somewhere in the middle. The and then magic happens every single
one of them. Then what is the self? Is that an illusion too? Well, damned if I really understand
that let alone consciousness and please let's not go in that direction because that just
I'm just thinking because that's what we think of as volition. It's me making this decision. I am
myself. But you know, in the reductionist model you're presenting, I'm just a bundle of I'm just
a bunch of neurons and chemicals and just electric meat. Yeah. And all you have to do to see that
and to like validate what Sam Harris is saying, who by the way is like the kindred soul for me
in terms of just how extreme we are. And he is brilliant at arguing for there being no free
will whatsoever. But to come back to his notion, we have consciousness. We have self awareness,
all of that. And we have fallen for this notion that that's where our decisions come from. And
all you have to do is do an experiment where you sit down somebody at a table, someone who is dieting,
and you put a big bowl of M&Ms in front of them. And if you have stressed the hell out of them for
10 minutes before with unsolvable math problems, they are now about 80% likely to eat more M&Ms.
Because when we get stressed, the frontal cortex is still trying to deal with those consequences.
And it's that much less capable of saying, believe me, it's only like eight months till
bathing suit season, you really don't want to eat those M&Ms. Self control goes out there.
If you could do that to somebody, and you can reliably see this often enough that like you can
get a PhD out of your thesis of this, it's so reliable. You're showing self consciousness and
awareness and all of that. That's like such a small part of what's going on. By the way,
parenthetically, I'm told that I forget who was telling me this, that the blood sugar level
self control thing is did not replicate. And this is I think Bob Meisters actually responded to that
criticism. There's some debate going on there. Yeah, that one is highly embroiled. It makes
tremendous sense to me not because I'm a psychologist, but I spend a lot of time thinking
about neuronal energetics and how some parts of the brain are more expensive than other parts.
What do you know? The frontal cortex is incredibly expensive. I think I've read the
backs and forths with it and I'm in zero position to be evaluating any of the details.
I think what the punchline is going to be is that that is a legitimate effect, but it's nowhere
near as strong as a lot of the original enthusiasm suggested it was. And does that make it less
interesting? Nah, not in the slightest. It's just a smaller voice in that whole picture of
distributed causality. Okay, let's pay a little bit less attention to that one, but that's still
part of the story. And that's happened with a lot of these. The hungry judges finding has
been challenged by all sorts of people. Some of it on statistical grounds and the authors have
responded, and I think they have absolutely answered those complaints. But there's other ones,
and there's been a couple of non-replications, but they did it in very different ways. And the
usual thing in science, which is at the end of the day, probably the answer there as well is,
yeah, it's for real, but it's not quite as strong of an effect, or maybe it's a lot less strong of
an effect. But that's part of how it turns out we work as biological machines. How cool is that?
Very cool. Well, but when I bring up the self, or since you mentioned consciousness, these might be
something like these, if they're illusions, they're, or fictions, they're useful fictions. I mean,
they work in terms of living a life that I feel like I have choices, and it's good that I feel
that way because I need to make choices, that I'm a self, I'm not just a bundle of neural networks,
I'm an actual entity. I am sentient, and I'm conscious. And even though there's this
hard problem of consciousness, and we'll never solve it, I see Christoph Koch just paid David
Chalmers a case of wine for their bet that this would be solved in 25 years. Okay. Of course.
Another 25 years. But what I'm thinking is, I'm wondering if it's not going to happen in 25 years
more, or 50 years more. It's the wrong question, or the concepts. That's why I mentioned
Wittgenstein and her email. We're just going about it the wrong way. We're using the wrong words.
I mean, it's not possible to know what it's like to be a bat. I can put on some sonar stuff and
pretend like I can get in the closet, we're in yell. I can tell which direction it sounds coming
from because of the walls. And I wonder if this is what it's like to be a bat. But at some point,
if I had all the apparatus in the neural networks, I would just be a bat, and I wouldn't know that
I'm even asking the question. It's almost a dualistic thing as if my little mini-me homunculus
can tiptoe into your skull and see what the red looks like to you, and then go back and go,
oh yeah, it looks the same as for us. It's a weird idea.
It's a very weird one because we're a totally weird species. We are just as mechanistic as a sea
slug. And I have one endlessly long chapter on how a sea slug learns to do different things,
learns. And this resulted in amazing Nobel Prize for Eric Cantell, one of the greatest pieces,
and then show it works the exact same way in us. Some of the same exact molecules.
That's just a more complicated process. So in that regard, we're just like every other species
out there, but then we're a weird one exactly along the lines you bring up of not only are we
biological machines, but we're the only species that could recognize our machineness. Maybe not
all the time, maybe never for some people, maybe only in periods of crisis, maybe only when things
are going great, maybe intellectually like all the time with me. But as soon as you're dealing with
that sort of recursive meta stuff there, we're in very complicated terrain. Because as soon as
we know our machineness, we have to wrestle with the fact that while our feelings are not real,
and are more mere material outcomes of our reductive universe, our feelings feel like feelings.
And somebody else's terrible pained feeling
like carries some legitimacy, even though it's an emergent property of their nuts and bolts,
you know, atoms. So we're a screwed up species in that regard. And one of the things that happens
when we recognize our machineness is we get totally depressed and traumatized because
machineness involves knowing we're going to die someday. And while there's nice molecules,
you're going to get necrotic on us. But another one is being able to look at the fact that maybe
some of the traits we're proud of, we had nothing to do with. And that's exactly where like you
and I make it freaked out, because we both are like, we have jobs, we like bring money home,
we could put meat and potatoes on the table, neither of us are like mass murderers,
both of us have fairly like clear social skills, we both like can like get all of that,
both have like college educations, and we've even published damn books and all of that.
And a totally mechanistic deterministic world, all you and I can do is sit there and say, wow,
so maybe I didn't really earn it. Yeah, all those times my roommate was out partying,
I studied instead, and I've always felt like that had it. But maybe I have nothing to do with any of
this bummer. And there's a big problem with this book of mine, which is anybody who's going to
like spend their time reading a book like this, or anybody who's going to listen to a podcast like
this is someone who by definition is going to be biased to go in the direction of finding out that
the things that have gone well for them in life, they may not have had really any entitlement to
bummer. But what the punchline and the whole thing is, is that for the majority of people out there,
the injustice is not that they are getting rewards for things they actually had no control over,
it is they are getting punished or deprived or ignored or viewed as irrelevant, because of
things they had no control over. For most people, like the finding that like there's no free will,
that's liberating. All you have to do is look at somebody who is wildly obese and whose family
has always been, and they really have tried and they and nonetheless, everybody kind of thinks
either implicitly or even says to each other, wow, what kind of they just have no self control.
And it's going to impact their likelihood of getting a job, of finding love in their life,
of all these things because of the implicit biases about body, blah, blah, blah, etc.
And then one day they find out there's this hormone called leptin, which has something to do with
satiation and the hypothalamus, and there's a leptin receptor, and their family has a screwy
version of that receptor gene, and that's why satiation doesn't work in there. And you can read
these accounts of that's the day my life, that's the day I stopped hating myself. That's the day I
stopped, that's the day I was freed from a totally false corrosive, viciously self-righteous domain
of deciding that's something we have control over. You and I had some some control over our
college degrees, so yeah, we should feel a little bit good about ourselves, and no. And at the end
of the day, rather than this being, you know, suck it up, and maybe you didn't deserve your high
salary in your corner office, at the end of the day, what this mostly is about is a huge percentage
of human misery is caused by the fact that we met out punishment and neglect and all those things
for things that people are not responsible for. I like the idea of feeling good about
things you're doing in your life, so maybe it's just the wrong words, instead of feeling pride,
maybe gratitude, maybe gratitude's a better word. Yeah, because gratitude is the most logical thing
to, like, come up within the face of sheer random unearned good luck. That's exactly what it should
be. Yeah, yeah, I'm finally making the point about, you know, if you wake up in the morning feeling
all motivated to get out in the world, make your mark. What's the Hamilton line, you know, get out
there and, you know, was it make my mark or make my, I forget, I forget what it was now, but...
I'm not going to waste my shot. Yes, take my shot, yeah. Take my shot, yes. But we know this is a
personality and temperament. We know from behavior genetics that at least 50% of the variance on that
is accountable by genes. You didn't choose to feel like you have a high need of achievement.
And so, yeah, so gratitude about that is important. That capacity to then
generalize that to what it means for those who didn't have that. Yes, and so somebody that chooses
not to work 80 hours a week. I mean, I've thought about this a lot, what does it take to be 60?
You know, why aren't there more people or, you know, women CEOs? You know, to me, it's like,
who would want to be a CEO anyway? I mean, who wants to work 80 hours a week and lead this
restricted life and you got no family life and no joy? I don't know, I'm probably overgeneralizing,
but... And less what does it for you is that you've got a 20,000 square foot house just north of
Silicon Valley up in the hills, because those are the folks that like are foraging all over the
bushes here out where I live in Silicon Valley. Yeah, that's it's not by chance that that's like
how that turned out. You know, there's got to be an explanation not only for Mother Teresa,
but for Elon Musk as well. And Vladimir Putin as long as we're at it. But yeah,
the pieces just came together differently. And that's not where their source of meaning in life
comes from. Or unless when they like get older and it suddenly strikes them that they've been
running after the totally wrong source of meaning in life and then they but not not all of them are
going to do that. Most of them were just going to fun startups that study had are like freeze your
head after your die so you could live forever. Cryogenics is the crackpot growth research industry
in Silicon Valley right now, because all of them have conquered the world except for death. So
that's what they're funding now. Yeah, that's how it turns out. Right. Okay, let's talk about
punishment, retributive versus restorative justice, you know, capital punishment and all that stuff.
I'm reminded of the 1988 presidential debate, Michael Dukakis and George H.W. Bush,
and Dukakis is anti capital punishment. What if your wife Kitty had been raped and murdered?
Wouldn't you, you know, want to put this guy away? And, you know, he rambled off on some intellectual
little lecture about capital punishment, which he should have said, yeah, I would be pissed off.
And if it was just up to me, I'd want to strap this motherfucker to ol' Sparky and fry until his
head count on fire. That's how I feel about it. And then you say, but of course we can't run a
criminal justice system based on how angry somebody is, you know, and that's why I shouldn't be on the
jury. Yeah, right. Yeah. And it said, Oh, what was what was the guy, the paroled guy in Massachusetts?
Oh, right. Yes. Yes. Willie Horton, as it was. Yeah, Willie Horton. Yes. Yes. When when George
Bush, Willie Horton, Michael Dukakis, in that debate, which was almost as destructive as the
silly picture of Michael Dukakis with his head sticking out of the tank there, trying to look
militaristic. Yeah, of course, that's what you're going to do. I, you know, a couple of years ago,
there was one of those horrors of some white supremacist guy burst into a place of worship
with an automatic weapon and mowed down a bunch of people. And it was horrifying. And I was
totally disturbed by that. And like Monday morning, NPR is saying the guy's being arraigned today.
And it looks like he's going to get federal hate crime charges as well, which will make him
eligible for the death penalty. And my thought was, yeah, fry the bastard, all of that. And two
seconds later, I stop and think, wait, I'm working on a death penalty case right now, try to.
Yeah, this is, we are run by very visceral emotions. Jonathan Hyde at NYU has done wonderful work
showing how much of the time when we are supposedly reasoning our way towards a moral decision,
we're doing post hoc rationalization for our emotional decisions, all of that. But yeah,
we're also self reflective. And we begin to learn how is it that I wound up this way and probably
much more importantly, how is it that that person wound up being different for me before I decide
I'm in a position to understand what made them do what they just did. I like the discussion in
your book on this idea that it helps the victims families come to closure when the guy is finally
put away. And that in fact, the research shows that doesn't close the door for them. Because
that's what you think of like, well, yeah, well, maybe we don't want to stay killing people,
but at least it makes the close the door for the families.
Yeah, and it's very mixed. It's very mixed. It depends on what part of the country you're in
and thus what part of regional culture. Yeah, closure is much more of a myth than lots of
people in criminology sort of think of people have different responses. And, you know, there's a
whole world of people whose immune systems work better after they are able to let go of their
hatred and forgive someone. I probably couldn't do that. And that's one of the outcomes also.
There's ones who write letters to the authorities saying yes, yes, yes, this person did this to my
loved one, but you're going to accomplish nothing by killing them. That's part of the picture as
well. They align themselves. Yeah. So the notion that that is where you get closure from,
separate of the fact that you probably don't get closure by most reports,
yeah, that one's a criminology myth. Yeah, but there is a kind of a game theory logic to why we
feel that way. Those emotions, you know, Christopher Baum talks about this in his book,
Moral Origins, about, you know, these hunter-gatherer groups that have a whole series of
steps they take to control bullies and free riders and people that don't play nice
and follow the rules, you know, from gossip all the way up to capital punishment where they, you
know, they take Aug out for a hunt and they come back without him. And how everybody has to
participate in the killing of this guy so that no one feels individually responsible. And also,
it helps attenuate some of the kind of fight back against, from that guy's families, you know,
what's a retribution against the killer and so forth. But if you don't have something like that,
then free riding and bullying can take over a group. It can propagate. So you need to have
some way of dealing with bullies and free riders. Now, why didn't evolution get us to where we get
rid of all the bullies and the free riders? And the answer appears to be a social group can tolerate
maybe one to three percent of psychopaths, which is the number, and still function pretty well.
And we don't want to have, allocate even more resources to give him every last one of them.
Yeah. And also, because when you have like nothing but an ocean of cooperators in a game
theory setting, the first wolf that shows up does fabulously. And so does the second.
And so does the umpteenth, but maybe not quite as much as the first wolf. And eventually,
you're getting to a tipping point in this frequency dependent selection sort of thing,
where now get one altruist, they're going to fail because all these wolves are just going to laugh
at what a like naive bastard they are, but get two altruists and they're going to out compete the
wolves because the wolves are not cooperating. And thus, you start getting more and more altruists.
There's this cycle of frequency dependent selection for in a world of nothing but nice people,
wolves get away with an awful lot. And in a world of nothing but backstabbing cheaters,
two cooperators who trust each other and who can interact on a regular basis,
they're going to drive everybody else out of business and force them to start cooperating.
So it's a it's a funny landscape in that regard. But in terms of so what do we do with societies
like lone wolves? And here where you get like, here's where people is going to like throw down
their their their their iPhones or whatever right now and saying this guy is such a ridiculous
bleeding heart liberal. No, hopefully I've convinced by now that I am so far beyond that.
But you know, one of the dictums of public health research is you figure out like what the
disease is and how to contain it. And you do it in a way where you contain the medically dangerous
person, but you don't do one smidgen more than that. And you do all that good stuff. But the other
thing that comes with it is you put at least as much effort into figuring out how did this person
get sick in the first place? Where did this disease come from? The the preventative sort of
stuff. And that's like at the heart of every public health person and every public health model of
what you do with violent damaging people, where you don't blame them and it's not retribution,
but it's a quarantine model so that they don't get people damaged. But like you don't do anything
more than what's needed to keep them from being dangerous and you don't preach to them about
how they have a rotten soul. And then in the same public health model, you need to at least put
as much effort into and how did they get this way in the first place and how we can do things so
that we wind up with fewer bullies and fewer lone wolves and fewer free riders and all of that.
And you see countries that do things that have far less bullying like the Scandinavian countries
and what's one of the good predictors of that having a lot of social capital.
People trust each other and they feel like they have efficacy. Whoa, a preventative measure. And
if you're doing any of this stuff, it's not just, oh, let's not let's not tell murderers that they're
terrible mean people and just like, figure out why growing up in this sort of neighborhood
quadruples the likelihood that that's who you turn out to be. Figure out why this prenatal stress
or figure out, do the preventative stuff. And that's where you're going to make a world with
fewer free riders and like, you know, roll your eyes if you will. But you got to keep coming back
to the Scandinavian social support models, like they are doing the preventative stuff and not
only do they have less problems with recidivism, with their violent people, they have fewer violent
people, they have fewer bullies, they have less spousal abuse, they have fewer less of all that
stuff. And yeah, root causes, because if I'm sitting there saying why that person do that,
where did the intent come from because of one second before one hour before one century.
All that is is this like, brand blowout of root causes. So yeah, do that.
The death penalty has been outlawed in pretty much every country except democracy, except ours.
I don't know, what is it? Half the states don't have capital punishment anymore,
but but have to. And then the half that do only a few states, Texas, Ohio, I guess,
Mississippi, Florida, you others actually practice it. I mean, most don't. In my book, Heavens on
Earth, I got to thinking about what people think about facing death because I was thinking about
terror management theory. And then I got, I discovered this literature on what people say
just before they're going to be executed. To my utter astonishment, the state of Texas actually
records their final statements. They the microphone, you know, you're strapped in, the microphone comes
down. What would you like to say? And almost to a man. And they're all men. You know, they thought,
I love my mother, I want my mommy, I can't, I love Jesus, I can't wait to see my Lord on the other
side. And it's all love, love, love, love. And once in a while they go, and I'm sorry, I killed
your because the families are there. Wow. I know it's astonishing. I know. I know there's all
sorts of websites that supposedly have accurate information on what these people's final meal
requests were. Yes, yes. But final words, that's much cooler. Yeah. Yeah. It's totally wild. Yeah.
So, I mean, I guess the capital punishment for two reasons. I don't like to give the power of
life and death to the state. And also they get it wrong so often. I mean, the Innocence Project
has just been an eye-opener. It's stunning. What kind of differences there are. I think you
mentioned the criminal justice. If you have money, you can buy justice. If you don't,
you're probably screwed. Of course. And since you work in the criminal justice system as a
eyewitness or no, what is it? A consultant expert witness.
Teaching witness. Yeah. Teaching witness. Is it as bad as it seems like? I mean,
is it really that corrupt? I mean, the rich people can buy the good lawyers and the,
you know, the perp that gets the district attorney or whatever assigned person right out of
college. Law school is just not going to get as good a justice. Oh, I have no idea at all other
than like reading the news, which any of us can do and see ample evidence of that day after day.
Because I work with public defenders. I work with the people who can't afford attorneys. So,
all I'm looking at are the people who were like 99% of the way lost by the time they were third
trimester fetuses. So, I never get to see wealth buying all the justice you can afford,
kind of thing. But in this whole, oh, God, we got to come like the Scandinavians and understand
how people became the way we all the time in our society are capable of taking individuals who are
dangerous, who are dangerous to the people who are around them. And we are capable of constraining
them, keeping them from being dangerous anymore. And we could do it without responsibility, without
blame, without preaching about their rotten souls. And then we could get insights as to why it is
that they're dangerous. Your kid is sneezing and you don't send them to kindergarten that day because
they're gonna get all the other kids sick. Satan isn't involved in that. We learn how to do a
quarantine model because it's a literal quarantine model. You keep your kid home until
they're not sneezing anymore. But you don't sit at home and tell your kid they can't play with
their toys because like there's something like they did a bad thing. You don't even do that you're
not a bad person, but you did a bad thing sneezing all over your class. It's got nothing to do with
that. You just constrain them so that they're not dangerous. And you don't do it once mission
beyond that. And you try to do some research of like, okay, why do people get colds when they're
five years old? And society hasn't fallen apart. And we don't burn five year olds with
nose colds at the stake, even though who knows somewhere back when they would have thought
that was a sign of Satan or because they thought illness is God's punishments for your,
you know, fetal sins you were born sinful. So it's not that crazy and like satirical.
Yay, we can do that. And it's a more humane world.
Why aren't we doing that? Why doesn't some state governor go,
look what they're doing in Germany or wherever and go, we're going to do that in our state. We're
going to try something different. Well, if starters just look at the Republican debate
the other night and look at what all those people were bragging about what they had done in their
states, which were like as different as you could get and predicated on free will like,
like I couldn't contain how happy I was seeing some of the some of the sound by some of these
people came out with. Why can't we do that? Because punishment feels good. And seeing pain
makes us irrational and makes us irrational in our attributions and very complicated phenomena
are really hard to piece apart as to what caused them because that's hard to see and simple explanations
are much more appealing cognitively and the more frazzled and upset we are, the more emotionally
appealing they are. And that's why that's much easier. Like go sit down somebody and say like,
you know, it's a walking cliche to say they had a very tough childhood. But my God, some people
do. And that usually came after an even worse fetal life and then a subsequent and, you know,
it's hard to think that way. Yeah, multiple causality is tough. And Allah height, we feel
our weighted decisions far more often than we like to think. Yeah. But still rationality counts,
it does work sometimes. Truth and reconciliation idea has taken off in the last half century.
Some countries have employed it to move beyond the anger, which isn't going to get anybody anywhere,
to try to find a solution. Why this hasn't happened with the two state solution, you know,
in the Middle East, I don't know, just seems like a nightmare. But then Northern Ireland somehow
pulled it off. I mean, if of our generation, that grew up as looking as even more intractable
in the Middle East. And, you know, it's not perfect. But stuff happens. And somehow, like,
they begin and Sadat managed to get to Camp David. And that seemed just as, you know,
every now and then. But it sure looks pretty awful. But, you know, South Africa managed to get
independence without a war afterward of the white militias. Somehow they pulled that one off every
now and then like there's one in the wind column for this stuff. Yeah. Well, maybe it's a meme that
your book will launch once again. Let's let's let's move in this direction and apply rationality
to solving social problems rather than letting our emotions drive us even maybe even being aware
of those of those emotions and why we have them would help. Yeah. Okay, last couple points here.
This is what you write here what the what the science in this book ultimately teaches is that
there is no meaning. There's no answer to why beyond this happened because of what came just
before what which happened because of what came before that. There's nothing but an empty indifference
indifference universe in which occasionally atoms come together to temporarily form things
which we call me. Well, yeah, this is interesting because I got to thinking about what I call Al
Alvy's error, which was Alvy singer Woody Allen's character and Annie Hall,
as a child, he won't do his homework in the universe is expanding expanding. Yes,
and his mother upgrades him. What's the universe got to do that we live in Brooklyn and Brooklyn
what's wrong with him to the doctor. Yeah. Oh, I love that scene. Yeah.
Right. So the error is that well, that's not the level, you know, the ultimate meaning of the
universe does anything to do. We live here now. I wrote about this with I watched a debate with
William Lane Craig and Shelly Kagan philosopher. You know, so Craig writes this, which so here
I'm referencing your chapter discussing people who believe in determinism. The claim is that
they're not as moral or they they're not they don't feel as motivated or what it has negative
effects, which you should point out that the research on that is pretty debatable. And some of
that didn't survive the replication crisis. But the other problem is that maybe that's the wrong
level to think of it as and then you also discuss can atheists be as moral and so on. Of course,
that touches something that's close to me. But here's what Craig argues on a naturalistic world
view. Everything is ultimately destined to destruction in the heat death of the universe.
As the universe expands, it grows colder and colder as its energy is used up eventually,
all the stars are burned out, all matter will collapse and dead stars and black holes.
There's no life, no heat, no light, only the corpses of dead stars and galaxies expanding
in the endless dark. At the light at the end, it's hard for me to understand how our moral
choices have any sort of significance. There's no moral accountability. The universe is neither
better nor worse for what we do. Our moral lives become vacuous, because they don't have that kind
of cosmic significance. Then he went on about the Holocaust. What difference does it make if we do
something about it or not? And Kelly jelly Kagan says, This strikes me as an outrageous thing
to suggest. It doesn't really matter. Surely it matters to the torture victims, whether they're
being tortured. It doesn't require that this makes some cosmic difference to the internal
significance of the universe, but to matter whether a human being is tortured, it matters to them,
it matters to their family, it matters to us. That's great. Wow, he must be a fun guy to hang
out with, although people may be saying the same thing about me at this point. This brings us back
to like we're a totally weird organism in that we could know our machinists, but at the same time,
our feelings feel real. And that carries a certain kind of weight and a certain moral imperative
that no matter how irrational it is, the notion that something good or bad could happen to a
machine, it's a good thing when we decrease cumulative pain out there. I know that ultimately
doesn't make sense because it runs counter all this mechanism. But at the end of the day,
like where are the species for whom the fact that nothing good can ever really happen to a machine
has to feel sufficiently unreal that we function and that we function even with some moral guidelines
that come out of that. Yeah, I guess maybe it's different levels of analysis. If you give me
a shot of oxytocin in the nose spray, then I want to cuddle more after sex with my wife or
something, I don't know what. You go, oh, it was the oxytocin that did that. Well, yeah, but I still
have the feelings and the feelings are good. Can I just experience the feelings and not worry about
the oxytocin? And maybe the answer is, yeah, don't think about any of this stuff when it comes to
who you love. Maybe you don't think about any of this stuff and how your olfactory
receptor makeup has nothing to do with the fact that this smells like a great meal and you're
happy and anticipatory. Sure as hell do the effort to think this way when you were feeling
entitled to more care or more access or more influence or more money or more anything
than somebody else just because you've got myths in your head about how you earn it.
And sure as hell do the hard work and resist that when you're judging somebody else.
You know, go be happy, enjoy your feelings of love, go enjoy the meal, go like figure out
why you love this music and don't have to think through why you're part of this culture that
likes this type of dissonance and this type of constant chord progressions or god knows what.
Yeah, go feel happy, go feel grateful, but don't feel like you earned it and don't feel like you
earned the ability to decide that somebody else earned their worse luck than you had.
Yeah, again, gratitude. Yeah, Feynman made that point about
you know, a scientific analysis of nature. It doesn't take away anything, it just adds.
I mean, it's nice to know why a rainbow looks like the way it does. It like bounces inside each of
the little droplets of water and so on, but I can still appreciate it. Also, just like anybody else,
it just is beautiful to look at and you get an emotional feeling. And even if those emotional
feelings have neurochemistry behind them, but what? It's still a feeling. Yeah, like Bach can be
broken down into all sorts of rules of contrapunctal composition and like, yeah, that's true. That
doesn't take away for there's there's biomechanical explanations for why gazelles look amazing when
they leap. But that doesn't, you know, the fact that there is more structure than we suspect
superficially to explain things. All that should do is like increase the amazingness of it. Like,
purpose of science is not to cure us of like gratitude and being amazed by stuff. All it
does is just reinvent it for us. Right. All right, Robert, I really love the book and I love
your work. What do you hope could come of this thread of thinking about why our lives turn out?
It's a little bit of an extension of your previous book, Behave. I mean, all the different factors
that go into it. But what's the bigger picture here? Changing society in a certain direction.
Oh, I don't know, given given the world I live in full of like uber uber,
astonishingly privileged sort of inheritors of random luck. I don't know, maybe make us all
feel a little less entitled, make us feel a little bit less whiny and difficult, make us have a little
bit more empathy for someone who's very different from us. And, you know, maybe have a few more
people out there whose rotten luck could be explained by, oh, their subtype of like leptin
receptor stop hating themselves in the process. You know, I don't know, I'll settle for something
incremental just because like scientists like are so accustomed to having no impact whatsoever.
So like getting three and a half people to think a little bit differently about their privilege
or somebody else's lack thereof. I think that should count as a win for me. Yeah. Well, again,
protopia. Just make tomorrow a tiny bit better than today. The problem for utopia is then that you
can find ways to sacrifice other people who are standing in our way. Exactly. At some point,
countries in light and Scandinavian countries seem inevitable to go to war over who takes
better care of their elderly. Yeah. Like somehow that is still part of our potential destiny.
I mean, part of the theist argument, which I understand that, you know, without God,
then Hitler got away with it. I mean, that that is dissettling. But on the other hand,
you know, we that's why we want to have good justice now in the here and now.
Because no one knows for sure what happens after you're dead.
Yep. Except for those of us who suspect the answer is nothing. Nothing. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Because we're made of stuff and stuff stops this weird emergent thing called animacy
at some point. But yeah, exactly. No, I know. And people say, well, what happens after you
die? Well, where were you before you were born? Well, I wasn't anywhere. Yeah. Right. Back you go.
But again, it's part of that kind of dualistic sense that we can't get away from. You know,
Paul Bloom even thinks we're naturalistic, natural born dualists that it just comes with the,
you know, bundled with the hardware from a very early age. And that, you know, again, back to
consciousness, you can't perceive your brain doing anything. And so it just feels like there's
thoughts floating around up there. So maybe when my brain dies, they float off into the
quantum field or wherever. Because, you know, if you say, imagine yourself dead, you can't.
You can't do it. If you're imagining anything, you're not dead.
Yeah. That's, that's it. You know, it's like Oliver Sacks talking about hallucinations that
people have. You know, they don't think they're hallucinating. You know, the audio cortex is
operating there, even though they're in the brain scan, their voices are out there. Right. So.
Yeah. Nobody comes into an emergency room saying, help, I'm hallucinating. They're saying, help,
Satan is telling me to do this. And I don't want to do it because that wouldn't be right.
Yeah. I think you're, again, the free will issue is along those lines. It feels like
something like I'm making a choice. So then you attribute to something. Well, it's that free will
thing. And then, hopefully, you see enough circumstances where that wasn't the case that
like you do a little bit of that like self reflection stuff, which is often not very
appealing and is kind of irksome and, you know, go do a little more of that. Yeah.
All right, Robert, that's a good place to end coming up on two hours here. I know you're
you're doing a lot of interviews for the book. We'll post this as soon as
let's see, what's the pub date of this book? I forget. It's coming up pretty soon, right? This
week or next week. Mid-October. Mid-October. Yeah. I think we put it. Mid-October or something. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So you got some debates coming up. That's good. That'll be fun.
I definitely have to watch the one with Bob Meister. He's one of the most interesting
people working in psychology today. I'm looking forward to it. And he appears.
Did you read his book? You read his book, Evil, right? Where he interviewed all these
serial killers and, you know, under the theory that they have low self-esteem. Just the opposite.
Hey, a little bit of sociopathic narcissism here and there. Everything is the world's fault,
not mine. Not me, not me. I'm looking forward to it. He also appears to be a very nice guy for
more email exchanges. Yeah, I know. So this should be fun. Yeah, he is. I know him. He's a super
nice guy. All right. We can ramble on for hours more. I'll just hit the stop button there.
