Hello everyone, it's Michael Schirmer and it's time for another episode of the Michael
Schirmer Show.
This one is brought to you by Wondrium, a series of college-level audio and video courses and
documentary films and series produced and distributed by The Teaching Company.
Wondrium brings you engaging educational content through short-form videos, long-form courses,
my favorites, tutorials, how-to lessons, travelogues, documentaries, and more covering every topic
you've ever wondered about, and many, many more you've never even thought you'd wonder
about.
For example, here's one I'm going to take this week.
Again, the app is right on the phone, you just tap it, open it up, and they give you
a whole series of courses and tutorials and films and things you can watch or listen to.
This one's called The U.S. Constitution Through History.
This is 24 30-minute lectures, which I always listen to at 1.2 or 1.3 speed, depending on
the lecture, America's founding ideas, failures of early American governments, dilemma, dilemmas
of the Constitutional Convention, ratification of the Constitution, the Bill of Rights, the
first federalist power, first federal powers, Hamilton's Bank, and this goes on and I'm
not going to read all 24 of these, but you get the idea.
Nice thing about these, you start a lecture and it remembers where you're located in the
lecture, such that if you stop and come back, it's right there, or if you skip into another
lecture, maybe you even change courses, literally, and then you come back to this course, it
picks up right where you left off.
So check it out, go to Wondrium.com slash Shermer to get 50% off the first three months
of Wondrium.
It's a subscription service, so that's half off the first quarterly plan, 50% off the
first three months.
It's a great deal, Wondrium.com slash Shermer, W-O-N-D-R-I-U-M.com slash Shermer, S-H-E-R-M-E-R.
Check it out, Wondrium.com slash Shermer, get your 50% off those first three months of Wondrium.
It's a great way to spend your time.
All right, this one is brought to you by Wren, W-R-E-N, Wren, Wren is a startup that's making
it easy for all of us to work toward making a difference in the coming climate crisis.
I don't think it's an existential crisis, as you've heard me say here, I think it's
the kind of problem that we can solve in the long run if we all do just a little bit of
changes in our actions.
And here with Wren, they're not talking about, you should use less carbon, make a lower carbon
footprint.
No, they will calculate for you what your carbon footprint is, information you give them,
obviously, and then they will plant trees.
And in your name, to counter, well, you get involved in all this, but they plant the trees
for you and do other things that help sequester CO2 gases and in the long run, lower the average
global temperature.
In the long run, again, not, no, there's a collective action problem, no one of us can
make a difference, much of a difference at all, but collectively, if enough of us do
it, and particularly if we get momentum, then we can make a change.
And again, I think in the coming years, decades, centuries, it'll be fine.
We will recover from this.
We will solve this problem just like we did the ozone, hole in the ozone problem.
And we did that through collective action against that, and that's what Wren wants you
to do.
So, here's the deal.
If you go to Wren.co slash Shermer, W-R-E-N dot CO slash Shermer, they will plant 10 extra
trees in your name.
That's pretty cool.
I did it.
I think it's cool.
I calculated my carbon footprint and so on.
And if enough of us do it, it will make a difference.
So check it out.
That's W-R-E-N dot CO slash Shermer, Wren.co slash Shermer, and you'll be on your way.
It's a cool thing.
Check it out.
Thank you to that company for supporting this podcast.
As you know, we don't have a lot of advertisers on here, and I would only have people that
are doing something that we support and that I personally support.
Thanks for listening.
Here's our episode.
My guest today is Tim Palmer.
He is a Royal Society Research Professor in the Department of Physics at the University
of Oxford.
He pioneered the development of operational ensemble weather and climate forecasting,
and in 2007, he was formally recognized as having contributed to the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Changes Nobel Peace Prize.
Palmer is a commander of the British Empire, a CBE, which is pretty cool, and a fellow
of the Royal Society, FRS, and the National Academy of Sciences, and a recipient of the
Institute of Physics, Dirac Gold Medal.
He lives near Oxford.
Tim, nice to see you.
Thanks for coming on the show.
Hi.
Thank you.
Great pleasure.
You can imagine, I love the title of your book.
This is the book we're discussing today, The Primacy of Doubt, given in as much as that
I publish a magazine called Skeptic, and might as well be called Doubt.
The subtitle is From Quantum Physics to Climate Change, How the Science of Uncertainty Can
Help Us Understand Our Chaotic World.
We'll be releasing this conversation the week this book comes out, so congratulations.
I love the book.
It was a really fun, interesting read, well-written.
Anybody can understand it, even though there's some technical science in it, but that's a
sign of good science writing, in my opinion.
Let me just open with the epigrams here you have from Richard Feynman, in which you write
quoting him, our freedom to doubt was born of a struggle against authority in the early
days of science.
It was a very deep and strong struggle.
Permit us to question, to doubt.
That's all, not to be sure.
So I'd gathered Feynman as something of a role model for you, or hero, or just somebody
to admire.
Absolutely.
I mean, Feynman's a role model, I think, for pretty much any physicist.
My background was in physics and theoretical physics, so he figured very strongly in my
education.
Maybe I could add the second quote in that thing, which is that the actual phrase, the
primacy of doubt, came from a quote by James Glick, who did a wonderful biography of Feynman.
And Glick says, yeah, he believed in the prime, he, Feynman, believed in the primacy
of doubt, not as a blemish on our ability to know, but as the essence of knowing.
And I kind of find that a very kind of profound statement that, you know, what characterizes
us humans and our knowledge and our ability to think and reason and so on, is intimately
connected to the fact that we are infallible, we make mistakes, you know, we're not computers
that just run the same old programs over and over again, getting the same answers.
So there's something profound about the human condition and the notion of uncertainty or
doubt.
I want to spend some time on that, but first I'm going to do a slight detour from your
first page of your author's note to give some biographical background, and then I'm going
to segue into how you ended up doing what you're doing as an example of chance and contingency
in how lives turn out, so you'll see where I'm going with this.
So here's a quote from you, I studied for a PhD in the 1970s researching Einstein's theory
of general relativity, Einstein had become a hero of mine by the time I was a teenager.
I was lucky, the 1970s were considered have been a golden age for general relativity theory.
At the first scientific conference I ever attended in 1974, I literally heard Stephen
Hawking, he hadn't lost his voice, announced his most important and famous result that
black holes aren't truly black, but radiate quantum particles.
That's Hawking radiation, right?
Well first of all, what was that, what was that, well let me continue because you end
up with a great story here.
My research supervisor Dennis Siamma, Hawking's PhD supervisor some years earlier was ecstatic
about this result.
Siamma was optimistic that we were on the verge of understanding how to unify Einstein's
theory of general relativity with quantum mechanics, the theory that successfully describes
atoms and elementary particles.
There were problems however, one problem which frustrated Siamma was that Hawking's calculations
were a little arcane, Siamma was convinced that there must be a more physically transparent
way of deriving such an important result.
He started to look at alternative ideas based on concepts from a field of physics called
non-equilibrium thermodynamics.
Siamma asked me to look at what is called the principle of maximum entropy production,
something I hadn't heard at the time.
Toward the end of my PhD research I had become an expert on black holes and was successful
in securing a postdoctoral position in Hawking's group at Cambridge.
All seems set for a career as a theoretical gravitational physicist.
Indeed, why would you want to do anything else?
I mean you're at the peak there and yet you ended up doing something completely different.
Yeah, it's a good question and I often, well actually I don't often but people often
say to me, what would your career have been like had you stayed?
I think there were two things.
One is that, let me tell you a story, I used to very frequently, parties and Oxford people
would ask me, some really attractive young lady would come up and ask me what I would
do and I would say black holes and she'd go, wow that's fantastic, wow that's incredible,
black holes, wow that's incredible.
Just tell me a bit more about what you do.
So okay, so you want to know a bit more detail, well I research into gravitational energy
momentum from black holes and how I'm looking for mathematical solutions for the quasi-locality
problem which involves looking at tenses over the tangent bundle to phase space and mappings
down onto space.
Anyway, so I've got half of these sentences and you can see starting to lose, very rapidly
lose interest.
So the point is that when you're doing research you're really doing kind of nitty gritty mathematical
details on probably kind of really infinitesimally small parts of a theory and at some stage
you ask yourself, well am I going to crack the really big problem with what I'm doing?
Because after all what I'm doing affects nobody, it's not really of any great service to humankind,
I'm doing this just for the sort of hell of it if you like to, I mean some sense advanced
physics, so I bet advanced physics in a pretty fundamental way I guess was my thinking and
the more I thought about what I was doing at a very, very detailed technical level I
was kind of decided, I was just making small inroads into a very big problem that I wasn't
likely to solve and the big problem which is actually still a problem to this day is
how to reconcile quantum mechanics and gravitation.
It sounds fascinating but unless you have some very specific ideas, you're either going
following along dotting eyes and crossing T's from some other person's work or you have
your own idea about how to make progress and at the time I didn't have any great ideas
so I got more and more thinking well maybe I should spend most of my career at least
doing stuff that is more relevant and hopefully useful to my fellow human beings and that
kind of led me ultimately to my, I have to say my parents dismay, I mean they obviously
wanted me to go to Cambridge and work with Hawking and so on but in the end I decided
to do something different and all I could say is it's worked out really well.
I actually continue to kind of, you know in the what spare time I have I continue to probe
some of these issues about quantum mechanics but fundamentally most of my kind of active
career has been much more in the climate and weather science which I, you know, I believe
I have made some impacts on how we perceive weather and climate so I think it's been a
good decision but of course it's a counterfactual to know what the alternative would have been
like but my gut feeling is it wouldn't have been as good.
Interesting, yeah.
So give us some sense of before we dive into all that research, what was it like to work
with Stephen Hawking?
What was he like as a person and how did you work as his condition worsened?
Well, no, I mean Stephen, Stephen was in Cambridge and my, my Dennis Sharma who, who
supervised me with, with Stephen's supervisor was based in Oxford.
Dennis had been in Cambridge so when he supervised Stephen as a PhD student he was in Cambridge
but he moved to Oxford in the early 70s.
So my biggest two influences were Dennis Sharma himself but also Roger Penrose who, who had
moved again fairly very recently from Birkbeck College in London to Oxford to the Mathematics
Institute in Oxford in the early 70s and I mean Roger was a phenomenal person, well still
is of course, he's won a Nobel Prize a couple of years ago and still very active in his
90s but he was, you know, he was a kind of Richard Feynman of general relativity.
So as, as Richard Feynman is to high energy particle physics, so Roger Penrose is to and
certainly was in those days to general relativity and in particular black hole physics and
all that sort of stuff.
And I have to say I, I kind of probably, you know, some of my skepticism about traditional
quantum mechanics and quantum field theory and stuff like that which goes into standard
particle physics probably came from interacting with Roger Penrose in those days, Roger, Roger.
Roger's carried on the, I guess Roger's carried on the tradition from Einstein if you like
of being somewhat skeptical about quantum mechanics even though experimentally it seems
to be a very accurate theory.
So I didn't have much interaction with Stephen during my PhD, I met him a few times.
Of course, you know, soon after I heard him speak, I mean he was, it was difficult, you
know, he'd already almost lost his voice when he gave that talk in the conference I went
to but he hadn't quite lost it but he was, you know, it was difficult to, you know, his
speaking was difficult so it was difficult to understand him and it became increasingly
difficult to communicate with him.
So I would say my, you know, the communications I had with Stephen were pretty limited, unfortunately.
But you know, if I had gone to Cambridge they would have obviously improved but that didn't
happen.
Yeah.
Yeah, just, just because I'm curious, what's the problem to be solved?
Why does quantum physics need to be righted with general relativity, why can't there just
be two different physics for two different levels and just leave it at that?
Well, because we think there is a domain where the two will overlap.
So for example, we can currently send, I mean the sort of iconic experiment that demonstrates
the quantum nature of particles is what's called the two slit experiment.
So the two slit experiment, you know, was originally done for light, you know, beams
of light in the, in the 19th century by Thomas Young.
So you take a beam of light and you pass it through two slits and you get this kind of
funny, what's called diffraction pattern in a screen behind the two slits where you get
regions of the screen which are very light and then other regions which are dark.
And the explanation is when you have light waves, the waves are kind of interfering to
create, to create regions of darkness.
Now the extraordinary thing is that if you, if you, so in the 20th century it was realized
you could send particles of light through one at a time, these are photons.
And again, the pattern, you send them through these two slits and this pattern of light and
dark kind of emerges even though the particles go through this one slit or the other, you
know, one at a time.
So it's a real mystery to know how, even to this day, it's still a mystery as to why
this interference pattern builds up.
But that's a quantum phenomenon.
Now over the years people have sent heavier and heavier particles.
So photons, yes, do that, do it with electrons, then you can do it with individual atoms.
And now people even talking about, you know, sending little sort of bacteria through slits
and getting interference patterns.
So then the question arises, what happens when you send particles that are so massive
that you can detect their gravitation, their own self gravitation?
And this is something we can't quite do yet experimentally, but we'll soon be able to,
I think, in a matter of years.
And it's really an important question as to whether sort of particles whose gravity you
can detect will still show this interference phenomenon or not.
So whether it does or it doesn't means that, you know, for what it's worth, my betting
is that once you detect the gravitation of a particle, you won't see this interference
effect.
But, you know, other people will say otherwise.
But basically that is testing a kind of a regime in physics where both quantum mechanics
and gravity are simultaneously important.
And so we kind of, we need a theory to describe that situation.
What the theory is, as I say, is open for grabs.
And then, you know, in the whole kind of nature in a more esoteric way, the nature of the
say the big bang, the beginning of the universe, and what goes on in the center of black holes
is, you know, it will be impossible to properly understand without having this combined understanding
of gravity and quantum mechanics in a single theory together.
So there are good reasons why we need this, but, you know, it's been, it is absolutely
the holy grail in theoretical physics.
And as I say, my supervisor, when Hawking announced his result, he thought, oh, well,
we'll solve this problem within two or three years.
But, you know, over, well, 50 years later, basically, we're still struggling.
And the solutions, and still I don't think in sight, either.
I'm not sure if this is applicable, but jumping ahead to your chapter on consciousness, you
discussed Roger Enrose and Stuart Hameroff's theory of consciousness.
And I should note, parenthetically, there's like 27 different theories that are floating
around out there.
So I think we're a long ways from any one of them being obviously right.
But there, you know, their idea that inside neurons are these little microtubules that
are like scaffolding that hold the cell together.
And inside the microtubules, there is these little quantum effects that can be measured
and that their idea is that if I get this straight, there's kind of a correlation between
the neurons in a brain that the wave function is collapsing in some kind of synchronized
way and out of that, you will get this kind of consciousness, whatever we mean by that,
you know, sort of aware of being aware of being aware in some level, something like that.
But then the counter to that when that first came out was that, well, those quantum effects
apply at the subatomic level, but neurons fire it at a molecular size level.
These are, you know, massive, you know, chemical molecules going between these neurons and
these synaptic gaps and operating like a lock and key molecules and so on, and that that
would wash out that.
Now, last time I talked to Stuart about this, he said, no, no, there's quantum effects at
the macro level now and so on.
And I haven't followed closely that research, but so kind of walk us through some of that.
Well, I mean, I think you're right to say that this is still a very uncertain area of
science, both from, you know, physically, exactly how quantum mechanics operates in
the brain.
And secondly, whether quantum processes are fundamental for consciousness, I personally,
well, personally, I do think quantum processes are important in the brain.
I'll give you an example of this in just a second.
But I also do, I'm inclined to Penrose's view, you know, because his ideas about
consciousness were very much motivated by the question of whether computers, you know,
can understand things, really understand things in the way we understand things.
And I still think, you know, the example he used in his, his original book, The Emperor's
New Mind, of what's called Gerdl's theorem, which basically says there are aspects of
mathematics that, you know, can't be described with algorithms.
So, you know, there are truth, there are things that are true, but are not provably true
with a with an algorithm.
Now, a computer by definition is something that works using an algorithm.
So a computer by definition cannot understand this, this kind of notion of Gerdl's theorem.
Whereas we humans can understand it.
I mean, if you read, you know, if you read through it, you can follow each step and you
say, OK, yeah, I get, I get all that.
So his, so Penrose's point is to say, well, if that's true, there must be something that
the human brain is doing, which is not like just an algorithm that a computer runs on.
So I find that actually, all those, I know some people are not convinced, but I find
that a fairly sort of powerful, generic kind of idea.
Now, I've, I was, I mean, one of, one of the things which has interested me over the years,
because I use in my professional climate work, I use computers a lot and really, really
big computers, like the biggest computers that there are in the world.
And in fact, I, I, you know, I, I, I spent a lot of my time advocating for the fact that
in climate science, we need even bigger computers than when we can get at the moment.
If we really want to get down to the nitty gritty of climate change, we need much bigger
computers or access to much bigger computers.
But there's a really interesting kind of anomaly between the human brain and, and a
computer, which is that computers are unbelievably energy intensive.
So these computers, you know, which do all these calculations are consuming tens of megawatts
of power.
And most of that power is actually used to move data around from one bit of a computer
to another.
Now, in the human brain, we actually, I mean, the optical, you know, the optical nerves
are actually transporting pretty much as much data into the brain as a big supercomputer
moves around.
And it processes all that data from the outside world, you know, tries to make sense of, of
what we perceive and so on.
But it does it all on 20 watts.
So six orders of magnitude less than a, than a computer does.
So supercomputer.
So I think that's a kind of, I mean, I, you know, I'm totally convinced that, you know,
there are some big clues in that, that, you know, trying to just emulate the brain on a
supercomputer is kind of missing the point, which is that it does it on 20 watts on a light bulb,
what a light bulb takes to, to light.
Now, so I've been certainly interested in trying to understand why the brain does what it
does on such a low amount of, of energy.
And I came across a really interesting paper by some physicists and neuroscientists from
Austria.
Gustav Bernreider is one of them, who's somebody I've met a couple of times now.
And what they have realized is that to, you talk about new neurons and sending signals
along these axons of neurons.
So these long sort of wires, if you like.
Now, the point is that the signals have to be boosted every, every short distance, because
otherwise they would just dissipate in the sort of noisy environment.
And they do that with kind of what you might call protein transistors.
You know, that's the analogy of a transistor amplifying a signal, but it's done with these,
with these, well, what are basically ion channels, so electrically charged atoms or yes, are fed
through the walls of neurons in a controlled way, which boosts the signal that propagates
along the neuron.
Now, what these scientists have realized is that if you did this, if you, if these protein
transistors were acting purely in a classical way, so non quantum way, the amount of energy
you would need to, to do the signal boosting would just be more than is available by, by
a long way.
And what they have realized is that it's actually a very quantum mechanical process, which allows
these protein transistors to operate.
So here, quantum mechanics is acting in a way to reduce the energy demand on the brain.
So it's one of the, and there may well be other examples of how quantum mechanics allows
the brain to do things which at a classical level would be impossible or just take too
much energy.
Now, I don't know whether, you know, Stuart Hammerhoff and Roger Penrose's microtubules
would actually come under that category that they're from an energetic point of view, they're
something where quantum physics can do things much more energetically efficiently than classical
physics.
But certainly this whole area of neuron propagation, I think, is a great example of where quantum
mechanics can step in and say, I can do this much cheaper than you could ever do with classical
physics.
And this has got to be surely a kind of an important message for, you know, building
computers which make much more efficient use of energy, which at the moment we don't, we
don't do.
So, so yeah, so there's lots of uncertainties here, but I do think, you know, that's an example
of where quantum mechanics probably does play a really important role in the brain.
And, and I think, I mean, this is another issue, but I do think the whole, I mean, it's
something I discuss in the book, you may not, we may not want to go into details now, but
the whole question of free will and consciousness, I think it actually is bound up with the role
that quantum mechanics plays in the brain.
Well, we can get into it because this is super interesting stuff.
I've had most of the big consciousness people on the show, Matthew Cobb and Christoph
Koch and Neil Seth and Jeffrey Goff and John Joe McThadden, you know, they've all, you know,
presented their ideas.
I guess my one beef I have is that this often turns on language.
My favorite science cartoon is Sydney Harris's cartoon with the two mathematicians at the
chalkboard and with the complex equations and then in the middle, he says, and then a
miracle happens.
And the other one says, I think you need to be more explicit here in step two, often feel
like, you know, right, you know, and then and then the microtubules and the wave function
and then consciousness or and then, you know, the the the waves, the kind of electromagnetic
waves that the EEG is picking up and then consciousness to me, it often feels like and
then a miracle or emergence, you know, complexity theory, emergence and then emergence happens
and consciousness to me, it often feels like and then a miracle happened.
Right, right, right.
Well, I understand that.
And well, OK, so, I mean, I discuss consciousness a little bit, and I'll give you my definition
of consciousness in a second.
But let me precede it with saying something about free will.
And I I've got interest, I mean, I'm interested in free will because it appears
I say appears because there's some controversy about this.
But in in standard, so so I need to backtrack.
So in the book, I discuss a lot about whether the uncertainty principle in quantum mechanics,
you know, which anyone who knows anything about quantum mechanics knows this thing called
the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, which is really, really difficult to understand.
Because normally, when we think about uncertainty, for example, in weather forecasting, as an
example of, you know, of a chaotic system, and a chaotic system is one where, you know,
very small uncertainties in the initial conditions for a weather forecast can can lead to a very
different prediction of weather.
So, you know, you we could say that we are uncertain about what the weather's going to
be like in a couple of weeks time, because we humans don't have perfect knowledge of
today's weather, we can't like measure it absolutely everywhere, all the little worlds
and eddies and so on.
So uncertainty is in those in that context, and in most context in which people use the
word kind of reflects what would be called a kind of epistemic uncertainty, in other
words, an uncertainty that that we have about the system we're trying to predict or understand.
The problem is in quantum mechanics, and I have to say Heisenberg himself, when he wrote
some of his first kind of expository articles about the uncertainty principle, he actually
tried to explain it in those terms, it's sort of we can't kind of measure stuff arbitrary
accurately.
And Niels Bohr, who was the, you know, one of the great grandfathers pioneers of quantum
mechanics, you know, took Heisenberg to task, he said, No, this is not right.
Whatever uncertainty is in quantum mechanics is different.
It's, it's, you know, the word philosophers would use is ontological.
There's something inherently uncertain in the equations of quantum mechanics.
So that's the standard, that's the standard view, which personally, I, I don't actually
believe, but that's a very controversial view.
So yeah, yeah, so I go into quite a lot in, in the book about, so what, what is the, you
know, if you had to say one reason why people don't think that uncertainty is epistemic and
is more ontological, they would probably cite something called Bell's theorem, Bell's inequality,
which is a kind of an experimental test, which seems to suggest that there is no kind of
definite, that quantum reality is not definite, it's something sort of indeterministic and
sort of, I don't know, it's difficult to use words actually here because it, it doesn't kind
of, it doesn't match with anything that we sort of understand.
So in the book, in my book, I go into Bell's theorem quite a bit.
Now Bell's theorem, as it's usually phrased, so I'm coming around to your question, Bell's
theorem as it's usually phrased involves the issue of free will.
So in Bell's theorem, you imagine experimenters who measure, you know, they just do simple
measurements on particles, like measuring their spin.
But an important ingredient in Bell's theorem is that although an experimenter actually
measured the spin of a particle in a certain direction or with the apparatus oriented in
a certain way, they could have measured the spin in a different way.
So in other words, the standard way in which Bell's theorem, which seems to suggest quantum
uncertainty is, is ontological, requires this notion of, well, it requires this notion of
counterfactual worlds, where the experimenter did other than what they actually did.
And I have been using ideas from chaos theory, and in particular, the mathematics of the
geometry of chaos.
So underpinning chaos is this wonderful, wonderfully beautiful, fantastically, just incredible
fractal geometry.
And fractals have gaps.
So if you look at a fractal, it's always got little gaps.
And the gaps, you know, you zoom in, and there are gaps within the gaps and the gaps and so on,
they get smaller and smaller, but they're always there.
And my claim is that some of these crucial counterfactual experiments correspond to points
that lie in the gaps in these fractals.
So in your, if your theory is based on these fractals, then these, these counterfactual
experiments would actually be disallowed by, by this theory.
And so this, this actually provides a way of getting around this, this Bell's theorem.
However, so we're coming to your point now, the point people say, well, yeah, but you know, I do
have free will, I could have done this experiment, you know, that's what was a typical kind of
reaction.
And so, you know, if it raises the question, well, first of all, raises the question, what is free
will, but a question which people don't ask very much, and there's something I've kind of
dwelt on in my book, is why do we, why do we humans feel so very viscerally, and kind of almost,
you know, will thump our fists on the table to assert this point that we have free will, what
is it that actually makes it such a, you know, I'm sure a computer doesn't have this feeling
of free will. So what is it that makes us feel we have free will. So this is where I think,
again, quantum mechanics in the brain could be playing a role. So this is my hypothesis that
see, because I, I do actually believe that ultimately, the laws of physics are deterministic.
So there are no, there's no kind of randomness in the, in the equations of physics, ultimately,
that things are deterministic. But you see, so the question is what distinguishes
quantum mechanics from ordinary classical mechanics. And this is where this idea of,
this is going to be sound a little bit, a little bit kind of weird, perhaps, but I can assure you
there is mathematics that will pin that will sort of back this up, that we don't want to go into it
now. But the idea is that these, the, I mentioned these kind of fractal attractors. The idea is
that quantum mechanics feels so it, you see, we can think of our world as the world evolving
that we perceive to be a particular sort of solution of the equations of physics.
But there are nearby solutions in some kind of more abstract solution space, if you like,
with slightly different initial conditions. And quantum mechanics kind of feels these
neighboring solutions in a way which classical physics doesn't. It kind of feels the geometry
of this fractal attractor, if you can sense, if you like, little neighborhoods of this geometry.
And my, my feeling is that what we think of as free will is a very sort of weak and imprecise
perception of these neighboring solutions, which we would interpret as worlds where we did otherwise.
So my belief is our really strong visceral feeling about free will comes from
this notion of sort of alternative solutions in this abstract solution space.
All right, so then I got thinking about, so I got to come to consciousness because that links to
consciousness. Okay, but Tim, let's, let's, let's halt for just a second, because there's a lot
of jargon on there I want to unpack. And this could be the core question for the entire book,
that that is to what extent is uncertainty built into the system itself, and is not just
a limitation of our knowledge. So the latter would be epistemic, the former would be ontological.
So here I have, from my coin collection in 1883, silver dollar, 18, yeah, 1883 silver dollar,
says in God we trust on there. So they've been putting that on the coins since the 1800s.
So if I flip the coin, and just do my little flip here, and, and okay, it's tails, all right,
so I flip it again, boom. And this time it's tails, so two in a row, and so I do this 10 times or 100
times. And so we know that I would, I would say, well, I got a 5050 chance because it's not a
rig coin. But that, that's only because I just don't know all the, all the particles and the wind
currents in my room here or whatever. Are you saying that if, if Laplace's demon was real,
or it was the equivalent of a magician that is doing a trick and so knows 100% what the outcome
is going to be, or, or God is, you know, knows his omniscient and tell, or is it that even with
the best all the knowledge we have, you would still cannot predict with 100% certainty the
flip of the coin because of something built into the physical system itself?
Well, okay, so what, if I, if I wear my, like, conventional physics hat, you know, if I, if you,
if you ask me that question, to me, a physicist, and I'm a representative of the,
you know, the conventional physics community, so I'm giving you the kind of conventional
answer, then I would say that in quantum mechanics, so if you were flipping, if you like an atom,
if you like or an electron or something, if you're doing the equivalent of this coin flip
to a quantum mechanical system, like an electron or an atom, then the uncertainty would not be
because you didn't know something about the atom. It, it, it, it, it would be because there is
something inherently uncertain and undeterministic about the equations for, for the quantum system.
So I have to be slightly technical, because when you, you, you, when you, you do two things,
when you do the equivalent of a coin flip to an atom, you flip the atom in some sense,
but then you have to look at it to measure, you actually have to see
whether it's kind of up or down, if you like heads or tails, quantum heads or quantum tails.
And the traditional view is that the actual process of looking to see whether it's up or down,
which is called measurement, introduces some inherently uncertain, indeterministic
kind of physics. So that's, that's the standard. So that is different to the epistemic uncertainty,
where it's just something about the coin that you don't know. Now Einstein famously
thought that was bunk, because he, his, his very famous statement, God does not play dice,
was exactly, you know, making the point that that's ridiculous. I mean, how can it be that
nature has indeterministic equations doesn't make sense to him. And of course, Schrodinger
thought it was nonsense as well. Schrodinger was with Heisenberg was one of the two founding
fathers for the basic laws of quantum mechanics that we now use every day in many different
areas of physics. And his famous cat is, is, is an example of that. So the cat, you know,
the cat's in the box, you have a little atom, which may or may not decay has a probability of
decaying. And again, quantum mechanically, you have to say, after say 10 minutes, there's
the, the atom is like half decayed and half not decayed in some weird sense. But the idea is if
the, if it has decayed, it breaks a capsule cyanide and kills the cat. So then you say, well,
what states the cat in? And the state of the cat is not just that you don't know whether the cat's
alive or dead, you open a box and you can see whether it's alive or dead. But quantum mechanics
says inside that box before you've looked at it, the cat is neither alive nor dead. There's some
inherent uncertainty about the aliveness or deadness of the cat. Now Schrodinger introduced
that example, not to say that cats are both alive and dead at the same time, but because
that's a completely daft idea. It's just stupid. And he wanted to really to make the point that
there's something wrong with quantum mechanics, even though he was one of the fathers of quantum
mechanics, he realized there was something wrong with it. And so in the book, I try to
develop ideas which might take us back. And I'm not in any way claiming I have a complete
theory. I have, I mean, I have, I have a theory to the extent that I have papers published in the
peer reviewed literature, and I certainly don't go into any technical details in the book.
But it's, I'm trying to show a path, if you like, where, which might take us back
towards a more kind of sensible, I suppose, theory of, of quantum physics where uncertainty
is again, epistemic. So the fact that we don't know whether the cat is alive or dead
is just because we don't know all the details about how that atom decayed. But sure enough,
inside the box, the cat would be alive or would be dead. So that's, that's, so that I'm just,
you know, I try to go and, and so it, you know, so that, and then that leads to the free will.
And then if we have a minute, we'll talk about consciousness. Yeah, let's stay on free will
for a minute, because it first, as you know, Dan Dennett argued that quantum uncertainty doesn't
give you free will because it just throws an element of randomness into the machine.
Absolutely, absolutely. So if you just add, that's a really important point. If you just say,
oh, you know, there's something indeterministic about quantum mechanics,
then it just, all that will do for you is that, you know, every time you're making a decision,
it's like, you know, just something random goes into your head. And that's what causes you to
make a decision. But that's clearly not how we make decisions most of the time. We think through
things and, you know, analyze things carefully. And free will is not, that's not what free will
is. So I totally agree with the Dennett on that point. It seems to turn very much on the question,
could you have done otherwise? So if we have these thought experiments, like, you know,
you rewound the tape and played it again. Well, if it's a read only memory tape, and everything
is just rerun exactly as it was, well, yeah, you'd have to do exactly what you did, because
it's just basically a movie of what happened. But so the question then seems to be,
if you could emulate the tape, say tomorrow, where it's pretty close to what happened yesterday,
could you have done otherwise? And so if I'm following you, I think you're saying you could,
because you, if you know, particularly if you know the causal factors operating on you, and you know
that yesterday this happened. And so tomorrow, I'm going to avoid going there or stepping left,
and I'll go right instead of left, or whatever, because you're aware of what happened. And the
universe can never be completely perfectly replicated from one day to the next. And last,
so here's a key question, the universe is predetermined. So this block universe idea, or there's a
God outside of it that knows every particle, and already knows what happened took next week,
just that we don't know. So take it from there.
Right. Well, I think you've absolutely hit the nail on the head by saying this whole thing hinges
around, you know, could we have done otherwise? So let's just, let's just, let's just analyze that
a little bit more carefully. So as you say, you know, you come out of a shop, and, you know,
there's a cyclist on the pavement, and the cyclist collides with you and, you know, you're
carted off to hospital with a broken leg or something. And you, you know, that that ruins
your life for the next year or so. And you say to yourself, Oh, if only I had looked,
you know, round, I would have seen that bicycle and I would have avoided it. So what you have to
do then is you go back to that moment, you're leaving the shop. And you're imagining a world
in which everything is the same, the bicycle is still, you know, the cyclist is just right
riding on the, did I use the word pavement, I have to be careful about British English here,
pavement means sidewalk, I think in America. So the cyclists on this on the sidewalk, yeah.
What we would call the pavement, which I think you shouldn't be there. First of all,
he shouldn't be there. That's the main point. He shouldn't have been there. But so anyway,
but the point is you wind the, you're lying in bed in hospital, and you're winding the
clock back to that moment, you left the shop, and you say, Okay, I'm going to keep everything in the
universe fixed. You know, the moons of Jupiter are where they are, the moon is where it is.
The cyclist is where he is. And everybody else is where he is. But I do still one small thing
differently. I look to my right, let's say. Now, what you're doing is clearly that isn't the real
world. That's not the real world. It's a hypothetical, what we call counterfactual world.
So the question to ask is, is that hypothetical world where everything is basically the same,
except for one small thing where you've moved your head to the right? Is that new hypothetical
world allowed by the laws of physics? Because if it's allowed by the laws of physics,
then you can, you know, you can, in principle, imagine then winding time forward again from
this slightly altered initial state. And you can, you know, rightly infer that you would have
avoided the cyclist, and therefore you wouldn't be in hospital and all the rest of it.
So, so the crucial question is, can we kind of fairly, let's say arbitrarily change
initial conditions, and still have states of the world which are consistent with the laws of physics?
Now, in my book, I give this, now you see, sorry, just before I come on to that point,
I just want to say in most kind of, in most examples in physics, that is possible. So a good
example is, you know, weather forecasting. We have, we use what are called classical laws of physics
for doing weather forecasting. And by classical laws, I mean like Newton's laws of motion
applied to fluids like the atmosphere, the atmosphere is the gas and the oceans are,
you know, liquids and so on. And according to those equations, we can change initial conditions
very slightly. And the equations don't care, actually, the equations will be quite happy
with that slightly altered initial condition. But in the book, I talk about how, and I mentioned
it just now, certain models of chaos can exhibit this fractal geometry in a kind of abstract
space of solutions, which may not be worth going, describing in too much detail here.
But if you take the view that this geometry is something sort of fundamental, then
actually, it can tell you that there are certain of these counterfactual states which
actually aren't consistent with the underlying laws. So in particular, if you have a state of
the world and you add a little, you change it very slightly, but that change takes you into one of
the gaps in the fractal, you know, places where there aren't any, where the fractal is doesn't
exist, if you like, a little gap. If we had a diagram I could show you, but people can look up,
you know, Cantor sets or Mandelbrot sets and they, they see, they can see these little gaps,
you know, there's always gaps. So if this counterfactual world takes you into a gap,
then you're no longer allowed to infer that that, you know, is an allowable state of, of the world.
Now, this may or may not happen at the level of, you know, of looking, of looking for bicycles on,
on, on, on pavements or sidewalks. But, but I do think it's relevant in asking questions
about measurements on quantum systems. If, if I measure, you know, if I measure the
position of a particle, could I also have measured the momentum of a particle and here,
you know, this idea of kind of gaps in solution space where you can't do these perturbations
arbitrarily. So, so in short, I'm not saying that all counterfactual worlds are impossible,
I'm not saying that, but I'm saying certainly in quantum mechanical situations, there may well be
counterfactual measurements on, on quantum systems, which actually are forbidden by the,
or at least they're forbidden by my, by my approach to quantum mechanics. And that's a way of getting
round this Bell's theorem, which is so important in the interpretation of quantum mechanics. So
counterfactuals, we shouldn't, so in other words, we shouldn't be, we shouldn't just take
counterfactual definiteness for, you know, as a given that things that we might have done,
but we didn't do are automatically allowed by the laws of physics. Some are allowed,
but some definitely aren't allowed. That's, that's my view. Okay, I want to talk more about
free will, but first on the weather. So when, when you guys make predictions like there's a 70%
chance of rain tomorrow, what you mean is if you ran tomorrow 100 times in your computer models,
70 days, it would rain. Now, what if the models were better, like decade from now or a hundred
years from now, and you could say, you know, it's 90% chance of rain. Isn't that still just a
measurement problem? It's an epistemic uncertainty. Or are you saying at some level, it'll never be,
you know, 100% predictable because of chaos theory and, and, you know, the butterfly effect and
things like that? Well, first of all, you're right that basically in that situation, the
uncertainty is, is epistemic. And you're, you're also right to say that as models improve, you
know, computers get bigger, we can, we can make our models more realistic. They can include
cloud systems, for example, which current global models can't, can't, can't describe.
Then, then the, the forecast will get more accuracy, more accurate. And, and as you say,
that will mean that today, when we say there's a 70% chance of rain, for exactly what the reason
sorry, the reason you said that we run an ensemble of say 100 forecasts and in 70 of them it rains
and in 30 it doesn't. So that gives us our probability. But you're right to say that it
could well be in, you know, in a decade or two, we'll have got that to 90% rather than 70% by,
by improving the models. And just the whole initial conditions will be more accurate. But
but I do go into the book in the book a bit that there's a kind of an interesting,
actually even non quantum systems have some strange
properties. And I describe quite a lot the, in one chapter, the uncertainty associated with
turbulence in fluids and the weather is kind of, you know, like a manifestation of turbulence in,
in the whole atmosphere as a fluid. And, and in particular, I talk about the work of, of, of a
meteorologist, American meteorologist called Ed Lorenz, who's, who's pretty much the father of,
of a lot of chaos theory. But he actually wrote a paper in 1969 that's actually less well known
than his 19 famous 1963 paper, which was the origin of chaos, which is the, how does uncertainty grow
in a, a turbulent, so I should say a turbulent fluid. You see, if you look at a turbulent fluid,
it's got eddies and whirls, but you can kind of zoom into one of those eddies, and you see smaller
eddies, and you can zoom into one of those smaller eddies and see yet smaller eddies. So it's actually
got a bit of a kind of self, what we call self similar structure like fractals have. So, you know,
you, if you look at a weather, a weather system from a satellite, and then you zoom in to a bit
of the weather system, you see clouds. And if you zoom into the clouds, you'd see turbulence
within the clouds. And if you zoomed into the turbulence, you'd see smaller turbulence. Anyway,
so Lorentz asked the question, how long would it take for small scale turbulence to, to start to
affect uncertainty in the very largest weather scales? And there's a, there's a really kind of,
from a conceptual point of view, there's something very interesting, which he uncovered,
which we haven't yet been able to prove mathematically, whether this is actually true or not,
which is that the time for uncertainty in a small scale piece of turbulence to affect a large scale
piece of turbulence has a fixed time scale. And it doesn't matter how small that uncertainty is in
scale, it will take a fixed time, let's say a couple of weeks to affect the uncertainty in the
the uncertainty in the very largest scale weather system. And this is actually a little bit different,
or this is, in fact, is quite different to normal chaos theory, because in normal chaos theory,
the idea is that if you could actually reduce the uncertainty to like an infinitesimally small
amplitude, you could predict as far ahead as you'd like, because you'd kind of suppress the chaos
for as long as you wanted by making the initial uncertainty sufficiently small.
But Lorentz conjectured, and you know, with pretty, I would say pretty strong mathematical
arguments, but they weren't 100% rigorous, that there is a finite time for uncertainty
in a turbulent system to grow to larger scales, no matter how small the uncertainty is.
Now, if that's correct, it means that although we'll be able to get that, like as you said,
70% to 90% for a weather forecast for, you know, the next few days, we'll probably never be able to
predict in detail the weather beyond two or three weeks, you know, that that's just going to be
hopeless. Now, the interesting thing is that this Lorentz's conjecture relates to a
problem which appeared at the turn of the millennium. So in 2000, the Clay Mathematics
Institute published a list of unsolved mathematical problems to kind of parallel what the famous
mathematician David Hilbert announced in 1900. You know, he famously gave an address where he
said, these are the most important unsolved problems in mathematics in 1900. And the Clay
Mathematics Institute, you know, with advice from mathematicians around the world,
announced a similar list of problems at 2000. And one of them was essentially this problem
of turbulence, solving this uncertainty about how uncertainty in turbulence grows.
And I could go on about this. I mean, this is this is what actually Lorentz meant by the butterfly
effect. It's this notion that a tiny scale disturbance could affect something very large
in a finite amount of time. So the butterfly effect actually has been slightly misused over the years.
And that's what it really means. So there's a lot of fascinating stuff, you know,
even in classical physics about uncertainty. Yeah, so but the butterfly effect,
I mean, the flap of a butterfly's wings in the middle of a hurricane isn't going to have any
effect at all. It has to be in the very early conditions or when the system is teetering on
shifting kind of a change, what they call a change transition point of criticality. I think,
yes, there is use that like the, you know, drop grains of sand and you get a little pile going
all of a sudden it collapses. And at that moment, the one little grain matters, but most of the
time the little one little grain doesn't matter. So it depends on the conditions either early
initial conditions or when it's teetering in the balance. So the horseshoe nail doesn't matter
for most of the battle only either early on or if the battle is hanging in the balance.
That's that's that's absolutely right. And you know, I
I mean, we talked about my decision to switch fields. Yeah. I mean, one of the things which
I like to think, and people may curse, curse me for it possibly, that I have done which has
sort of had an impact on people's lives is that I've introduced this notion of probabilistic
forecasting using these ensembles, so running models multiple times with slightly different
initial conditions and so on. And, you know, initially, it wasn't so much people, it's not
like, I mean, my colleagues were trying to think of the right words sort of skeptical about it.
Because, you know, if you if you have to run a weather model 50 times, each for each
forecast start date, you know, that takes up a lot of computer time. And, you know, what
what they perhaps didn't like was that they had other ideas on how to use that computer time,
you know, they'd rather improve the resolution of the model and so on. And they would say, well,
you know, most of the time, you know, we, we can forecast a few days out pretty well.
But I used to show them, I used to show them results from Lorenz's model of chaos. And I said,
look, this is a very sort of generic situation that that you can have within a single chaotic model,
a chaotic model, you can have initial conditions that are very predictable, which actually aren't
chaotic at all, or they're not for a long time, you have to integrate them out many, many, many,
you know, long period of time before they start showing evidence of unpredictability.
And in the very same model, you can find initial conditions where the uncertainty absolutely
explodes from the very start date. And, you know, I said, there's no reason why this
can't happen for, you know, the real weather. And the problem is, if you, if you, you know,
if you make blatantly wrong forecasts, people lose confidence in you. And around this time,
there was just the most, for me, wonderful example of this, which people of my age who
are British will know this, because it's kind of, it's kind of etched in our national psyche,
if you like, that in 1979, sorry, 1987, the weather forecaster came on the BBC TV,
a guy called Michael Fish, everyone knows this, Michael Fish, everyone British knows it, came on
TV and said, it's a kind of interesting story, actually, somebody apparently from France had
phoned up to say, they heard somewhere there's a hurricane on the way, is it true? And he just kind
of, he just laughed it off, he said, don't be stupid, you know, we don't have hurricanes in
Britain, there'll be no hurricane, don't worry about that. And then the next morning, there was
literally hurricane force winds, hurricane force gusts and, you know, caused, I guess in today's
money would be many billions of pounds of damage and people lost their lives and all sorts of chaos
ensued. And, you know, the head of the Met Office, they were called for him to resign,
the government, you know, had did an inquiry, what, you know, what was, how could, how, you know,
we spend all this money on the weather forecast service, how could they get it so hopelessly
wrong, just 12 hours before they weren't, they didn't know about this thing. So, we took a look
at this case, and it just is a spectacular example of, of just kind of explosive unpredictability
by introducing tiny, tiny flaps of butterflies wings, if you like, or computer types of flaps
of butterflies wings. We showed that just within a day or so, the solutions would completely diverge
from the most horrendous storms to completely benign weather. And it just, it just made it
completely clear then, there was, I mean, you know, that the only way to sensibly address this issue
is to, you know, is to develop an ensemble approach to forecasting where you, you introduce
these small uncertainties. By the way, not only in the initial conditions, but also in the model
equations. So we introduce noise, and I have a lot of a big chapter in the book about the,
the benefit of adding noise into, into certain nonlinear systems. And that leads to more
reliable, much more reliable forecasts. And you know when you can trust them, when you can trust
the forecast, and when, you know, you've got to be careful. And the really exciting thing about all
this is that now humanitarian organizations are using this type of information for deciding when
they can be proactive in sending aid and medicine and shelter and water and food and so on, to areas
that are potentially, you know, at risk of some extreme weather event. Whereas in the past, in
the past, with the old fashioned deterministic forecasts, so where you didn't have any estimate
of uncertainty, it was just too risky. They'd run out of money very quickly. If every time there was
a, a forecast of an event, you know, they sent, they sent aid out and they just run out of resources
immediately. Now what they do is they have a, they know they have a threshold, a probability
threshold. And they'd say, if the probability, the forecast probability exceeds this threshold,
then we take precautionary proactive action. And they've done a proper, you could, because now you
could do a proper cost loss analysis of whether the uncertainty is, is large enough. If it's too
large, then obviously all you can do is sit and wait and see what happens. But if the uncertainty
of this extreme event is sufficiently small, so that the probability of it exceeds the
predetermined threshold, then you know, you know, you have a logical and objective reason for going
in and helping people ahead of time. And that's always going to be more effective. But it means
they make use of their limited resources in a, in a much more, yeah, kind of objective and
way. So, so I, you know, I know people curse probability of rain on their apps and so on.
And I can understand that, you know, why don't they just tell us what it's going to be like.
But, you know, this is a case where actually for, you know, really serious extreme weather,
this probabilistic approach really is the way to, to, to make informed and logical and objective
decisions about whether it's sending aid into a region or evacuating a region or whatever it is.
And really that's, that's where weather forecasting is important.
Yeah, I wonder if you could comment on climate change models related to this. You'll often hear
from the climate skeptics. Well, look, you know, the limitations of these computer models, these
guys are running out a couple of days or a week. And then it, you know, after that, it's, you know,
it's, it's random. So how can you say a century from now, this is where we're going to be. Therefore,
we have to take drastic action to cut CO2 gases and so on. What's the difference between those
kind of models and how confident are you that they can make long term predictions?
Right. Well, there's a number of, a number of points there.
I think the first point to make is that one shouldn't conflate the weather forecast problem
with the climate change problem. And I'll give you a very simple example of what I mean.
So I'm, you know, I'm, I'm in my study in, in Southern England. I'm about 20 miles south of
Oxford. And we've had a, actually, we've had quite a remarkably warm for Britain anyway,
we've had a remarkably warm and dry summer. And today is a, is just another example. I mean,
outside the temperatures, probably in the high 20s, which is, we actually hit 40 Celsius,
which I don't know what that is in Fahrenheit, well, well over 100, 110 maybe.
But look, I can say with complete certainty, I think,
99.999% certainly, that in six months time,
so in January, it will not be 29 degrees Celsius. Right. And that's because every day the sun,
you know, spends a little bit less time in the sky. And, you know, we have an annual cycle.
So in other words, there's a kind of a predictable astronomical forcing,
which affects the statistics of weather. Now, I can't say in six months time whether it'll be
rainy or dry, but I can say pretty clearly it's going to be colder than it is today.
And climate change is, is like that with the, the predictable atmospheric forcing
of the annual cycle is now replaced with a predictable increase in,
in greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere caused by our emissions. So we can say, I think,
you know, with pretty much certainty that because most of the governments of the world have said,
we will not be reducing our emissions to zero until at least mid century. So we can say that we
will continue to emit carbon dioxide into the atmosphere for at least another, say 50 years,
possibly more. And as a result of that, carbon dioxide concentrations will increase a year on
year for at least the next 50 years, possibly more. And that has a predictable effect on the
statistics of weather, just as the seasonal cycle has a predictable effect on the statistics of
weather. So it's just a kind of a class error to say, oh, well, because we can't forecast the
detailed evolution of weather beyond a couple of weeks or so, it's hopeless saying anything about
climate change a hundred years from now, you're just conflating two completely different types
of problem. One is an initial condition problem, the initial weather forecasting. And the other is
where you're adding a kind of an external forcing. So what can we say? Well, so,
you know, there is there is no doubt whatsoever that as a result of this increase in CO2, the
global temperatures will continue to increase. Now, as I discuss in my book, how much they will
increase depends on factors, which actually are uncertain. And perhaps the biggest uncertainty
of all is due to clouds. Clouds have different effects on the climate depend, well, they have
multiple, they have many effects on climate, but they have different effects on temp, the surface
temperature of the earth, depending on what type of cloud they are. So when you have this kind of
what I call stratus clouds, very low level, sort of thick clouds, which just block the sun,
then that cools. I mean, then the atmosphere is typically colder than if the clouds weren't there,
because basically, the sun is reflected, the sunlight's reflected back to space. So the clouds
just block the sun, cool the surface. On the other hand, when you have very thin cirrus clouds, which
are way up in the high atmosphere, you know, 10 kilometers or more up, and they tend to be
much thinner clouds and often just made of little ice crystals. They actually play a much more
of a role in trapping the heat from the surface of the earth and stopping it radiating out to space,
which is why quite often, certainly in Britain, you know, when you think there's going to be an
overnight frost, and then a layer of cirrus cloud comes along during the night, that can often stop
frost from forming, because you actually end up warming the planet. Well, you know, in the sense
of that the atmosphere loses less heat to space. So this would be the greenhouse. So the critical
question, I mean, a really big sort of like zero thought of question for climate change is what
are clouds going to do? Because if cirrus clouds increase and stratus clouds decrease, then this
will amplify the climate change signal. It'll make it warmer, potentially by quite a lot.
That's actually, you know, that's that then you're into catastrophe, like, you know,
catastrophic changes in climate change. If stratus clouds low level kind of stratus
cumulus clouds dissipate, and the higher level clouds either stay the same or increase. If
it's the other way around, then actually clouds will help us. It will be won't be quite as bad.
Unfortunately, the models are tending towards the wrong in the wrong way, they're making the
low level clouds less, less of them, and that's amplifying the warming. But I would say because
we can't represent clouds explicitly in models, they're done with very simplified formulae. This
is the biggest area of uncertainty. Now, the other area of uncertainty is is local is what happens
at a regional level. So are we going to get more droughts? I mean, like here in the UK,
we've had a drought this summer. And the question is, I mean, this drought may well
continue into the autumn and winter. And that's a really big question for infrastructure,
how much more reservoir capacity do we need is based around this question of how
are long lived droughts of, you know, multi season droughts becoming more
commonplace or not under climate change? And current generation models just can't answer
that question because they're not good enough at simulating these long lived droughts. And that's
because we can't put enough resolution into the models. And that's because the computer's
resources we have are not big enough. So I I've been advocating for a like a CERN for climate
change where we pool our resources. And just, you know, by the biggest, you know, we now can
buy what's called exascale computers 10 to the 18 floating point operations per second,
that's a million, million, million calculations per second, that will make a big change in
our ability to simulate climate change accurately. We could have one of these centers in a place
where the energy comes from renewable could be solar wind or geothermal or something. We don't
want to burn coal to run the power to run a computer, that's for sure. But we can do it with
renewables. And if we if we form a new international institute, this could make a big
advance in our ability to understand and again, reduce these uncertainties in future climate
change. Would that be a good solution also for predicting pandemics and economic recessions?
Then you mentioned those and you have chapters on them. Well, it's it's yeah, I mean, it's it's an
interesting, you know, just coming back to my story about Michael Fish. See, you know, here was
the situation where the weather actually most of 1987, I don't think the weather was especially
sort of unpredictable or something, but suddenly in October 87, along this came this kind of a
massively unpredictable storm. And what it what it demonstrates is that what I said about the
Lorentz chaos model that the model itself is chaos, but the degree of chaos is not the same
day in day out. Different initial conditions have different degrees of chaos. And there are
some initial conditions that are exceptionally unpredictable. And other initial conditions
are reasonably predictable. And in fact, you could say most of the time, for these chaotic models,
the initial conditions are reasonably predictable, but just as a small region where they're
exceptionally unpredictable. Now, you know, you look at other systems like, like the economy,
or, you know, global health, or indeed, you know, the state of conflict in the world,
where you could say for a lot of the time things we sort of bump along
in a reasonably kind of predictable and sort of stable way. But occasionally we get these,
you know, like the 2008 financial crash. And then of course, in terms of public health,
the COVID pandemic. And now we have, you know, the Putin's invasion of Ukraine has kind of triggered
a global crisis. So, you know, it does seem that there are clearly parallels with other
types of systems, perhaps more involved in social sciences. So I do discuss in the book, because
I did a bit of research contacting economists and epidemiologists and conflict modelers
to see to what extent ensemble based forecasting is being used in these other fields. And I think
the answer is they're much less well developed than in, in, in, in sort of weather and climate.
But perhaps the one where I did find the most kind of traction was actually in COVID modeling. And
in particular in the United States, where a number of university groups have developed their own
individual COVID models. But there was a central facility which, which, you know, took in all of
the data from all these different models and synthesized it in a kind of probabilistic way
and showed actually that, you know, the ensemble forecast information of COVID, you know,
things like COVID incidents and COVID hospitalizations and so on, was actually much more
skillful from the ensemble as a whole than from any one of the models. And that got me thinking,
by the way, that just as the world meteorological organization WMO has been sort of leading the
development of climate change prediction ensembles, which go into these IPCC assessment reports,
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, you know, so the WHO World Health Organization
could maybe mastermind some of these ensembles for doing much more kind of coordinated
disease prediction in, I mean, not only COVID, but all the other types of
important diseases around the world. I mean, I think they're probably are starting to do this,
but I think there's a lot that they can learn, as indeed the economists, I think, and the
conflict models from what we have been through in weather and climate prediction in the last
few decades. Yeah, I think one of the problems with the divisiveness politically,
particularly around climate change, endemics, economic recessions, is the amount of doubt
that arises amongst people who just kind of watch the daily news go by and,
you know, Dr. Fauci says this, now he says that, the CDC recommended this, now they recommend that,
you know, they can't keep their story straight, you know, I should just be skeptical across the
board. This is kind of a larger question, you know, what is the skeptic, you know, are you a
climate change skeptic or are you skeptical of the climate change skeptics, which would make you
a believer, whatever that would mean in science. You see what I'm getting at, why should people trust
what health experts say about the coming pandemic or what we should do, wear a mask,
don't wear a mask, get the vaccine, don't, whatever. How do you think about it on that
larger scale and what would you recommend to people who bring these kinds of things up,
which sound reasonable, like they keep changing their mind and they've been wrong so many times,
why should I listen to the experts now? Well, I would say in my, if I could take climate change
as an example about which I know the most, so let me stick to that because I know
I think what I'm talking about.
You see, you have to realize that there are two sides to the issue. There's a scientific,
there's a scientific question. And then there's, and then because we're talking about policy
relevant science, there is a, there is a political, if you like, analysis and decision that has to be
made using as input the scientific evidence. So, in the case of climate change, I, you know,
and I think this is true of most, not necessarily all, but most of my colleagues,
they have tried to address this question of climate change from a science point of view.
So, what does that mean? It means if you ask the question, you know, are humans
emitting, you know, by burning fossil fuels, are we emitting carbon into the atmosphere,
carbon dioxide into the atmosphere? Yes, there's no question scientifically, there's no question
about it. Is that warming the planet? Yes, there's no question about that.
Will the planet continue to warm by our ongoing emissions of carbon dioxide?
Yes, there's no doubt about that. Are we increasing the risk of, you know, severe
or extreme weather events by these emissions of carbon dioxide? Yes, there's no doubt about that.
Should we therefore cut our emissions of carbon dioxide? Now, once you ask that question,
you're no longer asking a science question, you're asking a policy question. And,
I mean, my, as I say, I think I speak for a lot of my colleagues, they would just say, well,
you know, that, I can give you my personal view as a human being on the planet,
but if you ask me from a science point of view, should you cut emissions, then I can't tell you,
because that involves value judgments. You know, there is a cost to cutting our emissions. We do,
you know, I mean, everything in daily life, hospitals and, you know, social welfare, everything,
you know, is currently geared around fossil fuel energy. Everything, you know, in our lives
currently is based around fossil fuel energy. So converting to zero carbon energy is a difficult
and involves a cost. And you could argue, for example, and I have some sympathy with this argument,
that in the developing world, where we want people's standards of living to get, you know,
close to our own in the rich world, if we suddenly say stop burning fossil fuels and only use solar
panels, we're going to hinder their economic growth. So if you try to make that final step of
should we cut our emissions, you're going, you know, into politics. And I think it's important
to realize that that is where scientists have no big bigger or better insights than anybody else.
You know, I know pretty well what a molecule of carbon dioxide does in the atmosphere,
but trying to, you know, estimate way up on the one side, the benefits, and on the other side,
the costs of moving to zero carbon involves, you know, economic social assessments that I'm not
an expert in. I mean, in the book, I try to give an approach to that based on what's called an
estimate of a value of a human life. But, you know, I don't have any, I don't consider myself
an expert in that. So what I'm trying to say here is that perhaps COVID is, if we take COVID as an
example, the politicians, you know, that the scientists would have gone to meetings with
the politicians and said, well, these are what the model, these are what the models show. And
maybe not at the beginning of COVID, but certainly towards the end, they were able to show
their results in a probabilistic way. So this is the probability that there will be x deaths per
thousand people or something like that. Then the politicians have to decide, is that risk high enough
to take action to shut down an economy or to, you know, stop people moving around? And when people
say, oh, well, they got that wrong. It wasn't, I mean, the decisions may or may not have been
wrong, but it wasn't the science that was wrong. It was maybe in hindsight, the decision that was
made wasn't the right decision. I don't know. But actually, at the time, maybe it was the right
decision given given the evidence. But I just want to emphasize that point that there are,
you know, saying, oh, they got it wrong, you may actually, or the people making that, so it may
be more referring to the decisions that were made on the basis of the evidence that there was at the
time. You know, it's like if I say to you, there's a 70% chance of it raining tomorrow, you might say,
well, in that case, I'll take my umbrella to work or to wherever I'm going. And then, of course,
it may not rain. So does that mean you were wrong in deciding to take your umbrella to work? I mean,
the fact of the matter is, at the time, the best available evidence was that there was a 70% chance
it would rain. So you have to recognize that when you make decisions under uncertainty, I don't think
actually calling them wrong is the right way to describe such a decision. But the answer, you know,
in hindsight, it may be that a different decision would have cost you less. But this is just an
inevitable consequence of uncertainty. And it's better than just tossing a coin in the air when
you're making a decision where that's an important, I mean, taking an umbrella is not an important
decision. But if it's whether to evacuate somewhere or something like that, then having the
scientific, the best scientific available evidence is better than just, you know, tossing a coin.
Yeah. Yeah, people get confused about that. Like with the 2016 election of Trump and Clinton,
you know, that Hillary had a 70% chance of winning. Well, then how did Trump win? Well,
if you ran the election 100 times, Hillary wins 70 of them. So this was one of the 30.
And that's how it happens. Right. So, all right, so let's go back to... And I think it's important
for, you know, scientists to be honest. I mean, I tell you what the hardest thing is for me,
and I'm sure it's true of when you get interviewed by a journalist who's writing a story for,
you know, tomorrow's edition, you could tell that he wants you, he or she wants you to be
more definite than you are, because it's not a great story if it's couched in the language of
uncertainty. So you kind of feeling under pressure the whole time to be more certain than you are.
But I think it is important for scientists to tell, you know, to be honest about uncertainty.
And ultimately, you know, that's the politician's jobs to make decisions under uncertainty. That's
why we vote for them. It's not for scientists, you know, to make those decisions for them.
So we shouldn't, you know, let them off the hook. They have to make, it's tough. You know,
sometimes it's tough making decisions under uncertainty, but the scientist's job is to
tell them the evidence fairly and dispassionately. And that's what I certainly try to do. And that's
the kind of philosophy in the book, if you like. Yeah. Carl Sagan had a funny story about that,
how he would give some rough estimate, like, oh, I don't know, it's about 150,000 kilometers to
whatever. And then, and then the journalist would translate that into the Archaic American
Standard System, and it would come out, you know, at some exact number, you know, like 0.67. How
did he know that it's exactly that? It's like, he doesn't. It was just the rough estimate the
first place. Right. Yeah. So, all right, Tim, let's just kind of wrap up here by going to your
last chapter and again, return to free will consciousness and then God, which I love all
that stuff. So just one final point on the free will issue. I'm a compatibilist. I liked your
approach. It gels with mine very much. I think we can do otherwise. The universe is not, it's not
predetermined. You know, we are part of the causal net determining things ourselves,
as well as aware of the factors that we can at least try to control. Now here, the determinists
would say, no, no, no, no, you're just confusing different levels of causality. So here, I'll use
Adrian Reigns examples from his book, The Anatomy of Violence, about Mr. OFT off, they don't use his
real name, but he was this school teacher who had a, turned out he had an orbital frontal cortex
tumor and he, at mid-age, so like 40-something, became kind of a pedophile. He started acting
inappropriately with his wife's daughter, his stepdaughter, and kiddie porn on his computer
and all this stuff. So she turns him into protective services and, you know, he's going to go to jail
and then the psychiatrist scans his brain and, oh my God, he's got a tumor there. And then, so the way
Reigns presents this, it's like, you kind of feel sorry for him, like, oh, oh, he's not a pedophile,
he's a medical patient, he has this tumor and, you know, they took the tumor out and his, those
feelings go away, he's back to normal and then six months later, the wife finds more porn, kiddie
porn on his computer, oh, so brain scan, it's back. So, you know, there it's obvious. And then,
Reigns second example is this African-American young man named Dante Page, who was convicted
for raping and murdering a college-age woman in Colorado. And he was up for the death penalty
and Reigns was on the defense attorneys, defense teams attempt to get him life in prison rather
than the death penalty. So he wrote extensively about this guy's background, which is the most
horrible background you could possibly imagine. You know, single mom was addicted to drugs,
beaten constantly by the men in her life, dropped on his head a dozen times, many trips to the
ER for brain damage and so on. By the time he's 18, he's had like the worst life anybody could
have in America. Just horrible environment and gangs, terrible diet, you name it, he's got it.
Now, Reigns point is that there's nothing on the brain scan really quite like a tumor,
you know, but it's tumors all the way down. It's the equivalent of you just don't see
what the neural changes are because of that horrible background, but it's the same thing.
So why is the Dante Page different from the pedophile guy with the tumor? And the determinists
would say it's all the same. They're all just physical causes. The brain is a physical mechanism
that obeys the laws of physics and everything else. And so how would you respond to kind of a
deterministic argument like that? Yeah, I mean, I mean, I certainly accept that, you know, there
are situations where the moral culpability of somebody is borderline because of medical conditions.
But look, let's just take Hitler. I mean, surely we can all agree that Hitler was evil, you know,
he exterminated or attempted to exterminate, you know, large sections of society.
What word can you use an evil? So the argument that, you know, and I understand, you know,
the reason why people don't like determinism is that they say, oh, well, you know,
it was all conditioned by whatever the cosmological, you know, Big Bang initial conditions were.
That that sort of set the clock ticking and then everything after that was inevitable. So we can't,
we can't kind of blame Hitler for what he did because it was all determined by the
initial conditions. So that that's, I think, probably the most common type of argument that
people who don't like determinism bring up. And I actually find that a powerful argument.
You see, so it's kind of, you know, at the level of physics, theoretical physics,
determinism, I think, is quite an attractive concept because the alternative, which is
indeterminism and God playing dice and things is just such kind of nonsense, it seems to me.
But when you phrase it in this moral way, moral capability, it's a dilemma because,
you know, nobody wants to let Hitler off the hook for what he did to the Jews and the Gypsies
and everything else. So how do we square that? And I tried to address that again in the last
chapter by coming back to this notion of a fractal attractor. This idea that, which in some sense
borrows a lot of ideas from Einstein that the laws of physics are geometric. So his idea about
general relativity was that the laws of laws of gravitation are ultimately caused or due to the
fact that space-time has a sort of non-trivial geometry. And these fractal geometries in the
space of solutions of the equations is another kind of geometric approach. And what it does
is if you take that view, then actually the initial conditions, the cosmological initial
conditions are no longer somehow fundamental and sort of the moment that everything takes off from.
In some sense, all of the states of the world from the cosmological state to the present day and in
the future and so on, sort of have equal ontological status as points on this geometry.
And what that does then is to tell you that there's a kind of a, it's almost like a self-referential
picture that you have. The geometry is sort of telling us how we evolve from one day to the
next. But equally what we do is determining the structure of this geometry. There's a kind of
duality here, which is kind of a little bit difficult to say exactly. I mean, I don't have a
precise way of defining it, but there's a sort of duality here between the geometry. It's a little
bit like in general relativity, there's, I think, John Wheeler, the famous theoretical physicist,
kind of said, the geometry tells matter how to move and the matter tells spacetime how to curve.
So this is kind of duality in terms of spacetime geometry. And I think there's something in
parallel going on here that the spacetime, that the diffractal geometry is in some sense telling us
how the atoms in our body are going to evolve from one day to the next. But our actions are
equally, in some sense, determining the structure of this geometry. Again, there's a sort of duality.
I'm shaking my head because I don't have a clear enough picture to kind of really nail down what
I'm saying here, but I feel it intuitively that, as with the Wheeler duality for spacetime, there's
something here. But what that would mean is that that then will not let Hitler off the hook,
because it does put some onus on what we do as, you know, means we have to take responsibility
for what we do. I throw this out in the last chapter. Look, I mean, the book,
it's important to make this point that the book starts very, very in very, very, very solid
the maths and physics of chaos. It goes through things like weather and climate,
which again, pretty damn solid, I would say, talks a bit about economics, COVID and something,
perhaps a little bit more uncertain there. The last section of the book is all about consciousness,
free will, moral responsibility, and then as you say, right at the end, God. And I think I try to
say right at the beginning of that section, this is much more speculative. So I'm not going to,
I can't sort of absolutely nail everything to the mast and say I've completely picked this. But
there's something I think important here about taking away the Big Bang as something where,
you know, everything was set in stone at the moment of the Big Bang and nothing could change,
to something much more fluid, I suppose in some sense, where we do actually have some role in
determining this geometry, just as the geometry has a role in influencing us. So I think this,
at the very least, let's say this, it provides a new ingredient, I suppose, into the debate about
determinism and moral responsibility and so on. And I hope at least that will get people thinking.
Yeah, no, I like that very much. All right, last page here, you talk about, for example,
in the cosmological invariant set model, there is an afterlife, we and our loved ones will be
coming back in future epochs of the universe on trajectories in state space, close to the
present one, but none precisely the same as the present one. What in the world are you talking
about there? Well, yeah, so if you take something like the Lorentz model,
the states and the Lorentz model, they evolve on this fractal geometry, and
they can go round and round and round and then come back, they never come back exactly
to where they were, but they come back very close. There's a point in the future
of a trajectory in this solution space, I call it state space. I try to explain what I mean by
state space in the book, but there's no time here to go into detail. But let's say it's space of
solutions, where the solution comes round, it never exactly comes back to the point you started,
but it comes as close as you like. And at that moment, that state is like within the flap of
a butterfly's wings away from that original state. So if this is how the universe works,
and that's my belief actually, and it links in with a lot of Roger Penrose's latest ideas about
what he calls cyclic cosmology. But with this difference, that the universe is never
cyclic in a precise way, it doesn't actually repeat itself, but it gets back to a state
which is very close to where it was in a previous Eon. And so what that means is that we,
it's a bit like actually the example we had earlier of me walking out of the shop
and being hit by a bicycle. In a future Eon, I will walk out of that shop and see the bicycle
and avoid it, and I won't end up in hospital. So certain things will be better, but maybe some
good decisions, you know, that I made, I'll make lousy decisions. And so in other respects,
it'll be worse. But that's what seems to be, you know, if I mean, I'm being speculative,
I understand all that. But if you take this model of the universe as a
chaotic system evolving on one of its fractal attractors, as they're called,
this is where it leads you to a universe where, in some sense, you do come back,
but things are slightly different. And I find that quite, so as I say, loved ones,
you'll meet loved ones again, if that's right. But you'll have a different life with them,
things will be different. This would make God something of a computer modeler
who is replicating our loved ones in some sort of virtual reality.
Or am I missing that? It's something different in the future.
Well, it wouldn't be a computer, actually, because the thing about computers is because they're,
you know, one of the things about, if you have a model of chaos,
and you represent it on a computer, then actually, the state does eventually return to
exactly its starting point, because the numbers inside a computer can only be represented with
a finite number of bits. So God isn't a computer, but certainly God is mathematical, in some sense.
And, well, I just finish, I don't know whether this is giving too much away,
but I finish with this conjecture, well, suppose God just is this geometry, in some sense, this
fractal. I mean, that is God. It's kind of a Spinozian philosophy of God, but sort of on steroids,
because it's not just our universe, but it's like the sum totality of all of the eons and stuff put
together. You know, and I kind of, it just amuses me that Lorenz, who invented the butterfly effect
which we spoke about, he also invented this model of chaos. And if you look at the attractor of the
Lorenz model, it actually looks like a butterfly. A bit of the wing of that butterfly is on the
front cover of the book. It looks like a butterfly. Now that is a complete, yeah, I mean, you've got
you've got the sort of two wings of the butterfly there sort of thing. But that's a complete coincidence.
It's totally, you know, it's just fortuitous. But it just got me thinking maybe the geometry
of this cosmological attractor is a picture of God. I mean, who knows?
But this isn't a personal guy. I just feel it's it's worth exploring, but I, you know, who knows.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, at this point, that's all you can do, because I do think we kind of hit
an epistemological wall when we talk about things like that, or why is there something rather than
nothing? Well, what do you mean by nothing? And then you get into the physics metaphysics
of nothingness. And, and then it's just like, words, I do have.
Yeah, I do. I'm not somebody that dismisses religion and God out of hand, which of course,
a lot of scientists do. And I think, you know, we need to look for ways of reconciling science
and religion in ways which are not, you know, as confrontational as they often are. And I mean,
this is just my attempt to, you know, to raise a concept which might possibly bring people together
in a way. You mean as a strategy for, you know, can't we all just get along? Yes, that would be good.
Versus an actual epistemological attempt to understand the natural reality. We need religious
people in their views as well as scientists. Well, I'm not sure what I'm saying. I mean, you need,
can I say, I think to make progress in fundamental science, you do, you know, it's not, I mean,
science is not a kind of a logical process. You need insights of imagination, leaps of imagination,
which often you don't get from just staring at equations, you know, it's having some more
kind of liberating philosophy which can take you to places that you just don't get by looking at
equations. I think often that is important in science. You know, progress is kind of inductive,
it's not deductive. And yeah, I mean, people with religious feelings and backgrounds, I think there
are useful, they have insights that could be useful. I mean, I can't say categorically that
they are needed. But on the other hand, I would feel science would be the poorer if we somehow
excluded such people. I think it would limit us in our ability to think outside the box, which we
do need questionably. And in this area of quantum gravity, we need question. So I, you know, I'm
trying to say that in physics, at least, being cognizant of different religious, philosophical
traditions, I think is can be useful. Yeah. That's right. Because you had a discussion on the
relationship of noise in the brain and creativity, if I'm remembering that right. So this would be
an example of we need as many people as possible who have thought about these big questions,
because who knows what noise goes on in their head and they come up with some ideas
related to spiritual traditions or whatever that are useful.
Right. That's right. I mean, I, as you say, I mean, it comes back to this question of
what's so special about 20 watts of power that will run the brain. And what's what one of the
things that's special about it is that there likely are situations where the the the signals in the
neurons are affected by noise, thermal noise, maybe actually even quantum mechanical noise.
Now, what manifestations would that take? Well, it could be that that's what helps us
bring ideas together from what would be in a purely sort of logical deductive way,
you know, unlikely connections. And so you need two ingredients to make to make the connections,
you need two ingredients, you need to have those ideas, you need to have, you know, the ideas don't
come out of nowhere, but you need to have had those ideas. And then the noise, which by the way,
happens mostly susceptibility to noise is probably happens mostly when you're in a very relaxed
mode, not thinking about anything in particular. That's when the brain can make connections between
really quite different ideas. And I discuss in my book how the eureka moments that some of our
top, you know, Nobel Prize winners have had, these have all occurred when they're just relaxing,
doing nothing. And I tell my students, you know, don't spend the whole day in front of the computer
and night in front of the computer, because you're just, you know, you're you're preventing these
the eureka moments from happening. So yeah, so the brain, I think,
so having a diverse kind of multi, multi dimensional view of, of the world from different
perspectives, and then that ability to relax and allow the noise in the brain to make the connections
that that's the kind of my view of the secret to creativity and inventiveness.
So here we'd probably say no noise favors the prepared mind. Because if I have a dream about
writing on a beam of light or falling down an elevator shaft, I'm not coming up with the theory
of relativity, because I'm a nobody in physics, right? You got to have the mind ready to solve the
problem. You have to have a certain amount of I mean, you have to remember, Einstein was not
a mathematical genius. His knowledge of mathematics was actually somewhat limited. I mean, by the
standards of mathematicians, you know, people wouldn't have called him a mathematician, but he
knew enough mathematics to realize when he'd had that idea about writing a beam of light,
that that had mathematical implications. And then he went to his, you know, his friends Minkowski
and so on, and, and then formulated things mathematically. So you don't need to be like
super expert, you know, in different areas, but you do have to have a general broad,
I think knowledge of different things. I think that is important. At least that's what,
and that's squares with my own experience. I've tried to, you know, know a little about a lot
of things. And sometimes that's, that can be useful. Yeah, one of my favorite Steve Gould essays
was talking about since we started with Feynman, we can end with Feynman, where he was going to
Caltech to give a public talk and he was contacted by Feynman's office. We'd like to have lunch.
Yeah, okay, wow, the great Feynman. Yeah, that'd be great. So Feynman proceeds to bounce some ideas
he had about evolution with Gould, which essentially turned out to be sexual selection,
which Darwin had figured out by the 1870, that it wasn't just natural selection, there was
natural selection of female select emails, for example, but they're competing and they have
different kinds of camouflage or whatever colors that would not be camouflaged if it was natural
selection. So anyway, Gould finally said, well, yeah, we worked all that out like a century ago.
And Feynman said, I didn't, I never read anything about a subject like that, because I want to come
to it fresh with a clear mind. Anyway, Gould's point of his essay was, yeah, except it's good
to know what's already been done in case, you know, the errors that you're about to make have
already been made and we figured those out. That's right. I agree. So, all right, Tim, well,
you've been very patient. We've got almost two hours here and I appreciate you entertaining
all my questions here. Standing in for our listeners who don't know much about this stuff.
I think your book is super clear. I hope everybody reads it because it's just a masterful example
of clear science writing on some of the biggest, most interesting, important topics of our time.
So thank you for doing that. What's next on your writing or research plate?
I'm writing a paper whose title is Quantum Physics from Number Theory. So I'm a great
believer that, you know, Newton discovered the calculus and the calculus is used in pretty
much all of modern physics from, you know, throwing a throwing a stone in the air, forecasting the
weather, even the Schrodinger equation in quantum mechanics is based on the calculus. The problem
with the calculus is that it assumes variables are infinitely, you know, variable. Whereas
number theory is about the properties of whole numbers, one, two, three, four, five, six.
At very little is made use of number theory in physics and certainly in fundamental physics.
So my project at the moment is writing a technical paper on how some very interesting kind of number
theorems about properties of whole numbers, the relationship of whole numbers and what are
called trigonometric functions, like the sine and cosine of an angle could provide some really
big insights into the nature of quantum physics. So we'll see how that goes.
And do you get those insights from playing the banjo and guitar, if I can comment on your backdrop?
Is that one of your creative outlets? Einstein had the violin, you have the guitar.
Yeah, I play in a village rock and roll band. And I've been like a folk musician since I was
about 12 or so, inspired by the Beatles, I have to say originally. I don't find much connection
between science and playing musical instruments. I'm not somebody that loves Bach because of its
mathematical intricacies. I like playing fairly simple music just as an emotional release. There's
nothing better than playing Johnny B. Good on a Gibson EF 335 in front of 100 people who are
dancing like mad. There's just nothing to compare with it. It's fantastic. It's almost as good as
doing science. I was watching a YouTube video of Queen performing, I don't know where it was,
but there must have been 100,000 people. And there was Brian May. Doesn't he have a PhD
in astrophysics or something like that? Anyway, I just can only imagine. I have a story about Brian
May. He finished his PhD at Imperial College after Freddie Mercury had died and the group had
sort of gone into abeyance. And he finished his PhD and he had to give a seminar in the physics
department on his PhD work. And I wasn't there, but apparently he said, I thought this was great.
He said, you know, I've given concerts in front of 100,000 people in stadiums.
I've played on the roof of Buckingham Palace in front of royalty and things.
I've never been as nervous as I am now giving a seminar in front of 20 people in the physics
department. That's a great story. Every guy wants to be a rock star and so what are rock stars
want to be? I don't know, I guess astrophysicists or something. That's really funny. All right, Tim,
thank you so much.
