It is a very simple observation that sex is sexy.
That is almost, but not quite, a tautology.
Yet its implications seem, at least to me, to be quite profound and easily missed given
that one could argue from first principles that sex is ultimately one of the most powerful
forces shaping human society.
But whenever we attempt to discuss sex directly, our autonomic nervous system becomes engaged
if we are not very careful.
As the comedian Tom Lehrer once said, when correctly viewed, everything is lewd.
If you look hard enough, you will see that nearly every sentence has a double entendre,
like that last one.
As a result, when we attempt to analyze and discuss sex and sexuality using our prefrontal
cortex, the conversation almost reliably goes off the rails with a probability approaching
one as our lower brains become engaged, aroused, and amused.
It's almost designed not to be discussable.
Yet there are two groups of people I see who do better than the rest of us in this regard.
Some academics, such as evolutionary theorists, physicians, and sex researchers, and commercial
sex workers.
In this episode, I'm interviewing one of the world's most famous actresses, yet her
name is all but unknown.
She is Ashley Matthews, creator of Riley Reed, one of the top porn stars of our time.
My goal in this conversation is to try to stop sex from becoming sexy just long enough
so that we might learn a little bit more about how the pornography community and its civilian
clientele are now interacting.
We may wish to say that you have never found pornography interesting, but that doesn't
make a lot of sense when you consider that an individual's desire to avoid it doesn't
stop it from affecting society as a whole.
Like it or not, pornography is like dark matter, forming an Einstein lens with an immense gravitational
field affecting everything around it.
You don't have to watch it directly to feel it distorting us by monitoring our hypocrisies
so that it can cater to our denied selves.
It also presents a strange mirror to our society.
As if there were a Newton's law for pornography, it appears that everything we do here on earth
and civilian life is mirrored on planet porn.
They have a wage gap, but one that at least naively goes in the other direction.
When I call Ashley at her office, she has to be sexy to her coworkers simply to be professional,
and she claims that her experience with onset harassment is near zero.
Now, I'm in no position to evaluate these claims, but it takes some getting used to.
And just like another planet, there may be no easy way back from a one-way ticket to
becoming well-known as a performer.
Now I should probably describe the ground rules for the conversation you're about to
hear so that you can better understand the context of the episode.
I asked Ashley to humor me and that we would both try to lay off explicit language for
the most part.
We also agreed that we were not going to talk about sex much, rather we were going to try
to talk around it.
I'm sure the ratings will suffer as a result, but if I'm honest, I'm not really that interested
in interviewing the character of Riley Reed.
I'm sure that would have been fun, but here I get to do something far more interesting
because I'm talking to the person Ashley Matthews who both created her and plays her.
I told Ashley that I wanted to present her in a light in which she has seldom seen.
She is by nature playful and charming, and that comes through here at times.
But she is also hugely successful and courageous as a businesswoman who has stayed for years
at the top of one of the world's most brutal occupations, with her charm and her sweetness
seemingly intact.
The woman is polite to a fault, and humble whenever we speak.
She has few, if any, of the attributes we usually associate with stereotypes of erotic
performers or commercial sex workers.
She has also embraced her own bodily vulnerabilities as assets rather than deficits, and she has
induced others to talk about such things in public.
In that respect, at a bare minimum, she is a role model to us all.
So the subject here is not Ashley as a performer, but instead her as an observer and analyst.
I don't ask her about details of her sex life because I view everybody's personal
sex life, including a porn star, as none of anyone else's business in the healthy society.
If that is what you're looking for, you can find it in almost anyone else's interview
of Ashley.
Instead, in the midst of what appears to be peak shame of a new worldwide shame kink bubble
fueled by social media, Ashley is one of the few free voices having long ago learned how
to turn our shame and discomfort into her profitable business with recurring revenue.
As a result, we get to discuss terrifying topics like the awesome power of the state
to harass and target businesses like hers working within our legal framework.
This is done by trying behind the scenes to make their access to banking and commercial
services far more difficult, such as happened during the Obama era's quiet operation choke
point.
While I find this appalling and disturbing, we also need to discuss other means for facing
disturbing trends that are going under analyzed within the pornographic industry.
Perhaps the most disturbing of these is the mainstreaming and promotion of so-called
incest porn on the tube sites which serve up free videos to anyone with an internet
connection and a willingness to get past modest access controls.
This is a challenge given the obvious risks and concerns to anyone who believes in free
speech absolutism.
I hope you give Ashley a chance and that this gives us all food for thought.
It's a tough conversation, but with a kind and wonderful subject.
Without further ado, I bring you Ms. Ashley Matthews.
Hello, you've found the portal.
I'm your host, Eric Weinstein, and I'm here in studio with a special guest today, Ashley
Matthews.
Ashley, thanks for coming by the portal.
Thank you for having me.
Now, it's an unusual episode of the portal because the way I see it, you are Ashley Matthews,
but you've created a character who's an actress named Riley Reed who portrays a series of
characters in erotic films and shorts.
You have a successful business, you're a successful businesswoman, and I came to know about your
existence through sort of an odd chain of events, which is that when I did one of my
first large live shows with Sam Harris and Ben Shapiro at the Masonic in San Francisco,
I believe that you were tweeting about how excited you were to attend the event.
People said, wow, Riley Reed is going to your event, and I said, who's Riley Reed?
People thought, wow, you really don't know, this is an incredibly famous erotic actress
who is apparently very interested in rationality, psychedelics, sexuality, and sort of understanding
where our country is going from an unusual viewpoint.
You were at that show?
Yes, I was.
How did that impress you?
To be honest, wanted there to be more conversation about all the things, I mean, Sam Harris
talks about all the free will and this and that type of thing, but I think it was a lot
of politic type things, kind of Ben Shapiro and him kind of talking a lot back and forth.
I didn't really get to hear much from you.
Well, I tried to stay out of when they were trying to get into, is there a god, is there
no god?
It's like the sharks and the jets or the bloods and the crypts, you don't want to get in
the middle of it.
Of course.
Right.
But nonetheless, I loved it.
It was great.
Now, what drew you initially to that world of Sam Harris and his constellation of issues?
The first time I listened to him, a friend of mine recommended one of his podcasts about
social media and kind of the, what is it, like how it manipulates you, the manipulation
in social media and social media is such a huge part of my life and my job that I thought
it was really important for me to take a look and understand it deeper in a way that I've
never really even visualized it or even noticed what was going on in the social media world.
And so because I work in it, we kind of all now work in it.
I thought it was kind of like a duty to know exactly what we're all doing and kind of like
helping influence.
So when I first heard that podcast, I was really intrigued by it and thought that it
was, I thought that Sam was like so well spoken and it was very interesting.
And I wanted to look more into his work and whatnot.
I listened to a few more of his podcasts and learned about his fight against religion and
his perspectives on free will, which were things that I've never even heard of before.
And I grew up religious myself.
So to be able to listen to an atheist, talk about all of these things that I kind of always
felt within myself without ever actually expressing it, I thought was really interesting and beautiful.
And I felt like, I was like, oh, here's like somewhere I can relate and things that I feel
to be within me, but never actually expressed or found, I guess, my following or fellow
peers that I could speak to about this.
So yeah, I was very, very interested in everything he had to say and I'm an active listener
on his podcast.
Are you, would you self describe as an atheist if that's an appropriate question?
I would say so.
I didn't think that at the time that I was, but now kind of learning more of what it
is expressed to be, I would consider myself an atheist, yes.
Interesting.
Now, the way in which you sort of cropped up in my life a second time was that I started
looking into the aftermath of something I had known nothing about, which was called
Operation Choke Point.
And this had been initiated under the Obama administration, if I understand it correctly,
where the FDIC and perhaps the Justice Department came to realize that they could put a lot
of pressure on the financial system not to do business with people in certain sectors
of the economy or to make it very difficult for them to get access to regular financial
institutions.
And I recall an article or an interview, maybe it was in paper, I can't remember where it
was, where you were talking about the fact that you couldn't get normal credit and easy
access to commercial banking, despite the fact that you were running a very successful
and profitable business as a businesswoman.
Yeah.
There was a lot of, there was a lot of adult actresses and directors and whatnot, people
who have had their accounts shut down in banking institutions and things like that.
I have had simple things where like email servers where you can kind of like send blast
emails to your subscribers and whatnot, kind of reject me in being able to be able to use
them.
I think like, what was it?
I can't remember what the website was called or whatever.
Mailchimp.
Oh yes, Mailchimp.
That's what it was.
Mailchimp was one of the programs where I wasn't able to use it and there's like many, many
more when I was like building my website, I was trying to like build my website from
kind of like third parties, not trying to follow the standard adult website brands because
I felt like they took a large percentage of our money.
So I was like, what other avenues can I attract that can work with me?
And I was searching for months and months to find someone to like as simple to hold
my bandwidth and whatnot and it was really difficult.
And I ended up having to speak to like specific owners and reach out directly to be able to
be like, listen, this is who I am, this is what I want, would you be willing to work
with me?
And now through that, I work with certain companies where I'm like one of their biggest
clients and I think they work with a lot of sports networking and this and that and still
my adult website is, I'm like their number one client.
And so I feel very fortunate that they would take me on, but it took a lot of research
and a lot of emails being sent out to people to be able to be like, listen, I am not a
criminal.
I'm not a bad guy.
Like, you know, I understand that there are things that make the adult industry complicated
because I have to make sure people are 18 and older and they don't want to be, you know,
giving access to people who are not of the age and how do you find that they are 18 and
all of the retune regulations.
So I understand that there are those kinds of rules that take place that make it a little
bit more tricky.
And so I think that the problem is that so many companies just don't even want to take
the risk.
That makes it a bit more of a struggle for us to try and find legitimate business that
is, I mean, if I refer to you as a commercial sex worker, you're comfortable with the designation.
All right.
So as a CSW, you accept that there are some added requirements for doing this kind of
work.
So that is legit and above board.
Yes.
There are legitimate businesses that want to do business with us, even though I think
that they're missing out on a huge market by not doing it.
And I'm very curious as to some of the reasons why they even don't do it.
It's maybe politically, religion has something to do with it, I'm sure.
Well, that's one of the things that I'm interested in trying to reopen, which is that during
the 1950s, 60s and early 70s, when obscenity was a much hotter topic, in particular because
of the need to establish a standard by which something might be deemed obscene.
And there were even people who said, we should not have any concept of obscenity legally.
It was very much on people's minds that obscenity and the erotic arts were part of free speech.
So you had novels like Lady Chatterley's Lover or Tropic of Cancer that were deemed
too racy to be sold.
So you weren't even necessarily talking about films or pictures.
Even text was considered too hot to handle.
And for whatever reason, that branch of the free speech discussion has somewhat dropped
out of most people's consciousness.
Are you, do you find that as well?
Yeah, I would say so.
I definitely think that to some extent it's somewhat there and I don't know if it's just
into different degrees where it's like gay rights or things like that, but definitely
nothing really that is necessarily adult related in our triple X community.
So one person that you've worked with who has caught my attention on a number of occasions
is this man, John Stagliano.
And John Stagliano is famous for first porting the concept of gonzo, which was originally
popularized by Hunter S. Thompson in journalism, into porn.
That is, he abstracted it away from journalism and started bringing it into pornography in
the sense that he was using handheld cameras.
He was making use of the switch to VHS from film.
And one of the things that he was doing, if I understand correctly and you should feel
free to correct, is that he was showing females enjoying sexuality rather than being spied
upon by the lens, actually actively engaged for their own pleasure, and that this was
in some weird way a feminist upturning of the concept of pornography.
Do I have my facts even vaguely correct?
Yeah, yeah, I would say so.
So then John weirdly ran afoul of federal prosecutors having to do with a 1973 standard,
which needs to be more in all of our consciousness called Miller versus California.
Are you, is Miller versus California something that occupies your thoughts?
No.
Do you know about it?
No.
Oh boy.
Okay, I don't know.
I'm not a legal expert, but this is, I think this is still the governing case law.
There was originally, I guess you can't check me, but see if this even plays correctly.
My understanding is that in 1957, there was a decision called Roth versus United States,
which introduced the idea that an average person applying contemporary community standards,
whatever that means, would have to find obscene work to be in the prurient interest, that
it arouses passions and maybe makes us lascivious, right?
And that that was followed in the mid sixties by 1966, something called memoirs versus Massachusetts,
which was a much more liberal standard, which said that the work had to in question had
to lack all redeeming social importance.
And therefore, if you could just put one quotation from Shakespeare somewhere in your work, you
were almost certainly going to be safe because anything that was redeeming would keep something
from being deemed obscene.
And then the court revisits in 1973 and comes up with a three pronged approach.
And it says that somebody applying contemporary community standards has to find the work to
be in the prurient interest of sex, that it has to run a foul of offensive standards,
I think on the state books.
And lastly, it has to be seriously lacking in redeeming scientific, literary, political
or social importance.
So not totally lacking, it just has to be fairly lacking.
That is terrifying in the age of the internet because what is a contemporary community standard
when we have one giant community?
If you make porn in the San Fernando Valley, let's say where it's traditional headquarters
has been, what if it gets viewed in Ogden, Utah?
How do you know you're not violating somebody else's community standards?
Are you worried about this at all?
Oh, definitely.
I mean, to me, it's very extreme because what one perspective is to one person is totally
different to another.
Your life experiences, I mean, are going to be completely different.
Even like, you know, religion has a huge play in all of these types of things and I think
that a lot of people just have totally different ideas on what is okay and not okay.
And I think a lot of it is even just from lack of experience or perspective or communication
with different people.
So I think that some people even like, like many even of my own friends have totally different
views on pornography and actors and actresses in the adult entertainment industry.
Once they meet them, they're like, wow, I didn't even think that you guys would even be this
type of person.
I've had people who speak to me directly where they're like, I didn't like you until
I listened to a podcast where I was like, oh, she's like a real human being.
So I think that in general, it's really daunting and terrifying the fact that if I want to do
some really intense hardcore scene that to maybe the general public will think it's,
you know, you know, regular hot porno, you know, but then the there might be, you know,
five percent of the population who's like, oh my God, what did she just do?
Well, and that's just it.
There's no way that you can control where your material will be consumed.
So having a pre-internet, like almost 50 years old decision govern in part who can be
brought up on federal charges.
My understanding was that Stagliano about 10 years ago was brought up and was possibly
facing three decades in prison for making pornography.
Yeah.
You're like 28.
If that would, that would put you at nearly 60 years old before you got out.
Oh yeah.
So what, what do you think?
What are your thoughts on this?
What do we do?
If we, I mean, look, as you probably know, we've been talking about free speech issues in
this intellectual dark web group, for example, and a lot of the problems that we're finding
are not exactly free speech issues.
It's not really the government that's trying to shut you down, but instead it's sort of
the informal, the institutions of civil society, like newspapers and universities that have
suddenly come up with a new concept, which is hate speech.
And even simple biological reasoning is sometimes now considered hate speech.
Do you see any tie in between the erotic community and potentially even the scientific
community and the ways in which these amorphous standards might get invoked?
I mean, I could hope that there is some sort of way that we can change these types of laws
or perspectives and whatnot.
I'm not exactly sure what it would take.
I don't know if there's going to be like some sort of new television series that kind of lights
people up in a different way that now people can have a perspective where they look at
us as like humans and they humanize us.
I think that that's a huge part of it is that we're not given the opportunity to humanize
ourselves.
And I would be really curious to see what it would have to be like if, you know, do we
have to all become scientists so that we get the check of a seal of approval?
Well, I'm claiming that even biologists are now running a fowl of concepts like hate speech.
For example, what if you start talking about a study of trans issues and you discover that
trans is a giant umbrella category where some parts of trans are disorders, some parts of
trans is just nature doing what nature is somehow going to do and somebody says, well,
wait a minute, that's completely illegitimate because you're misgendering people.
I don't think that biology is a way to hide out anymore.
I think that in fact, the biologists and the pornographers are weirdly and quite unexpectedly
somewhat in the same boat now that we have a very potent political strain that's trying to
regulate what can be said and that you guys are in somewhat of a similar boat.
But because there's no, I mean, I would never encounter you in normal life, probably,
because our worlds are just very unlikely to collide.
Any thoughts?
I think that when it comes to, I know right now I'm working on this documentary and they're
following myself as an adult actress and they're also following a researcher who studies sex and
she speaks about how she gets death threats and things like that for being this almost
highly sexual woman, even though she's literally studying how vaginal secretion happens or things
like that. I think that it is like we have this lack of free speech and we have this like,
I don't know if it's also the era of where everyone is just highly offended by everything as well.
I would have thought that through with social media and all these things and even like music,
the way that music has kind of like even become more hyper sexual and aggressive that our culture
would be more accepting to these types of ways of life, whereas rather than kind of see the
opposite side of it, I think that like when it comes to being able to be free with what you
can do and say in sex work and researchers, I'm not too familiar with the researchers,
but I was definitely like, I thought of this book Bunk by Mary Roche when I heard about the
research study of this or the researcher in the documentary where it talked about like,
I think it was like in the 50s or something like that where they were all studying animals,
having sex with animals because it was so taboo and you were like a pervert if you watched two
humans have sex, even though that's the only way to actually study people having sex and to get
real information, you're not going to get, you'll get information about monkeys if you're watching.
Monkeys have sex, but it was like interesting to me that it was so almost pornographic for them
to even be able to watch people and study them even though that's how we're trying to understand
biology and science. Well, I have to admit that I have a couple of odd theories about this and
I was curious how you might find them. One of which is that in some sense, the normal world,
which I understand you call the civilian world, that the civilian world is almost hypocritical
and in denial by design. That is, we aren't supposed to have an accurate picture of human
sexuality because our society is based on what I call load bearing fictions that people are
supposed to present as relatively asexual. Their default assumption that they go around with is
that they are not sexual beings and you're supposed to hide this aspect and then there are
contradictory expectations. For example, you might be expected to wear cosmetics in a workplace
environment as a sign of professionalism, but the cosmetics in fact may be sexualizing, but then
you're not supposed to admit that the cosmetics may in fact be sexualizing. In some sense,
the civilian world is a mess by design because we're not supposed to see ourselves accurately
and that the world of sex workers is bizarrely a truth telling world, a world in which people
are far more honest. There's another one of these which I think is the world community of
evolutionary theorists and believe me, you can't invite those guys to parties either because they'll
tell you things that the civilian world does not want to hear. What do you think about the idea
that is it possible that commercial sex workers are just much more honest and undistorted around
issues of sexuality and that in fact, this is why they have to be excluded?
I would say so. I believe one time when we spoke previously, you mentioned to me,
I could be quoting it wrong, but the real estate effect or something like that,
where it was like the woman can sell you potentially a not a suitable home because
of her sex appeal and where she is dressed in a nice suit. Maybe there's a little cleavage
showing she has the makeup done and you as a general person is kind of,
you're in a phase, you're in a daze because you see this woman almost before you see the household
and I think that with adult entertainers, we kind of like are always so sexually driven and sex is
everywhere, it's our whole lives. I feel like I even personally experience less sexual tension
when I'm on set because we are always naked. They are so used to seeing naked women
that it's not even a statement or a question or anything like that.
Let's dig into how bizarre your workplace is because very often I hear about sexuality in the
workplace and I think, well, what happens when you take something like modeling or going even
further, commercial sex work on the set of a movie? Take us through what you think some of the
major differences might be between your workplace and a typical office. But again, I should just
tell the audience, I have asked Ashley to try to keep this as much above the neck as possible
so that we can have the broadest possible audience and so normally we might be making some jokes
and having some more fun, but we're trying to keep this as classy as possible.
Yes. I could even just say, even the feeling and the difference of how I'm working on this
documentary right now, when I'm on set with that documentary, it is so different than when I'm
typically on set and it's hard for my brain to almost wrap around it because it's a very similar
vibe. They're both sets. We have the same kind of production crews and me, I would naturally
change my clothing right here in the middle of the set and all of these things and not even think
about the guy on the sound. He's doing his job. He's looking at the things because he doesn't care
about me getting nude because that's what he always, every day there's a new girl and a guy
getting nude and when I was on the documentary, they were kind of like, oh no, go to your dressing
room and change and I didn't even think that I could be potentially offending them with my body
and whatnot by just undressing right there because I was like, oh, you want me to change? So
I'll just change right now. I'm like totally comfortable with myself and it didn't even cross
my mind that like, oh, maybe this guy is looking at me inappropriately and he has like a wife or
this or that or they don't want any set drama or anything like that. And so for me, it's very bizarre
to pull myself out of my world that is so normal for us to just be like
casually having sex like when the cameras aren't rolling to just maintain the energy,
maintain the flow. We want to make sure the male talent how, you know, stays erect and
everything like that. And so while they're changing lights and everything like that, it's so casual
for sex to be going on. It's so casual for the male to male. There's even like a lot of male to
you know, gay jokes within each other where, you know, they'll joke about like, you know,
teasing each other off and like doing all these fun playful things. Whereas maybe in the regular
work environment, you would never male to male be flirting with your, you know, co-workers even in
the slightest bit because one, you don't want to become like, I don't know, you don't want all
that some guys are so homophobic and whatnot. But in our industry, it's so
casual for everyone to kind of have this open love for one another and talk about their bodies
and their sexuality that when I was on this documentary set, it was so bizarrely uncomfortable
for me as the sex worker to remove myself from being who I naturally am, which is like just
comfortable within myself and my sexuality and my body and that I could be looked at as
a piece of meat on their set. So they're like, these men aren't used to seeing
women like this all of the time. So you have to make sure that you're not subjecting yourself in
this way or making them uncomfortable or whatnot. And to me, I think that like, if they were around
that more, if people were just comfortable with themselves and comfortable with their bodies,
then it naturally would be normal and the same and the guy would be able to adjust the lights
without staring at the girl the whole time. Not that these guys were, but I guess potentially,
maybe they would, but they weren't even really given the opportunity. And for us, I think that
there's this casualty in or we're just so casual with one another that the hypersexualness that
goes on on set is just, it's just another playful, casual, normal conversation of it.
So you believe, I mean, not to put words in your mouth, but I'm curious, you believe that in your
workplace bizarrely and quite unexpectedly, maybe issues of harassment, tension, unwanted sexuality
are actually decreased. I personally feel that in my experiences, 100%, like it's,
it's, to me, it's close to none. I've never felt creepy vibes from a director or anything like that.
I'm also very playful and comfortable with myself and jokes. And, you know, I'm not, I couldn't
say that for every female that she doesn't feel maybe possibly offended by certain statements.
But I, I have never felt that there was an a boundary that was crossed in our casual
workness with one another. I've never had any creepy director to be like offering me
things that he shouldn't be or whatnot. It's, it's always in a very playful manner. And there's
always like 10 other people in the room. So it's always like a casual joke or things like that,
where we're all just, you know, naked and, you know, up pee with the door open. It's just like,
we all kind of do. Like we're all just very comfortable with ourselves.
You know, there was a story, and I wish I could, could source it because I've referenced it a few
times, but years ago, there was a naked musical called, called Ocalcutta. And I remember hearing
a story that somebody had found that after being on stage naked in front of an audience night
after night, cause this was a relatively successful musical, that the performers could not go back
to normal life because they had become habituated to the excitement of being viewed by like hundreds,
if not thousands of people. And so, you know, one possibility is, is that in your world,
there is a permanent or semi-permanent brain shift that comes from
experiencing a level of arousal and familiarity that the rest of us will never ever experience.
I would say so to some extent, but even from me personally, to some extent, I feel like even
quite the opposite has happened where now I like favor and desire more the more intimate one-on-one
private sex life experience where it feels more emotionally involved. And I think that's also
because I'm often working with people that maybe I don't know them very well or things like that.
And there is always other people around. So the level of being able to drop your guard,
always and completely is very rare because there is a camera involved and we're creating
a product in the end. And as much as like I can be enjoying myself, I still am put into literal
positions that I can't always be enjoying myself because it's opening up for a camera or things
like that. Right. On your professional after all. Yes, yes, exactly. And so I find even for myself
that it's almost taken an opposite turn where I've now desired that less and less. And when
I first started, that was one of my favorite things was the viewer's, the voyeur aspect of
there being multiple people in the room and enjoying the fact that there is a guy with
a boomstick holding it up who's trying to not look, but definitely obviously wants to.
Got it. Do you see any way in which are the rest of the rest of us in society moving closer
towards pornography with let's say self sexualization on Instagram where you're sort of
part of a mildly erotic feedback loop. If you're a young woman and you notice what, you know,
suddenly a photo you've taken has, you know, 10 times the number of likes on it.
I would say social media has a huge part into doing and kind of almost making somewhat
hyper sexualizing yourself more casual. And I think a lot of it is this desire of engagement
as well as like people becoming an Instagram model or influencers so that they sell products.
I know I recently listened to like a Crystal Lea podcast where he was joking about.
Yes. Oh, he's amazing. Oh, he's hilarious. I love him. And in his podcast, he's making jokes
about these girls who are kind of, you know, smashing their chest together, holding a watch
and they're selling a watch, but nobody is obviously looking at the watch. And it's interesting how,
you know, in every kind of advertising world and media and they use sex to sell things.
And so it's very normal. But now when you're taking the regular girl who's not some Vogue
supermodel where it's like a Kendall Jenner where she's obviously is selling sex, but not
selling sex because it's perfume. These other girls are kind of doing the same thing. And
I think for them that they almost recognize it more so that they are selling sex because
they're not getting this Vogue ad to show that it is showcasing that they're with Vogue.
And I think this is one of the difficulties that a lot of us are having is that traditionally
we've always been self-deceptive about sexuality and that the signals, I mean, even biologically,
just in terms of evolutionary theory, the signals that we send which constitute the sort of language
of sexuality have always been cryptic. They're not sent transparently and in the clear. Maybe
that's more the case inside of the world of professional pornography. But in fact, being
deceptive and self-deceptive is what is normal. And I think one of the things that has been
very confusing is this passion, partially on behalf of like the psychological community
or professional sex educators, you know, be open, be explicit, talk about everything.
And that's never been how sexuality has functioned in what you call the civilian world.
No, sometimes I wonder if it has to do with the fact that people enjoy this taboo sense of things
where it's almost like if it's unspoken, then it's more enjoyable. If it's kind of subliminal,
it's almost like it's sneaking its way into yourself. And then if it is kind of like
less open, then maybe they would have, if it wasn't, if it was direct, then maybe they would
have certain other guidelines that they would have to follow. If this perfume commercial was
obviously transparent with the fact that they are using sexuality to sell their perfume, then maybe
in the real world, the civilian world, they would be like, you can't do that. That's inappropriate.
Our children see these commercials. It's aired on television at regular waking hours.
And I think that probably has something to do with the part of it where if it is subliminal
and it's not direct, then it could be more acceptable to the human eye. And it could be
something that where people are like, well, no, it's a lingerie company that's classy and pretty,
even though it's obviously selling sexuality at the same time.
I think that the issue of deniability. Now, I mean, we were talking, I should say,
this is the first day we've ever met. We've talked on the phone a bunch of times.
One of the people I've sort of pointed you towards is this evolutionary theorist,
Bob Trivers, and he wrote this book. I mean, it's really one of the most prominent
theorists of our time. And he wrote this book called The Folly of Fools that talks about the
evolutionary basis of self-deception as the precursor to being able to manipulate others.
And if you think about, for example, just I had Brett Easton Ellis in the studio,
who wrote American Psycho in less than zero. We were talking about the issue of seduction.
And he said that he wants to be seduced all the time. He doesn't want everything to be explicit.
He doesn't want everything as a mutually agreed upon decision that, in part, what is wonderful
and delicious to him about life has to do with seduction and that seduction involves manipulation.
But in a world where I think many more people are colliding without a common understanding of
each other, not coming from the same backgrounds, there's really an increased propensity for two
humans to get these signals wildly wrong. It's probably always been there, but maybe there's
an increased ability. So weirdly, the way I see it, the civilian world has always been based on
sort of self-deception. And then there have been both the problems that come from that and
the really much more exciting aspects that come from that. When it works, probably there's an
extra magic to it. Any thoughts on that between what translates to mystique? Do you see that when
you're looking at your civilian friends that they're kind of saying, well, I wonder if he likes me?
I got a message. I don't know how to interpret it.
Oh, well, 100%, when it comes to me even just dating, I am a very transparent, open person
in these aspects of where I don't do the whole seduction game. I kind of just am an open book.
And I find that a lot of times it is faulty, where a lot of people do want this type of seduction.
They like these types of games or whatnot in the sense of where they feel like when you're,
and I think it could be because the general public is not so honest and open with what they want,
that it's almost like a shock value, where they're like, well, this girl is just really
being completely open in general with what she enjoys. And it's often something I loop back
around with my therapist, where I'm like, do I need to start being like the more civilian-esque
type of a person to be a more dateable person? Whereas instead of being this vulnerable self,
where I am just constantly myself and say what I like and what I feel in these moments.
Pretty big trade-off.
Yeah, it is. And I often find myself incapable of catering to the general public. I don't know
how to do these own kind of mind games on myself. But it is interesting where I do find that the
most common people do enjoy this type of seduction and whatnot. They don't want things to be so
blunt and almost easy to an extent. There has to be some sort of work involved and trickery.
I believe that it is like a very common theme, at least even in like my dating world. It is.
So, one of the things that I thought was really terrific that I first heard from you
was some of your ideas about how to make sure that if people are considering entering the
erotic arts professionally, that they're making good decisions. You feel that very clearly this
has been a great decision for you. It's worked out financially at a great level. You've been in
the business for a long time. You haven't been chewed up. You seem to have an incredibly positive
attitude. But what I was talking to you about was how uncommon is that? You're obviously in a very
unusual position. You came up with this idea of having a virtual reality simulator of what it
would be like to enter the business. Can you say more about that? Yeah, I think that there are so
many people. I mean, you get to start the industry at age 18. And I think that there are so many
people who don't necessarily start for the right reasons. Even when I first became in the industry,
I was a very hypersexual adolescent. And when I began the industry, it was mostly for money,
though I started off as an extra. I wasn't partaking in these sexual acts. I didn't really
know what I was getting myself into. I had no idea the the concepts of it all and whatnot.
And I think that now, if a young male or female can get the opportunity to really grasp the sense
of what can happen when you join the industry, it would be, I think, a good filter for a lot of
the youth and whatnot. So I think it would be great to have this idea of a virtual reality
that allows people to put themselves inside different types of scenarios. So maybe like
one scenario is you go in and you tell your parents that you've now joined the adult industry. And
one of the reactions are that your parents are distraught. They humiliate you. They shame you.
They disown you. Things of this sort. These are fairly common. Yes. Yeah. I think a lot of people
have parents who are racist. There are some parents who are like, yes, you can do porn,
but not interracial porn. And weird things like that. And so they're making their children racist
by association because maybe this child wouldn't care. They would love to have sex with a person
of another race, but they don't want their father or mother to disown them. So by association,
then listening to their parental rules and guidelines, they will not partake in interracial
sex and things like that. So I think that this would be an interesting factor. And I think it'd
be very interesting to put the parents in these simulations as well for youthful characters or
maybe even older people who get in the industry. So maybe the parents can understand what it's like
to be the adult entertainer and to have their parents be so harshly judging and aggressive and
whatnot. Maybe your parents are in a religious state. You could maybe fill out a little questionnaire
and you're like, my dad is Christian. So how would his Christian beliefs affect us negatively and
put the father in that same virtual reality? And maybe it could also help change the parents to
be more accepting. But they're also obviously the parents who will just be terrible and unaccepting.
And I think there are other ways to put the future stars in the virtual reality, whereas we had
one star rest in peace, August Ames, where she can ask about this. Yeah, she, she had come at
suicide from what I gather, some internet bullying where she did not partake in a sex scene with
a crossover star, which is a star who performs both in male to male scenes and male to female scenes.
And I'm sure she struggled with other mental illness issues and things like of that sort.
And I think that if we were able to put these adolescents in or these 18 year olds or these
people's future stars in the industry, they would be able to get the experience of the
humiliation, the, the tweets and the social media hate that you're going to get the,
the ongoing, you know, struggle with dating. Right. Ashley, but how do you do it? I mean,
I've seen some of what comes back at you. It's absolutely brutal. It is. But I recognize that
when I, when I think about it, when I was a, when I was in elementary school, kids would make fun of
me because I, I'm kind of like a hairy girl. I have like hairy arms and whatnot and hair like, so
they would call me wolf woman or gorilla girl. And I would just start howling like a wolf or like
grunting around like a, like a monkey. And I think that I have always just personally taken
criticism and made it comical. So for me, when I see someone saying some hurtful comments, I'm
always like, hot, you're brilliant. Like it's, it's amazing. It's, it's so hilarious to me. So
I have a different ability into translating how negative terminology and derogatory statements
towards myself actually impacts me. You literally have a tattoo in another language. I don't know,
I don't know which one. It says, oh, is it Chinese? It says, when life gives you lemons,
make lemonade. So that seems to be pretty deep.
Yeah, I've always been able to make things a more positive experience within myself. And I think
that if we were able to help see which people could handle these types of experiences, which
who could handle the shame, who could handle, you know, all of the terrible aspects that come into
being an adult entertainer, then I think it would be a better filter for, you know,
allowing these experiences. And maybe they should have these experiences for the viewers who are
saying the terrible nonsense so that they could understand because I'm pretty much paying their
inflicted. Yes, like, I think that listening to one of the Sam Harris podcasts, he was talking
about to somebody where they were talking about putting men in simulations where they get cat
called or, you know, sexual suggestions thrown at them, where they were now almost able to think
of like, wow, actually, maybe I won't treat women that I don't know like this because it's actually
not okay. And that made me feel uncomfortable. Well, could I actually, I wasn't planning to do
this, but can I give you a compliment? One of the things that really discouraged me from going
into podcasting or doing anything on YouTube is that when I started to see, I think the first
time I was on a major YouTube podcast was Dave Rubin show. And I noticed that people stop the
video at particular places. And they say, what's going on at 1537? And you may not know this,
but the reason that you're sitting to my right is that I have a condition called Dwayne syndrome.
And so the guest always sits in that chair because my left eye is partially paralyzed and it will
not go out. I did not actually have this diagnosed until I was an adult. And as a result, I very
frequently appeared with some amount of cross-eyedness. And my YouTube comments were like, you know,
I remember one comment was, did you see that at 1821? His right eye goes in to check for information
and then it comes back out because it found where it's stored in the brain. And like,
that was like very playful and fun. But then some of them, and particularly the ones having to do
with the moles on my face, really started to get to me. And what I found, and here comes the compliment,
I found, and I have to confess, I can't really watch your really wild stuff, but I have watched
some of your discussion about your body image. And you talk about being small-breasted,
you're very open about this, and saying, I don't want silicon. And I know that I'm supposed to
get silicon in order to earn the big money. And I thought, wow, she's just talking quite openly
about this. And then you didn't shave your armpits for a while. And then you did a YouTube video
about the decision not to shave your armpits and shaving them. And you confounded everybody's
expectations for what you're supposed to do as a big-time erotic performer. And I just took so
much away from that. It was very inspiring that you would be that courageous. And it was something
that personally moved me and helped me a little bit. Also, people don't think my hair is real,
because they think it's a wig, because I'm too old. I'm not kidding you. So that was a great
image from a most unexpected corner of the world. So thank you. Oh, of course. Yeah, I think a part
of that simulation I was speaking about would be about body image, because there are so many
young women that I've met who, like one particular particular model, I won't say her name, but she
said that she had so many fans, and I don't even know what how so many are, but she had so many
fans who told her that her breasts were pointed in different directions, that she had two breast
augmentations. And I could imagine that the people who complimented her greatly outweighed those who
didn't, but people sit and they think about these negative comments, and it affects them greatly
to the point to where they will change their body. I know girls who have had complaints about their
nose or their this or their that, and they very openly go on their Instagram and they talk about,
well, you guys complained about this on my body, so I fixed it. Right. And it's very sad to me that
these people who aren't mentally strong enough put themselves out there and allow the feedback from
some Joe Schmoe, wherever he is, saying these hurtful things towards the women or and men,
and it affects them greatly to the fact to where they actually will pursue action and will change
their body and put silicone breasts in them, which is can be very dangerous. This can be life
threatening. You put yourself under under this anesthesia, which is already a risk as well as
the risk of the poisoning of the silicone. And it's really like, I know quite a few girls who
got in the silicone and then have gotten it removed later. I know a girl who has gotten her
her butt done and then removed afterwards. And these are very extreme life threatening surgeries to
put yourself through over the simple fact of you think your audience will like you more.
And to me, it's obscene where I've not I when I first started the industry, I had my first agent
told me if I wanted to be a big star, I would have to dye my hair blonde and get a boob job.
Right.
And I have done neither of those.
So this is the thing, which is like you really are you don't you're very disagreeable. You don't
take all of the standard advice and somehow it's been working out for you. You know, and I like
let me be a little bit more forthcoming. I don't think I'm entirely comfortable with what it is
that you do for a living. But I've tried to get over that because, you know, you've just been such
a genuine and wonderful person to talk to about all of these things. And so in part, you're extremely
disarming. You get people to be comfortable with the fact that they do have a sexual response to you.
And you get people to accept you on your own terms and you've risen to the top without any,
you know, seemingly any consequence to just being yourself. How did you figure that out
and nobody else did in your area?
I honestly am not sure. I think that to some extent my parents had, you know, obviously a very large
part of that. My mother has always been, she was never like the type of person who took her body
image into consideration. My mother was like an overweight woman who kind of never really dressed
nice. And I think that that kind of helped me a lot too. And she was always proud of herself and
her confidence was always very high. And I think a huge part of my ability to just kind of accept
myself for myself was to see that as a role model was that she still found herself to be beautiful
and loved herself, even though she may have not been the standards of beauty. And sometimes I wonder
if I would be more in my own head if I had this attractive, hot mom who dressed the part and
put on makeup and all of these things where she was not that at all. And she always was very
accepting into whatever we wanted to wear. And like when I went through my goth phase, she would
You did a goth phase?
I did have a goth phase. And she supported and got me all the like funky clothes and all these
things. And when I did go through my like more sexually explicit phase, she was always like very,
very open to everything that we wanted. When I wanted to start wearing like thong under garments,
she was like, Yeah, let's won't go get them for you.
Do you think that you're sort of set at the factory at a more hyper sexualized level?
I do think so. I think that like, I was always around a lot of like sexual activity. I grew up
in like a trailer with my uncles who had a lot of girlfriends, their girlfriends were strippers,
and they were drug users.
So there's a develop, there's probably a developmental aspect, maybe not set at the
factory, but that the that environment.
Yes. And and my, my dad does claim to be like a sex addict and things like that. So sometimes I
wonder if there is some sort of, you know, biological self something in me that is more
hyper sexual than others. And because I don't think that everyone is meant to be,
you know, into sex. I think that some are more than others. I think like Nikola Tesla was a
virgin when he died. And that makes sense. He was studying science the whole time.
So like, I think that there are certain people who are Newton was also pretty asexual.
Yeah. And to me, it makes sense. Like not everyone is meant to be a hyper sexual person.
Like some of us should be studying the arts or sciences or, you know, hunting and gathering
rather than procreating. Okay. I mean, I think I mentioned to you that I had heard a podcast
with a professional colleague of yours, Asa Kira. And she had said, I don't think that I'm an
appropriate role model for all young women. I think that I'm an appropriate role model
for hyper sexual young women. And I thought that was fascinating that I hadn't occurred to me
that we may be partitioned into different groups and that a hyper sexualized young
woman might need an appropriate role model that is highly specific. Do you feel comfortable being
that in your area? 100%. Yeah. I think that since very young age, I had always been a very
hyper sexual person. And I never necessarily had like a role model. And, and I agree. I,
I wouldn't say that I am a traditional type of role model, although I would like to be,
I think at some, to some extent, I, I would like to think that the more average girl could
admire me and look up to me for other aspects and whatnot. And because I, like I said, I, I know,
I have a lot of girls who know who I am from like podcasts and stuff. They have no idea of my,
my work or anything like that. And they just admire me for the way I speak and my opinions on
things. It's very hard for me to integrate. Um, you know, when I've spoken to you on the phone
before, you say, you know, it's been great talking to you, but unfortunately I have to get back to
the set. And I have this like, it's like somebody telling me, I have to go fight the battle of
Stalingrad. Some terrible crazy things about that. But you're like, Oh no, I love my work. And it's
just, it's, it's very funny to see my own discomfort and prudishness proper.
It is interesting. It's very, it's a very bizarre thing for me, even when I meet people like yourself,
you know, and like other types of fans, like I've, because I have these other avenues of
attracting personas, I've had very young adolescents come up to me and ask me for photos
for my podcast with like Logan Paul. And this is absolutely mind boggling to me. And I,
their parent will take the photo and I'm just like, do they even know? And I don't know what
possible to say. Well, this, well, this is the thing. I think that there's a lot of it that's
not personal. Um, when it comes to the trepidation, it has to do with, I have no plan for how we are
going to negotiate all of the issues that come up because in my world, we're all wildly sexually
hypocritical and that's normal. That's, that's the way the civilian world has always been. And
presumably it's likely to be that for the foreseeable future. Whereas I see you as this sort of
dangerous truth telling machine experimenting with things that, uh, you know, that's that are
unimaginable. Now you just went to burning man and burning man is a very odd thing. Um, in
the black rock desert, uh, of Nevada, because for one week, somehow the normal rules are suspended.
How do you find this sort of, I didn't find it. I went once. I didn't find it incredibly hot. There
was a lot of nakedness and there was a lot of play, but it wasn't a wildly erotic experience in my,
in my, uh, understanding. Did you find it otherwise?
I also agree. I did not find it as a very erotic experience and it could just be because it feels
kind of dirty with all the dust everywhere. To me, just hygienically, I'm not really interested.
It's a very creative place. Like the art is astounding.
Yes. It is a beautiful place. And I, I think that it's just a, a place of people to be able
to be comfortable in their bodies. And I think that the fact that it's not hyper erotic is also
why people are so comfortable with themselves because they are able to walk around naked and
look at, looked at as an art piece rather than looked at as a sexual object. Whereas
even an erotic art piece that isn't necessarily going to immediately lead to a, a sense of arousal.
Yes, exactly. They are able in that moment to embrace themselves for who they are because
you'll find young, old, overweight, thin, attractive, unattractive people who are just
nude running around and everyone is just so confident in themselves. And I think it's
such a beautiful environment and place for people to really be able to accept themselves.
And it's kind of sad that that is the one place that they are able to let their guard down.
It was very interesting. I, I remember seeing a woman on a bicycle who had very clearly had
a radical mastectomy and she was totally topless and she did, I mean, aggressively,
she was having the time of her life and didn't care. And there was this sort of,
you know, cocoon of like acceptance and love that was clearly in the air. I don't think it's
an easy thing. Now, Burning Man is this very funny thing that they refer to the civilian world.
As the default world. And so in the default world, it's very tough to get that kind of
radical acceptance. It is. Do you find that there's some sort of similarity between that
deviation from the civilian world or the default world that is Burning Man and the porn set?
I would say a hundred percent. Like a lot of my friends that I work with or a lot of my friends,
I get them to end up working for me. So I've got some friends who are like mainstream editors and
I somehow managed to get them to start editing my adult videos. And I have one that I ended up taking
to Burning Man with me who had such a, he recently told me how he's had such an epiphany within himself
to be able to be so comfortable with his own body and comfortable with other people, but other
people's bodies by simply editing my videos. He's not on set. He's not partaking in any of
the activities or anything like that. But because he's just been editing my videos, he's found that
he's able to have a different relationship with nudity and sex and all of these things. Whereas
in his regular world, previously to meeting me, he was more, I guess, vanilla or follow the
standards of these civil civilian type people where it was like, no nudity, you will never see
him naked unless you are his girlfriend or partner at the time. And now he's in a totally different
place where he said himself, he's like, by the end of Burning Man, I will be walking around naked too.
And I think it's like this ability within himself where he's now, he's gotten to be able to put
himself in the perspective in the shoes of us on set. He sees the delay of when before cameras
cut, he sees like, you know, they start action and there's moments of us getting comfortable
with each other. There's moments of us cutting and just kind of like being natural in ourselves.
We're like taking a water break and everything like that. And I think that there are elements that
definitely have helped people grow within themselves and be able to accept themselves as
they're just natural human self. So it seems to me that there's definitely something to learn
from this weird pornographic universe. On the other hand, I can't see that these lessons will
ever fully translate. So for example, do you remember this horrible number at the Oscars
where I forget who it was, somebody was singing the song, we saw your boobs and it was going through
all of the actresses who'd appeared topless. And the idea being that, well, if I've seen your boobs,
then in some sense, I've got something on you. And I thought about John Lennon and Yoko Ono
doing this album called, I think, Two Virgins. And they're appearing naked on the album. So
let's get it over with. So now you've all seen us and let's, now you don't have any power over us
anymore because it's done. Do you think that there's something like that that at some level,
there's this revelation that you have your privacy up until a certain point. And then when
you've given up your privacy in exchange, somehow you get a comfort with self.
Yes, 100%. I think that there was a study done that showed that women who perform in adult
entertainment or as a sex worker have higher levels of confidence within themselves than
the average woman. And I think 100% that there's something about putting yourself out there to
be so vulnerable kind of forces you to kind of have to not care what other people think or say.
And I think that there's also, as much as you get these negative statements, there are still so
much glorification in that there's still so many people who are applauding you for doing what you
do. Like I look like a normal girl, an average girl who's probably going to college or has some
sort of basic job. And when I go to the store and I'm at Target, I'm a very social person. I make
small talk with anyone. And I often will like, I just start conversations with like maybe this
random 60 year old lady. And we're kind of like, you know, talking lolly gagging. And she asks me,
oh, like, what are you a model? What do you do? And I tell her, well, I'm actually like one of the
number one porn stars in the world. And a lot of times they look at me, they like size me up and
down. And they're like, you, like, you don't have big silicone boobs, you don't have all this injection
in your face, like you. And I'm like, I explain to them, you're also pathologically polite. Yes,
I am. I am a lovely lady, I think. And a lot of a lot of times when it's like an older woman,
she will tell me how she regrets not being more exploring in her life and regrets not being able
to or not have done things that were more adventurous sexually or erotically, or maybe like, I think
one woman told me she wanted to do like nude modeling, but she never did because her herself
was a petite small brunette woman. And it was it's always so interesting to me that the positive
reinforcement I get from older women who are always like, wow, like, I am so happy that you
do that. And like, I wish that I would have been. I think there are a lot of post menopausal regrets.
I was friendly with a woman who I take to be maybe in her mid to late sixties,
who started for some reason as I was leaving San Francisco telling me more than she might have
otherwise. And she talked about how back in the day, she had allowed people to eat their meals off
of her naked body as a kind of performance arts. And she was just having the time of her life
cackling about it. And we were like laughing and making rude jokes. And I thought about the way
in which maybe the part of the problem is, is that men really need women in general in the
civilian world to be much more simple in terms of their sexuality that you want to imagine your
mother and your grandmother typically as somehow bringing forth life with, you know, not multiple
lovers and not having much of a history and that somehow I wonder whether it's male needs for an
idealized concept of woman that make this pressure lifelong and that post menopausally,
many women just say, well, what did I do? I gave up so much of myself.
Yeah, I agree. I do think that a lot of men want these types of desires. And I don't know if it's
biology or what it is. Sometimes I don't even think that necessarily matters. It's probably like
environmental. But I know personally, when I talk to a lot of guys that are my friends, they're
like, I love you and I adore you, but I couldn't date you. Would you make a bet? Does that make
sense to you? No, it doesn't make sense to me. Like, and I don't know if it's because I as a woman
would, I guess, by all biologically would look for the most suitable male and would probably have
multiple children. If it was a primal world, I'd be like, Oh, he's like six feet tall and
big hunky man. And he's like a smart, lovely gentleman. Like I would imagine maybe I would have
these desires to have these different types of children. So it could explain my attraction to
a variety of men. But I also feel like men would naturally be that way too. But I don't know really
what it is. Like, I think I would like, what is it? Some one of the big cats like lions or
something will kill the young of another, you know, it's even worse than that. I believe the idea
is that if the head of the pride changes and there's a new lion at the head, not only will he kill
the young offspring of his predecessor, but that horribly the female lions response to this
is to go into estrus to become receptive and aroused by the killing of their young.
Right? Like, no, I mean, nature is just so crazy. It's so crazy, right? And we can't really
accept this in part. And so my belief is, is that a lot of what you're seeing is the evolutionary
program that says, if, if I know this person to be so aroused, it's not their personality,
their looks, that this, that that one, they've got a tremendous amount of sexual knowledge. So
they're going to know exactly where I am on the totem pole of sexuality, which is terrifying.
I think there's another aspect that has to do with how do I know this person isn't going to pick up
and take off with somebody else because they've been, they've had their norms adjusted. And there's
another one that says, how do I know that the child, any child will be mine, but more than
anything, my guess is, how do I know that I won't be mercilessly teased? Because everyone will say,
Hey, I saw your girlfriend naked. I saw her doing this. I saw her doing that. And so the,
the assault on the male ego and, you know, just to be honest about it, I think almost none of us
are secure enough to deal with. Oh yeah. I, I know that every guy that I've dated publicly
faces a large amount of sliding in the DMs of very aggressive, you know,
harassment. And, and I'm sure that even after our breakup, they are still dealing with the
harassment because we were at one time a public image together. And I would see some of the comments
and they are absolutely brutal and terrible. And it's even actually one of the reasons why
I'm terrified to have children because I, I think that I'm being the best mother possible by not
having children because I think that the life that they could live could be full of suffering,
whereas they will be shamed their entire life possibly. Whereas, you know, that same statement
where how do you know that's your real dad? I've seen your mom take on many partners, you know,
and like all of these kinds of very hurtful, terrible things and direct assaults on our
construct of masculinity. And this is why, you know, I noticed the other day that Jenna Jameson,
who was obviously a person in an era slightly before yours at the top of the porn profession,
was following me and tweeting about the Jeffrey Epstein situation. And she is pretty aggressive.
And she got her kid in her picture at the top of her Twitter profile. And that is a very aggressive
mama bear who is not taking any shit from anybody. I think, you know, one of the things I've,
you ever see this movie, The Martian? Is that the one with Matt Damon? I've heard of it. I did not
actually see it. Okay. You know how like, it's one thing to get a human to Mars, but it's much
more difficult to imagine how we're going to get a human back. So maybe it's easy to go one way.
I think of planet porn as like Mars, that very often it is, there's a portal into something
where you have a lot to learn. And that's part of the reason that, you know, I was eager to have
you on the program, but it's not clear that there's a return ticket. Oh, I agree. 100%. I think that
it is a very, that's why one thing I was saying earlier is like, is the seal of approval that I
become a scientist, you know, like what, what do I have to do to become acceptable in the public's
eye? Like, do I write an amazing film, a screenplay that now is like, wow, she's more than an adult
actress. Can we talk about a couple of these? Cause I think these are fun. One thing is, I don't
know, do you know the story of Marie Curie on her second Nobel Prize? Okay. So, you know,
obviously it's Polish scientists living in France. Second Nobel Prize, she's told, we're going to
give you the prize, but you can't come to Stockholm to pick it up because we think that you're getting
busy with a married man. Can you imagine, I was going to write a book called Radium Slut,
because of her work with the radioactive element radium. And we were so wrapped around the axle
about her extracurricular life that we couldn't bring ourselves to let her have the pleasure
of a second Nobel Prize given her behavior. Some other ones in this category, which I think are
kind of interesting, obviously you must know the story of Hedy Lamar. So the spread spectrum
technology that allows your phone to keep a call, but to jump from frequency to frequency
was apparently co-developed by her. Now she was an actress who was famous for appearing nude.
She was like the most beautiful woman of her time, early in German films, I think before she came to
the U.S. I think it was German films, not quite sure. But again, highly sexualized female, brilliant
as the day is long. And that these examples, there's another one that I would love to have on
this program. I can't remember her name exactly, maybe Brooke Magnetti. And her pen name was
Belle De Jure. She was studying for a PhD and she was turning tricks as a high-class call girl in
the UK because the stipends weren't high enough. She loved the work. She loved her clients. She
loved science. And so these are all examples of highly sexualized, self-sexualized females
who have been at a very high intellectual level. Now one possibility is that we should
desexualize the work environment and science. However, if there turned out to be a correlation
between outsized performance and hypersexualization in females, we wouldn't be running the experiment
to be able to see whether there was any kind of a correlation. So these are topics which are
weirdly too hard to talk about. And my concern is that we're not built. I mean, one of the things
I've loved talking about these topics with you is that we've managed to keep this. And I think
I'm going to take credit. I can kill the sexuality and sex so that we've kept it pretty much above
board and above the neck and that we need to learn how to keep sex from turning sexy in
conversation because it's too important a topic not to be able to discuss. What do you think?
Oh, I agree 100%. I would like to think that hypersexuality and intelligence kind of go hand
in hand. Well, I think it's a suspicion, but you can't bring that up because the other major force
is that the workplace should be highly desexualized. And because I think that there is such incredible
denial and that there isn't a recognition of female sexuality in the workplace, there's only
a sense in general of male transgression. I think it's very unclear what the way forward is to
figure out what is keeping women out of the sciences. My personal opinion is that it has to
do with kin work, that women are taking up most of the work in caring for children, caring for
elder relatives, and that the burdens of kin work are often prohibitive when it comes to a really
intense career. But I think we have a very difficult road ahead because I think half the
brains of, you know, half the neurons in the world ride on female shoulders, that that should be a
huge source of opportunity, but somehow there's a puzzle of sexuality. May I ask you a different
question? Because you're not, you're nodding. Are you familiar with Christina Hoff Summers,
if you're following Sam Harris, who I think is at the American Enterprise Institute? She's sort
of a second wave feminist, not a third wave feminist. She calls herself the factual feminist.
She's called a lot of attention to the idea that the wage gap where women maybe are thought to get
75 cents for every dollar that a man gets paid for equal work. You have a very unusual situation,
which is that in your workplace, there is a huge wage gap. Oh yeah. Talk to me about that.
There's not only a huge wage gap, I think that there's also like a huge, maybe attention gap,
where on the video films, a lot of times I think they even cut the guy's head out of the frame,
you know? So I think a lot of times the male is almost more objectified than the female,
where he is literally just a phallic piece. He is not anything more than his penis. And a lot of
times they don't want to see the rest of his body, nor hear him speak or anything like that.
And a lot of times I think that they're doing almost even more of the work than the female is.
And we get this opposite end of the spectrum where I can get paid for anywhere from $2,500 to
sometimes $10,000 for a scene that I do. Just for one scene.
For one scene that I do, whereas the male talent can get anywhere from $500 to, well even like
less, like $300 to $2,000 is like the top star in the industry. And my starting rate is already
above those big huge stars. You know, that's similar for modeling. If we took the top 10,
suppose it's supermodel. I don't love the term porn star in supermodel because they get used,
let's just have fun with it. If you take the top 10 supermodels, male and female,
my understanding is that the pay scale is $0.10 on the dollar for the men relative to the females
because there is this super premium. I mean, in some weird way, the females are the males
of the human species. Like peacocks, the adorned gender or sex is the males and the
festoon gender in humans is much more the females. And so there's this very bizarre
reversal that there really is a wage gap in this one area and it totally favors the females.
Is that fair? How should we think about this given that we've learned to think about it in
reverse and you're in one of the few industries where it totally goes the other way?
Yeah. I mean, I like to think of gender equality myself personally. So I don't find it fair
in my personal opinion because like I said, even in the sense of like showcasing the male is not,
he's almost more objectified and they're still dealing with the same struggles that the females
are dating. I'm sure when it comes to dating, I'm sure the male struggles just as much as the
female actress. I bet not. I bet it's pretty bad. I don't know. I bet it's not quite as intense.
I'm not sure. I think that it is like because women have their insecurities. So,
you know, you have to think of this male is working with women who are mostly 18 years old
for almost all of their scenes and he's maybe like a 30, 40 year old man who's looking for a
woman his age and it's, I think, hard for a lot of these more civilian type women to be confident
within themselves when he's going to set, you know, working with these 18 year old girls.
I guess I hadn't thought as much about, I mean, obviously there's a lot of dating within the
industry because people are at least sensitized to what the issue is. Both men dating the females,
females going that, but I do, I know a lot of the men who personally struggle.
I take it back. It's interesting. Yeah. Yeah. Sometimes I think it's worse
because I think that guys will almost be more accepting than the women. But I mean,
I'm not really sure, but I think I know more women who date out of the industry than men.
I don't really know many men whose partner is not within the industry.
Let me ask you another one. You did your first transsexual sex scene recently.
My guess is, is that you were warned that this could have negative consequences on
your career. You elected to do it. Obviously the topic is very hot and you probably brought
a large portion of a heteronormative audience through something they weren't prepared to deal
with. How did that go? And just keep it so that we can have the broadest audience possible,
but just, I'm curious, is it a political act? Yeah. For the longest time, I was advised against
doing a trans type of scene due to the fact that my agent suggested that a lot of my fellow
peers wouldn't want to work with me because it is like a crossover type performer. They are also
a more high risk performer because of the activities that they do. I think that overall,
in general, my agent just kind of thought it was some sort of a career suicide type of thing where
it could really affect you overall within the industry. For a long time, I took his advice
and didn't want to do this potential dangerous activity. I didn't want it to hurt my ability
to perform with other peers and whatnot. It wasn't until recently that I dated a guy who asked me
to quit porn and I contemplated it for a very long time and had even a retirement date and
everything. Yeah. He helped kind of manipulate me into feeling like I should quit and everything
like that. I finally realized one day that this was not what I wanted to do. I loved my job and
that I would probably later on resent him if I had done so. After our breakup, it was when I
really took control over my job and realized that I want to do things that make me happy and not
really for my fans. I started to create my own content for my website that were things that I
wanted to do and ways that I wanted to portray myself and not in things or ways that I thought would
make money. I kind of stopped caring about the money and was like, I'm going to invest myself and
my own brand and money into things that I enjoy and hopefully it'll translate. One of my things
was always a fantasy of working with a trans performer. That's something that's erotically
interesting or is it politically interesting? Both. Okay. Both. There's something amazing about
a female with a penis. That is just you get best of both worlds to some extent. It was
something that I had. I'm curious. Have you ever been to the Uffizi Gallery in Florence in Italy?
No, I've not been to Europe. Oh, really? No. Okay. Well, here's a little piece of homework.
There's a room in this one of the most famous art museums in the world called the Hermaphrodite room
with an absolutely gorgeous reclining apparently female figure and then you walk around and sure
enough, there's this penis. The shock that we're cued to female indicia and then surprised that
there is this actual different state. This is something that people have been playing with.
This is energy that's been played with for a very long time in much more conservative eras.
And so I wonder whether some people, like there's a community that finds this specifically very
exciting. Oh, I think so. I think that more people are attracted to it than even want to
admit it or even are aware of it. Do you think that's where some of the prejudice and bigotry
comes from as people trying to suppress that they're actually fascinated? Yes, 100%.
Interesting. I had a very large applause to that and a lot of my fans were
so excited and happy to see me do this activity and keep asking for more. And that's actually,
because I shot it for my own website and it's one of my most viewed scenes on my website.
And I've had my website for since like 2015 and it outweighs and reaches numbers.
I would not have guessed this. Yeah, I've got so many other scenes with daddy play and multiple
partners in one scene and like, you know, the incestual things and all this stuff.
I'm starting to freak out. You're getting out of my comfort zone.
I know as soon as I said that one, I was like, oh, I love this scene.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
But I think I'm probably not. Well, I don't think I'm highly judgmental at a mental level,
but I think that I'm quite comfortable with the idea that I'm not really meant to explore
all of the hypocrisies that in some sense, I think I accept that my world is a world of
hypocrisies and that that's actually structural, which is why.
I mean, you could also be facing the fact that you'll get socially critiqued yourself.
Well, there's that. I think that I'm more comfortable
defending very well, here's something that I'm going to get socially critiqued for.
And when we talked about it on the phone, that I think I feel slightly more comfortable with.
The shunning of Louis C.K. was something that I thought the world probably got weirdly wrong
and that the porn world was strangely silent. So my understanding was that he was requesting
to disrobe and to bring himself to orgasm in the presence of fully clothed females.
And when I heard that and I heard that this was his desire to exert power,
I thought, I wonder if that's true or I wonder if this is just some sort of well-known kink.
And it turns out that there was a category which I asked you to look into.
And not only does this kink exist, it seems to be a fairly large kink
and it's coupled to some other kink called female domination. How does that? How do I pronounce
that in the industry? I mean, we call it femdom. Femdom, okay. So what if we got that wrong?
What if to some extent this was a powerful guy who was actually looking to be dominated by females
because that was his kink and then we couldn't actually talk about it in terms of the complexity
and because we're so judgmental and because of this sort of sense that right now the vogue
is to protect very powerless females from very predatory men and we're going to derange all of
sexuality so that that one case can be addressed because that has been a place where we haven't
had good tools. Did we effectively just kind of cancel a human being who was actually seeking
to be dominated? I 100% think so. I think that there's also trouble within the females he was
asking to be dominated by. I don't think that they probably even had the comprehension of what he
was asking for. Well, Sarah Silverman talked about sort of getting it and being down for like,
I want to see you do that. Oh, I would be if he asked me, I would 100% it would have been like,
you know, fucking do it right now. But I think that, you know, even when I first started performing
femdom myself. So this is something that you do? Yeah, I do. And when I, I'm such a sweet,
kind, caring person when I, my first pull the mask off. Well, it was like, it took a training
for me like where, where for my, you can get trained for this. Well, it's kind of like when
you throw yourself in a situation over and over and over and over again, you kind of learn
how to become better and more comfortable in it. So when I, I remember my first femdom scene was
kicking a guy and having to kick him repetitively. And the whole time I was just like, are you okay?
Like, are you okay? I don't want to hurt you. I was hardly kicking him or anything. And this man
flew himself out, covered his own expenses and was there for free. Because this was a niche and
a kink that he had wanted to do. And now I'm at a point to where myself, where I could kick a guy
and not ask if he's fine or not. When, when he, when he's put in the scenario, I won't just kick
any stranger. Well, I don't know. You better watch out there. Oh, no, but my, my point is, is like,
when you're put in this scenario, I have now learned how to be a better femdom. And
I think that the mistake that Louie made was that he was asking women who are not experienced enough
to participate in activities that they are not mature enough for.
Well, you didn't, I mean, here's the thing that blew my mind is that when I looked into this,
I found that there was this acronym for what he was doing, which was clothed female naked male.
And you didn't recognize the acronym and you're in the business.
No, I wasn't. I wasn't familiar with it. So this is what, what I found fascinating is that the world
of kink is so varied that even if you're in the business and you're in it, like, you know,
well, I'm my own niche. I'm not really in the, I'm more of the like girl next door niche. I'm
typecasted. I will never play a milf or things like that because I, I'm more Islamic liberation
front if you're following it. Not in my world, but, but I think that, you know, even for me personally,
I've learned to cater my brand around the typecast that I have. Whereas if I was maybe a more
alt tattoo type female, my brand would have learned to adapt to the audience around myself.
So my, my audience is a specific type of brand.
I guess, you know, just to talk about trends in the industry, it's now possible,
like, okay, Cupid, I think pioneered a blog that used the data component of a dating app,
in this case, okay, Cupid, to try to figure out, okay, well, what patterns can we discern?
Like for example, how old are people's photographs that they use for their profile relative to their
age? And then, you know, an average of 2.5 years lagged or something like this. We now have all
sorts of data on people's sexual proclivities based on their use of these websites because of the,
the sort of the big data opportunities. What have you guys learned about us?
Well, we've learned like there are definitely seasons of even from the type of adult films that
are consumed to the colors that the performers are wearing. So there's like algorithms that they could,
you know, or data that they could track where they know like holiday time, you know, around
now it's like October, or it'll be October in a few days, but like October to I think like February
is the niche of incest porn is huge. And I think that largely has to do with the holidays where
people spend a lot of time with their families. Now is incest porn actually trying to depict
straight up incest, which is I find incredibly disturbing, or is it really incest adjacent
where it's trying to depict sort of step like relationships gone awry? It's both and it mainly
depends on the particular company you're working with. And I think that's only specifically because
the payment processors. So certain payment processing will force you to say step mom,
like minimum three times, you have to kind of establish it multiple times throughout the scene.
Whereas our other sort of a legal requirement where it wouldn't, if it was not, but if the
payment processors did not have any input, then people would do straight up incest incest. So it's,
I think due to the payment. Are you comfortable with that? Me personally, not necessarily. I don't
feel comfortable saying the word mommy or daddy to me. It's also not erotic. It doesn't turn me on.
Got it. I would rather play the babysitter in my, if you want to keep that teen spirit alive.
But I also don't necessarily feel comfortable playing a teen either. Like I had one fan at
one point tell me that they loved my 10 year old vagina and it was because I didn't have a bush at
the time. And then, well, this was a huge trend where we habituated people to seeing females in
a prepubescent state. Yeah. I started growing my bush after that one statement. I was like,
all I needed to hear was that guy say that direct sentence. And I was like, well, this is my only
way of claiming womanhood. Yeah. And, uh, because I do look like a very young adult person and I
play a young person in my films. And so I don't necessarily feel comfortable constantly playing a
yes, prepubescent, you know, a teen, little teeny bopper. Well, and, and I think this is part of,
you know, getting back to the issue of the obscenity decisions. This is, um,
well, I usually come down on the side of free speech. I do think it's worth making the argument
against, uh, which is where we are now. There was a five, four decision and the five, four decision,
um, one of the justices, I believe in the, in the minority wrote saying that there should be no
concept of obscenity was it should all be covered. But because arousal takes place, not in the
prefrontal cortex where we're actually doing our thinking, but it's taking place in the
autonomic nervous system, which we have very little control over. We sort of only have supervisory
control. Um, it makes sense at some level that there are certain ideas that you don't wish to
excite. And this comes across not just in sexuality, like for example, the concept of, um,
fighting words is a defense, um, which is that if somebody riles you up and is trying to get your
goat and you, and you smash him in the face, there might, that might be, um, a mitigating
circumstance where it wouldn't simply be considered assault because the person's use of language
was trying to elicit passion that would likely end in violence. And of course, you know, crimes
of passion, uh, which does have to do with sexuality that, you know, sexual jealousy is
thought to be capable of arousing us to violence. Um, is there an argument to be made that if the
speech, um, or the art is intended to access the parts of our brain that are most primitive and
least under control, that maybe that shouldn't be considered speech at all? I'm not sure because
sometimes I wonder if these type of acts or videos or whatnot are helpful to viewers. Like,
I'm not sure if it's like, instead of the person going out and performing these acts on a person,
a fellow person, they're able to view it on screen and, and because they're,
that's interesting. So it may, maybe the idea could be helpful. It could be because we are,
we are acting, we are an actress and an actor performing and we're, I am not an actual under
age minor, though I am most times playing one, but legally I have to pretend I'm 18 because
the payment processors and whatnot and the laws. So you are a 28 year old woman playing what you
believe to be an underage person who is technically portrayed as being above the age. That's
three different ages that are taking. Yes. 100%. And a lot of the times I, I would like to think
that it's helping people so that they are not actually like, like the incest porn. It's helping
people to not actually take, you know, like experience these activities because it would
be wrong. Your guilty conscience would probably weigh on you. You would be like, what did I just
do? This is a terrible mistake. What did I, what am I doing? This is reflective of some kind of
sickness in our society that I don't, I don't even understand. I mean, I have to say it's quite a
shock to me. Well, you know, something very interesting. My dad married his step sister.
I, I had a girlfriend in college whose parents were stepbrother and sister.
Yeah. There he is. She's not my mother, but it is something where I make like a joke where I'm
like, my whole life is a big giant porno. Like, and it is interesting. He met her when she was
about like 13 years old and you know, he was. So after puberty. After puberty. I forget what
that effect is that if you grow up with somebody, you tend not to be aroused by them at an earlier
age. Yes. Right. So it is interesting to me that like it's, it is real life where you can partake
in these sexual activities and it's not blood related and it is technically legal because
they are step, stepbrother and step sister, but there is still for me a personal element where
I find it unattractive. Yeah. For me, at least myself. Right. Listen, I've really enjoyed this.
I have one final question, but I think that if we don't figure out, you know, I have this,
I'm going to get a little abstract, but I have a theory which is that the invisible world
is first discovered by the visible world's failure to close. That is, for example,
you learn about a, let's say dark matter in the universe, not because you can see it, you can't.
It doesn't have photons bouncing off of it, but it bends the light around it. And so you can see
that there must be something there because all the visible stuff is behaving strangely. And in some
sense, the erotic entertainment complex is like dark matter in our society. It's this enormous
influential thing. One of the things that was very strange was watching how many people literally
would say, who is, who is Riley Reed and, and their faces lighting up with the light that they had,
I mean, they just weren't aware that they were lying. So clearly this is shaping our society.
It's affecting who we are. It's affecting our sexuality. We're not really able to talk about it.
I feel like I'm taking a big risk, which maybe in my mind, maybe not, by having you on the program.
I think that for the most part, the discussion has been exactly the kind of discussion I was
hoping to have with you. So thank you so much for being here. But like my, my final question really
is, what is it that the pornographic world can tell us in the civilian world about ourselves,
watching all of these tensions between men and women? And what would be the best way
of being in dialogue if you do understand why it's so hard to mix these two worlds because
of their two shifts in basic norms? It's kind of hard for me to answer because I've been
in the industry for so long at starting at such a young age. So I don't, I almost don't know what
it's like to not be this world or this person. And sometimes it's hard for me to comprehend how
people cannot or aren't the same or have similar mindsets and perspectives.
I almost wish that every person would just be a performer for a month or two, just so that they
could understand and have a more realistic idea on what happens in, in our world, and then take
that and bring it to your world. Because I feel like we have so much valuable
self-awareness and confidence to offer that the general public is not really,
it's not tangible for them because they have all of these rules of society's standards that you
have to follow. And I think that if people could put themselves in our shoes and could be a performer
for a month, then I think that they would be able to understand the,
the business aspect as to where we are not these crazy criminal-like type people.
I think that it would help them understand the, that sexuality is so fluid and, and how love is so
transferable and like you are transferable where I've, I've personally learned how to
find beauty and attractiveness and love from so many walks of earth in just any human being
basically that I, and I got that from shooting porn where I, I don't know if I would be as
full of love for strangers because I am forced to have intercourse, not forced, I'm not like
held at gunpoint, but I willingly volunteer myself to have intercourse on film with strangers.
And it gives me the capability of really learning to love literally every person around me. And I
think that it's kind of taught me something really beautiful and like accepting within,
you know, my colleagues and literally all the people in the world and,
and I get to see how vulnerable people allow themselves to be with me when they meet me or
their fans of mine, whereas they wouldn't be so vulnerable in the sense of they were maybe even
just speaking to you or, you know, your editor over there. And whereas me, because I am a sex
worker, they, they see me in such vulnerable states that they can also let their guard down and be
the most true of self.
I didn't even let you do that. I mean, you're, you're this absolute master at disarming people
by making them feel non creepy about their own sexuality, which was something I prohibited
you from doing in this interview. And, you know, you don't even need it. I mean, I have to say,
I don't think my listeners even understand this, but I did the first show with Peter Teal,
which was really about innovation and growth. Um, Werner Herzog was about high art. Um,
Timur Koran was about, uh, our relationship to truth. I mean, these are all big themes. Rabbi
Walpie was God and, uh, Jaco Willink was war. And I, I don't feel like I could have picked a
better interlocutor on the subject of sexuality. And now I think what I get from you is a
a bizarrely and challengingly positive view of universal love that I was not expecting.
Um, I'm still not ready to accept it, but I'm certainly going to think about it because
uh, that's a real surprise at the end. Yeah.
Ashley, thank you so much for coming. Thank you so much for having me. I really appreciate it.
I thought this was quite a challenge for myself. We were both nervous about it, but for totally
different reasons. Yeah. Thank you. I really appreciate the opportunity. Okay. You've been
through the portal with Ashley Matthews, alias, uh, Riley Reed. Um, thanks for joining us. And
remember to subscribe wherever you listen to podcasts and go to our YouTube channel,
subscribe there and click the bell so that you'll be updated whenever the next episode drops. Thanks
for joining.
Okay.
Okay.
