All right. Hello and welcome, everyone. It is July 7, 2023. And we are in the first introductory
session of the course, Active Inference for the Social Sciences. This is going to be a really
exciting course and journey that we're all going to join and co-create together
with no further ado. I will pass it to, please mute. Turn off the live stream, Aval.
Thank you. Complex systems and feedbacks with cyber physical systems will be a theme.
We told you it would be. I will pass now to Aval for the introductory session. If you're watching
live, please feel free to write any comments or questions in the chat and I'll relay them at the
end. On to the lecture. Thanks, Aval.
Go for it.
Hi, do you hear well? That was a sound issue. Okay, cool. So, Aval, I organized the course.
I had the idea and worked on the curriculum. Do you see the slides well?
Looks good. And just make sure to close the YouTube video or mute it.
So, hi, do you hear well? That was a sound issue. Okay, cool. Okay, I did not know how to do that.
So, this is the introduction session of the course, very unsurprisingly.
My name is Regina Carleau. I am a funding member of Kairos Research and I am a non-funding member
of Active Inference Lab, which co-organize the course. And first, I will basically present
the teaching team. So, we have Danielle, which is here with us, which is a PhD in Ecology and
Evolution, studying and the everywhere in an eco-evo kind of way, who is president and co-founder
of the Active Inference Institutes and who is interested in, among other things, our philosophy
and cognitive security. Then we have Ben, which is also here with us, which is a secondary PhD
candidate in philosophy at the University of Sussex, which, like me, interested in
4E cognition, which is embodied, inactive, embedded, and extended cognition. We don't
need to get into that now. He will explain to you. And in projective processing,
which is basically working on the cognitive science of technology. And then we have people
who are not here today, which are Maro Albarassa, PhD candidate in the cognitive computing at
the University du Québec, Montréal, which is head of product innovation and research at
versus private sector research lab in AI and the mathematics of AI, which specializes in
while active inference. The theory we're working on right now, script theory, which she will extend.
Maybe I will talk a bit of it today, but she will be the one who explains what script theory is to
you. And modernity, artificial intelligence. And we have Laurence Gonzala, also a PhD candidate,
also in philosophy, but in Wollongong, I believe this is how you say it's in Australia, which is
centered in a philosophy of mind. And in the status of information processing, as the term is used in
cognitive science. And then there is me. So I may do career timeline, because when I talk about
what I did, people get confused. I did physics math, I did engineering, I did cognitive science,
I did research in ecology and evolution. I did masters in complex system physics. And
I did one year, apparently, given my timeline, or two, no, more than two of independent research
as a part of Keros research and as part of the French society of academics. Before I started
the PhD, I'm doing now, which is something about the relation between mind and material
culture. We will get into that at some point. And the question and motivation I have are
essentially describing the relation between phenomenology, so the way we experience the world
and physical reality, which I have the fringe view that somehow phenomenology is constructive
of physical reality, which could have weak and strong interpretation, I subscribe to both.
I'm trying maybe more importantly here to explain or at least describe how sociological life
format to say the regularities that in the life of human social life are constructed,
which is hard. And I'm trying to build a research that is effective at doing knowledge,
not word piles, through our work in Keros research. So these are specific references.
You will get the slides at some point. I guess I will publish them on the website.
And then we will be able to check it out if this is of interest to you.
So let us get on the actual relevant content. So what we are going for here is basically explain
the very basic demarch of the course, explain how it's of relevance, how the framework we
propose is of relevance to social science, and present a few case studies to make the case.
And then we will talk about course layout, but this is pretty quick.
So first I'd like to talk about the explanation of cultural dynamics. What does explaining
cultural dynamics even mean? Depends who talks. There are many, many, many, many, many types or
views on what is scientific explanation. I say we can cluster them in three broad categories.
One is a nomological, so it's about laws. And what it does is to take regularities,
just say, here is this regularity. And I consider that these statements, so the law,
has an explanatory capacity toward the regularity. So for example, for those of you who are
familiar with the work of, and I forget names, Foundation, the Foundation Trilogy, I believe
it's Trilogy. This is pretty close to what they call psycho-history. So basically trying to do,
trying to find laws of behavior and using them to predict history in a regular lawful way.
Then we have mechanical explanation, which are more typical of the life science. And what
we do in mechanical explanation is to look at the structure of a system, and model the structure,
and try to use this model to predict specific regularities that are of interest. And you
have an approach to social sense that is, I'd say, quite close to that, which is
close to that, which is chloramics, which weights a lot on the nomological side, but still is
centered on dynamics and mechanisms and explanation by calling onto structure in specific societies.
And then you have a functional explanation, which asks what constraints exist so that the
system does what it is that the system does. Here again, you will also use a lot of contextual
modeling, very often evolutionary game theory, so simulation where we suppose that agents can
have specific traits and those that reproduce more or that have more fitness give their traits
around. And you have the discipline, a field of study of cultural evolution that does that very
concretely by just asking how culture evolves, so what cultural traits can get more fitness and
be transmitted, a very evolutionary centered approach to social change. So to sum all of this up,
basically we explain things by calling onto regularities always. And we can talk about
regularities in the phenomenology, so what the system does in of itself, in the structure,
that is the language stem activity, or in the function that is the constraint that exists over
what the system does. And you have a specific brand of explanatory strategies that try to
legify behavior to make an homological lawful explanation of human behavior and of social
cultural change. And it's not immediately evident how they do that, how they think it's a coherent
idea to begin with, because humans learn, culture change, so what laws could there be
in a field where, which is changing with time always. So in my opinion, it is a more question of
rhetorics than of epistemology, because I do not think the answer is coherent. The answer is,
as far as I'm concerned, that people, they just reify regularities that are observed in
experimental settings, often that are quite heavily fabricated as kind of cognitive laws
of behavior. And because those people usually agree in spirit to the mechanical kind of explanation,
they talk about cognitive mechanism or mental processes, but only in so far that those
mechanisms or processes are explanatory of cognitive laws. They do not do the work of,
you know, looking at the structure and function of the systems. They just claim,
there must be a mechanism that explains the vague law that I have observed over 20 people that came
to my lab. And these laws, they are assumed to scale for the explanation of social activity,
and so you have it, you have the recipe for universal law of social change.
And the, basically, the whole argument stands on the idea that you have a presentation or
mental processes or a cognitive mechanism that somehow entail that the subject's
behavior is regular through time and between individuals. And you never have the work that
would actually, in any capacity, prove it for reasons that we will not get into because it would get
math heavy and renty. So if the rules and regularities of human behavior can change through
learning, through cultural evolution, through whatnot, how can we exactly model or explain
or even describe this agency? This is not doable in an homological slash lawful framework because
when we do natural laws, we look at regularities, we claim, here is a law, this regularity is a law.
So it explains that, you know, it exists. And this is a circle because as far as I'm concerned,
it's a circle, like the regularities explain the regularities which explain the regularities.
There is no way out of this. You can recurse this all day long. The only fact that you observe
the thing is your explanation for the thing. This is not, hopefully, how we do things in
science. And you have a process of explanation that is more complete if you look at
structure and function written large. You can look at a specific system, which is a specific
structure, and you can look at what the system does, the function of the system and act to
specific point of time. And you can look at how this function, this activity, shapes the system
later on at t plus one. You can have, you know, developmental approach to things that is internal
how system unfold, how they learn, how they evolve through time, like that is doable.
There is no law against that. And it could actually work. So, yeah, let's do that.
Let's explain natural phenomenon by describing how the underlying structure work, but also by
trying to explain how it's brought about, how the system's activity explains the way it takes shape
through time. So, a claim that we will make here, that is, itself, it could be contentious,
but we don't have to look at why it is not written here, is that active inference, which is a specific
new trendy theory of human cognition, can actually explain how regularities in the
language, social activity, be constructed through time. And let us look at what active inference
says precisely. So, there is, we won't look at the math ever. We won't look here at the specifics
of this theory. The only thing we are going for is to prove that this theory indeed does
what I think it does, which is explained, or at least described in a non-trivial way,
the evolution of social regularities. So, if active inference framework is true,
then cognitive agents perceive the world through expectation they have developed about the world.
So, perception is an active process. I do not perceive things with my eyes and compute higher
level of traits of what I saw. I basically expect things in front of me, and I will actively look
at the things that are most likely to inform me. And something that is critical about this
framework is that the prediction is also underlies action or policies. So, let's say, trajectory
of action that I enact. I will do the action that I believe I am more likely to do. I will do that
in virtue of me believing I am more likely to do this action. So, in that framework, active inference
is understood as a process of an action of a specific model that is causally shaped both
by an agent's dynamics and environment dynamics. And this relation, well, brings a model that
corresponds in abstract way to the structure of the dynamics of the relation. And this model,
I can also look at it in a way more concrete sense in that it is what underlies what drives
the agent dynamic. You have a duality between the dynamics and the epistemic mental states
that we put, that we project, that we can observe in the dynamic. So, a very important
aspect of this is that it dissolves entirely agency as we would understand the term.
There is no distinct step of perception which informs the agent on what action, on what the
world is like and based on which the agents decide freely what action it will take.
There is a constant prediction of what is going to happen. And this is enacted by the agent
both through perception and action. So, what drives decision here, what drives generally the flow
that underlies the agent behavior is the agent's self-model. And that is, that has
interesting consequences. So, I have notifications, so we'll look at them. Sorry.
What's, let me drink. I will drink. I need to drink.
So, one consequence of this formalism is that normativity. So, the values and norms, it's hard
to go around that word. That drive behavior, they are not, you know, in the brain, they are not
something that the agent abstractly relates to. They are embedded in the very process in which
the agent understand and goges and navigates the world. And this is a very relevant for a
human cultural evolution because, well, we are cultural creatures. We learn expectation about
each other both explicitly by, you know, looking at how people do things and then expecting them
to do the same things again. And implicitly through the very process by which we
relate to other people like norms, like language. And the way you look at this,
this learning through emotion, it can be reduced essentially because of the properties of active
inference to what people call regimes of attention. So, the way I pay attention to things, the specific
things I will look at in my process of understanding and navigating the world,
the flow by which I mean that is the same thing as a set of value and a set of expectations.
So, what is important here is that normativity and values and things like that, they are
embedded in my cognition in a much more basic way than, you know, conscious self-reflection.
Also, of course, conscious self-flection can inform that flow. It is embedded in the shared
expectation I have with other people and there is no Valentino result that I can actually be
reflexive about it. Because, well, the way I predict things, it's based on the statistical
regularities that I have seen in the world. And because the way I pay attention, it's, you know,
entailed by a predictive model of what is going on around me. I'm very constrained,
very much constrained by the statistics I have of the thing I have seen around me.
So, regularities drive how I pay attention, which drive implicitly value and normativity.
And you can add chemical steps, you can add reflexivity, you can add, I don't know,
accountability, you can add a lot of things, but you cannot remove the very basic way in which
cultural values and cultural expectation are embedded in perception. So,
yes, this is a repetition of what I said. The patterns in the flow of attention that are
embedded that I have developed through the very fact of engaging with a cultural niche
and they constrain my actions towards specific outcomes. They entail specific values, specific
norms, and they entail, at least they constrain very, very, very, very heavily the intention
that I'm even able to conceive to generate. So, there is a dual-dibrison equivalent way to see
this, which is engagement with the spiritual landscape. So, every agent, they experience
the world not in the same way, of course, but they experience the same. Let us say that each
person's experience of the world, it predicts very strongly the experience of the world that
all the people will develop around them. So, there are structural properties of the, you know,
landscape of opportunities and perception and possible action that we experience.
There are properties that are transferred between individuals robustly. This is the case, for example,
of norms. So, if I say, if I say, if I look at a law, any specific law, all of the people in the
same country, they are subjected to the same law. So, maybe some of them can just ignore it. They
live too far from the city. We don't have cops here. Maybe some of them are above the law and some
capacity of their relation. But the basic constraints that the law entails, it is experienced by
everyone in a different way. We all expect that specific people will react to specific situations,
specific way. And this is the property of the landscape that we experience. So, the way that
this landscape shapes transportation in a robust way, we can look at, basically, it's as a constraint.
So, not as a directive property of a landscape that I can or cannot experience, but just as a
statistical force that shapes behavior in a specific way. And looking at things like that,
it means that I can see a given social cultural field in two complementary ways.
As a site of agents that navigate common, well, not quite common, but mutually constrained
social cultural worlds or as a set of constraints that produce itself. And the way agents reconstruct
the world around them, in their mind, the way they understand it in a creative manner, it is
equivalent to the way the set of constraints reconstruct itself, which is important because
if I can reconstruct, if I can look at this world as a set of constraints over statistical
constraints for behavior that reproduce itself, I can look at it as a living thing, strictly speaking,
because this is how we define living things, at least in specific sub-branch of system
biology that I believe is relevant, is to be believed about that. So, when we talk about
structural landscape, we can look at them either as a landscape of affordances, this is an opportunity
for action that are experienced and enacted by a set of individual agents, which interact so as
to having some level of coherence between the landscapes they experience and enact. And I
can look at the same landscape as a system of constraints that are exerted over the behavior
of those agents. And that I can define and study with no clear reference to any individual agent
in the same way that I can study a dog without looking at every single individual cell. What
you're interested in biology or sociology is usually, you know, a great patterns, not what every
single living thing around thinks of every single thing. So, that was the heaviest it got, probably
over the world course. I do not expect you to grasp all of the consequences of what I said,
because it was very condensed and it was very abstract. But the case I'm making here is not
that everyone has to understand all the math right now. It is that this framework, it does things to
say about relieving question in social science. And to make this point, I will not just, you know,
give the abstract presentation of how it's awesome because we have landscape, whatnot.
I will look at specific fields, questions, case studies in social sense. And I will look at
basically how active in France entails a pretty specific model of that. That is well,
grounded in cognitive sense, and that is relevant, and that is adequate to the study of
living, changing systems, et cetera, et cetera. So, first, a genre setting. Some of you will
know what it is. Some of you will not know what it is. So, a genre setting is something
that is situated in the work on public opinion, specifically. Like, I believe this book is called
public opinion. So, a genre setting, it refers historically also you have a more diverse way
to understand it now, to the role of mass media like journals and later TV in manufacturing consent.
This is a text solicitation from the text of, no, I thought the book cover. I forgot the name
of the guy. I'm sorry, you have to look at the reference. But it is used to study how mass media
can manufacture consents by drawing attention to specific issues and shaping specific expectations
about the world. So, the idea is that you have a role, an active role of the elite, what I call
the elite here, people which have outsized influence of the flow of policy or society.
I will call them elite. And so, those people, they basically transmit norms. They transmit
normative expectations. So, consents to whatever is the thing that they do, that they want you
to do more specifically. And they do so not by telling you do this and that. They do so by
building agendas. So, drawing attention to specific issues in a specific way.
And you can see here, people who are, I mean, it's prevalent in the political life, everyone knows
that. But the US right wing is very, very, very transparent in doing that. And so, this is a meeting
between two experts in a general setting, Donald Trump and Ron DeSantis, which basically have
convinced people that they should not worry about things like, I don't know the price of life,
whether we wage war here and there. Why do we have to pay millions? Why do US people have to pay
millions to get healthcare? But to how LGBTQ democratic people threaten the US life in a
very abstract way, like I did not ever hear any consistent, coherent, believable mechanism
by which they explained how LGBTQ threatened whatever republicans. But they do draw attention
to this topic. They do share the expectation that Democrats and LGBTQ are predators. And they do so
in a way that is able to legitimize themselves as a beacon of the people, to mobilize people to
actually be behind them and do their bidding, and to canalize political life in a way that is
convenient for them, because it keeps them in power. And the role of attention, the way you pay
attention to things in shaping behavior, it's just a redo of what I explained in active inference.
If you believe that the way we, the forces, the way we constrain attention is applicative of
behavior, then you believe in active inference, just express differently. So this is a case where
you have a classical, let us say, concept in a certain sense that essentially reduces the concepts
of active inference. It's not to say, of course, that sociology is irrelevant, and we should just
do cognitive sense. But this is pretty rare to have such a direct response between topics that are
disciplinary, this far apart. So this is something we should definitely pay attention to.
So, second case theory, nationalism. Basically, this case theory is entailed by what I said over
the Republicans, because we move by which they legitimize their rule. It is just say, we share
an identity here, US conservative, traditional values, et cetera, et cetera. And this identity,
it entails a specific norms. And for reasons that we are usually left out of the frame,
I, so elite people run the Sanctis Tramp, Napoli or whoever, I get to tell you what this
identity entails in terms of behavior. You don't get to speak usually because, you know,
you are not someone who has newspapers that para out what they say, what you say, because you have
to keep constantly subject. And this is very consistent with the dynamics by which we constructed
nation states. So, for the historical context, the idea that we have ethnicities, and this is
somehow relevant normatively, like the Slav should organize together, or the, I don't know,
Hungarians should organize together, and we should get to agree to things that we do,
and then do them. It's very recent. It's extremely recent dates. Well, I won't get
into the specifics, but let us say in this specific formulation, it dates from the 19th
century. When you add a bunch of very powerful democratic administration that took hold respectively
of France, the Kingdom, Prussia, and they are the capability to rule most of the social activity,
but they did not have any clear argument why people should, you know, listen to them in any
capacity. And the way it worked is that those administration, they basically started claiming
that they were some representative of a given ethnic and linguistic community. And that in
virtue of being part of this community, you should listen to them and pay them respect and
actively work for their goal to be fulfilled. And of course, it is not that easy to make this
claim. But what happened is they invested a huge deal of energy and organization into actually
having people buy that they built schools, they built prisons, they built
psychiatric hospital, they built a lot of infrastructure that enabled them to transmit
norms in a very robust way and transmit identity in a very robust way. And in doing that, they
managed to embed most of the micro-socialization you could have into their specific ethnicity
and into the normative power they lent to this ethnicity. So at some point, you were, you know,
I always forget, farmer in a lost village in France, you only meet administration at tax time,
so main arm, come and tell you, give your grain and you give your grain, because else you're
dead. And at some point, those people send you a teacher and they send you a newspaper and they
claim, hey, you are French, you have to speak French, you have to be friends with us, you have to
fight our wars. And because there is so much, you know, energy that is spending that people actually
bites or die, that's not the option, because you know, the other side of the coin is that
states that legitimize themselves through our nationhood, they are basically to be all the time
invested in ethnical cleansing, because people who are not the right ethnicity, they are not
considered element of the states. So they have to be submitted or removed, which is a bad thing to
do. This is a very bad thing to do, ethnical cleansing. And I'd like to illustrate this whole
motion of identity capture through the African Renaissance monuments that Abdullah Iwait,
so the president of Senegal, had constructed in their capital. So it's very glorious, it is very
good example of identity capture, because it shows you the norms, it shows your glorious image of the
African man, and it shows how you have to, you know, be supportive of children, show them,
protect them with your big muscle, and give them very well ambition while African women look at you
like they were non-agents, let us say that. So it gives a blueprint around which society should
be organized. It gives you a very specific picture of who this is speaking to, in this case Africans,
because I guess Senegal gets to say what is good for Africa, that is
coherent claim to make, I mean sarcastic, sorry. And why I like this specific monument,
while you have a lot, lot, lot, well, first it's very expressive. You don't, you're the
art de triomphe in France, it serves the basic same function, but it's not, it does not show you,
it tells you, and the African monument, it shows you what it means in a very, well, obvious way.
And the second main reason is this, you have nothing around it, they just put it in a pile of dirt,
and they invested nothing in the infrastructure because they were too busy, you know, keeping
taking money for themselves, I guess. I don't know exactly what did with tax money, but clearly
it was more invested in the symbolism of what African men should do and why they should follow
him specifically, and not in concrete infrastructure. And in most cases, anti-capture is a very
role deal for people who are, you know, captured. This is why I call that capture, because what
you get out of anti-capture is a symbolic sense of being part of the good team, and what you have
to give is usually, you know, the entirety of the work you do over your life, it gets
given to the state or administration that wants you to do things, and yeah, you do things for them,
and sometimes they build infrastructure, but if they don't want to, they will not.
That is very, very, very, very much a bad deal. And I give it away. So National Entity,
it was diffused to school and mass media, it was embedded in micro networks of solidarity,
so typically the African Resource Monument, it gives you, basically tells you that as a
husband and father, you have to give in whatever the state ideology of what was, and then it is
leveraged for mobilization and legitimation and control. And you have another, that's not,
oh, I did not say why it was relevant to active inference. Well, it is relevant to active inference
because all of this is mediated by self-model. All of this is enabled because people have
self-model, and they enact the self-model. And there is no necessity of a reflexive
step where you actually, you know, think about what is your self-model, and you are
expected to do a thing, you do the thing, because you expect yourself to be doing the thing,
and active inference, as we said, you do what you expect to do. So this basically explains
why such symbolic, you know, raw power, it has actual consequences. While if you have, you know,
more rational model of humanity, the question is, hey, why you build big things and not
infrastructure, it would be a rational response. But this is not what people do, people follow
norms. And this is a way to broadcast norms very efficiently and robustly. So due to that,
I'd like to talk about the structure and agency. So there is a constant question in a social sense.
Usually social sense talk about structure, so norms, habitus, way that institution builds
social life. And there is a legitimate question that is asked, which is, if you believe structure
to human behavior, what is the pace for agency? So there are constant debates in every field
possible of social sense regarding what is actually explained by the structure and what is left to
individual agency. And what I want to say is that this question is essentially dissolved by the
model of agency we have. So as we said, agency is exerted through expectation over myself.
So because social structure, it becomes expected, it is enacted through the agency of
these specific people that are within it, not having a position between how strong institutions
are and how attentive people are because strong institution or institution that
basically become embedded in your self model. And so there are people freely, not freely,
it's about them, but from their own accord, they enact those institutions. And this is the whole
thing about an anti-capture which I presented. Nationalistic ideology is strong, is efficient
in building actual mobilization, because it makes you believe that you will actually,
if you were in court, follow the social order it gives, which was not represented,
but pretty rare in a pre-modern institution. Usually, a modern institution are,
I am looking, I have an army, give me food. And when you have legitimation,
attempt to actually explain why I should get the food, these are pretty much justifications.
This is the elite people talking to themselves about why they are justified knowing that,
but you have no arguments and you have that would be actually compelling so as to why
you would have to give the food. And you have no attempt whatsoever to convince people who have
to give the food they should give the food. This ideology is not, they do not talk to the
people they ask things from. They talk to themselves about why they are, they can,
they are legitimate to take those things. And so, yeah, in those case, you have a pretty
evident conflict between structure and agency. Do I do what I am told to do under threat of death,
or do I do any other thing? Of course, most people would like to do other thing,
but they can't, and they will feel that they can't. But if you accept that agency is built through
normativity, through engagement, with a sociocultural field of finances of practical
interaction, you have to admit that structure exists at least in part through agency. Because
what agent believe is legitimate, what agent believe is right, what agent believe is expected,
it is very precisely what constitutes structures. And that is a insight that is at least in part
of the conversation in some field. And I'd like to show why it's the direct conflict
between structure and agency, it does not have a strong grounding. Yes, again, I have said the
thing that the slide would say. There is another thing that is very closer to my core body of
work, which is how active inference affords directly an archeology of cognitive landscape.
If a social organization is made of constraints or behavior,
and those constraints are to some extent embedded in the natural environment of the people,
then we can to some extent study archeological landscape for themselves. We can look at landscape,
like material landscape, the objective study of archeology, and we can make some inference
over the constraints that this landscape entails over collective behavior. I will not get into
details as to why, because it's far call. Making this inference is difficult. But very concretely,
we can ask whether you're a key, so that is that some people get to say to other people what to do,
and certification, the idea that some people are by nature above other people,
they can be embedded in vertical patterning. So you have a claim by people who found me
escape projects, look it up, it's nice. You have a claim that to some extent,
the verification of society around the Iron Age, it is written, it is embedded in vertical patterns,
in material culture, and architecture. And maybe I will not buy the claim outright,
but it is very compelling. If you look at specific architecture, you'll get a specific feeling.
So this is the not cathedral, but maybe basilic or fricadic. I will not try to say the name,
because I do not speak Slendik, and that would be bad. But you have very progressive,
compelling curve toward the sky. You have specific feelings that are
produced by this architecture. And you have a very specific way in which it drives attention from
something wide on the ground to something that goes up. And if I did not make it clear yet,
if we buy active inference, we buy that the patterning of attention, the way you give attention
to things, it carries norms, it carries intentionality. And in first person, by
introspection, I think all of you can very clearly see how architecture drives specific
patterns of attention, and how those patterns elicit specific feelings.
And we currently do not have models that would be very specific and very predictive of how this
work, but we could. This is huge work, but this is doable work. This is not speculations.
And I do not know of another formalism that active inference that would actually make it possible.
And last, I'd like to talk about the favorite work, my favorite thing in social sense, I guess,
which is a scene like a state, Scott's anthropology of states. So the core argument of Scott,
I'd say, it's hard to identify a core argument in that book, but you have ways in which states,
so here, equivalent to administrations, understand the world, understand the world through,
you know, written forms that they can pass around, many people, many institutions to have
actually a coherent model of the world, that is pretty much abuse. And what should be abused,
but is not, is that those models are reductive in the sense any model are. They emphasize specific
information, and they leave out other specific information. And something that is very interesting,
I'd say, is that states they tend to push specific models, specific landscaping,
specific norms in urbanism, specific family norms that build legibility. So the ability
to be understood by the state. So for example, you could have you could have very sparse
settlements that are quite autonomous, and that do the thing, it is a possibility.
So yeah, there is no law or physical constraint around that. But it is far easier as a state
to manage what is very close to it, right? So for a state, it's good to have, you know,
a population that is very close to the center of power. Because those people, they are just there,
you can go tell them what to do. It's simple. And you can you can go ask them things, it's simple,
it's very easy to manage that. And those people, they would need, you know, food to stay there.
So we need some kind of food production model that is easy to take from, that is easy to
organize and go as a centralized institution. And this is monoculture, this is agriculture,
as we understand it currently. This is people that make big fields that make the same crop,
always cereals, well, not always, sometimes potatoes, but mostly cereals. Because cereals,
you know, it's very dense energetically, it is easy to keep. It is easy to transport,
because it is dense and it is, it stay edible long after, you know,
recalled, you say recalled English cropping, I don't know what is wrong, but when you take
the food from the plants, and people have to stay there for very long to cultivate that,
so they cannot, you know, go around and put potatoes here and there and leave when they don't.
So you can just go to people and you will know where the people are and where you can take the
food. And, you know, when the food is going to be, to be, again, I don't know the word, cropped,
because it's cereals, it's always the same time, it's very visible in the landscape,
how far you are from recoating slash cropping. So you cannot really have a way to cheat that.
You can just send many norms, take the food, give it to the city to depend on the population,
and you have a very rationalised, controllable society. And we, we do not know that this is
the reason why we have cities and monoculture, but we do have traces that states very consistently
tried to have big cities and monoculture fields, and mostly they succeeded.
And, oh yeah, this is relevant to active in France, because in active in France,
the way you pay attention to things, it is productive of your world, it is productive of what
cognition you have. And here, the capacity for administration, the capacity for written symbols
that tell what things are, they are critical to a state's understanding of the world. They are
what literally produces the way states pay attention to things. And, in fact, it was a
basically major thing for them to have a world that looks like this. It is very directly telling
about, you know, the fact it creates a world. It's a direct instantiation of that. And that is a
nice thing to do, and I'm happy I did this link. So, this is for the K stories.
Expectedly, you don't see the collections, not all of them. Maybe you're convinced that there is
something there, but most likely you don't see very precisely what is to be seen here. So,
the expectation is that, of course, you develop a very specific understanding of active in France,
the framework. You develop a specific understanding of how it relates to social
science, to questions that are relevant in social science, and you develop the capacity to, you
know, have an informal opinion that's a critical informal opinion on how this relates to question
in social science. So, we are doing the introduction lecture. Hopefully I've convinced you there is
something to see here, if not too bad. And the next session will be in four days, not one week,
four days. It will be about basically the basics of active in France. What you have to know to
understand, not the framework per se, because it's math heavy, but what the framework says about
our life as community agents. So, then you have the discussion. You should know that for each
lecture there is discussion. Lecture is, you know, vertical. Keep on talking, listen. Discussion is
more free form. Every person has a basically authority on how they share the discussion,
but the expectation is that it is a discussion because it's the name we gave to the thing.
So, after the basics, we'll look at patterns of collective behavior. So, how those elements
on the cognition, human cognition, or non-human cognition, they give tools to study the organization
of collective systems, like, and colonies, or societies, but will stay not specific to human
approach. We'll be interested in collective behavior, but we're not
interested in the specific patterns of collective behavior as afforded by human cognition.
Then we'll look at the semantics and semantics, the evolution of symbols. So, think that are
close to the treatments. We'll look at how active in France accounts for evolution of symbol and
what evolution of symbol affords for cognition. And then from here, we'll look at very social
sense things, norms, script, narrative, language. So, how this discussion on active in France and
collective behavior and semantics, they inform very directly, they give a model, specific
principles, predictive model of social human behavior. And then we'll look at, so, my thing,
the way I like to think of it all, which is social constraints. And we'll go back to the claim that
there are landscapes of social cultural commission, and those landscapes can be looked at in,
abstracted from the individual scale manner. And this is explanatory of cultural change.
And then we go for the conclusion. So, we'll be interested in your clinical course. This is
the first one. We'd like to have feedback, a lot of feedback on what you thought of it and what
would make it good. So, that will be for the conclusion discussion.
So, here, I hope that you present yourself. We have not the capacity right now to have
students take the screen and talk. But I'd like to know, you can say in the chat, what is your
background? What are your expectations for the course? Whatever you want to say about things,
the world, preferably being related somehow to the course, that would be nice. But yeah, please
tell the things to us.
That concludes my talk. I thought these slides would be clear.
We have last thing, maybe we considered making projects. So, you making projects that we read
maybe, let me say, grades. But I do not think that we are in capacity to give
standardized, normalized degree or attestation that has any value. So, we decided not to do it.
But if you, so asking you to do things, to do projects is a bit weird if we're not going to
grade it and attest that you did it. But if you want to do it, if you want to write things and
send them to us for review, this is very okay. You can do that. We're not formally invited to do
that, but you can do it. Well, I'll just add a point on that. And then, meanwhile, if anybody
wants to ask a question in the live chat, we did raise this topic of different qualifications.
And it's something that we've been working on and continue to work on in the Institute.
So, potentially in future versions, but absolutely in future offerings, we will have these kinds of
courses. But as I've all mentioned, this is kind of a first run. And so, it's really exciting just
to even start that conversation and see what people are looking for in terms of certification.
All right. So, let's go to some questions in the live chat and comments. So, I'll begin.
Please, please, please. Oh, yeah. Go ahead. I did not make the escalation clear, but
because it is a first and because we're still taking the course, it is
so much more important than you actually tell us what you expect out of it. Like,
what you want or what you perceive will be here. Expect in the active influence sense
that is a bit perception, a bit action. Please tell us about that.
Awesome. In fact, the only way to reduce one's uncertainty is through active engagement. And
one is literally applying active inference when they do actively engage in this epistemic way. So,
I hope that all comes through. All right. A first question from Smomato in the chat.
Does active inference provide us with predictive power, potentially focusing on
human or social scale issues? What does it look like? Or where would you say active
inference provides us with predictive power or unique explanations and predictions?
So, yes or no, depending on the granularity of the question. So, what should look at active
inference and not active inference? Active inference is a branch of predictive processing.
So, it's a family in cognition that consider that your perception of the world is based
on prediction. You have two specificity of active inference within predictive processing.
One specificity is that it says that action are predictive, are based on prediction two.
The other is that it proposes basically a mathematical formalism in which to study that,
that grounds the claim, but also constrained the mechanisms a little bit.
Predictive processing as a family is predictive of many things. It's predictive of the fact that
basically you think you see things, but you are not in capacity to perceive them right now. So, I see
a bit of tissue, no, fabric that is behind my computer, but I know and I see the patterns in it,
but I know perfectly well that the cell that are actually, that have the precision to see those
patterns, they are looking at the screen now. So, I cannot possibly know what the patterns are,
except if I expect it and this is what shaped my perception. So, this is predicted by predictive
processing and what is also predicted is that basically the information flow in the
perception part of the brain, it is heavily top-down. You have more bandwidth that goes from
these cortex to the retina than reti-procli, which is simply not compatible with the
direct perception, passive perception kind of model. It is, however, compatible with the idea
that we predict the content of retina activity and when our prediction is wrong, then you have
feedback. You have perception error propagation. So, this is pure predictive processing.
This is explained by predictive processing. This is contradictory actively with
most conceivable variants of non-predictive processing. So, predictive processing is
predictive and I'd say it's not up for debate, as I know. Active in France, it takes in addition
the idea that the actions are based on prediction. I do not know what work empirical work existed
to check whether this is specifically the case. Maybe Daniel, you know what has been done about
this? Complete your answer and I'll give a thought. Okay. So, there are conceivable empirical
settings that would check that out. I do not know of them, so I will not claim that they exist or do
not exist. What is important to me is the mathematical grounding because most model of cognition
kind of assume that we have computational power that is implemented somehow, somewhere by
meat and this is wrong. We cannot just suppose that the big properties that the brain have,
you know, they must exist somehow, somewhere. We have to actually explain it and this is what the
mathematical formalism behind active in France principle does. It explains that we should expect
a chemical system to be predictive somehow and although it is not directly made in math,
it is pretty easy to see why the brain should have a lot of power at doing that because of the,
you know, very heavy tuned power for chemical attunement it adds.
So, but I would not if active in France is empirically distinct from other
case of predictive processing, I am not sure how. I cannot think of an experiment or empirical
observation that definitely discriminates between active in France and non active in
France predictive processing. I think it exists. Great. Thank you. Well, in many ways active
inference is predictive processing with action under additional sophistication and richness
supported by the free energy principle. These are technical topics that we explore in other
discussions as to whether active inference gives us unique explanation or prediction capacity.
One could look to, for example, the linear regression or any other type of statistical
framework. Linear regressions in and of themselves don't make predictions because you need a target
to make a prediction about. However, given a linear regression model relating to health outcomes,
for example, you might use that model to reduce your uncertainty, which is to say have predictive
power about that system of interest. And so in that respect, active inference has been used to
develop a host of unique explanations and predictions related to a variety of cognitive and behavioral
phenomena. I'll just leave it at that. And I'll read some introductions and such in the chat.
So Robin writes, Hi, my name is Robin. I work in digital governance. But yeah, good.
What makes that I buy active inference as a mechanical model of human cognition is that
you don't really get adaptive, chemical attunement, adaptive action without some variant of
action being predictive. Because the default picture would be that you have to plan a full
action trajectory. But there is no computable way this can be fast enough and robust enough and not
costly enough to underline adaptive action. So you'd be basically, you'd say, I have to grab a cup,
I would look at the cup, see the cup, plan if I move months, and at the movements, if something
happens, if I was slightly wrong about the position of the cup, the algorithm is too heavy for me to
adjust. So you'd not be able to navigate anything at limit information or that is changing. And we
are very good at navigating things that means information which are changing. So until there
is another mechanical model that predicts, you know, attuned adaptive action, I will have to buy
active inference as a model of human cognition specifically, because the math underlying is
pretty solid, in my opinion. Yeah, it's always a great question is relative to what
measurements need a comparator. And so active inference with predictive value relative to
something unspecified doesn't really make sense, but we can evaluate it better or worse in a certain
setting. And so it's important to compare it. So I'll just read a couple introductions. Robin
wrote, Hi, my name is Robin. I work in digital governance. I've been curious about applying
active inference to the construction of governance for digital commons. Great kickoff.
Swamado wrote, Hi, I've been studying fundamental physics. And now I am doing
Cleo dynamics with a current interest in pragmatist philosophy. I came to discover active
inference and see how to apply it to cultural evolution. Under says hello. Anthony writes,
Bonjour. Anthony, Anthony writes background poker player, father, entrepreneur, very little
knowledge on subject, attend cognitive security in Davis, working on project that active inference
is very relevant to expect to learn and engage. And Gina writes, Hi, I'm a biologist and neuroscientist
that wants to understand the theory to do experiments with the escape team.
Cool. Well, people can continue to add on introductions or questions in the chat. Ben,
if you want to ask or reflect on anything. Or I'm sure there's more things to talk about.
Yeah, I thought that was a fantastic introduction. Some very interesting connections that I wasn't
expecting there. Nice to see manufacturing consent making an appearance. And a lot that
I think I can let me turn on my camera. Yeah, certainly a lot that I want to pick up on and
hopefully circle background to in the in the in the session that I'll be doing.
Cool. Cool. By the way, what I wanted to say earlier, and I could check now is that
I believe I believe that manufacturing consent was a Shamsky thing, but it is not. It is a
Leapman thing, which is the guy that basically founded the very notion of public opinion in the
thirties in the book called public opinion. The book is co-authored with Chomsky there, no?
Shamsky was not. It was maybe eight at the time. I very much doubt he actually did a thing.
I'm sure I have a copy of that book on my shelf. And I'm pretty sure of the book
manufacturing consent by Shamsky. The expression manufacturing consent is from a thirties book,
public opinion, by Walter McMahon that founded the whole public opinion thing.
According to Wikipedia, at least I did not looked for a specific book that would specifically
mobilize public opinion because like, what do we mean by public opinion? I don't know.
Le Bon does not go clearly, but maybe something else goes. I don't know.
It's great for that, I can at least say it. That's kind of the interesting question about
multi-scale systems and emergence. If we enable or grant that brains can perceive or do things
that a single neuron can't, but that they have a material relationship to one another,
then is public opinion just like a pile of sand? It just represents the summation
of the nest mates. Or does public opinion represent a singular integrated unit in its own
respect? One that might have to be sampled by investigating the material constituents,
but still being something different from that. I'll just go to a question in the chat,
or Aval if you have a thought. Does a pile of sand have semantics?
I love it. For an observer or for itself? Sorry? Does the pile of sand have semantics for an
observer or for itself? Good question. For an observer, I guess naturally for itself,
clearly not. Really not. That is symmetry. But I can put together brain and public opinion
different coordination mechanisms, but still coordinated systems.
Yeah. Comprehensive systems in a non-fuel sense. If the sand is piling up at the bottom of an
hourglass, it certainly has semantics for an observer who knows about hourglasses.
Michael says hello. Habtivist, greetings, Michael, and asks a question. Please further
contrast the terms regimes of attention and sociocultural landscapes.
Contrast as you explain what the terms are, I guess.
Yeah. How are those terms similar or different?
I do not see. Basically, I propose we active inference people. I do not have the idea.
Propose regimes of attention, so specific patterns in the way your attention flows. As
an explanatory mechanism, let us say what underlies the experience of cognitive landscape.
Cognitive landscape, whatever is the array of things that you as an agent experience as your
world. Then we active inference people also claim that the coordination between individuals in a
cultural agency, so the way we co-construct, synchronize regime of attention, means that
there is a coupling between the landscape that we experience. Landscape that are constrained in
such a way, I will call sociocultural landscape because it is easier than saying cognitive
landscape that are constrained by sociocultural processes. Is that satisfying?
Yeah, it is great. I will just give another view on that. A sociocultural landscape is something
like the ecological landscape or the actual basis materially of our system of interest,
what we are studying in sociology. It consists of inert objects as well as animate cognitive
entities. Whereas regimes of attention refers to the dynamical patterns of attention,
which is to say relevance and salience for cognitive agents. The sociocultural landscape,
to use an example from Avel's presentation, might include the modified niche that includes a monument.
Then a given cognitive agent might, when they gaze upon that landscape in a
encultured fashion, have a regime of attention such that their eyes are moved towards the point
of a monument. But the regime of attention is modeled as a pattern of dynamics of a single
cognitive agent. In active inference, we model attention as covert or internal action.
I want to add something I use, possibly abuse, the term landscape
because it has a very specific meaning slash connotation, which is a space that you can gaze at.
This landscape is a space that you can gaze at. If you go to a more mathematical notion of space,
you will basically find very closely the expectation or formal entailments that this space
represents the set of possibilities accessible to a system. This is all there is to it.
This is not what a cognitive landscape is. It's not the set of possibilities that abstractly
an agent could experience. It is what an agent experiences now, what it can gaze at now.
This is why the notion of a landscape is very heavily used. It does not have a clear mathematical
meaning. It should have because it has a very specific conceptual meaning that is critical
to the understanding we have of cognition and that is not afforded by set theory. Most mathematics
we would use, the brand of mathematics we teach in school and that physicists use,
most physicists, not all physicists. Well, if we consider like Waddington's epigenetic landscape,
or if we consider the surface that variational free energy is optimized on as a landscape,
it gives us a lot of really good intuitions. It gives us something to gaze upon as instrumental
modelers, but it is not the same as the landscape of trees, even though each one of those trees
might be modeled by an observer as possessing a epigenetic landscape or a regime of attention
or a free energy landscape. Well, if anyone has other thoughts or questions, we can consider them.
Otherwise, Ben? Just give me a second. I don't think everyone has...
Do you see the image? Yeah, it's small, but Waddington's landscape. There you go, thank you.
Yeah, Waddington's landscape. So it is very old, 30s, 20s, 30s, I guess,
thing in evolutionary biology. So Waddington is, let us say, the founder of contemporary
developmental biology, and the landscape are basically a dynamical fitness... I do not know
how to not say landscape, that is a problem. They're basically the space in which agents can evolve,
the phenotype of the agent can evolve during its development, and this is a very, very, very
grounded visual metaphor or symbolism, I don't know, for the study of developmental system.
So this is why we told Coffin's landscape for the gazing and for this historical
grounding of the developmental studies in biology. And also, I literally am
paid to landscape archaeology, so yeah, let's overuse it on landscape. That is good for me.
Cool, but it's an example of using our spatial and embodied experience to get a grasp
on different conceptual topics. Ben, you have any comments or I'd love to hear a little...
Yeah, I actually ask about this image. There's a couple of words that I was expecting to creep
into this discussion that did not, which are attractors and rappellers, about when you mention
dynamical systems. I wonder if you think these are useful terms for thinking about,
because attraction goes very naturally with thinking about attention. And I wonder if you
think this is a useful kind of linguistic tool for visualizing the relationship between
social cognitive landscapes and attention?
Do you see the social constraints diagram now? Okay, I wanted to have it, if there is a screen
show laying around, I wanted this to be a screen show. So attractors and rappellers,
yeah, I mean, we're basically talking fitness, when we're talking landscape, we're talking fitness
landscapes, so I guess it kind of entails the notion of attractors and rappellers.
Now, there are many reasons why I'd stay away from demical systems terminology, because, well,
the demical system, they entail the pre-formulation of all possibilities of the system,
which I think is very, very, very wrong to do for biological system and social system systems that
are. But on the go, upon ending the evolution and reconstruction, so I'd stay away from this
formalism whenever possible. And attractor technically mean
subregions that you cannot possibly get out, which exist in conservative system, basically, but
in all cases that we're interested about, it's technically not attractor, and
we can't think of it as attractor to specific timescale, it's okay. But then if we have to abuse
the formalism this much, why not use the formalism? That would be my flow of reflection about this
terminology. I understand attractors as states that have visited more regularly than others,
so is there something about that that's not correct? I will check it out. Yeah, an attracting set
is one that is revisited, but there are, of course, many sub definitions to be more technical,
like the attractor, is it just the point, or is it the basin of attraction? But broadly, on a
landscape, as things shake out, the attractor begets some states that are revisited more
than those that are not. That's kind of the tautological definition of the attracting set.
So, attractor is emphatically not at least under standard definition,
set of states that is visited more often. It is characterized by forward invariance,
so the fact that once you're in, you don't get out. So an attractor is a manifold, so a subspace,
let us say, such that if you're in, you don't get out. Well, there is a basin of attraction such
that if you get in the basin, you get into the attractor. So under, if you look at stochastic
chemical systems, maybe you will get out because it's, you know, stochastic means
with random noise, basically, let us say that. So if you are specifically within a stochastic
chemical system, so an optimal system per se, then you can talk of attractor and think of
things that are not actually, that do not have this forward invariance, just things that you
tend to stay in for a while once you're in. But you are not talking about attractor anymore,
you're talking about some other thing. The functionality is forward invariance. We don't
have forward invariance here, so let's not talk of attractors. I do not. Yeah, that's fine.
We can, I mean, we shouldn't fall down this rabbit hole completely. We can talk about this another
time. Let me go to another great question in the chat. Michael says, a philosophical question.
Science does a beautiful job of describing and building testable predictions of reality but
underweights subjective experience. Human subjectivity arises within experience of observation,
but includes preconditioning as well as experience. How should science-informed observers reconcile
the limits of subjective experience with the limits of objectification?
Science builds good models. Good models are all competent engagement. That is basically it.
So the question of how to build a sense that is effective to information is basically the
question that Pondid Kairos, I would not use the word effective per se, but
you know, that's pretty close. And we'd have to, in principle,
sense this build to create precise models, precise adding does not create prediction error
within a specific context that is a heavily, heavily ritualistic and conservative.
And that would be, you could criticize pretty heavily the institution of science as a
truth-seeker, normative thing. But so you'd have to have a good level of reform to basically enforce
a modeling that are both robust and easy to transmit socially outside the cast of scientists.
So Daniel and I, many other people, wrote a paper on ontology for decentralized science,
which speaks to it. And yeah, so if you get science, you get good models. And once you
have good models, you can navigate competently. But slash and I don't know, but and both what
bend, bend, bend, you would need a heavy level of reform institution of science
to get this process be more, you know, ergonomic efficient comparing and socially influential.
And yeah, I think it's an important thing to do when I try to do it. So thank you for the question.
I'll give another angle on that. Bayesian statistics
qualitatively equates to the explicit provisioning of our priors and how we update those prior
beliefs as new observations come in. We may have high attention to new observations and
update our beliefs a lot. We may not be paying to the attention to the new stimuli and therefore
continue our prior belief. So if we're not paying attention, it's kind of like a belief with inertia
that's greater. And if we are paying a lot of attention, then beliefs change more rapidly.
And trying to capture every single belief that leads to a research team, whether they're in
academia or not, to carry out, interpret, analyze and communicate a certain topic,
that is a really far reaching task. However, Bayesian statistics and Bayesian approaches
like active inference are helping us get a grasp at the preconditioning that does play an essential
role with ongoing experience. So the question of how to engage with extant institutions and norms
and practices is a challenging and ongoing work. But in some ways, the formal principles that help
us understand how context and measurement come together for cognitive entities and groups,
those fundamental principles are being communicated. Maybe also, I'd love to hear about what you're
planning to talk about. Yeah, I'm not sure if I, I'm not sure if I even fully understand the question.
I took it, the question is briefly, I took it to be maybe some worry about the relationship
between the formalisms and computational models in active inference and human subjectivity itself.
So how do they, how do they bridge the gap to phenomenology there? It's a really interesting
question. I know that there are some people who think that phenomenology is human subjective
experience is just going to have these transcendental aspects to it that can't be captured
with by the formalisms. That's something I won't be talking about in my session.
What I will be talking about is, so some of the, so I'm going to speak on some things that did come
up briefly today. So many of the readings that feature in my section are readings that will use
the term predictive processing. So I was going to say a little bit quite briefly about how I think
these different, different, slightly different frameworks fit together and what some of the
similarities and differences are. I was going to say move quite quickly and superficially over
some of the core mechanisms, so precision weighting, predictions, generative models.
And then I was, what I'm going to try and do is before we go on to the subsequent weeks where
we look at collective behavior, norm, normativity, social scripts and things, I wanted to try and
build up a nicely layered picture of what it's like to be an active inference agent in the world.
And so the way I'm going to do this is by swooping over some philosophical territory. So I'm going to
look at the way active inference has said interesting things about philosophy of mind,
particularly in terms of the role of internal representation. If I have time, I'm going to
say a little bit about embodied cognition, some of the four restuff. You got it right. So it's
embedded, embodied and acted and extended. And I'm not going to be able to talk about all of those,
but I'm going to say a little bit about some of them and how active inference kind of brings
interest in debates in that area out. I'm going to say a little bit about folk psychology
and motivated action. So talking briefly about what agency itself is for an active inference
agent and whether it's folk psychology. It's a kind of propositional psychology. So it's a
framework of propositions that we generally use to describe and explain human behavior.
So it involves propositions such as A desires B or X hopes that Y. And it turns out that this
propositional psychology is pretty good for explaining and predicting human behavior,
but it's not. Can you say we it's 70 slay persons? Philosophers.
So do you mean we in the sense that it's a useful framework?
I mean that you should explain what the term is because it's folk psychology is quite specific.
It's not a word that is in folk psychology. Oh, okay. Yeah. So folk psychology is basically
the linguistic framework we use to describe human behavior. So if I want to explain why
Avel goes to the refrigerator to grab a beer, I would say you believe there's beer in the fridge.
You desire a beer. And then on the basis of that, you form the intention to then go to the fridge.
And it's been the subject of a lot of philosophical interest because the kind of ontological status
of those concepts is very unclear. So it's not clear whether when we use folk psychological
concepts, are we saying that those concepts exist in some meaningful way? Or are we taking a more
should we take a more pragmatic approach and say that this is just instrumentally useful,
but we're not actually positing the existence of any kind of brain states or anything like that.
And there's been some interest in work on how predictive processing and active inference
might map onto folk psychology. Are they in a necessary kind of tension? Because obviously
with predictive processing, you have just a very, very limited set of primitives with which to
describe and explain human behavior. So I'm going to say a little bit about that. And then I'm going
to move straight into talking about phenomenology and talking about how certain aspects of the
framework have been said to underpin certain kinds of experiences. So I'm going to use a case study
of addiction, I think possibly depression, but I think I'm going to talk about addiction. And
with this case study, I'm hoping to bring out kind of tie together all of the things that I've
set up to that point and some of the things that you've covered as well. And I should say as well
in the discussion session for my section, we'll have a special guest as well. So we're going to be
joined by Professor Mark Miller, who is a prolific author of predictive processing and neuro
phenomenology type stuff. He's done some really, really interesting work on happiness and well
being depression addiction and really using the active inference framework in some quite
imaginative ways. And he's awesome in discussion. So hopefully you will find the readings for my
section really interesting. And if you do, you'll have a chance to kind of have a conversation
with the author for those pieces. Avel, any closing notes?
Active inference rules, I would say.
One short question. I just want to get it on there while we're here. Brynn asks,
as a psychologist, I am more or less in the business of helping people minimize their
variational free energy and expected free energy. Great profession. But what are the markers of free
energy in the brain or organism? Is it heart rate, neuromodulation, galvanic, skin response,
cortisol levels, et cetera? I say the closest proxy would be sort of those prediction error
things in the brain. So when we have expectations, they are related to the backpropagation of this
information. In fact, the expectation was verited. And this would be the closest
proxy to variational free energy. I do not think it would be the exclusive one,
but it is the main one. And I don't think it could make an exhaustive list. Basically,
anything that is out of order so as to prompt any kind of response of either letting models
of acting on things, it would be a marker of one prediction error, which is not
quite variational free energy, but is also quite not it's so far expected free energy.
I have no idea whatsoever. I don't think this framework has connected explicitly to physiology yet.
It's very interesting question. And all I will say or all I feel like I can say on it is one
thing we're going to talk about in my session is how prediction error is not always a bad thing.
So there's a really nice AON article that came out fairly recently about the value of uncertainty.
And one of the things I'm going to talk about is how predictive processing has
perhaps it can account for phenomena such as playful behavior, creativity,
engagement in challenging hobbies and dangerous sports and things like this and how
we get an account of exploratory behavior and curiosity, which is kind of rooted in the fact
that the creatures like we are for active inference agents, the resolution of prediction
error itself is a good thing. And so in some sense, we're always seeking it out. So I think
it might be a mistake to kind of in it's very intuitive to equate prediction error of free
energy with kind of allostatic load and stress and negativity, but actually it's going to turn
out that that's not the case. Yeah, thank you. And I'll give another type of answer, which is
variational free energy and expected free energy are statistical calculations about
statistical models. So bodies don't have expected free energies. Models that are made about bodies
can have variational and expected free energy. And so to that end, whatever you put in your model
is either an observable or a proposed latent hidden state that you didn't measure.
And you may find that different experiential reports or different physiological phenomena
have different relationships to each other. So indeed, it has been explored, for example,
which neural firing rates are associated with surprise or which hormonal changes are associated
with this or that change in body temperature. When the generative model is made, the deflationary
answer is look at the data and find out which cues you measure are associated with your calculation
of VFE and EFE. However, I think it's a little bit of a map territory situation. And one that's
going to come up, I am sure many times in our course. Great. Well, I'll just remind people to
go to the course website to review the syllabus and also encourage everybody to submit questions
through the course website. All of the teachers will review the questions and will give the best
answers we can. And also please, from all backgrounds, we would love to hear your voice
in the discussions. So thank you again, Ben and Avel. See you next week. Bye.
