For thousands of years, we're known as the land of poets and thinkers, among them, Emmanuel
Kant.
Ask yourself only, what are the facts, and what is the truth to the facts bearer?
The most important value that you can bring to the table is your integrity, is your trustworthiness.
Emmanuel Kant, one of the most influential, consequential and groundbreaking philosophers
in history, changed the way we think about what we're all capable of.
Each of us swim in the water of his philosophy.
Politically, morally, culturally, he changed everything.
The course of history, us, our ways of thinking and acting.
He saw that people had been pushed around by religious sellers, by powerful leaders,
and by arrogant metaphysicians, and he wanted to prove and show how we could think for ourselves.
That in here, we had a powerful tool, one that no one had quite yet properly understood,
and that if we used it properly, we could begin to strip away misconceptions, false opinion,
all this fuzz, all this confusion, all this complexity, and find within us pure reason,
a big claim.
He said that the Enlightenment, that 18th century period of radical change in Europe,
was quote man's emergence from immaturity, and reading him, when you really understand
what he's saying, really does have an effect on the inner workings of your mind.
You can feel the way you think change.
So we'll look at both his ideas about rationality and knowledge, and his philosophy of morality,
and in doing so, we'll try and find a peak, a viewpoint, from which we can reliably view
the world, a solid foundation to stand on, from which we might be able to find some tools,
some guidelines for thinking and acting, a place we might be able to find, or at least
glimpse, pure reason.
This is also the story of a man, who, like Kant, is attempting to find their way up a
mountain, searching for something pure at the top.
Emmanuel Kant, born in 1724, wanted to make us a truly scientific species.
He wanted to bring together reason, how we think, and experience what we see, hear, touch,
what we get through our senses.
He wanted to bring them together on a sure foundation, one that scientific knowledge
could be built on.
He hoped to lay out what he described as a cosmic idea of philosophy, one that followed
in Newton's footsteps, when he discovered the universal laws of motion and gravity.
Kant wanted to lay out and discover the laws that governed human thought, human experience,
human action.
In that, he said how we think is central in the three most important questions we can
ask ourselves.
What can I know, what should I do, and for what may I hope?
His most important work was the monumental Critique of Pure Reason, a 1000 page book
published in 1781, written in technical philosophical language, in winding and penetrable passages
with no accepted interpretation.
The goal of the book, though, is quite simple.
He's asking what can we know objectively, surely, with certainty about the world and
about ourselves and about the relationship between the two.
He starts from a simple premise.
If we look around us, at the landscape, the universe, the weather, our health and our
bodies, our pursuits, our relationships and choices, how if you really think about it,
it all seems so incomprehensibly complex.
There's just so much going on.
This almost chaotic, has so many distinct moving parts, can be approached in so many
ways.
How is it possible that we make sense of the world and our lives at all?
Out of all of this, somehow, we do get meaning.
We get lives and routines.
We get schedules and books and places to go and walks to go on and people to see.
He's asking how?
In the philosopher Imiyahu Uvel's words, we constitute a cosmos out of chaos.
Kant said that two things fill the mind with ever-new and increasing admiration and reverence.
The starry heavens above me and the moral law within me.
The starry world, he calls an unbounded magnitude.
Systems upon worlds, systems upon systems, that unimaginable complexity everywhere we
look.
And the second is that the way from that, I managed to carve a path through it.
Through that unbounded magnitude, I managed to somehow think and act.
In all of this bangless complexity, we do seem to have a compass, something that guides
our thoughts somehow, something that guides our sense of right and wrong.
So let's get going.
I'm going to avoid technical language as much as I reasonably can.
I'll avoid going down the route normally taken, a route you'll recognise if you've
looked at any introductory book or podcast about Kant.
It's the route of analytic, a priori bachelor's being unmarried men.
And I think that's a confusing place to start.
Because actually, I think the key to Kant is quite simple.
He's asking how we create concepts, how we make our ideas of the world.
What's happening when we do this?
In thinking about this, we approach the peak of pure reason.
Because conceptualising is what we do in every moment.
It's the foundation of thought itself.
In finding what's pure, you can know what's reliable, what to most focus on.
You can sharpen how to think.
Think about all the experiences you've had in your life.
The things you've seen, felt, smelt, heard and tasted.
Now multiply that by all the people that have ever lived.
By the numerical extent of the world, of the universe, what we know of it, what we don't,
add in all the things you've forgotten, that they've forgotten.
The experience of animals, the lives of plants, the processes of physics or chemistry too.
Look around right now.
Look at all the parts of the room that you could focus on, but haven't, have sidelined.
Now I could select this single quadrant here, out of all of the others.
And I could think about not just its colour, but its shade, not just its shape, but its
particular lines, its particular corners.
I could think about its texture, how it feels, how it smells, how it tastes, if I wanted to.
Now zoom back out.
How do we choose what to select, out of all of this?
How do we know?
How do we get a comprehensible picture from something so chaotic?
And that's one rock.
What about one piece of grass, a tiny piece of dirt?
This same problem applies to everything in the world.
What we have for lunch, who we're going to see, what we're going to say next, what we're
going to choose to do next, our life plans.
About half a billion photons hit the retina every single second, yet somehow we translate
that into something intelligible, something human, a picture, a focus.
This is Kant's fundamental question.
How do you get a structured, comprehensible idea of the world from all of this stuff?
The collection of perceptions, impressions on the eye, on the skin, in the nose, on the
eardrum, are like billions of artists' paintbrush strokes, each and every second.
Like the collecting of infinitesimal peas, in a colossal bag.
What we have is what Kant called content without form.
There's no organising factor, it's just a mass, a mess, a chaos.
So the first problem is the organisational problem.
How do we organise all of this?
The second problem is how is objective knowledge possible in the face of all of this?
Out of those trillions of artist's impressions, so many have been wiped away, turned out to
be mistaken, mistrokes.
How do we know that the sun will continue to rise, that the laws of gravity will hold
ten years from now?
Kant was responding to the influential Scottish philosopher David Hume.
Hume was an empiricist.
He believed that all knowledge came from the senses, that we learn about the world from
what we absorb from outside of us.
From this, Hume made a radical claim that if we only know the sun rises and sets from
experience, or from the experience of others, from what we've been told, no matter how
many times we watch it rise, no matter how many times it's been recorded rising throughout
history, there is no certain proof that it will rise again tomorrow.
We can only say that with each time we experience something happening, the chances of it happening
again increase.
This deeply disturbed Kant.
He said that it awoke him from his dogmatic slumber.
It disturbed him so much because it shook the new scientific method that was emerging
in Kant's time from having any secure scientific foundation.
We might observe gravity working consistently, but this could change.
After all, people believed many things throughout history that turned out to be false.
The second and related thing that disturbed Kant was that if Hume was right that all of
our knowledge came from outside of us, from experience through our senses, then we have
no innate knowledge making capacity for ourselves.
If all comes from outside, we're just receptors, passively driven by outside stimuli, as Suvelle
puts it.
Kant felt intuitively that this was wrong, that we have knowledge of our own, and that
some scientific truths, for example that everything that happens has a cause, or some mathematical
truths like two plus two is four, are true for us, for everyone, and doesn't come from
outside experience, we just know it from within somehow.
Do we really have to go about like explorers with magnifying glasses, searching for mathematics
in nature?
For followers of Hume's philosophy, surely it follows that numbers had to be discovered
one at a time, counted out.
Pythagoras could only find his theorem out in the world, in the wild.
This surely wasn't true.
Do we not have an innate capacity for working through some mathematical and scientific claims
ourselves, independent of experience?
Don't we know that numbers exist even if we haven't counted them or thought of them ourselves?
As Roger Scruton puts it in his introduction, Kant wants to know, how can I come to know
the world through pure reflection, without recourse to experience?
This pure reflection is pure reason, the root of all thinking.
In short, again, how do we in here constitute a cosmos out of chaos?
Kant wrote several influential books, but what's referred to as the first critique?
The critique of pure reason is the central one.
It's where he answers the most fundamental of questions.
How do we constitute meaning out of chaos?
How do we create knowledge for ourselves?
Okay, so first, what does reason mean for Kant?
Broadly, it means the process of thinking, the conditions, the rules, the operating system
for thinking itself.
If Hume was right that everything comes from outside of us, then the very act of thinking
makes little sense.
If we get everything from outside, do we get the rules for thinking from outside of us
too, like picking up someone else's cookbook?
If Hume was right, it would be like all the thinking was done for us, before it even gets
to us through the senses.
So in short, asking what reason is, is asking what thinking is, if it was emptied of all
of its content.
That's why he says pure reason.
Finding out what this is could be unimaginably powerful.
To know how to build and program on a great computer, of course you need to know how the
source code works.
Working this out is like finding the source of knowledge, stripped of everything else,
a kind of meaning of life.
Jovel writes that reasons interests are inherent to it and not directed at any external goal.
In other words, human rationality is a goal-orientated activity whose goal lies in itself, rather
than in anything other than itself.
Pure reason is like this beaker, a cup, or a measuring jug.
It takes the data of the outside world and shapes it, defines it in its own way and reason
does that by formulating concepts, concepts at how we see the world.
As Kantian philosopher Paul Gaia puts it, the critique of pure reason argues that all
knowledge requires both input from the senses and organisation by concepts, and that both
sensory inputs and organising concepts of pure forms that we can know a priori, thus
know to be universally and necessarily valid.
Okay, Kant uses that phrase a priori a lot.
It just means independent of experience, before all thinking is done, the conditions
for thought itself, universal, it's the elixir, the holy grail of pure thought.
He says a priori means what is left when one removes from our experience everything that
belongs to the senses.
He continues that every cognition is called pure, that is not mixed with anything foreign
to it.
Pure thought receives, organises, judges, and applies concepts to the raw data of experience.
Kant also calls pure thought the understanding, because while it attempts to understand the
world.
Jovell writes that the senses supply the understanding with a crude element that is not yet a real
object but only the material for it, and the understanding, a spontaneous factor, must
order and shape this material according to its, the understandings, own a priori modes
of operation.
Kant's responding to two traditions in philosophy that were new at the time.
The empiricists, as we've seen, like Kuhn, who argued that all knowledge comes from experience,
and the rationalists, people like Descartes and Spinoza, who argued that reason is the
way to secure knowledge, like mathematics.
Kant carves a path that requires both.
It's a mixing of them, and it's how that happens that's important for him.
Famously, he says, without sensibility, that's senses, no object would be given to us, and
without understanding, that's thinking, none would be thought, thoughts without content
are empty, intuitions without concepts are blind.
Kant takes complex bewildering twists and turns towards his proof of this.
He takes different pathways towards the same goal.
I'm going to focus on the three central ones.
From them, pure reason can be glimpsed and understood.
The technical names are the transcendental aesthetic, the metaphysical deduction, and
the transcendental deduction.
But don't worry about them sounding technical.
Just focus on that peak, and together, we'll meander our way towards it.
Okay, so what is that first path?
What's pure and necessary and fundamental and universal and a priori to receiving any
of that data from the environment, from the senses?
What's the first part of our pre-empirical toolkit?
Time and space.
Kant is always asking this question, what must be the case for this to be true?
What are the conditions that make this possible?
And the first thing that Kant claims is that space and time are the universal forms of
all intuitions.
Space and time are the preconditions for experience, those inputs, to happen at all.
And it doesn't come from the senses, from outside, because to even have sensations in
the first place, we must have some kind of intuitive framework to receive them.
This idea is the first stone laid in Kant's transcendental method.
Speaking of stones, for me to even experience an object, whether I see it, hear it, touch
it, I must be able to place it in space, separate from other objects, and importantly is distinct
in space from myself, as something separate from my consciousness.
We have to have what Kant calls pure intuition, a framework of space and time, that the experience
can happen in.
Kant says,
Space is not an empirical concept that has been drawn from outer experiences, because
in order for certain sensations to be related to something outside me, the representation
of space must already be their ground.
In other words, our experience of space is not something we learn empirically.
This presuppose to even have empirical experiences at all, because in order for us to even say
something is over there, the over there-ness is assumed in the judgement.
When I say this is over there, the very quality of this-ness must be recognised as something
I've carved out in space.
What am I doing when I say this?
I'm delimiting this as a thing in space, separate from me, relative to other things.
Time functions in the same way.
For me to even understand that one thing follows another, for me to say something happened
after something else, before and after are assumed in the recognising of a moment.
We have to have carved out a period of this-ness in time, a moment separate from other moments.
And so space and time are pure intuitions, they're the sea that everything else swims
in.
But we can learn something else from this too, something radical.
That this pure intuition is about being able to perceive particulars within a totality,
like being able to recognise, carve out, select, pick out, designate a particular unit
of space, in this case the stone, or a particular unit of time, now, then, when, again, a particular
in a totality.
Jovell writes that pure intuition works by perceiving a priori a basic singular unit.
In geometry, it's a unit of space, in arithmetic, the number, and transcends it towards other
units of the same kind existing outside it.
For us to perceive the world at all, we must have an innate grasp of what is inside of
us and outside of us, what is here and what's there, without which everything would be everywhere
at once, and an innate sense of succession, of something following another thing in time,
without which everything would happen at once.
What this assumes to be able to distinguish points on these spectrums is that we can splice
them up, that I can locate, isolate, analyse, focus on single particular points, and this
leads to another radical implication, a consequence of this.
That carving out units is the basis of mathematics.
Once I can say one rock, or one moment in time, I can conceive of there being another
unit, then another, then I could add them together, I could multiply them, subtract
them, divide them, so Kant says that the very idea of mathematics is presumed in having
any experience at all.
Jovell writes simply that the number five is the product of a construction that adds
the basic numerical unit to itself and stops at the fifth place.
Mathematics is transcendental, a priori, universal, pure thought that does not come from out there,
from experience.
Again it means that Pythagoras did not have to go around the world with the magnifying
glass searching for his theorem in the wild.
The question though is whether he could have imagined it with no sensory input at all.
OK, so space and time are pure forms of intuition, through which we are connected to the objects
of empirical experience, but this is still something passive.
It's the common landscape of the universe, something we swim in, swim through, but Kant
also needs to prove that we bring something to the table to do the thinking, that on this
landscape of pure intuition we are doing something, and in short, that something is the forming
of concepts.
We do this by categorising our experience.
Kant calls the metaphysical deduction a mere clue to the discovery of all pure concepts
of the understanding, and it's the second pathway up towards the peak of pure reason,
before we get to that third and main path.
First, what is a concept?
Well, in general, a concept is an abstract idea, the way we think, the way we hold something,
an object, or an idea, a thought, or an image, in our heads.
Concepts are everything.
In fact, they're the only access to the world outside of us that we truly have.
OK, so I have a concept of water, for example, what it's like, what it does, where to find
it and so on.
I can't see the other side of this bottle, but I have an idea of it and where it fits
in nonetheless.
Concepts are the way we focus on the parade of experience around it, they're the very
way we experience, the way we select and organise.
Without some way of focusing, the parade of experience is just that, a parade passing
us by, float by float, act by act, we need something that focuses, that selects one
of the floats, one of the ants, one of the dancers, one of the lights.
Exactly what we do when we watch a parade, we change our focus, move our necks, and suddenly
a whole different perspective is within view.
So what's going on when we do this?
Once again, Count asks, what must be the case for this to be possible?
Concepts are something like how we create those containers for our experiences of the world
to fit into, containers that are ours, that are pure thought.
They are innate to us, but they have no content of their own, because they need something
to fill them before they're anything a tool, something to organise, something to give shape
to.
Concepts are the way we understand the world, and we judge what we experience so as to categorise
it through concepts.
In fact, all thinking is understanding, and all thinking uses categories.
It's the job of our pure understanding to organise that data we receive, to judge where
it fits, to recognise patterns.
If it doesn't do this, what job would it have?
We'd be placid, docile receptors just soaking everything in like sponges.
He calls the understanding discursive, which he gets from the Latin running through.
We run through our experiences, and when we run through something, we make judgements.
Let's imagine I was born yesterday, which some people say is true, and the first thing
I see is this leaf.
I recognise certain qualities.
It's green, it has a particular shape, it's found on a tree or on the ground.
It's light, but it's singular.
I've carved it out in space and time.
Now, I come across another object.
It looks similar.
I recognise that it too has this quality of greenness to it, that's two instances.
Its shape is different, but similar too.
Now I see the grass as green, but it's different to a leaf.
It has a different shape, it's found elsewhere.
I find another leaf, this time on a tree, in a different place, but it looks, it feels,
it smells very similar.
What's happened here?
I've identified an object as separate from its surroundings.
I've judged that a part of it seems to have a certain quality that differs from other
parts of the environment in my view, greenness, softness, lightness, this particular shape.
I've focused on each of these properties, drawing them out from the leaf as a whole.
Then I've unified them back into the concept of a leaf as a whole, for me to recognise
it again.
Philosopher Gilles Vance Barocca writes that,
judgments are acts in which the understanding unifies diverse representations into a single,
more complex representation of an object.
The judgment splits the world up into different parts, analyses it, then unifies it back together
again into a representation of an object or an idea.
I see this tree, I split it into its colours, its shapes, the bark, the leaves, the wind
rustling through it.
I might later include its roots, or scientific knowledge about photosynthesis say, or ideas
about where the tree came from, or its different species, but ultimately I unify it into a
concept of a tree.
Conceptual thinking unifies distinct representations of the world by making judgments about them.
This is one of the roots of all thinking.
Everything, whether it's objects like leaves and trees, or ideas like democracy or love,
looks for the distinct parts that make up the unified concept.
Goya writes that the premise of Kant's argument is that all cognition involves the combination
of concepts into judgments, which in the first instance subsumes more particular concepts
under more general ones.
Like the particular concept of bark and the general concept of tree, or the particular
concept of a specific shade of brown under the general concept of brownness, or the particular
concept of all of these things under the general concept of nature.
Now the question becomes, what are the rules that govern this process?
How do we unify our representations?
How do we combine them together?
What rule book are we judging by?
This answer is the categories.
Now bear with me here.
All thinking is judging by applying the categories.
Like space and time, the categories are the conditions for having any understandable
experiences at all.
Now this next bit gets a little bit technical, so don't worry too much, it doesn't matter
too much, but there are four main categories, each with three subcategories.
Philosophers have criticised Kant here for various reasons, but it's the idea of these
rough set of categories that's important for us and important for understanding Kant.
The four main ones are quantity, quality, relation and modality, and don't get too
bogged down in this, but it's the way we judge particular representations and unify them
into concepts.
It works like this.
A quantity of judgments is either universal, particular or singular, it's just the way
we carve up units and say all of them, some of them or one of them.
For example, all leaves come from plants, or some leaves a green, or a leaf is in my
pocket, universal, particular, single.
Quality is the affirmation of some predicate that an object has, quality is the R in some
leaves R green.
It's our ability to recognise that some unit, a unit we carve out is different in quality
from, for example, the air or the ground or the rest of the plants or myself or the birds
that surround it.
There's also relation, if something happens, something else happens, if then statements.
You might always find a leaf by a tree, for example, so it would be if tree, then leaf,
or it might be exclusive either or we never find a leaf growing out of concrete, say.
And then there's modality, that's statements about existence, say, or whether something
is being asserted or not, or held in the mind or not.
And this we also have the idea of possibility, this might be right, or might not, or this
is here now, or that is not.
OK, but back to the path.
The particulars of the categories aren't too important for an introduction, but what
is is that we have a universal, a priori, pre-experienced, transcendental set of categories that we use
to run through, experience, judge it, understand it, and organise it into sets of ideas.
What we have, if Kant is right, is quite incredible.
It's the foundation of knowledge itself.
This is the heart of Kant's philosophy, the third path up to the peak.
It's here that Kant argues that the concepts, like quantity and quality, apply to experience,
synthesise experience spontaneously, and that through them experience becomes our experience,
that the whole process requires an identity that's persistent through time.
Like the previous two paths he's asking, what must be true for thought to happen at
all?
What is transcendental?
He starts from a simple premise.
What are the conditions of the possibility of the I think itself?
It's really a common sense question.
If we were just receiving experiences like he thought, what would the I think even mean?
After all, we'd just be passive.
We'd have no way of distinguishing our representations of the world from the world itself.
We'd receive the world, but we wouldn't have concepts like cup, walking, cloud, life.
We wouldn't even be the containers that the experience was poured into, because we wouldn't
have any containers at all.
We'd just be this amorphous mass that was just drawn from and shaped by everything around
us.
In having a representation of an object, in thinking about this apple, its redness, its
sweetness, its location of turning it and remembering what the side I can't see looks
like, in remembering what the inside smells like from a previous experience, I'm obviously
aware that what I'm thinking about is an apple that is my idea of the apple, that I'm constructing
a concept.
Let's go back to that empirical chaos.
It starts with that simple premise that all of my representations of the world are inherently
complex, a whole of compared and connected representations as he puts it.
The world, any snapshot of it, is seemingly irreducible, full of objects and impressions
and sense data that could be cut up in a dizzying and infinite number of ways.
This doesn't just apply to a space, to a snapshot of the world around us, but to time
too.
Pause for a moment, listen to and look at your surroundings.
The speed of things vary, the birdsong comes and goes, the water flows, the rain moves
at different speed, maybe quickens, the clouds move, hunger appears.
Some things are long, large and steady, others, smooth and fleeting.
Kant says they must all be ordered, connected and brought into relations.
For example, if I'm trying to understand the apple or the leaf or the tree, I'd watch
them and experience them over the course of a year, say, through the seasons, as the leaves
shed and the fruit falls and find something new to add to my understanding of the concepts
of apple, leaf or tree.
Now, the key to this is synthesis.
It's only in spontaneously recognising the world in its parts, breaking them down, then
unifying them, synthesising them back together into unities that I do any thinking at all.
This is the carving out of units in space and time that I talked about earlier.
Take a look at this pillow.
It has so many colours, shapes, intersecting parts, threads.
How do you decide where to focus?
In the very act of focusing, of looking through, of touching, of smelling, hearing even, we
synthesise either a part of it or all of it into a unity.
It's also true that space and time can be cut up infinitely, even more so today with
microscopes and hearing equipment.
I can look at a part of an apple.
It's hard in some places and soft in others.
It's found on a tree but can be picked up.
It can be cut up into many parts.
The number of shades it has is immeasurable.
The feel of the stalk, the inside and the outside are all different.
To experience the stalk, say, I've synthesised its parts, its brightness, roughness, its shape
into one unity and excluded the rest of the apple.
The key is we separate into parts, into units and then synthesise back into holes.
It again can't go further.
He makes the point that for us to even begin to construct a concept out of experience, we
also need memory and imagination.
He writes,
Apprehending identifiable objects requires reproducing an imagination, the previously
apprehended parts.
We have to recall parts of the apple, even if it was just milliseconds before, to synthesise
those parts into a single concept, apple.
We can't see the back.
We have to remember what it tasted like.
In fact, me and you are looking at different sides right now.
We have to remember where we found it and this applies to everything we experience.
Previous representations have to be recognised as being related in some way to present themselves
as unified representations and this is true for exclusion too.
It's only in recognising that the redness of the object that I just looked at is different
from the brown branch and the green leaves that I'm now looking at, where it grows,
that I recognise that the red quality of the apple, along with its other qualities, makes
it something to focus on and conceptualise at all.
This doesn't just apply to simple objects like apples, but every thought we have, every
concept we have, democracy, maintainering, love, friendship, they all require breaking
phenomena into parts, then reunifying them into a concept, recalling separate parts of
it, to do that.
This is the basis of thought, fundamental for pure reasoning.
The cat now brings the categories back into the picture.
To do any of this, to synthesise, to use our memory or imagination to recognise how our
different experiences are related, we must use the categories.
We have to count.
We have to recognise quality.
We have to exclude parts and so on.
Even if we're not doing it consciously, we have to do these things in the abstract.
This has been called the embryo of Kant's philosophy.
The core, the middle, the centre, the foundation, the top, the summit, the terrifyingly titled
the transcendental unity of apperception.
It's the bringing of all of this together.
Kant synthesises it all into a, quote, unity of consciousness that precedes all data of
the intuitions, or a, quote, pure, original, unchanging consciousness, applying the categories,
counting through the world, recognising qualities, affirming and denying, requires a thoroughgoing
thread, a consistent, self-same unity that's required for any experiencing to happen at
all.
He writes,
We are conscious a priori of the thoroughgoing identity of ourselves with regard to all representations
that can ever belong to our consciousness.
Remember that phrase, discursive, that running through?
Well, it's central.
It's at the centre.
It's the me taking the roots up to the mountain top.
It's the I synthesising it all together.
The world, space and time, experience, me.
He says,
The I think must be able to accompany.
All my representations, for otherwise something would be represented in me that could not
be thought at all.
Which is as much as to say that the representation would either be impossible or else at least
would be nothing for me.
This unifying can only be done by some singular activity of a unified independent consciousness,
which one becomes aware of through the process of understanding, through judging, through
time, through fabricating our ideas of the world, through constructing, through counting,
through looking at qualities.
We build up the world for ourselves, self-aware and self-conscious of the world as my experience
of the world.
We can represent nothing as combined in the object without having previously combined
it ourselves, and that among all representations, combination is the only one that is not given
through objects, but can be executed only by the subject itself, since it is an act
of its self-activity.
Again, this requires the categories because to judge and organise any experience at all,
I must be able to carve out a unit to judge, to compare it to other units, to recognise
its qualities, to count it and so on.
The rocker says that I then judge that each of these judgements belongs to me, and I find
that I can make judgements about one representation, some representations, and all of my representations.
What he's saying is that in the very act of recognising a representation of the world,
in sightseeing, in carving out a particular unit, in timesay, in excluding a different
part, or in synthesising it back together again, we're doing something that's not given
in experience.
We're doing something that's truly mine, unifying can only be done by a single unity,
a thread, a core, a central meanness, and that cannot be given by experience. That is
the summit of pure reason.
The unity centres everything, space and time are the vessel, judgement, synthesising and
understanding are the process, and the categories of splitting up, recounting, recognising qualities
and so on, the tools, the rules, along with our imaginations and our memory, to do all
of this, to survey everything. This combined is the centre of counts project, a priori,
universal, required, necessary, from which everything else can be experienced and understood.
But remember that Kant says that experience is required too, so we should now be in a better
position to understand its famous and influential phrase. Thoughts without content are empty,
and intuitions without concepts are blind.
Kant wrote a lot and we've covered as much as we can in a video the first critique of
pure reason, but he went on in later texts to apply this to practical reason, how pure
reason informs how we choose what to do, what political systems we might use, what we find
beautiful, for example, and he began this later project in his 1785 groundwork of the
metaphysic of morals.
His starting point is this, if what we found at the summit is the only thing that is universally
guaranteed, a priori, from which all else is surveyed, then it must be the highest good.
It must be the only thing we can absolutely depend on, rely on. It's what he calls an
end in itself. Kant wants to unleash the reason that we have within us.
He said famously in his essay What is Enlightenment, that enlightenment was man's emergence from
self-incurred immaturity. That immaturity was not using the reason that we are endowed with.
And just as Kant wants to find pure reason stripped of any experiential content, something
that's ours to rely on, he wants to find a moral code that's pure too, one that doesn't rely on
anything outside of us. He called Hume's philosophy a wretched anthropology. If we reduce morality
to just what we experience, what we see other people do say, well, people do some pretty
horrible things to one another. It seems that many people don't care about morality at all,
and it doesn't seem that nature gives us too many clues either. So morality must come from elsewhere.
As Kenneth Westfowl writes, by definition, pure practical reason emits all corporeal
desires, motives, urges, inclinations or preferences, and all consideration of the agent's capacities
and resources for achieving ends. Kant's in search of a moral compass that's cleansed
and stripped of anything outside of itself that could sway it. Because if, as Hume thought,
our morality comes from our feelings, our sympathies towards others, instead of from reason,
then how do we ever condemn those that have no feelings towards others, those that just
don't care, that are selfish, psychopathic even? How can we ever say that anyone is wrong
if empathy and sympathy are the basis of morality, and they simply don't feel those things?
For Kant, reason is so important that we have a duty to it, because having the ability
to reason implies we have something else, freedom. He writes,
If only rational beings can be an end in themselves, this is not because they have reason, but because
they have freedom, reason is merely a means.
David Misselbrook writes that Kant started with the fact that mankind's distinguishing
feature is our possession of reason. Therefore, it follows that all humans have universal rational
duties to one another, centering on their duty to respect the other's humanity. In a later
work, The Metaphysics of Morals, Kant says,
What characterizes humanity as distinguished from animality is the capacity to set oneself
an end, any end whatsoever.
Humans can set goals, and use reason to meet them. It's this that makes us human.
What this means is that we shouldn't use people, treating them as means to our goals without
their consent. We should respect their capacity to reason for themselves to set their own ends,
as Kant called it. He famously writes that
So act that you use humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of any other, always
at the same time as an end, never merely as a means.
Each of us only has access to the outcomes of our own reasonable thinking. We set goals
and reason how to achieve them. It might freely set a goal to come down the mountain, and you
can tell me that one way is better than another. But if you force me down against my wishes,
you've gone against the reason of another. The only thing we can all trust, absolutely,
each person sets their own ends. Each person is an end in themselves. This belief is the
grounds of what Kant called the categorical imperative.
Reason for Kant was the path to morality because all other things, love, sympathy, friendship,
charity, can wax and wane, be felt one minute and gone the next. Instead, we should rely
on reason and duty to do what reason commands. He said,
He called the result a categorical imperative. Categorical meaning unconditional, always true,
and imperative meaning something that we know we ought to follow.
So how would this work? Well, first, we should formulate a maxim, a test, to see if something
is moral or not. A maxim is a principle for acting. I will give this spare change to charity.
I will drop this litter or trash here. I will steal this sandwich. I will lie to my friend.
I will drive faster. I will cheat on my exam. Kant says that the first way to see if a maxim conforms
with reason, to see whether it's moral or not, is to ask whether it could become a universal law without any contradictions.
Kant asks, would it be logically possible for everyone to do this if it was universalised?
Is there a contradiction in conception? Take breaking a promise. Then ask,
if everyone broke promises when they wished, what would it mean to promise in the first place? Nothing.
The institution of promising itself would break down, wouldn't function, would become untrustworthy.
There's a contradiction in conception. James Pfizer writes that if such deceit were followed universally,
then the whole institution of promising would be undermined, and I could not make my promise to begin with.
Or take stealing. If everyone stole from each other whenever they wished, then the idea of any personal property at all would become meaningless.
And in cheating, the institution, whether it's the institution of the rules of a card game,
or the procedure of an exam at school, the expectations and the rules that govern the activity would fall apart and become pointless once everyone starts cheating.
If, when universalising a maxim, we get a contradiction in conception, then Kant says we have a perfect duty not to do it.
But we should also ask whether the maxim is something I could rationally will for myself and for others.
Some things do not contradict themselves when universalised, but are still clearly intolerable.
He writes,
You could indeed regard it as possible through your will.
Take laziness, for example, or not helping someone in need.
They don't contradict themselves when universalised, but they don't aid reason in pursuing ends if everyone did it.
Kant sees that we all need aid sometimes.
So a world where no one helped each other would obviously be a bad one, one more inhospitable to reason itself.
A Pfizer says that two types of contradictions emerge, one an internal contradiction with the proposed universal rule and the other a contradiction between the proposed universal rule and another rational obligation that treats reason as an end in itself.
The next formulation of the categorical imperative is to ask whether we're treating people as people with goals themselves.
He says,
Act in such a way that you treat humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of any other, never merely as a means to an end, but always at the same time as an end.
This means that not only should we avoid manipulating, using and blocking that freedom in others, but that even more than this, we should actively pursue aiding it in others.
We should not only avoid treating people as instruments for our own gains, but we should find ways of helping them in achieving their ends, because that's what we'd rationally will for ourselves and that's what furthers and expands rationality in total.
To take one example in asking whether I should help someone in need, not only should we pursue it if we see someone is in need, but we should actively seek it out, if we can, within a balancing of our other responsibilities and our own rational life plans and goals,
because it will help them achieve their own goals, their own ends as humans, and if everyone did it, it would help us achieve our own goals and our own ends ourselves.
Finally, we should ask whether we are seeing that every rational being must act as if he were by his maxims, at all times a law-giving member of the universal kingdom of ends.
In short, this means thinking about whether, if everyone was rational, everyone followed each other's moral rules, if everyone respected each other, the maxims would all hang together.
Think about traffic lights. I have a maxim to stop or go at a certain time. If everyone cheated the traffic lights, then the traffic lights would be pointless, and this all hangs together, and my stopping or going hangs together with traffic coming the other way.
The maxim fits the maxim of the pedestrian to wait patiently for their turn to cross. Our moral ideas, in other words, should be symmetrical, so as to be universalizable, otherwise there would be chaos.
Alan Wood writes that rational beings constitute around to the extent that their ends form a system in which these ends are not only mutually consistent, but also harmonious and reciprocally supportive.
Well, in writing these works, around the time of the French Revolution, at the onset of the truly modern world, at the end of the Enlightenment, Emmanuel Kant changed everything.
For example, Goya writes that Kant's idea that humanity must be treated as an end in itself and never merely as a means has gained wide acceptance in modern moral thought and philosophy.
And while the liberal consequences of this have had a huge effect on our politics, the question has to be asked. Has its implications been fully realised?
Do we treat each other as ends, not as means?
He was immediately, immeasurably and imitably influential. The idea of focusing on that relationship between experience and conceptual thinking started a revolution in philosophy known as German idealism that led to thinkers like Hegel and Marx, much of the modern intellectual world and modern politics too.
And in many ways, he began to put an end to many of the intellectual arguments that defined the Enlightenment.
This was because, for many, Kant had proven that you couldn't get beyond immediate experience and thought.
Many grand theories that tried to disprove or prove God to say, or whether there was a beginning to time, were, in their very nature, pointless and graspable.
In this sense, he was a very conservative figure, carefully attending to the matters at hand, but also, strangely, a very radical one. We can all think for and guide ourselves.
But once you've been to the top of the mountain, once you've got a glimpse of pure reason, been convinced of your own, truly your own, powers of rational thought, of applying careful categorisation to the world, of recognising qualities, counting carefully where and in what ways those qualities are found,
you'll notice you're doing this everywhere, in ideas and objects, in facts and feelings, in relationships, philosophies, pursuits, passions and projects, how we judge, in what ways we understand, how we reason through the world, well, it's everything.
If you're interested in learning more about Kant, please make sure to check the sources in the description. I've added a few comments and listed them in the order I think they should be read to understand him, because, well, he is a difficult thinker.
So, have a look at that, and if you want to support me in making more videos like this, like all these wonderful people do, then please head over to Patreon, where you can chuck us just a dollar per video, and you get access to scripts and the Discord server and all the rest of it.
Thank you so much, I've really enjoyed making this one. See you next time.
.
