The Age of Entanglement. When Quantum Physics was Reborn. By Louisa Gilder.
Read by Walter Dixon.
3. Bohr and Pauly
Einstein's judgment on Bohr's physics was like the old Sufi story of the seven blind men and the elephant.
An elephant, says the first, who has felt the flapping ears on a hot day, is like a fan.
No, no, no, that's not right at all, says the second, who once got in the way of the tail swatting at a fly. An elephant is like a rope.
The third, who has stumbled against a strong leg, says, she is like a tree.
The fourth, who has felt the warm smooth tusk, declares her like a spear.
The fifth, who walked by while she was bathing and was doused by her trunk, finds the elephant to be more like a hose.
The sixth blind man muses that we must always speak of this ineffable creature in classical terms, like hose and tree,
and these terms must be used in complementary ways, depending on what we are measuring.
The elephant will not simultaneously feel like a fan and like a rope, but both are needed for the complete description.
We must in general be prepared to accept the fact, he says, that complete elucidation of one and the same object may require diverse points of view which defy a unique description.
The seventh blind man is the Mahout, and he walks away laughing.
Einstein was not the Mahout, but he could hear the laugh.
Subtle is the Lord, he said, but he is not malicious.
A thousand identical physical reviews, Volume 47, rolled off the presses in mid-May 1935 and began their journey out into the world.
A thousand-page 777s faithfully asked if the quantum-mechanical description of physical reality could be considered complete.
Almost immediately there were three radically different responses from three people, Bohr, Pauly, and Schrödinger, who mattered the most.
At Bohr's Institute in Copenhagen, this onslaught came down on us as a bolt from the blue.
Remembered Bohr's assistant, Rosenfeld.
Finally, Einstein had really caught Bohr's attention.
Its effect on Bohr was remarkable. A new worry could not come at a less propitious time, yet as soon as Bohr had heard my report of Einstein's argument, everything else was abandoned.
We had to clear up such a misunderstanding at once.
Bohr started with great confidence to take the same gedankin experiment and show the right way to speak about it.
But soon he hesitated, fumbling, his brow furrowing as his eyebrows overshadowed his eyes.
No, this won't do. We must make it quite clear.
He tried again and again, with growing wonder at the unexpected subtlety of the argument.
Silence reigned, punctuated by Bohr, suddenly turning to his assistant.
What can they mean? Do you understand it?
Bohr later told an interviewer that when Dirac heard of EPR, he had a similar reaction.
Now we have to start all over again, because Einstein proved that it does not work.
The evening had drawn late, and Bohr was bewildered.
Well, he said, I must sleep on it.
Pauli, meanwhile, was pacing around his apartment in Zurich, composing a letter to Heisenberg in as devastating terms as possible.
Einstein has once again expressed himself publicly on quantum mechanics, namely in the issue of physical review of 15th May, with Podolski and Rosen—no good company, by the way.
As is well known, this is a catastrophe every time it happens.
Pauli ended in a flourish.
Weil so schlicht er Messerschaff nicht sein kann, was nicht sein darf.
These are the last two lines from the beloved Nonsense poet Christian Morgenstern's The Impossible Fact, in which, in English translation,
old Pam Strum, an aimless rover, walking in the wrong direction, at a busy intersection, is run over.
Pam Strum ignores his death, for in the final verse of the poem it became,
As clear as air, cars were not permitted there, and he comes to the conclusion, his mishap was an illusion, and so he reasons pointedly, that cannot be, which should not be.
I'll grant him, Pauli continued snidely, that if a student in the early semesters had made such objections to me, I would have regarded him as very intelligent and hopeful,
because a certain danger exists of a confusion of public opinion, namely in America.
It might be good to send a comment to Phiz Rev, and I'd like to convince you to do it.
Pauli went into great depth for pages discussing this supposedly trivial argument, and trying to prepare Heisenberg to think about it in the right way.
It was all, of course, a tempest in a teapot. He wanted Heisenberg to understand.
It is probably only because I recently got an invitation to Princeton for the next winter semester that I have gone to such trouble on these things, which, for us, are just trivialities.
It will be a lot of fun to go there. In any case, I want to make the Morgenstern motto popular.
Elderly gentlemen like Lau and Einstein, both 56 to Pauli's and Heisenberg's 35, are haunted by the idea that quantum mechanics is correct but incomplete.
They think that it can be completed by statements which are not part of quantum mechanics without changing the statements which are part of quantum mechanics.
Maybe you could, in the reply to Einstein, clarify with authority that such a completion of quantum mechanics is impossible without changing its content.
In fact, just such an impossible, hidden variables completion already existed, presented by De Broglie to deafening silence at the 1927 Solvay Conference.
It would take the independent resurrection of the idea in 1952, with even less positive response, to lead John Bell to his discovery, no thanks to Pauli.
Quite independently of Einstein, Pauli continued, it appears to me that, in providing a systematic foundation for quantum mechanics, one should start more from the composition and separation of systems than has until now, for example with Dirac, been the case.
This is indeed, as Einstein has correctly felt, a very fundamental point.
Physical review reached Schrödinger and Oxford, where he was cloistering himself from the Nazi world, but finding the all-male professional dinners of the university a little stifling.
The EPR paper struck him, as it had bore, like a bolt from the blue, but for Schrödinger, the lightning strike was one of inspiration.
He wrote to Einstein, I was very happy that in the paper just published in PR, you have evidently caught dogmatic Q.M. by the coattails with those things that we use to discuss so much in Berlin.
He analyzed the situation mathematically, and, unlike bore, was already focusing on what, in two months, he would christen, entanglement.
In Copenhagen the next morning, bore walks through the door looking ecstatic.
Podolsky, he says, with a swashbuckling motion of his hand.
Oh, Podolsky, I.O. Podolsky, Si.O. Podolsky, Az.O. Podolsky, Baz.O. Podolsky!
Rosenfeld is startled, as well he might be. Bore's whole face lights up in a big grin.
Just a few appropriate lines from Holberg. Ludwig Holberg was the poet, thinker, and prolific playwright of early 18th-century Copenhagen who single-handedly legitimized Danish as a literary language.
Where the servant comes in and starts talking nonsense in Ulysses von Ithica.
Rosenfeld is still bewildered, but bore is exuberant.
Well, let's write that paper.
That paper?
Echoes Rosenfeld.
A response to Einstein and Podolsky and Rosen.
Rosenfeld begins nodding.
Oh, of course. Right, right.
The trend of their argumentation, says bore, does not seem to me to adequately meet the actual situation with which we are faced in atomic physics.
Rosenfeld is nodding faster, eagerly awaiting the solution. He had thought as much.
We will show that their criterion of physical reality contains an essential ambiguity when it is applied to quantum phenomena, says bore.
I shall therefore be glad, he really does look glad, to use this opportunity to explain in somewhat greater detail a general viewpoint.
He smiles at Rosenfeld.
Conveniently termed complementarity, which I have indicated on various previous occasions, and from which quantum mechanics within its scope would appear as a completely rational description of physical phenomena.
It's so strange that Einstein won't appreciate complementarity, uses Rosenfeld, when it is so similar with his own approach to these problems.
Exactly, says bore. I would also like to emphasize that, perhaps near the end of the paper.
Complementarity, this new feature of natural philosophy, means a radical revision of our attitude as regards physical reality in striking analogy, as has often been noted.
Nodding once to Rosenfeld with joking formality, with the fundamental modification of ideas brought about by the general theory of relativity.
Once one is capable of making that revision in one's attitude, everything else falls into place.
Rosenfeld smiles with relief.
You seem to take a milder view of the case this morning.
That's a sign that we are beginning to understand the problem, says bore.
It all became very clear to me when I began to consider the simple case of a particle passing through a slit in a diaphragm.
He begins to pace.
So, let us begin there.
Rosenfeld picks up his pencil and pad.
Even if the momentum of the particle is completely known, bore stops walking to explain.
My main purpose in wanting to repeat these simple and, in substance, well-known considerations, is to emphasize that, in the phenomena concerned, we are not dealing with an incomplete description.
He pauses, then expands his sentence.
We are not dealing with an incomplete description, characterized by the arbitrary picking out of different elements of physical reality at the cost of sacrificing other such elements, but with a rational discrimination between essentially different experimental arrangements and procedures.
Any comparison between quantum mechanics and ordinary statistical mechanics, however useful it may be for the formal presentation of the theory, is essentially irrelevant.
Rosenfeld looks up from his transcription.
It doesn't have to do with ignorance. It's actually impossible to know more.
That's right, says bore. Let's put that in.
Indeed, he begins to walk again.
We have, in each experimental arrangement, not merely to do with an ignorance of the value of certain physical quantities...
He trails off, then retraces his steps.
In each experimental arrangement suited for the study of proper quantum phenomena, we have not merely to do with an ignorance of the value of certain physical quantities, but with the impossibility of defining these quantities in an unambiguous way.
As in the simple case, in the special problem treated by Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen, we are just concerned with a discrimination between different experimental procedures which allow of the use of complementary classical concepts.
That should be underlined, Rosenfeld. We are concerned with a discrimination between different experimental procedures which allow of the unambiguous use of complementary classical concepts.
Rosenfeld nods, underlines, bore stops and turns to him.
Oh, Rosenfeld, you can imagine the relief I felt when this all began to make sense to me. Last night, I was almost in despair. A broad smile. But now, he resumes pacing and dictating.
We now see that the wording of the above-mentioned criterion of physical reality proposed by Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen, contains an ambiguity as regards the meaning of the expression, without in any way disturbing a system.
Of course there is, in a case like that, just considered no question of a mechanical disturbance of the system under investigation during the last critical stage of the measuring procedure.
Goodbye to detailed mechanical drawings showing how one measurement physically disturbs the other. Bore has advanced, or retreated, to a higher level of abstraction.
But even at this stage, there is essentially the question of an influence on the very conditions which define the possible types of predictions.
Rosenfeld is writing as fast as he can. Without looking up, he asks, could you repeat that last sentence?
Bore obliges. There is essentially the question of—this should be underlined, too—an influence on the very conditions which define the possible types of predictions regarding the future behavior of the system.
Since these conditions constitute an inherent element of the description of any phenomenon to which the term physical reality can be properly attached, we see that the argumentation of the mentioned authors does not justify their conclusion that quantum mechanical description is essentially incomplete.
Bore turns on his heel.
Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen have, of course, already anticipated this reply.
One could not arrive at our conclusion if one insisted that two or more physical quantities can be regarded as simultaneous elements of reality only when they can be simultaneously measured or predicted.
And reiterated, as Einstein has been saying since 1930, that this made the reality of one thing depend on measurements made on the other. But Bore has bigger fish to fry. He wants to win Einstein over to complementarity.
In fact, Bore expands, it is only the mutual exclusion of any two experimental procedures which provides room for new physical laws, the coexistence of which might at first appear irreconcilable with the basic principles of science. It is just this entirely new situation that the notion of complementarity aims at characterizing.
Bore falls silent for a bit, then continues.
We see throughout the necessity of discriminating in each experimental arrangement between those parts of the physical system which are to be treated as measuring instruments and those which constitute the objects under investigation.
He stops.
It is true that this choice is a matter of convenience. He starts pacing again.
But it is of fundamental importance because we must use classical concepts to interpret all quantum mechanical measurements.
Necessarily involving what Heisenberg calls the schnit, says Rosenfeld looking up.
The schnit, the cut, was the movable, thirty years later John Bell would call it, shifty, split, between the quantum under investigation and the classical measuring apparatus, which is ultimately made of quantum mechanical atoms.
Bore nods.
It is impossible to make a closer analysis of the reactions between the particle and the measuring instrument.
We have to do here with a feature of individuality, completely foreign to classical physics.
This would be about as close as Bore would come to entanglement, a suggestion that further analysis of the complicated interactions of measurement be precluded.
The very existence of the quantum, Bore explains, entails the necessity of a final renunciation of the classical ideal of causality and a radical revision of our attitude toward the problem of physical reality.
He stops again, looking pleased.
That's what I've thought out so far, but I do believe I am on the right track.
Though how closely anyone can really follow this argument is an open question, Rosenfeld is odd.
Their whole argumentation falls to pieces, for all its false brilliance.
They do it smartly, says Bore, but what counts is to do it right.
Rosenfeld muses.
If I understand you rightly, he says, this is really a case in which the authors paid too much attention to their own preconceived notions of reality, instead of taking guidance, humbly, as you are always exhorting us to do, in what we can learn from nature herself.
Bore starts pacing again.
Hmm, well, let's not get out of hand.
We've got to make sure we've really cracked it open.
Shall we go back and work over their argument again?
I want to work out what role the idea of time plays in the description of this phenomenon.
4.
Schrödinger and Einstein
Einstein had not yet received Schrödinger's letter when, on June 17, he wrote to him of Bore's point of view.
I consider the renunciation of a spatiotemporal setting for real events to be idealistic, even spiritualistic.
This epistemology soaked Orgiot to burn itself out.
He was not sure where Schrödinger stood in all of this.
No doubt, however, you smile at me and think that, after all, many a young whore turns into an old praying sister, and many a young revolutionary becomes an old reactionary.
The next day Schrödinger's letter arrived and Einstein thanked him for it, explaining that he had not written the paper himself and apologizing that it did not come out as well as I had originally wanted.
Rather, the essential thing was, so to speak, smothered by the formalism.
For example, he explained,
I don't give a sausage whether or not incompatible observables, Bore's favorite subject, are involved.
It all came down to the relationship of Schrödinger's equation to reality.
What is the connection between the mathematical description of events and the events themselves?
In what way does the Schrödinger wave function, psi, reflect the actual state that a particle found itself in?
Reality, or the particle's real situation, is represented in these discussions by the word state, or the phrase, state of affairs.
The wave function, psi, must represent this real state of affairs somehow, but it was hard to even articulate what was meant by such a connection to reality, or even what was meant by reality, or state.
In his letter to Schrödinger, Einstein characteristically cut through this briar patch of linguistics with a parable.
He wanted to illuminate the main point that had been obscured in the EPR paper.
In front of me stands two boxes, with lids that can be opened, and into which I can look when they are open.
This looking is called making an observation.
In addition, there is a ball, which can be found in one or the other of the two boxes where an observation is made.
Now I describe a state of affairs as follows.
The probability is one half that the ball is in the first box.
This is all the Schrödinger equation will tell you.
Is this a complete description?
asks Einstein, and then gives two different answers.
No, a complete description is, the ball is, or is not, in the first box.
Yes, before I open the box, the ball is not in one of the two boxes.
Being in a definite box only comes about when I lift the covers.
Naturally, the second spiritualist, or Schrödingerian interpretation, is absurd.
Einstein continued tactfully, and the man on the street would only take the first, Bornean interpretation seriously.
Borne might not have recognized his interpretation, which Einstein seems to be using in this description only as far as he wanted to,
but presumably Borne would have recognized himself even without being named.
But the Talmudic philosopher whistles at reality as a bugaboo of naivete,
and declares that the two conceptions differ only in their mode of expression.
One cannot get at the Talmudist if one does not make use of a supplementary principle, the separation principle, Einstein explains.
The contents of the second box are independent of what happens to the first.
If one holds fast to the separation principle, only the Borne description is possible.
But now it is incomplete.
The flood of letters on the subject of EPR, Einstein to Schrödinger, Schrödinger to Pauli, Pauli to Heisenberg, Heisenberg to Bohr,
continued unchecked throughout the summer, sometimes as many as three of them being written on the same day.
I'd really like to know, Schrödinger wrote to Pauli about EPR, whether you really think that the Einstein case, let's call it thus,
doesn't give anything to think about, but is completely clear and simple and self-evident.
This is what everybody said with whom I talked about it for the first time, because they had well learned their Copenhagen credo in Unum Sanctum.
Three days later, usually there came the statement, what I said earlier was, of course, wrong, much too complicated.
But I've not yet received a clear explanation of why everything is so clear and simple.
So, hearty greetings, dear friend, from your old Schrödinger.
Schrödinger complained to Pauli of the murky use of the word state.
A word, he wrote, that everyone uses, even St. P. A. M. Dirac.
But that doesn't add to its content.
And Pauli responded to this instantly.
In my opinion there is simply no problem, Pauli replied about EPR, and we know the state of affairs even without the Einstein example.
Pauli believed, as he later wrote, that an observer, by his indeterminable effects, creates a new situation.
And this observer-created situation is a quantum state.
The observer creates reality by observing it.
It was necessary, according to Pauli, that the process of measurement be an ineffable, indescribable, lawless event, and its outcome, like an ultimate fact without any cause.
But enthroning measurement to the status of an unanalyzable God, creating worlds out of nothing, was not a point of view that either Einstein or Schrödinger could find useful.
You have made me extremely happy with your two lovely letters of June 17th and 19th, Schrödinger wrote to Einstein, and the very detailed discussion of very personal things in the one, and very impersonal things in the other.
I am very grateful.
But I am happiest of all about the physical review piece itself, because it works as well as a pike and a goldfish pond, and has stirred everyone up.
I am now having fun and taking your note to its source to provoke the most diverse, clever people—London, Teller, Born, Pauli, Zillard, Vile.
The best response so far is from Pauli, who at least admits that the use of the word state for the psi function is quite disreputable.
To uncritically say that the wave function represents the real state of affairs of a particle is to throw a veil over a multitude of mysteries, since it was not at all obvious what that meant.
So far seen, by way of published reactions, Schrödinger continued to Einstein, is less witty.
It is as if one person said—the exiled Austrian and Oxford tried to think of the most strange and faraway places—it is bitter cold in Chicago, and another answered, that is a fallacy, it is very hot in Florida.
My great difficulty in even understanding the orthodoxy over this matter has prompted me, in a lengthy piece, to make the attempt to analyze the current interpretation situation once and for all from scratch.
I do not know yet what and whether I will publish on it, but this is always the best way for me to make matters really clear to myself. Besides, a few things in the present foundation strike me as very strange.
The whole idea of speaking only in classical terms made him feel that, only with difficulty, can precisely the most important statements of the new theory be forced into the Spanish boot.
The Spanish boot, whether or not lined with spikes, is an instrument of torture in which boards are cranked tighter and tighter around the foot.
Einstein's illustration of the action at a distance that happens when what was wave-like and spread out over miles suddenly becomes particulate upon measurement, he also continued to find curious.
The third thing that bothered him was a feeling that we have been prescribed with wise philosophical expressions that these measurements are the only real things, that whatever goes on beyond is metaphysics.
Then, in fact, it does not trouble us at all that our claims about the model are monstrous.
You are the only person with whom I am actually willing to come to terms, Einstein replied.
Almost all the other fellows do not look from the facts to the theory, but from the theory to the facts.
They cannot get out of the network of already accepted concepts.
Instead, comically, they only wriggle about inside.
He proceeded to describe his solution to what he called the paradox that Schrodinger's wave-function psi does not describe individuals at all, but only groups in a statistical way.
You, however, see something quite different as the reason for the inner difficulties.
You see in psi the representation of reality and would like to change its connection with the concepts of ordinary mechanics, that is, concepts like position and momentum that do not have much meaning for a wave, or do away with them altogether.
Only in this way could the theory be made to stand on its own two legs.
This point of view is certainly coherent, but I do not believe that it is capable of avoiding the felt difficulties.
I would like to show this by means of a crude macroscopic example.
Einstein then described at charge of gunpowder that by means of intrinsic forces can spontaneously combust and will do so, on average, in a year.
In principle, this can quite easily be represented quantum mechanically, but, according to your equation, after the course of the year, the psi-function, wave-function, then describes a sort of blend of not yet and of already exploded systems.
This blend is known to those who study waves as a superposition.
Examples of classical superposition involving sound, water or light waves abound.
For example, the four individual voices of a barbershop quartet superposing into one harmonic wave.
The superposition of two waves is just another wave, or the absence of a wave if the two waves are exact opposites and cancel each other out.
The concept is stranger when it describes not waves, but particles, as it does in the quantum world, where, for example, electrons routinely are in a superposition of two different locations, acting as if they are in two places at once.
And the concept becomes positively ludicrous when it is applied to something like gunpowder.
Through no art of interpretation can this psi-function, of gunpowder simultaneously dormant and exploded, be turned into an adequate description of a real state of affairs.
Rodinstein. In reality, there is just no intermediary between exploded and not exploded.
Schrodinger responded first to Einstein's own interpretation of the wave-function.
He explained, diffidently but correctly, as John Bell would later prove, that it doesn't work to try to solve the antonomy or paradox by claiming that the wave equation merely describes a group of atoms on average.
With his tongue good-naturedly in his cheek, he quoted Einstein's words back at him.
Interpreting the wave-function in this way would change the connection with the concepts of ordinary mechanics.
This time, because of the concept Schrodinger had just defined five days before, in a paper submitted to the Cambridge Philosophical Society on August 14, 1935.
In what he called a discussion of probability relations between separated systems, Schrodinger, writing in English, described the EPR situation of two atoms interacting and separating again.
After all the discussion that had gone before, he could barely bring himself to use the words state or wave-function.
Instead, he talked of the representatives of these atoms in the quantum mechanical formalism.
As far as this formalism is concerned, these two atoms, no matter how far they separated, ceased to be individuals after their interaction.
I would not call that one, but rather THE characteristic trait of quantum mechanics, wrote Schrodinger.
The one that reinforces its entire departure from classical lines of thought.
By the interaction, the two representatives have become entangled.
Thus the word and concept of entanglement entered physics.
In August of 1935, the Nazi curse arrived at the door of Arnold Berliner, the founder and editor of D. Natur Wiesenschaften, who had asked Schrodinger to write something discussing the EPR paradox.
Schrodinger's general confession on the subject, along and wonderful exploration of the strangeness of quantum mechanics, was still lying on Berliner's desk.
But, as Schrodinger told Einstein on August 19th, as of twenty-four hours ago, he was no longer editor.
The random injustice of this deposition was all the more striking given Berliner's habitual kindness and wisdom, well known to the whole community of physicists.
In particular, he had been instrumental in encouraging a young and insecure Max Born.
Schrodinger wanted to withdraw the paper in support of Berliner and in protest of his treatment at the hands of the Nazis.
Carrying more for his journal than himself, Berliner asked Schrodinger to publish the paper in Natur Wiesenschaften anyway, and it came out in three parts in the last three months of 1935, while Einstein tried to find a way to rescue the old man from Germany.
Instead, Berliner would spend the war in his apartment, leaving as little as possible to avoid wearing the Nazi-mandated Star of David.
The only bright spots were the weekly visits of Van Lau, when both men were able for a few hours to retreat into a better, more cultured world, sitting and talking beside a bust of Berliner's friend Mahler, sculpted by Auguste Rodin.
But in March of 1942, with the Nazis telling him he must leave his apartment by the end of the month, Berliner gave up hope and made his fatal decision.
Van Lau received a gently-worded letter which obliquely described how Berliner sat down in his armchair and went to sleep.
Berliner's beloved Natur Wiesenschaften did not even recognize his death.
The Nazis ordered that there be no funeral for the elderly Jewish suicide and no one was to honor Berliner as he was laid in the ground.
Van Lau ignored the orders and came to stand beside the grave as his friend's coffin was lowered into the earth.
Schrodinger's paper that Berliner had insisted on publishing was, after his wave equation of 1926, probably the most important paper of his life, certainly the most entertaining and ultimately the most famous.
In it, among many other things, he introduced the concept of entanglement in German, Verschrankung.
This is actually a somewhat different word than the English word he had introduced half a year earlier, and Bohr might say they have complementary meanings, where the English word colloquially conveys mess.
The German one suggests order.
A German speaker will define it by folding his arms across his chest to illustrate cross-linking.
Leading up to the most famous thought experiment of all physics, echoing his correspondence with Einstein, Schrodinger discussed the born interpretation of the wave function as a list of probabilities.
Does one not get the feeling that the essential content of what is being said can only with some difficulty be forced into the Spanish boot of probabilistic predictions for finding this or that classical measurement result?
The wave function does not show itself to be a list of anything.
Instead, all the so-called options are added together as if they are simultaneous.
This superposition is the characteristic of waves.
But when certain kinds of measurement are made, the superposed quantum mechanical wave function ceases to be literally accurate, and it is then that, with great success but no explanation, it is interpreted as the tote board of the gambling god.
But without the help of this interpretation and its magical collapse of the wave function, Schrodinger's equation loses all connection to the outside world.
He was thinking of Einstein's exploding gunpowder and his ball in a box.
One can even construct quite burlesque cases, wrote Schrodinger.
He described,
A cat shut up in a steel chamber with a diabolical apparatus, which one must keep out of the direct clutches of the cat.
This apparatus involves a vial of poison which will be smashed by a hammer.
The hammer is triggered by the decay of a single radioactive atom.
If the atom decays, the cat breathes the poison.
If not, the cat remains safe.
There is so little radioactive substance that, in the course of an hour, perhaps, one atom of it disintegrates, but also with equal probability, not even one.
If one has left this entire system to itself for an hour, then one will say to himself that the cat is still living, if, in that time, no atom has disintegrated.
The first atomic decay would have poisoned it.
The psi function of the entire system would express this situation by having the living and the dead cat mixed, or smeared out.
Pardon the expression.
With this reductio ad absurdum, a cat in a superposition of simultaneous death and life,
Schrodinger demonstrated the desperate state of a theory that required measurement to make it work.
Schrodinger was getting bolder and more confident.
The quantum theory really was more fascinating than any of its inventors had realized.
In October, in the midst of writing the paper, he sent off a letter to Bohr teasing him about Bohr's avoidance of the Einstein paradox.
There must be quite definite and clear grounds, Schrodinger hoped, why you repeatedly declare that one must interpret observations classically.
It must belong to your deepest conviction, and I cannot understand on what you base it.
Schrodinger wrote that, I should like very much to see and talk with you again, but the times are now little suited for pleasure trips.
Heisenberg was, meanwhile, withdrawing into his shell, writing to his mother around the same time.
I must be satisfied to oversee in the small field of science the values that must become important for the future.
That is, in the general chaos, the only clear thing that is left for me to do.
The world out there is really ugly, but the work is beautiful.
The final section of what Schrodinger called his General Confession, but which is now universally known as the Cat Paradox Paper, was published before Christmas of 1935.
In early 1936 he got the chance to discuss all these things with Bohr as he wrote to Einstein.
Recently in London spent a few hours with Niels Bohr, who, in his kind, courteous way, repeatedly said that he found it appalling,
even found it high treason that people like Lau and I, but in particular someone like you, should want to strike a blow against quantum mechanics with the known paradoxical situation
which is so necessarily contained in the way of things, so supported by experiment.
It is as if we are trying to force nature to accept our preconceived conception of reality.
He speaks with a deep inner conviction of an extraordinarily intelligent man, so that it is difficult for one to remain unmoved in one's position.
I found it good that they strive in such a friendly way to bring one over to the Bohr-Heisenberg point of view.
I told Bohr that I'd be happy if he could convince me that everything is in order and I'd be much more peaceful.
1935 was both the climax of the fight for the meaning of quantum theory and the year of its armistice.
There were to be no more public skirmishes over the soul of the quantum theory and, in subsequent years, Einstein, Schrodinger, and von Lau were mostly allowed to drift along undisturbed in their skepticism.
It seems hard to look in God's cards, said Einstein in 1942, but I cannot for a moment believe that he plays dice and makes use of telepathic means as the current quantum theory alleges he does.
A few years later, Schrodinger wrote to him,
God knows I am no friend of the probability theory.
I have hated it from the first moment when our dear friend Max Born gave it birth, for it could be seen how easy and simple it made everything, in principle, everything I earned out and the true problems concealed.
Everybody must jump on this bandwagon, and not a year passed before probability became an official credo, and it still is.
You are the only contemporary physicist, besides Lau, who sees that one cannot get around the assumption of reality.
If only one is honest, Einstein wrote Schrodinger after World War II.
Most of them simply do not see what sort of risky game they are playing with reality.
Reality as something independent of what is experimentally established.
Their interpretation is, however, refuted most elegantly by your system of radioactive atom, plus amplifier, plus charge of gunpowder, plus cat in a box, in which the psi function of the system contains both the cat alive and blown to bits.
Nobody, he said, really doubts that the presence or absence of the cat is something independent of the act of observation.
Schrodinger agreed.
No reasonable person would express a conjecture as to whether Caesar rolled a five with his dice at the Rubicon.
As he crossed the river Rubicon, which separated his province Gaul from Italy, knowing that by doing so he was provoking war, Caesar famously said,
Yachta alia est, the dice cast.
But the quantum mechanics people sometimes act as if probabilistic statements were to be applied only to events whose reality is vague.
Bohr, too, remained concerned.
One day in 1948 Abraham Pice walked into the guest office at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.
Einstein, who did not like the big room, was glad to offer it to Bohr, and he in self was using the little assistance room off to the side.
Pice found Bohr sitting at the desk with his head in his hands.
Pice? he said.
Oh, Pice, I am sick of myself.
He put his head in his hands again.
I am sick of myself.
It turned out that he had been talking with Einstein about quantum mechanics.
I don't understand why I can't convince him.
Pice didn't understand it either, as he later wrote,
There was Einstein, so wise, yet so incomprehensibly unyielding.
There was Bohr, and he could just as well have said, Einstein is a great man, I am fond of him, but in regard to quantum physics he is out to lunch.
Let him.
It was Einstein whom Pice had come in to discuss.
Bohr was writing a tribute in honor of Einstein's 70th birthday, in which he planned to review their famous decade-long debate, and Pice was his scribe for this project.
Bohr took a deep breath and stood up.
Sit down, he said, and then grinned.
I always need an origin for the coordinate system.
Pice sat down and took out a pen and paper.
Bohr began to dictate.
The discussions with Einstein which form the theme of this article have extended over many years,
years which have witnessed great progress in the field of atomic physics.
Sometimes there has not been much time.
Some meetings?
Our meetings?
His voice dropped as he sank into thought, pacing around the desk in what Pice, at the center of the coordinate system, described as an eccentric ellipse, occasionally repeating,
Our meetings?
Bohr stopped and turned.
The sentence had come to him.
Whether our actual meetings have been of short or long duration, they have always left a lasting impression, a deep and lasting impression on my mind.
Pice was scribbling away.
And even when entering on topics apparently far removed from the problem under debate at our meetings, I have, so to speak, been arguing with Einstein all the time.
Moved, Pice looked up at Bohr, whose voice was dropping as he circled.
I have been arguing with Einstein all the time.
I have been arguing with Einstein.
Pace, slower and slower, hands behind his back muttering.
Einstein, Einstein.
And finally stopped, gazing out the window without seeing anything.
The assistant's door soundlessly swung open behind him and Einstein himself tiptoed into the room.
There was an urchin smile on his face as he signaled Pice to be silent.
What was at a loss what to do, remembered Pice, especially because I had at that moment not the faintest idea of what Einstein was up to.
Very quietly Einstein lifted the lid of Bohr's tobacco pot and began to fill his pipe.
At that moment Bohr got his thought and spun around.
Einstein is—and he stopped in complete shock.
And they were, face to face, as if Bohr had summoned him forth, wrote Pice.
It is an understatement to say that for a moment Bohr was speechless.
I am sorry, Bohr, said Einstein as Bohr burst out laughing, but you know my doctor forbade me to buy tobacco.
In October 1960, the year before Schrodinger's death and five years after the death of Einstein,
Schrodinger, back in Vienna, wrote to Max Born, back in Germany.
Maxel, you know I love you and nothing can change that, but I do need to give you for once a thorough headwashing, so stand still.
The impunence with which you assert time and again that the Copenhagen interpretation is practically universally accepted, asserted without reservations even before an audience of the laity who are completely at your mercy, it's at the limit of the estimable.
Have you no anxiety about the verdict of history? he demanded.
Are you so convinced that the human race will succumb before long to your own folly?
After Schrodinger died, Born, who was his foil in so many aspects of their long and full lives, wrote his most touching eulogy.
His private life seemed strange to bourgeois people like ourselves, but all this does not matter.
He was a most lovable person, independent, amusing, temperamental, kind and generous, and he had a most perfect and efficient brain.
Niels Bohr died the next year. On his blackboard were left two drawings, a record of what he had been thinking about the night before he died.
The first looked like a spiral staircase, a Rheinmann surface, which was Bohr's favourite metaphor for the ambiguity of language, the way you can arrive back at the same word in your thought and it can have a whole new layer of meaning than when you first thought it.
But how, he used to ask, can you communicate this to another person?
The second drawing, almost vibrating on its chalky spring, was Einstein's light-filled box.
The Search and the Indictment, 1940-1952
Chapter 17 Princeton, April to June 10, 1949
Night is falling. It is late April in Princeton, New Jersey. Two young men are walking about the grounds of the university, talking in low voices.
Einstein told me I should refuse to play along with their games, says the older one, a 32-year-old assistant professor at Princeton named David Bohm.
His face betrays his pride to speak of the great man, whom he has met only briefly.
He thinks that to appear before the committee would validate the hearings.
But then, he relates with a queasy look, he said, you might have to sit for a while.
A subpoena had arrived on Bohm's desk a few days ago, calling him to testify about his time as Oppenheimer's student in the pre-war Berkeley campus, full of brilliant physicists, and at least one leak to the bomb program of the Soviet Union.
World War II is over. The Cold War has begun. And, in the last decade, the world of the physicists has changed again and again.
Bohm is known for not letting his friends get a word in edgewise, but tonight, his companion, Eugene Gross, his 23-year-old former student, is grateful for this. He wouldn't know how to help.
Gross is now a graduate student at Harvard, but Bohm and he remain close friends, still writing papers together on plasmas, the form of matter that makes up the stars.
On the side, Bohm's other writing project is a book on the quantum theory, a subject that he teaches at an evening graduate class.
On a similar walk, he would tell another young professor, Murray Gelman, that, as a Marxist, he had difficulty believing in quantum mechanics.
But he is diligently reading Bohr, hoping for enlightenment.
Bohm's words are coming faster and faster.
And then Oppenheimer. Did I tell you Rossi was here and we saw Oppenheimer?
Giovanni Rossi Lomenitz, Bohm's roommate and fellow Oppenheimer disciple back in Berkeley, was a brilliant, outspoken, 21-year-old PhD student who had come to California from Oklahoma in a burst of national publicity over an uncle who was on trial for some form of extreme unionist activity.
We were on Nassau Street and out of the barbershop came Oppenheimer. We told him what had happened and he said, oh my God, all is lost.
This last statement Bohm reports with a bit of bemused flair in the Oppenheimer-esque cadences that he, like all Oppie students, had tried so hard to acquire back at Berkeley.
Now, in Princeton, after the war, Bohm is in the shadow of both Oppenheimer and Einstein, two living legends.
Einstein, in fact, had once received a letter saying, if you and Oppenheimer will run for president and vice president of the United States in 1952, I shall vote for you.
But while eight-year-old girls tried to bribe Einstein with fudge for help with their math homework, Oppenheimer is famous for quoting the Bhagavad Gita upon the first test of the atom bomb.
I am become deaf, the shatterer of worlds.
Just returned from Los Alamos with little over a hundred pounds on his tall frame, he wafts through the Institute for Advanced Study like a disembodied spirit, staring through people with haunting blue eyes.
But the Redbrick Institute with its white cupola and white-haired geniuses, whose work the young professors and graduate students at Princeton study and emulate and try to supersede, is a few winding country miles from the university.
Here, rising up behind Bohm, Gothic Princeton looks like a herd of dark cathedrals grazing on the close-clip lawns.
Bohm is in his element while walking.
His favorite way to think about physics is, on a ramble like this, walking around the campus as an idea turns around in his mind.
He feeds his ideas on fresh air, coffee, and nighttime conversation.
When he goes back later to the chalkboard or the notebook, the math falls into place as if it were wanting to please him.
But tonight, they are talking of problems that are harder to solve.
According to him, they're taking it all pretty seriously and there's an FBI man on the committee.
Oppie looked at us and said, promise me you'll tell the truth.
Oppie is a paranoic, that's what Rossi says.
Bohm finishes in a rush of words.
Late that night, after the physics department has all gone home, Bohm sits in his office before an empty desk, tossing coins in the air and catching them again and again.
He is totally free of guile and competitiveness and it would be easy to take advantage of him.
Gross later wrote of Bohm.
Indeed, his students and friends, mostly younger than he is, felt a powerful urge to protect such a precious being.
Mr. Bohm said the senior investigator for the House Un-American Activities Committee.
Have you ever been a member of the Young Communist League?
It was May 25, 1949.
Bohm, sitting in the cold room in the old house office building in Washington, facing the six representatives present, repeated the phrases his lawyer had given him, sounding nervous and ill at ease.
I can't answer that question on the ground that it might tend to incriminate and degrade me and also, I think it infringes on my rights as guaranteed by the First Amendment.
The chairman said a little incredulous, would you mind repeating your answer?
Bohm repeated his answer.
The chairman said, I am a little curious to know how his rights under the First Amendment to the Constitution would be infringed by his answer to that question.
But the hearing went on.
Mr. Bohm, are you now or have you ever been a member of the Communist Party?
I declined to answer the question for the same reasons as just stated.
While employed by the Manhattan Engineering District, did you ever attend Communist Party meetings?
I declined to answer that question for the same reasons as already stated.
Around the quiet room, faces were hardening, little muscles in hands or shoulders tensing, breaths taken, digging in for an unexpected siege.
The questions, pages of them, were implacably asked and nervously, politely, blankly answered with the same statement.
There was a moment of relief when they came to the question, are you a member of or affiliated with any political party or association?
Whereupon Bohm said, yes, I am, I would say yes to that question.
He was prompted.
What party or association is that?
All ears perked to hear the confession.
Bohm leaned over to confer with his lawyer.
I would say definitely that I voted the Democratic ticket.
The representative from Missouri who asked the question must have been truly annoyed as he said,
that is not responsive to my question.
I asked if you were a member of any political party or association.
Bohm said, with grating innocence, how does one become a member of the Democratic party?
Princeton University quickly declared that Bohm was regarded by his Princeton colleagues as a thorough American and at no time has there been any reason for questioning his loyalty.
His loyalty, nonetheless, was challenged at another round of questioning on June 10.
Bohm was told to help protect our country, which statement he answered characteristically with an analogy.
I believe that in some cases many people feel that security has been so...
He knows he is treading on thin ice here, regroups, and tries to put it in the best possible light.
People have concentrated so much on security that they are not able to do the job on hand.
He looks around at the skeptical stairs.
In other words, I mean, as an analogy, take the individual who was so afraid to cross the street, he would never be able to do anything.
You would have to take a certain media attitude in that.
Two different committee members spoke at once after this satisfyingly suspicious comment, with one finally prevailing.
Do you not think that persons who have to classify information had better air on the side of overcaution than the other side?
Bohm, now deep into the argument said, to a certain extent but there is always a limit. You have got to draw a dividing line somewhere.
The committee members got huffier and started moving in for the kill.
Finally one of the committee said, I say it is better to air on the right side.
To which Bohm replied dryly, I say it is better not to air at all.
The meeting was adjourned.
He used to make jokes about it. Remembered his student, Ken Ford. Real gallows humor. There was a faculty lecture on unresolvable paradoxes.
If the barber is the man who shaves all men who do not shave themselves, who shaves the barber?
And Dave said that Congress should appoint a committee to investigate all committees that do not investigate themselves.
Chapter 18. Berkeley, 1941 to 1945
It all started with Oppenheimer.
I loved Oppenheimer, said Bohm, and in this he was not alone.
Oppenheimer taught every spring term at Caltech, after the Berkeley term was over.
A long-limbed stork swooping down the California coastal cliffs, and one term, in 1941, finding Caltech cynical and uninspiring, Bohm followed him back up the coast.
J. Robert Oppenheimer was raised in an eleventh-floor apartment overlooking the Hudson River, among his gregarious father Julius's van Gogh's and foe's, by an elegant, gentle mother named Ella, who had studied art in Europe and always wore a glove to cover her artificial hand.
Science arrived in Robert's life in the form of a mineral collection from his impecunious, self-educated grandfather back in Germany.
By twelve, Robert was reading papers to the New York mineralogical club.
But a post-high school trip to visit Bohemian mines resulted in dysentery.
As a rest cure, his parents sent him with a favorite teacher to New Mexico, where he fell in love with horseback riding, high, piney plateaus, and open spaces.
After Harvard, he sought the centers of quantum theory.
He went to Rutherford's Cambridge, where he became almost suicidal over his experimental and social clumsiness.
Born's Göttingen, where his arrogance, quick-mind, and what his students would later call the blue glare treatment, reduced the sensitive born to a puddle of nerves, and two places where he felt at home.
Aaron Fests Leiden, where he befriended Dirac and was christened Apci, later Americanized to Appi, and, best of all, Pauli's Zurich, where anything Oppenheimer could dish out, Pauli could handle effortlessly.
He arrived as a twenty-five-year-old professor in Berkeley a month before the stock market crash of 1929.
In addition to a superb literary style, he brought to his lectures a degree of sophistication in physics previously unknown in the United States.
Remembered Hans Bethe, one of the greatest theorists of the thirties and forties.
Here was a man who obviously understood all the deep secrets of quantum mechanics and who yet made it clear that the most important questions were unanswered.
And he knew so much, he became an almost mythical figure, especially to experimenters.
Remembered his friend, the great experimenter I. I. Robbie.
He could display his great knowledge in their own fields but then could take off into the blue of abstract theory where they could not follow.
I didn't start out to make a school, Oppenheimer recalled.
I started really as the propagator of the theory, quantum theory, which I loved, about which I continued to learn more and which was not well understood but which was very rich.
His influence on the students for whom he claimed not to be looking was phenomenal.
Oppenheimer's students watched and learned and tried to walk and talk as much like him as possible, even down to the sound he made when thinking.
Nim, nim, nim.
He took them to restaurants, concerts, read them Plato in Greek, he taught them to eat his incendiary chili, drink his fine wine and light other people's cigarettes.
Robbie claimed he could recognize an Oppenheimer student across a crowded room.
In a 1934 letter to his younger brother, in which he sent greetings from many physicists, all the Californiacs, Oppenheimer wrote,
I take it that physics has gotten now very much under your skin, physics and the obvious excellences of the life it brings.
It was this that Oppenheimer imparted to his students.
He had created, purposefully or not, the theoretical department at Berkeley along the lines of Rutherford's Cavendish Lab at Cambridge or Bohr's Institute at Copenhagen, a combination of cutting-edge physics institution and personality cult.
When told in the thirties that there was no good American physics, Pauly responded, Oh, haven't you heard of Oppie and his Nim, Nim, Nim boys?
Oppenheimer was to impart two theories to David Bohm in the short time that Bohm was his student.
One theory was Oppenheimer's entire intellectual life, and the other almost took that life away from him.
The first was the quantum theory, as put forth by Bohr and his students.
Bohm had left Caltech in 1941, a convinced classicist, deeply skeptical of the quantum theory.
He and a friend and fellow grad student at Berkeley, Joe Weinberg, would argue late into the night, Weinberg secure in the quantum theory, and Bohm calling Weinberg's emphasis on mathematics, Pythagorean mysticism.
Physics, said Bohm, has changed from its earlier form when it tried to explain things and give some physical picture.
Now the essence is regarded as mathematical. It's felt that the truth is in the formulas.
Bohm, the lover of analogy, felt he could never be at home with a theory like that.
But Oppenheimer was fascinating. Bohm's slow process of acceptance and then rejection again of the quantum theory was to be the defining struggle of his life, the ramifications of which would spill out into the history of physics and unwittingly lay the foundation for John Bell.
Bohm absorbed much more quickly the other theory that the hitherto apolitical Oppenheimer had started to impart to his students naive and tired of cynicism and depression in 1936.
Bohm joined the Communist Party a year after his arrival in Berkeley in November 1942, encouraged by his new friends in the physics department.
Though he found its meetings dull and drifted away in a few months, he only grew more excited about the original ideas.
Oppenheimer himself admitted to having been a fellow traveler, the euphemism for a Communist sympathizer, but was heard to report jauntily, I would say I traveled much less fellow after 1939, the year of the Nazi Soviet pact.
If so, this change was not obvious to his worshipful students.
Then he disappeared. He was doing something classified for the government, the Manhattan Project, and his students were left without him in wartime Berkeley.
Grad students started disappearing too, as if they had died and gone to the bosom of Abraham. Instead, they were surely happier. They were in the bosom of Oppenheimer, doing secret and important things among the otherworldly red New Mexico plateaus.
Those left behind knew only that it was classified work, and Oppie was in charge, though Bohm later claimed. We knew that people were working on uranium so we could guess it might be a bomb.
Most of Bohm's friends, the leftmost wing of Oppie's left-leaning students, were not called.
In March of 1943, when Oppenheimer asked for the transfer of Bohm to Los Alamos, General Leslie Groves, who was in charge of the Manhattan Project, told him that Bohm could not come.
We had a little quadratic letter code, Oppenheimer remembered, for this sort of information, with the limp excuse that Bohm had relatives in Nazi Germany. But there was much that neither Oppie nor his students knew.
Oppenheimer and Ernest O. Lawrence, the heads of Berkeley's theoretical and experimental physics departments, had joined the nascent bomb project in early 1942.
At the same time, the Army made a security investigation of the campus.
A year later, while Oppenheimer was asking for Bohm and Los Alamos, the Army's surveillance paid off when some unidentified man, scientist X, came to Steve Nelson, a local communist leader and friend of Oppenheimer's wife Kitty, at his house.
He read to Nelson a formula and was apparently handed money.
Colonel Boris Posh, who led Counterintelligence in San Francisco's beautiful Presidio military base, recalled,
We had very little information. The only thing we had definite was that the man's name was Joe, and the fact that he had sisters living in New York.
They began to scrutinize the Berkeley Radiation Lab. The dashing Giovanni Rossi Lomenitz, he with the famous Unionist uncle from Oklahoma, was their first suspect for, scientist X.
Rossi was rarely seen without Bohm, Joe Weinberg and Max Friedman, Counterintelligence soon noted.
Bohm and his friends were soon being followed everywhere, to classes and communist front organizations.
By June of 1943, Counterintelligence reported that its investigations had revealed, scientist X, to be Joe Weinberg of the Radiation Lab at Berkeley.
By July, Rossi Lomenitz was drafted and switched from uranium separation work to boot camp, over Ernest Lawrence's howls of protest.
That September, Oppenheimer casually mentioned to the security guards at Los Alamos that,
It was known among the physicists, that people at Berkeley were being approached for espionage.
A week later, he found himself summoned to Washington.
His interviewer was the man who had led the Berkeley investigation, Colonel John Lansdale.
He was now the head of security for the whole atomic bomb project, though his pleasant, wholesome looking face made him appear more like a father of small children than an army bloodhound.
Lansdale discovered immediately that Oppenheimer had no intention of revealing who had been approached, or who the approach was on the grounds that,
I would regard it as a low trick to involve someone where I would bet dollars to donuts that he had done nothing wrong.
Here we are, said Lansdale in the middle of a long session of fruitless questioning.
We know that information is streaming out from this place every day.
Now, what shall we do?
Shall we sit back and say, well, my God, maybe the guy recanted?
Oppenheimer nodded with wrinkled brow, intellectually interested in the problem.
Hard for me to say, he said, because of my own personal trends.
Then gave Lansdale an, of course you understand, old boy, glance from the famous blue eyes.
Well, said Lansdale, is there anything else that you believe you can tell me that could give us any assistance?
Let me walk around the room and think, said Oppenheimer.
He got up and paced, then said abruptly, I can tell you that I doubt very seriously whether...
Well, I don't know Bohm very well, but I doubt very seriously whether Weinberg would do anything along the lines of what we were talking about.
He went on to say something about an older German student of his, Bernard Peters, which the hidden tape recorder did not catch.
Oppenheimer had found Peters working as a longshoreman on Fisherman's Wharf in San Francisco and brought him into the physics department.
He was later to state that it was during this time period that he began to think, because of the way he talked about things, that Peters was a dangerous man to be on a secret war project.
Beyond these insights, the conversation wound on without result.
I wish, Colonel, said Oppenheimer, that I could do what you want. I can't deny that I could give you that information. I wish I could do it.
Well, I want to say that personally I like you very much, and... Lansdale grinned sheepishly. I wish you'd stop being so formal in calling me Colonel, because I haven't had it long enough to get used to it.
I remember at first you were a captain, I think. Oppenheimer lifted his head and raised his pipe to his half-open mouth.
And it hasn't been so long, said Lansdale, since I was a first lieutenant, and I wish I could get out of the Army and back to practicing law where I don't have these troubles.
Oppenheimer was nodding in business-like sympathy. You've got a very mean job.
More than fifty years later the controversy still rages on, more muddied than ever, about just how much Oppenheimer had to do with the Soviets.
In 2002, the husband and wife team of Gerald and Leona Schechter published a book titled, Sacred Secrets, How Soviet Intelligence Operations Changed American History.
The book caused a scandal among physicists, and many people instantly denounced it, to the point where its authors felt their book had been hurt by a conspiracy of silence, citing, perhaps oversensitively, the fact that The New York Times' review in recommending the book mentioned errors.
Their information about Oppenheimer comes from an ex-KGB agent named Sudopolodov, who has not always turned out to be telling the truth in his other confessions.
However, amid all the confusion and conflicting stories, the Schechter's print in their appendix—a, quite possibly inflated—report to the head of the KGB dated October 4, 1944, which reads,
In 1942, one of the leaders of scientific work on uranium in the USA, Professor R. Oppenheimer, while being an unlisted member of the apparatus of Comrade Browder, informed us about the beginning of work.
He provided cooperation and access to research for several of our tested sources.
In January 1944, Oppenheimer was on a train to Santa Fe. In his compartment was a security man from Los Alamos, Major Pierre de Silva, who began prodding him about his former students, asking who, among Bohm and his friends, Oppenheimer thought was,
Truly Dangerous.
De Silva reported,
He described Peters as being, quite a red, and stated that his background was filled with incidence.
He had fought street battles with Nazis in Germany and then escaped from Dachau, which indicated his tendency toward direct action.
In March of 1944, Oppenheimer came back to Berkeley for a visit, and Bohm came to see him.
He and Joe Weinberg were having a predictably tough time teaching Oppy's legendary course in his absence.
Bohm wondered if things had changed and there might be a possibility of being transferred to Project Y, the Manhattan Project, since, in his present situation, he had a strange feeling of insecurity.
The word choice is unintentionally ironic but characteristic of Bohm, standing earnestly before Oppenheimer.
Oppenheimer said he would let him know. Later, he asked Major de Silva, the same man who claimed that Oppenheimer had described Bohm to him two months before as, Truly Dangerous, if he would have objections to Bohm coming to Los Alamos.
The undersigned, wrote to Silva, duly reporting the incident, answered, Yes.
Still, Bohm participated in war work in a way.
The army wanted to learn about plasmas, the stuff of the stars, northern lights, lightning, St. Elmo's fire, and even the alien glow of a neon pizzeria sign.
Paralleling the ancient Greek universe, composed of earth, water, air and fire, plasma is the fourth state of matter, after solid, liquid and gas.
Hot gas becomes plasma, when most of its atoms are disassociated into positive ions and electrons, freely floating around each other.
Bohm discovered that electrons in a metal, which float among its nuclei, belonging to the whole metal, but not to any part, form a plasma, too.
He was fascinated by the collective behavior of electrons in a plasma.
Plasmas have long lent themselves to allegory. To Bohm, they symbolized the perfect Marxist state.
He became the leading plasma theorist in the country, an expert on arcane topics such as plasma oscillation and what is still known as Bohm diffusion.
After the war, Bohm became a Princeton professor on the recommendation of Oppenheimer at the Institute for Advanced Study, a few small woods and open fields away.
Oppenheimer's big secret had now exploded over Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Bohm still did not know Oppenheimer's other secret, which, justifiably or not, made both of them, and their friends, marked men.
Bohm asked the department if he could teach a small graduate class on his longtime nemesis, quantum mechanics.
In preparation, he returned to the Oppenheimer class notes taken years ago by his friend Bernard Peters, the concentration camp escapee and longshoreman whom Oppenheimer had inducted into Berkeley's Ivory Tower.
Chapter 19. Quantum Theory at Princeton. 1946-1948
When I was a boy, a certain prayer we said every day in Hebrew contained the words, to love God with all your heart, all your soul, all your mind.
Remembered Bohm in a 1987 interview.
My understanding of this notion of wholeness, not necessarily directed toward God, but as a way of living, had a tremendous impact on me.
Pouring over Peters' notes on Oppenheimer, Bohm finally rediscovered in the quantum theory that old atmosphere of wholeness.
During rereading after rereading, a deep physical sense began to slowly emerge from the fog of Bohr's pre-war semi-philosophical papers, and Bohm started to write a textbook called Quantum Theory.
The theory is usually taught by inching ever closer to the quantum from the classical point of view, but Bohm found understanding through the most foreign and elusive, the least classical aspects of the theory.
The notion of spin particularly fascinated me, he remembered.
The idea that when something is spinning in a certain direction, it could also spin in the other direction, but that somehow the two directions together would be a spin in a third direction.
I felt that somehow that described experience with the process of the mind.
He was able to produce in myself an analogy in my state of being, of spin.
I can't really articulate it, it had to do with a sense of tensions in the body.
In quantum mechanics, which Bohm analyzed in three parts as quantized motion, statistical causality, and indivisible wholeness, I came closer to my intuitive sense of nature.
He remembered that, even as a child I was fascinated by the puzzle, indeed the mystery of what is the nature of movement.
He got his students thinking about the way perception really works.
If we think of an object in a given position, we simply cannot think of its velocity at the same time.
A blurred photograph of a speeding car suggests to us the car is moving.
On the other hand, a sharp picture of a moving car, taken with a very fast camera, does not.
The uncertainty principle, so counter-intuitive and strange, is actually in close accord with our simple picture, Bohm told the students.
Our planets and our cannons have brought us different equations, Bohm told them.
The idea of continuous motion that we now think is so natural arrived with 18th century ballistics and astronomy.
Many of the ancient Greeks were unable to grasp the idea of continuous motion, he reminded the class.
As those who have studied Zeno's paradoxes will know, one of the most famous of these paradoxes concerns an arrow in flight.
Since at each instant of time the arrow is occupying a definite position, it cannot, at the same time, be moving.
In the case of causality, just as with the continuous trajectory, once again quantum theory was a step in the direction of the less sophisticated ideas that arrive in ordinary experience, declared Bohm.
Ordinary experience, where one seldom encounters an exact relation between cause and effect, but instead usually thinks of a cause as producing a tendency in a given direction.
He reassured the students, or shocked them, by saying that,
Contrary to general opinion, quantum theory is less mathematical in its philosophical basis than is classical theory, for, as we have seen, it does not assume that the world is constructed according to a precisely defined mathematical plan.
With quantized motion and statistical causality effortlessly embraced, Bohm reached his most deeply felt concept, indivisible wholeness.
Even in the classical limit, Bohm pointed out, we recognize that the separation between object and environment is an abstraction.
For example, a bacterium.
In a few hours most of the matter that was originally in the bacterium may have been expelled and replaced by matter from the surrounding medium.
In the meantime, the bacterium may also have changed into a spore.
How are we justified in thinking of this as a continuation of the same living system that we saw originally?
Causality and continuity allow us to do so, despite the microscopic blurring of object and environment.
In a system whose behavior depends critically on the transfer of a few quanta, however, Bohm explained,
the separation of the world into parts is a non-permissible abstraction,
because the very nature of the parts, for instance, wave or particle, depends on factors that cannot be ascribed uniquely to either part,
and are not even subject to complete control or prediction.
He was a wonderful teacher, remembered Ken Ford, who took Bohm's evening quantum theory seminar in the spring of 1949.
Timed, Ford figured, not to conflict with Bohm's three-night-a-week movie-going schedule.
He didn't just teach us standard problem-solving, he tried to get us to understand the meanings behind the equations.
He never said, go away when he was in his office, so everyone liked him, said Ford, laughing.
We spent a tremendous amount of time together, wrote Bohm's student Eugene Gross.
There are advantages to having a bachelor for a mentor.
He had no concern for personal comfort or appearance, said Ford.
No social life, his whole being was physics.
Looking back years later, Bohm felt that understanding reality as a coherent whole had been the goal of all his work,
from the mathematical to the philosophical, and he wanted to understand the mind as a part of that whole.
Three dense pages of his quantum theory cover what he enthusiastically called
the remarkable point-by-point analogy between the thought processes and quantum processes.
Some of these points are unexpectedly witty, like his correspondence of logic to thought as classical physics is to quantum mechanics.
Though it's probably four moments like this that Dirac's brother-in-law Eugene Wigner condemned the textbook as too much schmooze.
But vivid imagery, Bohm explained, can be helpful in giving us a better feeling for quantum theory.
If a person tries to observe what he is thinking about at the very moment that he is reflecting on a particular subject,
Bohm began his favorite analogy.
It is generally agreed that he introduces unpredictable and uncontrollable changes in the way his thoughts proceed thereafter.
His students could not have expected that this discussion was headed in an unusual direction.
If we compare, one, the instantaneous state of a thought with the position of a particle, and two,
the general direction of change of that thought with the particle's momentum, continued Bohm, we have a strong analogy.
He went beyond mere analogy, however.
Stressing the speculative nature of such a possibility, he brought up Bohr's idea that quantum mechanical limitations might play a role in human thought.
Even if this hypothesis should be wrong, continued Bohm to his students, and even if we could describe the brain's functions in terms of classical theory alone,
the analogy between thought and quantum processes would still have important consequences.
We would have what amounts to a classical system that provides a good analogy to quantum theory.
At the least, this would be very instructive.
It might, for example, give us a means for describing effects like those of the quantum theory in terms of hidden variables.
Hidden variables?
What other teacher and what other textbook would even mention such a thing?
Despite the carefully added warning, it would not, however, prove that such hidden variables exist.
This was a big departure from standard operations.
At the Solve conference in 1927, De Broglie had sought to explain the scheme of probabilities that made up quantum mechanics with an underlying hidden causal structure
to give a muscled skeleton to its mysteriously moving but apparently vacant skin.
De Broglie had been disregarded, then, his ideas insufficiently in tune with de Copenhagener Geist.
After six years of ignoring the theory, justification for doing so was reassuringly supplied with von Neumann's proof that an underlying causal structure could not exist,
keeping the innards of the quantum theoretical beasts numinous and ineffable.
Von Neumann was one of the greatest minds of the twentieth century, and few aside from the distracted Einstein and the ignored Greta Herrmann
wondered if it could perhaps be von Neumann who was mistaken.
De Broglie himself did not wait for von Neumann's proof. By then, he had already recanted.
Quite early in his textbook, Bohm told his students that every indication pointed to the continued success of quantum mechanics and to its ultimate conquering of the nucleus and relativity.
Until we find some real evidence for a breakdown, it seems therefore, he concluded, almost certainly of no use to search for hidden variables.
Yet, he returned again and again to the idea throughout his book, always with the caveat that he would later explain in detail why hidden variables are a lost cause.
He made this promised explanation not a dismissal or a footnote, but the climax of quantum theory.
Already this is unusual enough, but the surprised reader finds that Bohm's argument against hidden variables resurrects the ten years forgotten problem of Einstein, Podolski and Rosen.
Importantly, for all future discussions of EPR, or ERP as Bohm calls it, he reformulated the Gadankin experiment in terms of spin, definitively sharpening it to such an extent
that the original treatment is relegated to historical curiosum. Two options in each direction, spin up or spin down, keep the argument simpler than when it dealt with a near infinity of possible positions and momenta.
Bohm started his discussion of the EPR-Gadankin experiment with two atoms, once bound together in a molecule, hence with opposite spin, insofar as the spin may be said to have any definite direction at all.
The molecule is delicately disintegrated and the atoms are now moving apart from one another. We are free to measure the spin of either atom in any direction, x, y, or z, but not more than one of these, by passing it through a Stern-Gerlach magnet.
The argument then follows as usual. Without disturbing the second atom, we could arbitrarily know its spin in any single direction from a measurement of the first atom.
Nothing about the way the atoms were separated from each other could prepare them for what the angle of the Stern-Gerlach magnet will be. Presumably, it's all the same to the second atom whatever we choose to do to the first, and any measurement on the first merely happens to reveal part of the other unmeasured atom's pre-existing state.
Since the first atom might be measured in any direction, the unmeasured atom must really have spin in all three dimensions. Because the wavefunction can specify, at most, only one of these components at a time with complete precision, we are then led to the conclusion, explained Bohm, that the wavefunction does not provide a complete description of all the elements of reality existing in this second atom.
Though Bohm found this a serious criticism of the generally accepted interpretation of quantum mechanics, he believed that it was not a fatal attack because of an implicit assumption that the EPR paper did not even question, but that Einstein himself had worried about ever since 1909.
The world can correctly be analyzed in terms of distinct and separately existing elements of reality.
And this separability was the one thing above all that Bohm did not believe.
This is why hidden variables are inconsistent with the quantum theory, he explained.
A system composed of causal, separable elements is exactly the kind of classical construct that vanishes in the face of what he described elsewhere in his book as, quantum theories interwoven potentialities.
We conclude then, Bohm said, that no theory of mechanically determined hidden variables can lead to all of the results of the quantum theory.
Chapter 20. Princeton, June 15, December 1949
Bohm was wandering the halls jangling a bunch of coins in his pocket when one of his grad students, intent on a question about plasmas, startled him.
It was five days after Bohm's testimony to the HUAC.
Dave, I was just-
He took in Bohm's preoccupied, miserable face.
Dave?
Bohm did not stop jingling the coins.
Yes, he said after a couple of seconds.
Dave, are you okay?
He felt weird asking his professor this question in the midday halls of the physics building with undergrads pouring into the various classrooms all around.
Did you ever know Bernard Peters?
Bohm asked.
The student thought about the stories he had heard.
Was he the guy that Oppenheimer discovered working as a longshoreman?
Bohm nodded.
He had escaped Dachau, amazingly enough, and was putting his wife through medical school in San Francisco.
We were friends back at Berkeley.
Bohm was talking faster and faster.
He was so smart, and he was older than the rest of us, and he had been through so much, and he and Oppenheimer were friends, and now Oppenheimer...
Bohm's voice collapsed.
Have you heard about Oppenheimer and the House Un-American Activities Committee?
The hallway suddenly went empty as the hour struck, and classes began.
The grad student shook his head.
I don't really understand, said Bohm, rattling away.
But apparently it's all over the newspapers in Rochester, where Bernard's a professor now.
They asked Oppie about Joe Weinberg and Rossi, friends of mine back in Berkeley, Bohm explained.
And he was... protective, like I would expect him to be.
Jangle, jangle.
Everyone was used to Bohm's coin rattling, but it seemed louder and more insistent today in the quiet hallway.
But apparently long ago he had told them that Bernard Peters was a crazy red that people should watch out for.
Bohm pulled his hand out of his pocket, holding the coins all in one loose fist and shaking it, squinting his eyes.
This was all over the papers.
Geez! said the student. Did he take any of it back?
No, no, no, no, that's it. He repeated himself. He said it was all true. Poor Bernard.
All these years Bernard has thought of Oppie as the best teacher he's ever had, as his friend.
And all this time Oppie was ready to hand him over to the... to the Feds.
I wonder if he said anything about me.
Said Bohm in a small voice.
On September 23, 1949, four months after Bohm was brought before the House Un-American Activities Committee,
President Harry S. Truman announced that the USSR had tested... an atomic device.
The decryption of thousands of cables between the KGB and its agents in San Francisco, New York and Washington,
had revealed Berkeley and Los Alamos as primary targets of Soviet espionage.
And now the quality of the job these spies had done could be tested by airmen flying over Siberia,
who were the first to relay back to the United States that the bomb had been built and successfully detonated.
On a night in early December Bohm was arrested for contempt of Congress in his refusal to answer questions,
and the Marshal took him to Trenton so that he could obtain bail.
In the dark the scene flashing past was the grim naked woods of the end of the year.
Bohm looked wistfully at one neon light and thought about plasma.
Millions of overheated individuals behaving as one perfect society, telling him to drink Coca-Cola.
The Marshal asked him conversationally about physics.
He told Bohm that he had come from Hungary and was now a loyal American.
I hope that you were not disloyal, he said to Bohm.
The morning Bohm returned from Trenton, he found that he was suspended from teaching and forbidden to set foot on campus.
A few of the graduate students approached the President of Princeton to try to appeal this decision.
After a brief exchange, remembered Sylvan Schweber, one of these students,
we were reprimanded, reminded that gentlemen there is a war on, and were invited to leave.
Thus Bohm, courtesy of the House Un-American Activities Committee,
ended up with a paid year and a half with nothing to do but go to the library, think about plasmas.
During the time he was officially absent from Princeton he wrote four papers on plasmas with Princeton friends and students,
who would ruminate on the quantum theory.
Chapter 21 Quantum Theory, 1951
It is another evening, a year and a half later, and there is Bohm, still pacing about Princeton.
This time his companion is physics new wonder boy, Murray Gelman.
He is a twenty-two year old postdoctoral student at the nearby Institute for Advanced Study,
having just received his PhD from MIT after an early undergraduate sprint through Yale.
They stop in a small coffee shop. Things are good and bad for Bohm.
He was finally acquitted, the Supreme Court decided in December 1950 that the Fifth Amendment protected those, like Bohm,
who had refused to incriminate themselves. But he was not reappointed to his Princeton post.
For the moment, however, they are not discussing that. Bohm is ecstatic.
He has finished his quantum theory textbook and has been sending it around for opinions.
Einstein called me, Bohm said. He told me he wanted to discuss the book with me,
and Bohr hasn't written me back but Pauli has, and he was actually enthusiastic.
His smile of triumph splits his face.
They head back out into the dusk under the orange streetlamps. Gelman too feels infected by Bohr's excitement.
You think you can convince Einstein? Bohm grins broadly. We'll see.
Two days later they are back at the coffee shop. Bohm seems sapped of energy.
He doesn't want to walk. He doesn't know where he is going anymore.
Gelman breaks the silence.
How was your meeting with Einstein?
He talked me out of it. Bohm places his coffee cup on the table punctuating the statement.
This was slightly worse than Gelman was expecting. Bohm is looking at his cup.
I'm back where I was before I wrote the book.
What did he say? asks Gelman.
He explained Bohr's point of view as well as could probably be done, but he still wasn't convinced.
Bohm takes a sip of his coffee and remembers the old man standing at the window in his office at the institute, smoking and talking quietly.
He remembers the effortless persuasiveness of genius, lulling him like tobacco smoke swirling in the light.
What came out was that he felt that the theory was incomplete, not in the sense that it failed to be the final truth about the universe as a whole, but rather in the sense that a watch is incomplete if an essential part is missing.
Bohm finishes his coffee with a rye expression on his face. They stand up, leaving their money on the table.
Then Bohm says,
What Einstein said was so close to my intuitive sense, before, of what was wrong with quantum theory, it's a theory that can't go beyond appearances.
He shrugs his shoulders, then smiles weakly.
Remember, he says, I'm a Marxist. We like our theories deterministic. When he looks up, the hazy orange glow of the street lamp obscures the stars.
Albert Einstein, to PMS Blackett, at the University of Manchester, England.
April 17, 1951
Dear Professor Blackett, Dr. David Bohm of Princeton University, whom I know personally and from his scientific work, has told me that he has applied for a fellowship connected with your university.
Dr. Bohm has a clear mind, is very energetic in his scientific work, and of rare independence in his scientific judgment. He will be an asset to any circle of scientists he joins.
There is also a second reason to give Dr. Bohm an opportunity for work, preferably outside the United States.
Mr. Bohm himself has not been in any way politically active. He has refused, however, to answer official questions concerning colleagues.
This admirable attitude was the cause of an official indictment and subsequent termination, or rather, non-renewal, of his appointment at Princeton University.
I would be very grateful to you indeed if you would consider favourably Dr. Bohm's application. Yours very sincerely, Albert Einstein.
I had taught a course on the quantum theory for three years, wrote Bohm, and written the book primarily in order to try to obtain a better understanding of the whole subject, and especially of Bohr's very deep and subtle treatment of it.
However, after the work was finished, I looked back over what I had done and still felt somewhat dissatisfied.
The problem that weighed on his mind most heavily, as he explained later, was that the wave function could only be discussed in terms of the results of an experiment or an observation, which has to be treated as a set of phenomena that are ultimately not further analysable or explainable in any terms at all, so the theory could not go beyond the phenomena.
Bohm then set out to single-handedly create a theory that could.
CHAPTER XXII
HIDDEN VARIABLES AND HIDING OUT
1951-1952
The usual interpretation of the quantum theory is self-consistent, but it involves an assumption that cannot be tested experimentally, Bohm wrote to start his infamous paper.
Videlisette, that the most complete possible specification of an individual system is in terms of a wave function that determines only probable results of actual measurement processes.
It was 1951. Quantum theory would soon appear in bookstores, but as his book was being printed, the author himself was refuting its main point in a long, two-part article in Physical Review, the most authoritative journal in the field.
Bohm continued,
The only way of investigating the truth of this assumption is by trying to find some other interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of, at present, hidden variables, which in principle determine the precise behaviour of an individual system, but which are in practice averaged over in measurements of the types that can now be carried out.
He sat back from his desk for a second and looked at the almost empty paper, its few lines scrawled in his boyish handwriting. He could barely believe what he was about to write.
In this paper, and in a subsequent paper, an interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of just such hidden variables is suggested.
It is not a new theory, he explained, just a reinterpretation.
It is shown that as long as the mathematical theory retains its present general form, this suggested interpretation leads to precisely the same results for all physical processes, as does the usual interpretation.
Nevertheless, the suggested interpretation provides a broader conceptual framework than the usual interpretation, because it makes possible precise and continuous description of all processes, even at the quantum level.
After subsuming all the ideas of quantum mechanics into his worldview, this was a drastic reorientation. But Bohm was buoyant.
This broader conceptual framework allows more general mathematical formulations of the theory than are allowed by the usual interpretation.
He went on to explain his hope that quantum mechanics might, as seemed possible at the time, break down at distances shorter than the diameter of a small nucleus.
In any case, the mere possibility of such an interpretation proves that it is not necessary for us to give up a precise, rational, and objective description of individual systems at a quantum level of accuracy.
He sent the paper to physical review just before Independence Day, 1951.
So commenced David Bohm's long, lonely fight against Copenhagen, which would lead in the end to John Bell's pivotal breakthrough.
Only after four dense and unrushed physical review pages, mostly on the uncertainty principle, does Bohm start to discuss his own idea, set out in a subtitle, A New Physical Interpretation of Schrodinger's Equation.
Never a great reader of other people's work Bohm did not know until after he had finished his article that this new physical interpretation of the wave function was actually a resurrection in a more fully realized form of De Broglie's pilot wave that guides the quantum particle.
The pilot wave interpretation dealt with the Schrodinger equation as something corporeal, like a stream, albeit a weirdly woven invisible stream, rather than a catalogue of possibilities that mysteriously collapsed into a single choice during the act of measurement.
The quantum particles in Bohm's and De Broglie's imagination are like twigs in this invisible stream. Here riding the broad current, there eddying among trapped leaves, over there driven under the foam on the sheltered side of an underwater rock.
The forces that an ordinary stream exerts on an ordinary twig are mostly reducible to gravity or electromagnetism, and so it is for quantum particles in the stream of the Schrodinger equation.
But not all of the effects of this equation can be ascribed to these forces, and Bohm tentatively called the remainder a quantum mechanical potential.
Associated with this potential was an objectively real field that Bohm dubbed the psi field. This field, as he boldly wrote in the second half of his paper, gives a simple explanation of the origin of quantum mechanical correlations of distant objects, as in the EPR scenario.
The quantum mechanical forces may be said to transmit uncontrollable disturbances instantaneously from one particle to another through the medium of the psi field.
Mediated by a field or not, an instantaneous effect is still spooky action at a distance. Exactly the explanation Einstein could not accept.
There is, of course, wrote Bohm, no reason why a particle should not be acted on by a psi field, as well as by an electromagnetic field, a gravitational field, and perhaps by still other fields that have not yet been discovered.
For those with the stomach for it, all the strangeness of the quantum theory, minus its pernicious and queasy subjectivity, could spring from this unknown and eerie force in the invisible stream.
The first half of Bohm's paper, not the half of the simple explanation of EPR in terms of an instantaneously acting field, comes reassuringly bookended by references to Einstein, who had turned Bohm's thinking so dramatically around.
On page 1, Einstein has always believed that even at the quantum level there must exist precisely definable elements, such as those Bohm is postulating, determining the actual behavior of each individual system and not merely its probable behavior.
Likewise, Einstein has always regarded the present form of the quantum theory as incomplete,
and Bohm wraps up the first half of the paper with thanks to Dr. Einstein for several interesting and stimulating discussions.
The paper ends with a comment that he or Einstein might well have made during those discussions.
For the purpose of a theory is not only to correlate the results of observations that we already know how to make, but also to suggest the need for new kinds of observations and to predict their results.
In fact, the better a theory is able to suggest the need for new kinds of observations and to predict the results correctly, the more confidence we have that this theory is likely to be a good representation of the actual properties of matter.
This is a strange way to close a paper that begins with a reassurance that it leads to precisely the same results for all physical processes as does the usual interpretation.
I can't believe I should have been the one to see this.
Bohm's hands fluttered and his face looked almost prayerful as he finished describing his new theory.
He was sitting in his old friend Mart Weiss's long island living room, his back to the window.
Evening was falling, a yellow convertible driving by glowed in the dusk.
To break through after thirty years of everyone believing there's only one way.
Weiss grinned.
Bohm's excitement reminded him of their days at Penn State, the late nights reading and arguing with each other, teaching themselves modern physics over the sweet, day-old pies Weiss would bring back from the diner where he worked.
Bohm was fulfilling his wildest undergraduate dreams.
Let me guess, Weiss said, you worked it all out on a walk.
Bohm grinned.
I don't understand how anyone can think inside a building.
In college Bohm had been famous for his reliance on the floods of oxygen obtained by walking.
He took a two-hour post-lunch walk through the hills every day along with his evening campus strolls, and for his sweet tooth, which Weiss saw had not changed either as Bohm devoured the celebratory ice-cream Weiss brought out.
They reminisced even further back to their childhood in Wilkesbury, Pennsylvania, about trips with the tent Bohm's father bought them so they could go camping on their own because the Boy Scouts didn't serve kosher food.
One of their childhood friends, Sam Savit, was now an illustrator of horsebooks, another with whom they used to study physics after school dropped out to work in the mines.
Even in that coal town there had never been any danger for Bohm and Weiss with their middle-class Jewish parents of such a fate.
They also talked of Bohm's book.
Oppenheimer told people that the best thing I could do when I was done with the book was to dig a hole and bury it.
But Oppenheimer had also written a recommendation for Bohm, and, with another recommendation from Einstein, Bohm had finally gotten an appointment in Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Have you seen a yellow convertible driving by the house? asked Bohm suddenly.
Yes, I have, said Weiss, surprised.
Why?
I'm being followed, said Bohm.
That night Bohm decided to leave under the cover of darkness for Florida, and Weiss came with him on the commuter train taking Bohm to Penn Station.
Holding the bar above his head, his jacket hunched up around his shoulder, Bohm talked about his theory, letting go to gesture often with his fluttering hands.
A man opposite them was reading the paper.
On the page facing Weiss was a picture of Bohm, that thin, elfish face with wistful eyes, with a caption, all they ever got from him was his name.
Weiss wanted to laugh for the surreality of it all.
Dave, look, you don't need to wait for the Fizz Rev to get your name in print.
Bohm looked over his shoulder, his eyes dilated. He quickly looked away.
I think you did a brave thing, said Weiss quietly.
Your dad always thought I would come to a bad end politically, said Bohm.
Weiss said, I know, I used to go upstairs to bed while you two argued communism versus capitalism late into the night, and then, he shook his head at the memory, you always refused to ride home.
Even back then you were always walking at night.
His brow suddenly furrowed as he looked at Bohm.
Dave, you know, it really isn't the same, is it?
Bohm looked at him quizzically. Then he remembered. Heavy, late night snow falling past bright Penn State windows, the two boys' breath coming out in clouds as they returned from a walk, Weiss tossing snowballs into an unaccountably open window in their dorm.
Bohm then had opened the front door and walked into the fist of an angry and snowy victim lying in wait.
No, said Bohm, reaching up to feel where his nose had broken. It's not.
Weiss said sincerely, Dave, I'm really sorry. I hope the crucial floods of oxygen haven't been affected.
Bohm laughed. Don't worry.
You never held a grudge, Dave, Weiss said.
They got off at Penn Station, and Bohm boarded the Florida-bound train, away from actual or imagined-watching eyes.
In October Bohm set out for Sao Paulo. As he sat inside the plane, the rain lashed the tarmac, and the wind banged the drops against the double-pane oval windows.
Bohm sat in the blue and brown checked seat, watching the rain and willing the plane to leave soon.
He had agonized as his passport was being processed. Isn't it taking longer than it should?
After consulting with Appi, Einstein had assured Bohm that he thought no one would try to keep him from leaving.
It may be that Oppenheimer takes the case too lightly, but I too am inclined to think nothing serious is behind the matter.
This, from his two greatest mentors, was heartening, and his passport arrived with no apparent problems.
The plane began to move. Bohm stared out the window, watching the dreary landscape streak by.
Then the plane pulled to a halt. The pilot's voice announced,
The plane will return to the terminal due to a passport irregularity of one of the passengers.
Bohm felt as if there was a sudden volt of electricity running through his lungs, colliding with his stomach.
His knuckles, for some reason, grasping his seatbelt were white. He tried to swallow.
The stewardess was walking toward him, looking as if she were about to ask him if he would like ice cubes in his orange juice.
His heart was beating so fast it scared him. The seatbelt hurt the insides of his hands, but he couldn't let go.
It may be that Oppenheimer takes the case too lightly.
She walked by. It may be—what just happened? She hadn't even glanced in his direction.
A few rows past Bohm, she stopped and leaned over one of the passengers.
A small Indian man, who didn't seem to know much English, followed her off the plane.
The plane began to taxi again down the runway. Bohm collapsed, his head on his knees.
The plane lifted off the runway, like a miracle into the rainy skies.
I know, liftoff is just so terrible, said a sympathetic female voice beside him.
But my sister says air travel is now safer than driving a car. Can you believe it?
Bohm sat up again, nodding weakly to his neighbor. He felt as if his stomach had still not received word of his deliverance.
He swallowed, took a breath, tried to get his heart to behave normally.
I wonder why they took that foreign gentleman off the plane, she mused.
Chapter 23 Brazil, 1952
Brazil had seemed awful from the moment Bohm realized, panicking yet again, that there was no one at the airport to pick him up.
He gesticulated his way to a hotel, where he sat on the bed in his room trying to learn Portuguese from a little book.
The next day, stumbling over his new Portuguese words, he got in contact with Jaime Teomno,
a Princeton graduate student who took him to his new home on Avenida Angelica,
and then, through the big white pillars of the university on Rua Maria Antonia,
introducing him to a student who would show him around.
On a wall was the seal of the college, and, written beneath,
Vensaras Pela Ciencia.
The student explained with pride how sophisticated the building was.
Bohm asked, what does this mean? Ciencia.
Science, right?
Yes, yes, true science. How do you say... knowledge? The words say, you shall conquer, yes?
You shall conquer through knowledge, yes?
The student moved on. Let me show you the physics building.
Bohm stayed a second longer, looking at Vensaras Pela Ciencia,
thinking of his paper which would come out in physical review in only a few months.
When he started teaching, he was enthused by the amount of good he could accomplish there.
He felt needed.
He worked with Teomno on spin in his hidden variables.
It never before read the physics journals too assiduously,
but now they formed one of his few links with other physicists when they trickled across the hemispheres to him.
He walked from the university to his home on Avenida Angelica,
feeling sick from the smell of decaying food which haunted his sleep, and all his eating.
He threw up often and lost weight, looking more gaunt and ethereal.
His face grew more lined.
One human night he thought,
I have discovered the sixth law of thermodynamics, valid only in Brazil.
Everything that is supposed to move is stationary,
and everything that is supposed to be stationary moves.
He lay in the ocean water.
I like to float and watch the waves break, he wrote his friend, Hannah Lowey.
One gets a feeling of unity with this warm sea,
and sometimes I wish I could dissolve in it and spread out to its furthest shores.
He lay in the hospital with various stomach complaints, feverish and fretful.
His student and collaborator, Todd Staver, left Brazil from Massachusetts,
and a little while later, Bohm was to learn that he had died in a skiing accident.
Jaime Teomno moved back to Rio de Janeiro.
Bohm had not made new friends,
had not learned to cook, and felt somewhat shaken in my convictions about the value of my work.
In December, three months after Bohm had arrived in Brazil
at a meeting of the Brazilian Academy of Sciences in Belo Horizonte, he saw Feynman.
Richard Feynman was taking a sabbatical year teaching in Rio,
a little way up the Atlantic coastline from Sao Paulo.
It was amazing to see that familiar face and the good old boy act.
Hear all the stories and the Feynman laugh.
Bohm felt as if his own personal universe had been restored to some kind of order.
Feynman was here.
After the conference, Feynman said,
Come on, Dave, let's go somewhere.
Do you know where there's an interesting bar?
Bohm didn't.
OK, great! said Feynman without irony. Come on!
Feynman hailed a cab, then asked the driver a question in Portuguese.
Bohm, sitting back on the fake leather cab seat, understood a little of what Feynman said.
Where's something samba, something interesting, something?
The cabbie was nodding, looking ahead, but attentive, and replied at length as he poked his meter.
Ben, Bohm! said Feynman to the cabbie, and OK, great! as he leaned back in the seat.
He's going to take us to the Savasi district. That's the place to go.
Bohm felt sort of giddy and collegiate. Here they were, dick and he.
Two bachelors, not much over thirty, and not that bad to look at, going out on the town, in Brazil.
Fun, right? OK, great!
He wished that he wasn't so dressed up.
Feynman always wore any old thing, could go effortlessly from bongo drumming to physics conference to nightclub,
and look out of place in a way that was better than looking in place.
He was like Einstein, who wandered around Princeton, wearing what Bohm thought of as some genuinely odd things.
No socks. But it was OK. It was more than OK. It was part of the whole mystique.
Feynman was becoming an expert at generating mystique himself.
So, Dave, said Feynman, how's everything going for you in Sao Paulo?
Bohm was nodding, eyebrows raised.
Uh, it's OK. There are several good students here.
Tell me, Dave, do you find that it's all memorized? The students down in Rio have memorized everything,
yet nothing has ever been translated for them into meaningful words. There's so much for us to do out here.
There's so much to teach.
We're helping establish physics down here, said Bohm. The department in Sao Paulo was founded less than twenty years ago.
Yeah, it's exciting, said Feynman. You know, I don't believe I can really do without teaching.
I remember when I was at Princeton and I could see what happened to those great minds at the Institute for Advanced Study.
They'd been specially selected for their tremendous brains and were now given this opportunity to sit in this lovely house by the woods there
with no classes to teach, with no obligations whatsoever.
So, these poor bastards can sit and think clearly all by themselves.
He laughed. That would choke me up like nothing else.
Bohm was laughing out too. The Princeton Institute, home of the greatest stagnating brains of the century.
You need someone to bother you. They just don't have anything, any students, any interaction with experimentalists, anything to give them.
Feynman snapped his fingers. The spark of an idea.
But here, said Bohm slowly, I worry about stagnation myself.
In explaining physics to people who do not understand English very well, the imagination has not stimulated nearly so much.
It's a little frightening to realize that the language barrier will make really close contacts with most people rather difficult.
You'll get it, Dave, said Feynman. It won't take as long as you think.
The cabbie stopped, said something in Portuguese to Feynman.
OK, great. Feynman paid him while Bohm was reaching for his wallet.
This bar is supposed to have good Sambistas playing tonight.
Oh, Dave, I've gotten so crazy about Samba, I've joined a school now.
They walked out of the skyscrapered street into the close dimness of the bar.
School, in the sense of fish, explained Feynman, not in the sense of Princeton.
Oh, so you play the drums?
Well, to play with my Sambista school, I'm learning this great instrument called the frigidera.
It's like a toy frying pan that you beat with a little metal stick.
Feynman sat on a bar stool and moved his hands to suggest the instrument.
It's great. We're getting new music ready for the Rio Carnival. It's really exciting.
You have to dress up. I think I might be Mephistopheles.
Bohm was suddenly and completely overwhelmed by the jealousy that had been creeping up on him ever since he had run into Feynman.
Feynman was actually happy in Brazil. He thought it was OK, great.
For Bohm, there were the stomach problems, the hospital stay, the fear of traffic, the fear of restaurants, the fear of people talking Portuguese, and a new fear about his passport.
He was miserably, corrosively jealous of Feynman and his vibrancy, his fluency in any situation, how everything always worked out for him.
Dick, they took my passport away.
They what? Who?
The American consulate. They told me I had to go there for registration and inspection of passports, and suddenly, there I am.
They say I can come and get it if I want to go back to the States. Otherwise, they'll keep it.
Geez! Feynman scowled. Any idea what the point is?
They want to make sure I stay here and don't pass on any of their precious secrets to Russia, as if I know any.
Feynman laughed broadly.
Well, Dave, you heard them. No hobnobbing with reds.
The evening after they took my passport away, two days ago, my roommate saw a car circling the house for over an hour.
Geez! said Feynman again, and then...
You know, it was probably just somebody who was lost. These South American cities are awfully confusing, especially at night.
Bohm shrugged and raised his eyebrows.
I'm being watched, Dick, even down here, he said simply, and Feynman could not tell if it was the truth or Bohm's paranoia speaking.
Feynman leaned back, his arms across his chest.
Well, I don't know, Dave, but Bohm was on a roll.
I realized I am not really out of the US, even here.
You're not going back, are you, Dave?
Yeah, I can see it.
Look, this type of stuff makes me depressed, and hey, you haven't told me, but word on the street is that you've submitted something interesting to Fizz Rev.
Suddenly Bohm glowed, so obviously that Feynman noticed the change.
Tell me about it, said Feynman, leaning, arms crossed on the bar.
I have reformulated quantum mechanics in terms of hidden variables.
Feynman's eyebrows shot up toward his wild hair.
You see, I was looking at the WKB approximation to the Schrödinger equation, a useful semi-classical tool, and thinking, why couldn't the particles actually have paths?
Feynman's lower eyelids squinted up, his head tilted.
And then, if they did, if they moved along them in a totally deterministic way, then what would I have to do to transform the approximation into something that would reproduce the results of the quantum theory?
Somewhere in there, Feynman's generous suspension of disbelief had come crashing down.
Dave, you're totally crazy. You can't have determinism and quantum leaps. You're completely crazy.
No, Dick, wait, the whole thing works. Let me talk you through it. The key thing is this new kind of potential energy that fell quite naturally out of Schrödinger's equation. I called it the quantum potential.
Several drinks and lots of hand-waving and napkin writing later, Bohm felt he had explained the fine points and convinced Feynman that the whole thing was logically consistent.
He later wrote to his friend, the mathematician Miriam Yevik, that Feynman was terrifically impressed with it.
Feeling the momentum of Feynman's approval, Bohm rushed on.
See, Dick, remember how exciting a really new theory can be? You used to be so interested in speculating, finding out new ideas. I think Betta's trapped you back at Cornell in this depressing place where you spend all your time doing endless calculations. Betta's a human calculator.
Feynman looked serious.
Dave, he said, Hans Betta is one of the greatest scientists and greatest men and...
He broke out in a grin. Greatest human calculators of my acquaintance. One of my favorite things is doing math with Hans. We compete. We see who's quicker, who has better tricks. It's lots of fun, even though he always beats me.
Bohm had been lulled by Feynman's open-mindedness into thinking that he could actually woo him away from the orthodox quantum theory. As Feynman himself was fond of saying, why are smart men so stupid in bars?
Look, Dave, Feynman continued, I'm glad for you that you've pulled this theory together. It's something great, but it's not my thing. I don't work that way. You know me. I like the problems. For me, I don't see any problem here. Quantum mechanics works. Why mess with it?
It's OK, Dave, he said, as Bohm was about to answer the rhetorical question. I believe that you have seen something, and that's great. You should do that, if that's what you want to do.
Do you want a beer? I want a beer, said Feynman.
Do a cervejas, he said to the bartender.
No, said Bohm hurriedly. So, uma cerveja.
Then he asked.
So, Dick, have you heard from home?
I have to say, not that much. You?
No, no. I don't hear much at all.
I got a letter from Einstein. That made my day.
And Pauly wrote, he practically concedes my idea is logical, but it takes so long for letters to get here.
No kidding, said Feynman. For a while I was talking with Fermi. We were, you know, writing back and forth about mesons. Mysterious new particles just found in 1947.
And it was so frustrating to float out a good idea and then have to wait and wait.
He took a swig of his beer.
I have one instant connection, though. He grinned. I can hook up to Caltech by ham radio.
You what?
I've got this friend, this blind guy. He's a ham radio operator. He sets me up once a week.
That's so amazing. To be able to talk physics with people back home like that. I... I feel so cut off.
Things are dated by the time they get published, let alone by the time they arrive down here.
Feynman nodded, dragging his finger around the edge of his beer mug.
You know, I get lonely, and then sometimes I think I should get married again.
Yes, I thought that too. I thought maybe I should get married before I came here.
But then I think, look at all the nifty girls down here, said Feynman, determinedly waving an arm in the general direction of the rest of the bar.
Yeah, said Bohm. But anyway, it's not just companionship. It's scientific companionship that's missing down here.
For a while at least, Teomno was around, but now you've got him.
Yeah, yeah, I know what you're saying. Look, I feel lonely even with my once a week ham radio link and Teomno, Feynman said.
He was laughing, but ruefully, elbows on the bar, looking at Bohm.
Bohm felt the jealousy lift away. Feynman, even Feynman, with all the physicists and all the girls who worshipped him, with all his vitality and ease, was lonely too.
Bohm and Feynman stood on the curb outside the bar just before dawn. Feynman was joking around, hailing cars that weren't cabs and Bohm was laughing as he had not laughed in three months.
I now think he is my friend for life, Bohm wrote when he got home.
Chapter 24 Letters from the World, 1952
The day he arrived back in Sao Paulo, Bohm received another letter from Pauly, sent on December 3, 1951.
I do not see any longer the possibility of any logical contradiction, as long as your results agree completely with those of the usual wave mechanics, and as long as no means is given to measure the values of your hidden parameters, both in the apparatus and in the observe system.
Bohm smiled at that final phrase, observe system. In his own way, he was telling Bohm it was all right, and if Pauly couldn't find a problem, then no one could.
Bohm read on,
As far as the whole matter stands now, your extra wave mechanical predictions are still a check which cannot be cached.
Bohm leaned back in his chair reading it again. The hidden variables are a check which cannot be cached.
It was, he realized, the best he could hope for from Pauly, just as Feynman's reaction was the best he could hope for from Feynman.
Bohm was not shy to speak of the instantaneous interactions between distant particles, that is, nonlocality, of his quantum potential, which depends directly on the state of the whole, not on individual parts.
I want to emphasize, Bohm wrote, how radically new are these implications. They are hinted at only vaguely and indirectly in the subtle arguments of Bohr.
Where Bohr had thrown a veil, Bohm had cast light by putting quantum and classical theories in terms of the same intuitively understandable concepts, allowing a clear and sharp perception of how the two theories differ.
I felt that such an insight was important in itself.
Bohm would have to wait for Bell before this was appreciated.
Louis de Broglie, on the other hand, did not answer when Bohm sent him a copy of his paper. Instead, he published objections to it in a French journal.
News of this drifted down to the bewildered Bohm. He wrote to his old friend Miriam Javek that de Broglie had not really read my article but simply reiterated Pauly's criticisms, which led him to abandon the theory.
But, did not point out my conclusion that these objections are not valid. He's going to look a little silly. That's what he gets from rushing into print five months before my article came out.
He began to suspect the Brazilian postal system of sloppiness while he waited for other responses, and read and reread Pauly's letter.
What I am afraid of is that the big shots will treat my article with a conspiracy of silence, perhaps implying privately to the smaller shots that while there is nothing demonstrably illogical about the article, it really is just a philosophical point of no practical interest.
He wrote to Miriam.
January came around, and he knew the 1952 physical review must have come out.
It's hard to predict the reception of my article, but I am happy that in the long run it will have a big effect, he told her expectantly.
As January wore on, Bohm ate at more and more expensive restaurants as his stomach troubles worsened. Living every day for the moment the mail came, seeing American agents poisoning his life wherever he went.
He wrote to Miriam of his passionate desire to fight this stupefying spirit of formalism and pragmatism in physics, which was causing the physics community to turn a blind eye to his paper.
It cuts at one's insides like a hot knife being twisted inside your heart.
Meanwhile his old friends, Appie's other grad students, were all in trouble.
Rossi Lomenitz couldn't get work, and Joe Weinberg was on trial, accused of giving secrets to the Russians as scientist X.
Bernard Peters, teaching at an institute in Bombay, found that his passport had expired and would not be renewed. He became a German citizen again.
The South American winter rolled around, and a letter arrived. Not from Copenhagen, but from Bohr's sidekick Rosenfeld, now in Manchester, England.
Rosenfeld, as Pauly described him only two years later, 1954, had become the square root of Bohr times Trotsky.
Pice called him the self-anointed defender of the complementary faith, plus royalist Q. Leroy.
Unlike Bohm, he apparently felt no conflict between his quantum theory and his strong views on dialectical materialism.
30th May, 1952, Manchester.
Bohm smiled at the 30th of May and read,
Dear Bohm, I certainly shall not enter into any controversy with you or anybody else on the subject of complementarity for the simple reason that there is not the slightest controversial point about it.
But I shall gladly reply to your kind letter in the spirit of a friendly conversation about some of the points you raise.
Obviously you are thinking that my assertive attitude in this matter is extravagant, in as much as I might be forgetting that I and even Bohr are also subject to error.
I may reassure you by telling you something of my experience in working on this subject with Bohr.
In our work on the problem of measurability of fields, we have made probably all the errors that could conceivably be made before reaching at last solid ground.
It is just because we have undergone this process of purification through error that we feel so sure of our results.
To give only one example, we have not hesitated to throw doubt on the validity even of Maxwell's equations, in vacas, when a certain argument, later recognized as erroneous, suggested to us that they could be wrong.
I tell you this to show you that there is nothing dogmatic about our attitude of mind and that there is no truth in your suspicion that we may just be talking ourselves into complementarity by a kind of magical incantation.
I am inclined to retort that it is just among your Parisian admirers that I notice some disquieting signs of primitive mentality.
The difficulty of access to complementarity, which you mention, is the result of the essentially metaphysical attitude which is inculcated to most people from their very childhood by the dominating influence of religion or idealistic philosophy on education.
The remedy to this situation is surely not to avoid the issue, but to shed off this metaphysics and learn to look at things dialectically.
The main thing is not to accept any other guidance than that of nature herself. With kind regards, yours sincerely, L. Rosenfeld.
Bohm sat in his office above the Rue Maria Antonia with the Sao Paulo traffic shrieking along the streets below him, irritated and tired.
He had waited nearly half a year and this self-parody, even Bohr is subject to error, was the only response he would get from Copenhagen.
If he had seen de Broglie, he wouldn't be talking about your Parisian admirers any more, he thought.
How can I be down here in this humid chill and not be able to fight for my theory? He thought wistfully of Venseras pela ciencia.
It was so sure of itself. You will conquer through knowledge.
We are both friends of Dave. We should know each other, wrote Miriam Yevik to Eugene Gross the month after Bohm departed for Brazil.
Gross had been Dave's first graduate student and raptured by his first lecture.
In his low-key fashion, Dave Bohm had opened up a vast panorama, remembered Gross decades later.
Gross would write his first four papers with Bohm, mining the rich territory of the plasma's Bohm had talked about in that lecture.
Early in 1952, Miriam and her husband George, a physicist who was also a friend of Bohm's, drove up to MIT, where Gross was now a post-doc, to meet him and his wife, Sonia.
As Gross came walking toward them, Miriam was surprised by how familiar he looked.
Studying in Princeton's grand old Fine Hall, she used to see him pacing up and down, jingling his coins in his pocket, in a way so characteristic of Bohm that it would give her a start.
The two couples made friends quickly.
We spent three days talking, Miriam remembered later.
The men were both more down-to-earth, pragmatic physicists than their friend Bohm, and Sonia, though studying chemistry, had much in common with the mathematician Miriam, who had spent part of her college days learning to blow glass and nights tending to liquid nitrogen cooling tanks.
The conversation eventually turned to the contents of the new edition of Physical Review.
Miriam said, When do you think people will start responding to Dave's theory? It's so frustrating for him to be so far away from all news.
Gross's kind, sardonic face formed a grimace. I don't know if he's ever going to hear much of a reaction.
Miriam said, You don't really think people will just ignore it? He's done what von Neumann said was impossible. That must be worth something.
Physics isn't philosophy, though, said George in his quick voice. The ordinary way of doing quantum physics works. It's too much effort to think about another interpretation.
But that's ridiculous, said Miriam. What if he's right? Physics isn't as clean and mental as math. It's a theory, Eugene. How much more clean and mental can you get? It's just a theory.
Bohm's hidden variables theory made Gross feel tired. He wouldn't want to have to do all his calculations with it. Not only was it less mathematically elegant, but he was used to quantum mechanics the way it was.
The only reason he would switch was if...
He's got to get results, Miriam. He said. He's got to get results. His fists slammed the table for emphasis.
He's asking people to do what they never have wanted to do. Switch from one worldview to another for a philosophical reason, which doesn't affect their daily life.
But if he gets results, then it won't be a question of taste or whether or not the math is cumbersome. Everyone will switch.
Otherwise, right or not, he should just shelve it and move on.
Gene's right, Sir George. Can he work spin into his theory? Things like that he can't just talk his way around.
Gross laughed. I remember once at a party, Dave, tongue in cheek, constructed an elaborate and convincing theory of the existence of ghosts and devils.
He shook his head with amusement at the memory. It's incredible how persuasive he can be, how good he is at constructing coherent intellectual structures.
But you can only get so far with that, Sir George.
So, said Miriam, you're saying that Dave's new theory is an elaborate and convincing demonstration of the existence of ghosts and devils?
Gross grinned.
I hadn't thought of it that way. Funny, though, that was the terminology Einstein used when he was playing with a theory like Dave's. He called it Gespensterfelder, Ghost Waves, Guiding the Particles.
But he never published that, said George, and he certainly didn't wait around to see if people would listen to him.
Miriam was meditative. Dave's problem is that it matters to him what other people think. It matters too much.
Gross suddenly serious again, said. It matters to him because he's so completely, calmly, passionately absorbed in the search. He wants to share what he discovers. His lack of competitiveness or guile amazes me.
His brow creased.
I've thought about this, and I can only use old-fashioned language to describe his impact on me. He's a secular saint.
That evening, Miriam wrote to Bohm about what Gross had said.
Bohm only saw the negative.
One of my best friends seemed to be turning away from me and running with the tide. Results, sometimes results take decades to arrive. Einstein and relativity, Copernicus, for goodness sake.
No one these days was producing anything but trivialities. Feynman and Julian Schwinger may have produced resultlets with their quantum electrodynamics, but these little mice are all that come out of twenty years of labor by the mountain of thousands of theoretical physicists.
I alone am supposed, in a year or two, to produce a scientific revolution comparable to that of Newton, Einstein, Schreninger, and Dirac all rolled into one.
As for Pice and the rest of the Prinstitut, what those little farts think is of no consequence to me. In the past six years almost no work at all has come out of that place.
He had heard through the grapevine that Niels Bohr had called the theory very foolish after he had gotten over his initial surprise that the feat had been accomplished at all.
Von Neumann, Bohm had been told, thought the idea was consistent and even very elegant. Higher praise than Pauli had given before the paper had come out.
But now Bohm was in no mood to take scraps from the table. When recounting to Miriam this praise of Von Neumann's, Bohm wrote, The Unprincipled Bum.
When another of his friends expressed misgivings, Bohm lost his usual dry wit and spluttered almost incoherently to Miriam that it was comparable to a man who shoots you in the back and then begs pardon, saying that he was using a theorem from which he deduced that bullets come out from a gun at an angle of ninety degrees relative to the barrel and that he was therefore really shooting at someone else.
Schrodinger did not deign to write me himself, but he deigned to let his secretary tell me that his eminence feels that it is irrelevant that mechanical models can be found for the quantum theory, since these models cannot include the mathematical transformation theory,
Dirac and Jordan's generalization of quantum mechanics, which everyone knows is the real heart of quantum theory. Of course, his eminence did not find it necessary to read my papers, where it is explicitly pointed out that my model not only explains the results of this transformation theory, but also points out the limitations of this theory.
In Portuguese, I would call Schrodinger um burro, and I leave it for you to guess the translation.
And still, Boem wrote to Miriam, I am convinced that I am on the right track.
Chapter 25. Standing up to Oppenheimer. 1952-1957
Just before the war, a young Max Dresden left Amsterdam for Ann Arbor to get his PhD at the University of Michigan.
Ann Arbor was swiftly becoming a destination for young physicists under the guidance of Paulie and Heisenberg's old friend Otto Laporte and the Dutch discoverers of Spinn, Sam Gauchmet and George Julenbeck, all in the United States because of Hitler.
Dresden's American move was to be permanent, and he would become a beloved institution for a quarter of a century at the State University of New York at Stony Brook.
There, he wrote a masterly biography of Boers, Cardinal, Kramer's, that tells the larger story of the great era of quantum physics.
It is an unusual book, since its hero is the one repeatedly disappointed amid the victories of his closest friends and colleagues.
Kramer's came near to discovering matrix mechanics, the Dirac equation, and quantum electrodynamics, but each time failed to make the last imaginative leap.
In 1952, however, when Dresden was a new professor at the University of Kansas, already well appreciated for his jokes and his wide-ranging enthusiasm for physics, art, and literature, his students presented him with David Boem's paper.
At first he told them, oh, well, von Neumann has shown, but his students were so fascinated that he read it too. He was surprised that he could not immediately find the fatal flaw.
He went back to von Neumann, at which point it began to dawn on him that von Neumann's argument did not apply to Boem's hidden variables.
Dresden asked Oppenheimer for his opinion.
We consider a juvenile deviationism, Oppenheimer said. He hadn't read the paper. We don't waste our time.
But when Dresden said the issue troubled him, Oppenheimer proposed that he give a seminar on Boem's theory at the Institute for Advanced Study.
Presenting the seminar turned out to be a surreal experience.
PICE, too, called Boem's work Juvenile Deviationism.
A public nuisance, said someone else.
People complained about Boem's fellow-traveling more than his physics, though Dresden relates that, amid the disdain, some hard questions were asked about the physics of Boem's interpretation, which he himself could not answer.
Oppenheimer summed up the situation.
If we cannot disprove Boem, then we must agree to ignore him.
This edict of Oppenheimer's incurred little resistance among physicists, but a mathematician tried to stand up to him.
This was the tragic John Nash, the subject of the movie A Beautiful Mind, who had had his greatest insight, a discovery about the theory of games called the Nash Equilibrium, at Princeton in late 1949,
while Boem was roaming about the same grounds struggling with the quantum theory.
A decade later, at the Institute for Advanced Study, Nash got in a fight with Oppenheimer over the quantum theory, which the mathematician had learned from reading von Neumann's famous book, In German.
All that survives of this argument is a letter Nash wrote Oppenheimer in the summer of 1957.
He apologized for how aggressive he had been, but voiced his frustration that most physicists, also some mathematicians who have studied quantum theory, whom he found quite too dogmatic in their attitudes.
They treat anyone with any sort of questioning attitude or a belief in hidden parameters as stupid or at best a quite ignorant person.
Reading Heisenberg's 1925 paper on Matrix Mechanics brought some clarity.
To me, one of the best things about the Heisenberg paper is its restriction to the observable quantities.
I want to find a different and more satisfying underpicture of a non-observable reality.
Nash's biographer, Sylvia Nasser, notes that,
It was this attempt that Nash would blame, decades later in a lecture to psychiatrists, for triggering his mental illness,
calling his attempt to resolve the contradictions in quantum theory on which he embarked in the summer of 1957, possibly overreaching and psychologically destabilizing.
By February 1958, Nash's always eccentric ways suddenly took a horrific turn for the worse.
He embarked on a long journey of losing, and then, very slowly reclaiming his mind.
A struggle that culminated in the 1994 Nobel Prize.
It was awarded to him for the Nash equilibrium, discovered almost a half-century earlier.
The quantum theory seemed to have almost destroyed Bohm too, but the story was not finished.
His theory would not have such a grand comeback as Nash's, but, in the hands of an obscure physicist in a remote land,
it would reveal the mysterious mathematical inequality of Bell's theorem,
an idea that would prove even more important than equilibrium.
Chapter 26
Letters from Einstein
1952-1954
Early in May of 1952, Max Born wrote to Einstein about death.
They were both in their early 70s, but younger friends had died recently, including Cramers.
So we old fellows become more and more lonely, and I am writing to you in order to keep intact the few remaining links with our contemporaries which still exist.
He relayed the best wishes of his wife, and both of their greetings to Einstein's stepdaughter Margo.
Einstein's reply was quick.
Dear Born, you are right.
One feels as if one were an ichthyosaurus left behind by accident.
Most of our dear friends, but, thank God, also some of the less dear are already gone.
Have you noticed that Bohm believes, as De Broglie did, by the way, twenty-five years ago, that he is able to interpret the quantum theory in deterministic terms?
That way seems too cheap to me, but you, of course, can judge this better than I.
Kindest regards to you both. Yours, Einstein.
At the end of the month, Heidi Born replied to this letter.
Dear friend Albert Einstein, old age is not so bad really, provided one does not have too many twinges.
What have you got against being an ichthyosaurus?
They were, after all, rather vigorous little beasts, probably able to look back on the experiences of a very long lifetime.
In any case, we too old ones will go on thinking of you and Margo with unchanging loyalty.
Even if we should never be able to meet again. With all my heart, I remain your old Heidi.
In Born's notes on their collected letters, which he annotated before his own death in 1969, he commented,
Today one hardly ever hears about this attempt of Bohms or similar ones by De Broglie.
Einstein mentioned Bohm again a year and a half later.
The occasion was Born's retirement at the age of seventy from the University of Edinburgh,
and the volume of papers that was to be presented at the celebration.
12 October 1953
Dear Born, for the presentation volume to be dedicated to you, I have written a little nursery song about physics,
which has startled Bohm and De Broglie a little.
It is meant to demonstrate the indispensability of your statistical interpretation of quantum mechanics,
which, Schreninger too, has recently tried to avoid.
Perhaps it will give you some amusement. After all, it seems to be our lot to be answerable for the soap bubbles we blow.
This may well have been so contrived by that same, non-dice-playing God, who has caused so much bitter resentment against me.
Not only amongst the quantum theoreticians, but also among the faithful of the Church of the Atheists.
Best regards also to your wife, yours, A. Einstein.
Einstein's nursery song had included, once again, his skepticism that Born's interpretation could really be the last word.
26 November 1953
Dear Einstein, the presentation of the volume was made yesterday during a little celebration at the university.
It gives me tremendous pleasure that so many of my old friends and colleagues have contributed to it.
For the time being, I have read only a few of the articles. Yours was the first, of course, and you are also the first to receive my heartfelt thanks.
Incidentally, Pauli has come up with an idea, in the presentation volume for de Broglie's 50th birthday, which slays Bohm not only philosophically, but physically as well.
With sincerest thanks and kindest regards, also from Heidi, yours, Max Born.
By 1954, Bohm, slain, as Born wrote so offhandedly, both philosophically and physically, was ever more desperate to leave Brazil.
He wrote agonized epistles to all his friends describing the rotting food that kept him sick, the constant and relentless building projects that kept him sleepless, and the unintellectual atmosphere that kept him uninspired.
The United States, symbolizing despotism and Brazil, symbolizing chaos, loomed over his subconscious.
Pauli's supposedly devastating idea turned out to be that Bohm's work represented artificial metaphysics.
It is hardly a consolation, still, to find that your ideas are so disliked that weak claims against them are considered overpowering.
Eventually, even Einstein heard about Bohm's misery and wrote him a characteristically practical and perceptive letter in January of 1954, which began,
Dear Bohm, Lily Lowy has shown me all your letters concerning your feeling of distress for being closed out and closed in at the same time.
What impressed me most was the instability of your belly, the matter where I have my self-extended experience.
This sympathy and fatherly tone from the great man loosed a flood of emotion from Bohm, who responded with a five-page enumeration of his miseries in his boyish cursive hand.
A brief digression describing the utter corruption of the Brazilian government ended with the tragicomical statement,
Now I want to return to my own problems. Nathan Rosen had given him a not particularly good offer to come to the Technion in Haifa, Israel.
Rosen had just arrived there and would soon build what was a small technical college into a prominent center of physics, which Bohm had decided to accept,
but did not know if either Brazil or the United States would let him go.
Would Einstein, who had just been invited to assume the Israeli presidency, write a letter which might facilitate a visa for Israel?
Bohm finished on a slight upswing.
I am beginning to think in a new direction. He was still searching for a causal underlayer to the quantum theory.
Einstein wrote back in his unflappably kind, ironic way. His final paragraph is made even more poignant by his death a year later.
February 10, 1954
Dear Bohm, I was very impressed by your letter. I was really very happy to hear that Rosen is trying to call you there and I have already written to him.
I am, of course, very glad to do everything to facilitate the realization of this plan, so do not hesitate to write me as soon as you see a possibility that I could help in the matter.
Your picture of your idyllic environment made a vivid impression on me.
I believe your report was exhaustive with nothing left out.
I am glad that you are deeply immersed, seeking an objective description of the phenomena, and that you feel that the task is much more difficult than you felt hitherto.
You should not be depressed by the enormity of the problem.
If God has created the world, His primary worry was certainly not to make its understanding easy for us.
I feel it strongly since fifty years.
With kind regards and wishes, yours, Albert Einstein.
Epilogue to the Story of Bohm, 1954
It took a long time for Bohm to forgive Oppenheimer, and it certainly did not happen until Oppenheimer had more or less destroyed himself during his appearance before the House Un-American Activities Committee.
By all accounts he came out a shattered man, and was perhaps easier to forgive that way.
But in 1954, Oppenheimer's troubles were only beginning, and Bohm wrote to Miriam,
I have just heard from a friend that J.O. may be called before a committee soon.
Of course, he has ways of getting out of it perhaps.
It's all going to happen to the great man himself, whose face once appeared with infinite sadness on the cover of Time magazine.
Perhaps he will really have reason to be sad, too.
As I once said, he looked like Jesus Christ in the picture.
I think a better image would be a linear combination of J.C. and Judas, or of Judas trying to look like J.C.
An interesting case of mistaken identification, don't you think?
Bohm taught in Israel, and then, ever unsatisfied, in 1957, moved on to Britain,
with a favorite, brilliant grad student from the Technion at Haifa, Yakir Aranov, following close behind.
Though his papers with Aranov were well respected for the gains they represent in physical understanding,
his interests, communism finally renounced, began to turn toward mystical, philosophical musings,
sitting at the feet of the guru, Krishnamurti.
His vision of the world became ever more abstract, and ever more popular with the public.
He propounded, with his gently fluttering hands and earnest face, complicated ideas with broad strokes
and beautiful, if somewhat vague words.
I would say, wrote Bohm in the introduction to his bestseller, the philosophical, physical book,
Wholeness and the Implicant Order, that in my scientific and physical work,
my main concern has been with understanding the nature of reality in general,
and of consciousness in particular, as a coherent whole, which is never static or complete,
but which is an unending process of movement and unfoldment.
Feynman would become even more wildly popular.
In November 1964, he returned to his old snowy stomping grounds in Ithaca
to give Cornell's annual Messenger Lectures for the general public on the subject,
the character of physical law, which were subsequently made into a book.
With his clarity, his humor, his accent undiminished in spite of years of living far from Brooklyn,
he charmed and inspired the crowds that packed into the lecture room to watch him cavort across the stage below them.
The lectures displayed his love of nature itself, of the way things really work,
of the specific, the actual, the find-outable, and they gave an overview
of how one of the greatest physicists of his generation thought about his subject.
The sixth lecture was titled, Probability and Uncertainty.
Now was the time to talk about quantum mechanics, where, he told his listeners,
Our imagination is stretched to the utmost, not as in fiction, to imagine things which are not really there,
but just to comprehend those things which are there.
He warned his listeners that these things would be difficult to understand.
But the difficulty, he assured them, really is psychological,
and exists in the perpetual torment that results from your saying to yourself,
but how can it be like that?
Which is a reflection of an uncontrolled and utterly vain desire to see it in terms of something familiar.
I will not describe it in terms of an analogy with something familiar, I will simply describe it.
There was a time when the newspaper said that only twelve men understood the theory of relativity.
I do not believe there ever was such a time.
There might have been a time when only one man did, because he was the only guy who caught on before he wrote his paper.
It was typical Feynman to dodge the mention of anyone but the first person singular.
But after people read the paper, a lot of people understood the theory of relativity in some way or other, certainly more than twelve.
On the other hand, I think I can safely say that nobody understands quantum mechanics.
So do not take the lecture too seriously, feeling that you really have to understand in terms of some model what I am going to describe,
but just relax and enjoy it.
I am going to tell you what nature behaves like.
If you will simply admit that maybe she does behave like this, you will find she's a delightful and trancing thing.
Do not keep saying to yourself, but how can it be like that?
Because you will get down the drain into a blind alley from which nobody has yet escaped.
Nobody knows how it can be like that.
Feynman described the famous two-slit experiment, where a stream of electrons, for example, flows through a barrier with two holes.
On the other side of the barrier, an electrical system notes each electron's arrival.
They arrive as particles, but they interfere with one another like waves.
This is true even if only a single electron is traversing the barrier at a time.
A series of very many such electrons, each passing alone through the double-slitted barrier,
do not strike a detector on the other side and the patterned particles would leave, a broad clump just beyond each of the two slits.
The pattern at the detector is instead striated and diffracted, made up of the parallel stripes that are the trademark of a wave.
This means that the individual electrons mostly hit the detector in places no ordinary particle trajectory would land them,
as if a single electron somehow passed through both slits or was guided by a wave.
If you light their path to watch them, however, the interference disappears.
They act just like the particles we thought they were.
The question now is, how does it really work? What machinery is actually producing this thing?
Nobody knows any machinery. Nobody can give you a deeper explanation of this phenomenon than I have given.
Nobody can go beyond a description of it.
Physics has given up, if the original purpose was, and everybody thought it was, to know enough so that, given the circumstances, we can predict what will happen next.
There is a theory that tries anyway, said Feynman. The motion of the electron in a theory like this is determined by some very complicated things back at the source.
It has internal wheels, internal gears.
You've missed the point, bone-lover of wholeness would have said.
That, said Feynman, is called the hidden variable theory. He looked out at his audience.
That theory cannot be true. If we were able to know in advance which hole the electron would go through, he continued, then whether we have the light on or off has nothing to do with it.
It is impossible, he continued, to explain the interference pattern as merely the sum of the contributions of electrons going through one hole or the other.
A corollary to what John Bell, unmentioned by Feynman, had shown earlier that same year.
It is not our ignorance of the internal gears, of the internal complications that makes nature appear to have probability in it. It seems to be somehow intrinsic.
Someone has said it this way. Nature herself does not even know which way the electron is going to go.
Feynman did not mention what Bell, in 1964, had made very clear.
The key difference was that Bohm's theory allowed the behavior of its particles to be influenced by faraway things.
Just two years before Feynman's speech and Bell's theorem, Bohm had written,
Even in its present incomplete form, the theory does answer the basic criticisms of those who regarded such a theory as impossible.
It seems that some consideration of theories involving hidden variables is at present needed to help us avoid dogmatic preconceptions, he continued to insist.
Such preconceptions not only restrict our thinking in an unjustifiable way, but also, similarly, restrict the kinds of experiments that we are likely to perform.
The Discovery, 1952-1979
Chapter 27
Things Change
1952
John Bell, a red-haired, 23-year-old college graduate from Northern Ireland,
sat outside the English hostel in the Berkshire Downs where he was living, surrounded by the pieces of his motorcycle.
Taking apart, fixing, and reassembling these bikes was the major hobby of the Accelerator Design Group of Britain's Atomic Energy Research Establishment.
Young men who spent all day devising a theory of how to push particles to ever higher speeds in order to smash them to pieces.
The energy of destruction created new particles and new opportunities to understand the Constitution of Matter.
The motorcycles also sometimes smashed.
Bell's new red beard hit a scar around his mouth that was a souvenir from a wreck.
It was 1952, and he was filled with an excitement that had nothing to do with high speeds.
He had just read Bohm's paper.
Bohm had accomplished what Bell had dreamed of—a theory with entities that were real, regardless of the actions of experimentalists,
which, nonetheless, produced the same results as quantum mechanics.
Bell saw that the great Fann Neumann must have been just wrong when he declared such a hidden variable theory impossible.
He would soon identify the same logical flaw that Greta Herrmann had described some seventeen years before, though her remarks were now buried by history.
The kind of professions I had heard about in the family, Bell remembered, were carpenters, blacksmiths, laborers, farm workers, and horse dealers.
My father's first profession was horse dealer.
He stopped going to school at the age of eight.
His parents paid fines from time to time for that.
His family had lived in Ireland for generations.
But we are from the Protestant tribe, explained Bell, so the real Irish people regard us as colonists.
This situation was not stressed by Bell's parents.
Annie, his mother, had many Catholic friends, and her knitting skills adorned their daughter's first communion dresses.
Bell spent much of his childhood in depression and wartime Belfast at the library.
At home he was called Stuart, his middle name, or the Prof.
At eleven, an age when money pressures made many Irish children drop out of school, including his older sister, Ruby, and the two younger Bell boys,
Stuart told his mother he wanted to be a scientist.
The Second World War had just begun.
During the Battle of Britain, with his father sending money home from the army, the family somehow managed to pay the tuition for high school.
After graduation at age sixteen, as the war raged on, Bell got a job as a lab technician in the physics department of Queen's University in Belfast,
where kind professors gave him books to read and allowed him to attend other lectures.
The next year, Bell entered Queen's as a student, and the war finally ended.
Bell was a young man of high caliber, according to Bill Wackenshaw, head of the accelerator design group, remembering,
great pleasure at the sharpness of John's mind and the challenge of keeping up with him.
Two years before, he had snatched the newly hired twenty-one-year-old away from his nuclear reactor work, also for the atomic energy research establishment at Harwell,
when its leader, Klaus Fuchs, was arrested for betraying Manhattan Project secrets to the Russians.
Wackenshaw admired Bell's independence, and, as a certain smart Scottish girl, Mary Ross, also working in his group recalled,
did not mind John's Celtic temperament.
Bell's special liking for particle dynamics was crucial in their work, calculating how particles would travel through various experimental schemes to accelerate them.
Perhaps it also heightened his appreciation of a quantum physics, like bones, that allowed those particles to have definite paths even when no observer was present.
Mary was to be Bell's best friend and lifelong co-author, marrying him two years after they met in the Berkshire Downs.
He always liked the theory of anything to be well understood, she remembered.
As a boy, he studied every boy and girl a swimmer, and then followed the instructions.
Ballroom dancing and skiing followed in a similar manner.
At high school in Belfast, he had a theoretical course in bricklaying, but, she remarked, as far as I know, no practical experience.
The director of atomic energy research in Britain was the recently knighted Sir John Coacroft, who split the atom with Ernst Walton in the library of the Cavendish when Bell was a child.
Coacroft was also interested in bricklaying, and, on Sunday drives in Cambridge, collected old bricks from farmers with which to refurbish the crumbling buildings of his college,
spurning the garish factory-made ones that were used to renovate other colleges.
The Nobel Prize-winning Coacroft-Walton machine was now merely the warm-up track to feed particles into machines many times larger and faster.
Gone were the pre-war days when cozy physics department labs like those at the Cavendish and Berkeley formed the cutting edge of high-energy physics.
Now, Brookhaven National Laboratory on Long Island, a consortium of nine East Coast universities, with money from the federal government,
boasted the fastest particle accelerator in the world, with the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, slack, hot on its heels.
The European physicists, barely done burying the dead of the World War and eager for something hopeful and positive, were not immune to the building excitement over particle smashing.
A united Europe should have a European Center for Particle Physics, suggested de Broglie.
As Bell was reading Bohm's papers for the first time, eleven countries were signing an agreement to set up a Conseil européen pour la recherche nucléaire.
CERN
Accelerator designers came to the CERN headquarters, a villa at the Geneva Airport, to advise on a multinational accelerator bigger and faster than any yet built.
Among these, in 1952, were Bill Wackenshaw and John Bell, experts on the just-discovered principle of strong focusing, which would make this accelerator possible.
Bell had not read von Neumann's book.
Written two decades before, it had never been translated into English, remaining a landmark rather than a resource.
Bell knew of the No-Hidden Variables Theorem from The Beautiful Book by Bourne, Natural Philosophy of Cause and Chance, which, he remembered, was in fact one of the highlights of my physics education.
Max Bourne stated von Neumann's result firmly without getting into detail.
Having read this, Bell wrote thirty years later, I relegated the question to the back of my mind and got on with more practical things.
But now he realized he had to see von Neumann's proof for himself. In this, he was lucky.
Franz Mondl, his colleague in the accelerator design group, was fluent in German and interested in the subject.
Mondl also considered himself lucky to have such an interesting person with whom to debate.
For months, they studied and shouted over von Neumann's proof and Bohm's papers in detail.
I can remember how excited he was, wrote Mary Bell years later. In his own words, the papers were for me a revelation.
When he had digested them, he gave a talk about them to the theory division.
There were interruptions, of course, from Franz Mondl, with whom he had had many fierce arguments.
Franz told me something of what von Neumann was saying, Bell remembered.
I already felt that I saw what von Neumann's unreasonable axiom was.
It was becoming clear to Bell's supervisors that he was a theorist, and soon after this, the atomic energy research powers that be,
tapped him to do some postgraduate work under one of the best physicists in Britain, while still receiving his salary.
In 1953, Bell went north to Birmingham to the physics department of Rudolf, soon to be Sir Rudolf, Pyrals.
Pyrals had the great gift of being able to instantly understand and, with penetrating questions, to clarify any new subject in physics.
He created an atmosphere full of intellectual investigations, social gaiety, and students living at his home,
with his kind and bossy Russian wife, Chenya, organizing every inch of their lives.
Soon after Bell arrived in Birmingham, Pyrals asked him to give a talk.
Fresh with the excitement of bones, papers, and von Neumann's mistake, Bell offered two options, accelerators, or the foundations of quantum mechanics.
Pyrals' time with Bohr and Pauly had been the keynote of his career.
He certainly saw no need to reopen the book on quantum theories' foundations.
Bell took the hint that talking about Bohm would be bad for his career, and gave the speech on accelerators.
Ten years would pass before Bell picked up the subject again.
Chapter 28
What is Proved by Impossibility Proves? 1963-1964
The Proton Synchrotron, planned at the Geneva Airport in 1952, was built in nearby Myron, Switzerland in 1959.
It was a circular, underground tunnel, one half mile in circumference, in which to accelerate and smash protons, and analyze the results.
Brookhaven in the United States followed with its own proton synchrotron the next year.
For most of the sixties, these two machines would be the world's preeminent accelerators.
CERN was by now a huge, bland-colored herd of box-shaped buildings.
Big black numbers like brands on their tan flanks identified the otherwise anonymous interconnected lab and office structures.
This numbering system seems quite as erratic as if the buildings were actually bovine and ambulatory,
with, for example, a knot of buildings numbered in the low five-hundreds, including the cafeteria, grazing intermingled with the low sixties.
While hundreds of buildings distant, Building 65 stands protectively around Building 604.
Prolonged map-gazing produces no glint of hidden order, though the tangled streets sport familiar names.
Root Einstein parallels Root Democritus until an intersection with Root Pauley when it becomes Root Yukawa,
named for the Japanese physicist Hideki Yukawa, who, in 1935, predicted the existence of the Misan,
the particle that carries the strong force holding the atomic nucleus together.
Root Bohr skirts the big lawn in front of the cafeteria.
Inside the jumbled and linked buildings CERN is Labrithine,
endless tan halls funnel into other tan halls than dead end.
Along these halls, with plastic Venetian blinds protecting physicists from their industrial view, lie small cell-like offices.
Young scientists coming here to work for the first time often feel isolated and anonymous.
They must join one of the little self-formed groups in order to work.
Even the theorists work in small teams.
For some, the right opening never occurs, and after a few months, they vanish.
Even for those who stick out, the experience is less than welcoming.
Bell used to joke to Mary in their early years at CERN that after a mere six months,
he felt comfortable saying, good morning, to everyone he passed on his hall.
But CERN finally becomes welcoming over food.
The big cafeteria is a place of green plants, big glass windows, sun, and people willing and want to talk.
Round tables fill most of the room, each surrounded by a little flock of lavender or tan plastic chairs that perch on two bent metal legs.
Here, unlike at the university and particularly unlike a European university,
even the really important people are known by their first names, and any question is fair game.
John Bell leaned back in one of the bird-like CERN cafeteria chairs,
his eyes squinting as he looked side-long at the man across the round table from him.
I don't believe your impossibility proof can be right.
There was a slightly amused look on his face.
Joseph Maria Jauch was affronted.
A revered professor visiting from the nearby University of Geneva,
he had just given a seminar on his strengthening of von Neumann's famous No Hidden Variables Theorem.
Jauch was fifty at the time, Bell only thirty-five,
and though Jauch recognized Bell as an up-and-coming new CERN physicist who had done good work in quantum field theory already,
it was hardly the same thing as having written a much-praised and well-known book on the subject,
as Jauch had done a decade before, with Fritz Rohrlich.
And Bell's other subjects in nuclear and accelerator physics hardly gave him special knowledge on the subject of von Neumann's impossibility proof.
For Bell, the fact that Jauch had actually brought up this subject was liberating.
None of his friends at CERN knew of his interest in the subject, or would have been interested had he told them.
Before Jauch said anything in reply, Bell continued from his perilous angle in the chair.
You see, though I notice that not too many people remark on this,
Bohm ten years ago did the impossible.
It's been done.
A hidden variables theory has been created.
There simply must be something wrong with von Neumann's theorem.
The existence of Bohm's pilot wave picture shows this.
Bell referred to Bohm's hidden variable theory by De Broglie's name for his similar version of 1927.
In both cases, real particles are piloted by the non-local quantum wave.
So before you can strengthen it, you'll have to find out what's going on there.
Bohm's theory and De Broglie's before him is a very ingenious solution to the problems which one has to face
when one wants to maintain a realistic interpretation of these phenomena.
Said Jauch.
He looked sternly at Bell.
It is an important issue to discuss, but I think we cannot get any further
without at first admitting that the quest for hidden variables has at its roots
an ideology that is just past.
In the determinism of 19th-century materialism, it is hardly a vision of a future theory,
and that past is receding more and more quickly as it gives way to new forms of scientific thought
under the new impact of new evidence.
Well, yes, said Bell, so they say.
There's no mystery why, said Jauch.
Pilot wave picture is a trivial reconciliation of quantum phenomena with the classical ideas of the past.
He looked at Bell with the on-guard expression of a teacher faced with the one student who persists
in passionately bringing up irrelevancies in the middle of class.
Yes, said Bell.
But is that a bad thing?
He came forward in his chair with a small crash and leaned elbows on the table opposite Jauch.
Here we have a closed set of equations whose solutions are to be taken seriously
and not mutilated when embarrassing.
The subjectivity of orthodox quantum physics, the necessary reference to the observer, is eliminated.
He shook his head a little.
The way De Broglie was laughed out of court, and Bohm ignored, I regard as disgraceful.
Laughed out of court may not be exactly the words you want to use to describe what happened, said Jauch.
It is the scientific process that less good theories get passed over in favour of better ones.
Bell's pale eyebrows shot upward on his forehead.
What happened was not science as usual.
Their arguments were not refuted.
They were simply trampled on.
Jauch's hand rose to his face to rub something out of one eye from behind his glasses.
It is possible, as De Broglie did, to speculate on what a causal infrastructure would have to look like
in a theory that merely avoids leading to predictions which disagree with the known facts.
The argument cannot, of course, be decided unless one can construct a causal theory
which permits a confrontation with experimental facts.
And, of course, no one has succeeded in doing so.
That is no reason to ignore the theory.
Bell burst out, his brogue thickening.
Why do people never bring it up, even if only to point out what is wrong with it?
Why did von Neumann not consider it himself for that matter?
More extraordinarily, why do people go on constructing impossibility proofs?
Why are you doing it, when even Paulian Heisenberg could produce no more devastating criticism of Bohm's vision
than to brand it as metaphysical and ideological?
Why is the pilot wave picture ignored in textbooks?
Should it not be taught?
Not as the only way, but as an antidote to the prevailing complacency
to show that vagueness, subjectivity and indeterminism are not forced on us by experimental facts,
but by deliberate theoretical choice?
Bell's forehead was furrowed.
He was almost quivering in frustration.
Jauch's head tilted in a professional way,
his piercing eyes hidden by the sun glinting off his glasses.
There will almost always be more than one theory which agrees with all the facts known at a certain point, he said.
His voice calm with its Swiss-German accent.
External confirmation is not the only criterion for the truth of a theory.
As Einstein himself said in his autobiographical notes, there is a second criterion,
the demand for inner perfection, including logical simplicity.
The neglect of this second criterion leads to absurdity.
Of course it is the same autobiographical notes which suggests that the hidden variable program has some interest, said Bell.
Undeterred, Jauch continued.
The situation really presents a remarkable similarity with the confrontation between the followers of Ptolemaus and Copernicus.
As now, the question could not be decided on empirical grounds alone,
since both systems were capable of correctly describing the observed phenomena.
In order to keep the earth at the center of the universe, Ptolemy's system became ever more elaborate and ungainly.
By putting the sun at the center, Copernicus swept away these contortions,
explaining the world and the night skies with dramatic power and simplicity.
For Jauch, Bohm's theory was murky and artificial, like earth-centered astronomy,
and the Copenhagen interpretation was as clear as Copernicus's.
Then as now, he said, the new view is often opposed by an appeal to reasons which are completely invalid.
Bell actually looked a little angry. He took a breath.
Among the books I would like to write, he said, and then smiled with irony.
I would like to write half a dozen books, which means I won't write any.
He leaned back in his chair again.
But one of those books would trace the history of the hidden variable question,
and especially the psychology behind people's peculiar reactions to it.
Why were people so intolerant of de Broglie's gropings and of Bohm?
Leaning forward, he said in a clear voice.
For twenty-five years, people were saying that hidden variables' theories were impossible.
After Bohm did it, some of the same people said that now it was trivial.
They did a fantastic somersault.
First, they convinced themselves in all sorts of ways that it couldn't be done,
and then it becomes trivial.
He raised his hands off the table with a bemused expression.
Even Bohm did not cling to his theory, said Jauchkonli.
Even he found his quantum potential rather artificial.
The wave function and quantum mechanics can spread arbitrarily far.
If it transmits influences instantaneously from wherever it spreads,
there is no limit to what faraway factors might be implicated in an experimental outcome.
Why should we not also regard the influence of the phase of the moon?
He went on, or which constellation the sun is in, or the state of consciousness of the experimenter.
If hidden variables are needed to render atomic events causal,
why should we stop at that point and not admit all kinds of occult causal relationships?
The door is left wide open.
Bell had a faraway look on his face, and he was nodding slightly.
Terrible things happen in the Bohm theory, he said musingly,
that trajectories assigned to the elementary particles instantaneously change
when anyone moves a magnet anywhere in the universe.
Jauchkonli looked relieved at Bell's agreement.
Indeed.
I wonder, Bell continued, if this is a defect of his particular picture,
or is it somehow intrinsic to the whole situation?
Well, I think we can safely say, said Jauch, that it is a defect of Bohm's theory
and a rather egregious one at that.
But remember the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paper?
Said Bell, becoming excited for no reason that Jauch could see.
Well, really, Bohr explained what was going on with that idea, said Jauch.
Did he? asked Bell with a growing smile.
Of course he did, said Jauch.
Imaginating the false route that Einstein and the others were on,
so that they, and we, are left with fewer possibilities
among which we may find the one that will open our understanding
for the basic complementarity which pervades all of our physical universe.
Hmm, said Bell.
He looked, as he often did, as if he were laughing deep down.
While imagining that I understand the position of Einstein
and the EPR correlations, I have very little understanding of the position of Bohr,
despite earnest scrutiny.
I have never hidden my profound humility when I speak about complementarity, said Jauch.
He paused, and then elaborated in words that hardly made Bohr's
famously opaque explanation any more satisfying.
Do we not see in the EPR correlations another example of that all-pervading principle
of complementarity, which excludes the simultaneous applicability
of concepts to the real objects of the world?
Rather than being frustrated by this limitation of our conceptual grasp of the reality,
we can find in this unification of opposites the deepest and most satisfactory result
of the dialectical process in our struggle for understanding.
Yes, yes, said Bell.
I forget that rather than being disturbed by the ambiguity in principle,
by the shiftiness of the division between quantum system and classical apparatus,
Bohr seemed to take satisfaction in it.
He put forward his philosophy of complementarity,
not to resolve these contradictions and ambiguities,
but rather to reconcile us to them.
It is without a doubt the sum and substance of our experience
with the phenomena of microphysics, said Jauch.
Instead of being a principle which expresses the limitation of our ability to know,
he looked at Bell.
It expresses the very essence of the objective rendering of the physical phenomena
in the unambiguous language pertaining to factual evidence.
Bell looked at Jauch as if he wasn't quite certain the other man hadn't been making a joke.
I have a question about complementarity, he said,
in the voice of one who is changing the topic slightly.
Because it seems to me that Bohr used the word with the reverse of its usual meaning.
He grinned, tipping his head to the side.
Consider, for example, the elephant.
From the front she is head, trunk, and two legs.
From the back she is bottom, tail, and two legs.
From the sides she is otherwise, and from the top and bottom, different again.
These various views are complementary in the usual sense of the word.
They supplement one another, they are consistent with one another,
and they are all entailed by the unifying concept, elephant.
Bell's hands gestured to suggest this.
His eyebrows then lowered.
But Bohr, Bohr wouldn't.
It is my impression that to suppose Bohr used the word in this ordinary way
would have been regarded by him as missing his point and trivializing his thought.
He seems to insist, rather, that we must use in our analysis elements which contradict one another,
which do not add up to, or derive from, a whole.
By complementarity he meant, it seems to me, the reverse.
Contradictariness.
I'm sure you have heard Bohr's statement that the opposite of a deep truth is also a deep truth.
Yes, said Bell.
And that truth and clarity are complementary.
He certainly did like aphorisms like that.
Perhaps he took a subtle satisfaction in the use of a familiar word with the reverse of its familiar meaning.
It emphasizes the bizarre nature of the quantum world, the inadequacy of everyday notions and classical concepts,
and lays stress on how far we have left behind naive, nineteenth-century materialism.
The difference between the modern quantum physics and the classical physics of the past is less drastic than you'd think, said Jauch.
You will agree that chance is everywhere in nature and that we have no evidence in any branch of science that things happen with certainty.
Nevertheless, we agree that some things happen with such high probability that for all practical purposes it is reasonable to suppose that they happen with certainty.
It seems then that the acid test of any science is to be able to make statements about the occurrence of events whose rightness is overwhelmingly probable.
I am inclined to believe that, once this point of view is admitted, the difference between classical and quantum physics becomes much attenuated.
What seemed before an almost unreconcilable division of the world into two opposite camps now becomes more like complementary aspects of one in the same object.
Well, yes, I think that is what Bohr might say, but he seems to have been extraordinarily insensitive to the fact that we have this beautiful mathematics and we don't know which part of the world it should be applied to.
We do know, said Jauch, with a bit of carefully controlled annoyance. Bohr insisted that one had to regard the apparatus as classical.
Yes, and there was no doubt that he was convinced that he had solved the problem, and, in so doing, had not only contributed to atomic physics, but to epistemology, to philosophy, to humanity in general, said Bell with a smile.
There are astonishing passages. Have you come across this, in his writings, in which he is sort of patronizing the ancient far-eastern philosophers, almost saying that he had solved the problems that had defeated them?
It's an extraordinary thing for me, the character of Bohr. Absolutely puzzling. In my mind, there are two Bohrs. One is a very pragmatic fellow who insists that the apparatus is classical, and the other is a very arrogant, pontificating man who makes enormous claims for what he has done.
Well, really, it is hard to overestimate what Bohr has done, said Jauch, more annoyed. I think you're going too far. The principle of complementarity is possibly one of the greatest discoveries in the scientific history of mankind, with ramifications on many other levels of science.
I would never deny that Bohr's prestige is justly immense, but isn't it a little strange in Bohr that, at least as far as I can see, you don't find any discussion of where the division between his classical apparatus and quantum system occurs?
For me, it is the indispensability, and above all, the shiftiness of such a division that is the big surprise of quantum mechanics, and the hidden variable approaches one way to get rid of that division.
If you give definite properties, hidden variables, to the elementary quantum particles, you don't have to be concerned that the classical apparatus has definite properties. Everything has definite properties. It's just that they are more under our control for big things than for little things.
Now you're back to your hidden variables. Jauch leaned back in his chair, bending back a frond of the potted plant behind him.
You know, I think they resemble, as a theory, the French law courts, where you are suspected of being guilty unless you can prove your innocence to the satisfaction of the prosecution, which is, in a way, an easier system for the prosecution, just as hidden variables are, in a way, easier on the physicist.
Like a hard-pressed prosecutor, Bohm finds randomness just as unacceptable as any crime, and he requires a culprits be found. But culprits are everywhere.
When we have so many in the dock, the situation becomes bewildering. Jauch smiled tightly.
Perhaps we have uncovered only a small part of a profound, all-pervading conspiracy to annoy us with random sequences at some crucial points in our quest for understanding.
Bell was looking off into the distance. Does every hidden variable theory have to be so hideously non-local in order to work? Would any completion of quantum mechanics, in which particles always have a position and a real state, have to rely on non-locality, the spooky action at a distance that Einstein had derided?
Bell leaned over the table, his finger tracing some design on its shiny surface.
The Einstein-Podolski-Rosen setup, finger-tapping in his invisible design, would be the critical one, wouldn't it, because it leads to distant correlations. They ended their paper by stating that if you somehow completed the quantum mechanical description, the non-locality would only be apparent.
The underlying theory, unlike Bohm's, would be local.
Jauch looked at Bell in amazement.
You're so stubborn, he was shaking his head.
I can't help but—
He had an incredulous and semi-exhausted smile on his face.
I can't help but admire you.
Through the following decade, Bell was not the only one who continued to think about the hidden variable's problem.
Jauch remained intent on the parallels he saw between this debate and the long-ago one over the Copernican system versus the Earth-centered Ptolemaic system with its preposterous epicycles, circles upon circles, where, if enough were added, the planetary orbits could be predicted.
Feeling that the times were very similar to 1630, when Galileo wrote his Dialogue on the Two Chief World Systems, Jauch wrote a book titled,
Our Quanta Real, a Galilean Dialogue, which, he sets in the fall of 1970, in a villa on the shores of Lake Geneva.
Jauch brings Galileo's three characters—Philippo Salviati, the wise one, Gio Francesco Segredo, the seeker, and simple Simplicio, back on stage to give us the benefit of their wisdom at a juncture of history which is, perhaps, comparable in importance to that of 300 years ago.
Salviati is now the sage of Bohr's complementarity, and Simplicio is the one who doesn't see what's so bad about hidden variable's theories.
Many of the passages used, writes Jauch in his introduction, are more or less faithful reproductions of actual conversations or statements from correspondence and published material.
The three interlocutors do not represent actual persons, however. They are composite characters, each representing a current tendency.
I hope that living persons who find themselves thus, quoted, are satisfied as to the accurateness with which their opinions are represented.
While Bohm could be recognized in Simplicio, in one paragraph, quoting Lennon and talking about wholeness, there is never a trace of Bell. Simplicio is a strawman with clumsy arguments.
This, despite the fact that Jauch started writing this book not more than five years after meeting Bell, who had emerged during that time as the preeminent force in the opposition to the dual world of complementarity that Jauch loved so much.
What Simplicio really represents is just how little Jauch understood the force of Bell's one-world argument.
Jauch's own argument oscillates between cogent and insightful, on one hand, and cloudy and complementarian on the other, in a manner paly reminiscent of his old teacher Pauli.
It turns out that this is for the same reason.
At the end of the first day, the book comprises four days of conversation. Salviati, who always has the second to last word in these discussions, encourages the reader to seek new scientific concepts in
ideologies and their systems of images, which are the symbolic expression of the archetypal structure of the human soul.
And Segredo, who always has the last word, which tends to consist of reverent banalities about the depth of Salviati's wisdom, responds that this statement needs to be contemplated by us all.
These injunctions might bewilder the reader, but the explanation comes in the notes which begin in the psychology of C. G. Jung.
This in turn clarifies why the climax is given over to a long dream, which Simplicio recounts to the other two on the third day, complete with a whispering Jungian anima and a discussion of the significance of the passage from the number three to four.
The notes explain that the dream deals with the symbolic acceptance of the principle of complementarity for which Simplicio is not ready.
The notes also explain that this dream conveys a moral. What is the good of winning the whole world if one loses one's own soul?
Evidently, there are two ways of winning and losing. Simplicio is not yet capable of distinguishing between the two.
The book ends grandiosly, with Salviati's declaration in the second to last paragraph. Thus does microphysics lead to insights which give reasons for hope of a better understanding of all our experiences, including the moral and social behavior of man, commenting that I address these words particularly to Simplicio.
Segredo responds, Your words, dear Salviati, are so filled with meaning that anything we might say after them would seem shallow.
The second paragraph of Bell's paper on the problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics appears similarly to be addressed in particular to one person.
Whether this question, the problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics, is indeed interesting, has been the subject of debate.
The present paper does not contribute to that debate. It is addressed to those who do find the question interesting, and, more particularly, to those among them who believe that. Here, Bell footnotes yow.
The question concerning the existence of such hidden variables received an early and rather decisive answer in the form of von Neumann's proof on the mathematical impossibility of such variables in quantum theory.
An attempt will be made to clarify what von Neumann and his successors actually demonstrated.
Bell ends his introduction with a characteristic amused observation at his own expense.
Like all authors of non-commissioned reviews, he thinks he can restate the position with such clarity and simplicity that all previous discussions will be eclipsed.
In fact, that is exactly what happened, but first, the Bells went on a trip to California.
When John and Mary Bell arrived at Stanford on November 23, 1963, people were wandering past the terracotta roofs and yellow walls, the rows of palms and colonnades in shock.
John F. Kennedy had been shot the day before.
Mary immediately began work with the accelerator group there at Slack, but John seemed to be alone often, fiddling away with a pencil and a piece of paper.
For days he drew little diagrams, all the while looking as if he were trying to solve a particularly vexing word puzzle or mind-teaser.
All the esoteric particles he had been writing papers about, the pie-missons that hold the nucleus together and the neutrinos that emerge from its decay, had flown out of his mind.
He was consumed by Yoke's impossibility-proof and his own suspicion that, as he was to write years later,
what is proved by impossibility-proofs is lack of imagination.
Eventually Mary asked him,
Whatever are you doing, John?
Well, you know, it's very strange, said John, looking up from his desk for the first time in hours.
I've just been playing around with a simple system of two spin-one-half particles, the name for particles, like electrons that must spin twice around in order to arrive back at the state they started in.
Not trying to be very serious, you know, but just to get some simple relations between input and output that might give a local account of the quantum correlations.
Mary looked at him surprised.
A local account of quantum correlations?
Of all things.
But, John continued,
Nothing I have tried has worked.
And Bohm's theory is non-local, and de Broglie's before him.
I'm beginning to feel that it very likely can't be done.
But why?
Asked Mary, curious, bending over his scribbles.
She pushed one paper aside, looked at the one beneath it.
Why are you suddenly trying to do this?
Joseph Yoke is actually trying to strengthen von Neumann's theorem that bans hidden variables.
For me, that was like a red light to a bowl.
He grinned and Mary laughed.
So you've returned to von Neumann, she said, smiling.
Here, would you take a look at this for me?
He asked, reaching under the top level of papers to a series of calculations carefully written out and interspersed with lines of notes in John's beautiful handwriting.
This is my answer to Yoke.
He handed it to Mary, who pulled up a chair beside his desk and began to read over his calculations, knotting slowly as she read down the page, her bobbed, wavy hair falling around her face.
She laid the first piece of paper behind the second, and continued reading in silence.
John watched her with a mixture of fondness and expectation on his face.
Well, really, she said as she looked up.
Von Neumann's assumption does look rather foolish when you phrase it like that.
Bell had come to the same conclusion that Greta Herrmann had, the same point that Einstein had made to Bergmann and Bergmann.
Einstein, of course, never published anything about this, and the offhand presentation of Greta's insight had kept it from broader notice.
So you don't see anything wrong with my steps?
No, it all looks good and clear, she said with a smile.
She laid down the paper and said, So then, these drawings?
She gestured at his desk.
The strange thing that kept on coming up as Yoke and I discussed these matters was how non-local Bohm's theory was.
In his theory, the Einstein-Podolski-Rosen paradox is resolved in the way Einstein would have liked least, using spooky action at a distance.
It's very strange.
And what you wonder, said Mary, is whether a hidden variables theory must be non-local in order to agree with the predictions of quantum mechanics.
Exactly, said John.
So I've been testing the EPR thought experiment.
I think Einstein was wrong, said Mary.
I suspect that action at a distance has not been disposed of yet, said John.
Bell finished his first paper on Neumann's faulty hidden variables proof.
Mary checked it over, and he sent it off to Reviews of Modern Physics.
It seems likely that David Bohm was the referee.
He suggested that Bell expand on the role of measurement, a subject that occupies fifty pages in Bohm's textbook.
Bell tacked on a paragraph.
With or without hidden variables, the analysis of the measurement process presents peculiar difficulties, and we enter upon it no more than is strictly necessary for our very limited purpose.
He returned the manuscript to the journal.
Here, the ghost of Thon Neumann rises for a third time to prevent, or at least once again delay, the general knowledge that he had made a silly mistake.
Bell's edited paper, on its return, was mis-filed.
After a while the editor wrote Bell to ask for the paper, but sent the letter to Slack.
No one at Stanford felt sufficiently public-spirited to forward this letter on to Bell, who sabbatical in America had taken him across the country from Stanford to Brandeis.
So, the paper languished somewhere among piles of paper at Reviews of Modern Physics for two years, until 1966, when Bell wrote the journal to ask what had happened.
In 1964, of course, Bell had no idea of all this, and meanwhile he was feeling more and more confident that it was this requirement of locality that created the essential difficulty to the hidden variables scheme.
One weekend his ideas coalesced, and it was Bell's turn to make an impossibility proof. No local hidden variables theories.
The equation he came up with was to become famous, known as the Bell Inequality.
A pair of distant particles may exhibit a certain amount of correlation. The requirements of locality and separability together restrict that amount to beneath a certain level.
If the correlations surpass that limit, either locality or separability is violated.
Entangled particles violate this inequality with disconcerting frequency. They are flagrantly more correlated than they have any right, by common sense, to be.
The fabric of reality requires some form of either non-locality or non-separability. Incredibly enough, after all the gedonkin experiments and accusations of metaphysics of the previous four decades,
the example considered above, wrote Bell of this inequality, has the advantage that it requires little imagination to envisage the measurements involved actually being made.
Thus, in 1964, the second one of Bell's pair of papers sallied forth in the pages of the very first, and second to last, edition of Physics, to take its chances in the world.
But already a link had been formed. Just as Bell almost uniquely saw the importance of Bohm's paper the very year it was published,
so Bell's paper actually found its critical reader immediately. And this, improbably, in the philosophy department of MIT.
Chapter 29. A Little Imagination. 1969
Some consideration of theories involving hidden variables is at present needed to help us avoid dogmatic preconceptions.
Such preconceptions not only restrict our thinking in an unjustifiable way, but also similarly restrict the kinds of experiments that we are likely to perform.
David Bohm, 1962
There are three kinds of worlds. The great world, the middle-sized world, and many little worlds.
The great world is the world of nature, consisting of the stars, the sun, the planets, the moon, the earth, and all that the earth contains.
The middle-sized world is the world of human society, with its nations, governments, armies, religions, factories, farms, schools, families, and everything else formed by human beings.
The many little worlds are individual human beings.
Each man, woman, and child is a little world. But, of course, each is shaped and influenced by the middle-sized world of human society, often in strange and surprising ways.
Likewise, each is shaped and influenced by the great world of nature, sometimes in ways that no one could predict.
So begins the story of Tobaldo and the Hole in the Calendar.
A tale of a little Italian boy in 1582 who found that when Pope Gregory reformed the Julian calendar by deleting ten days in the October of that year, his birthday had been deleted too.
Because the Julian calendar was accidentally eleven minutes and fourteen seconds longer than the solar year, it had set Easter on an inexorable march toward the summer.
When Tobaldo finds that his birthday has fallen through this Hole in the Calendar, he sets out on a campaign to get it back.
It is a beautiful book, a children's chapter book of science and society contained effortlessly within the story of a boy.
And if one reads the cover flap, one finds that the book was written by Abner Chamoni, a Bostonian theoretical physicist and illustrated in sepia tones by his son, a Parisian printmaker.
Science is the search for truth, but its searchers are individual people, operating and sometimes caught within the webs of the middle-sized world.
The opening words of Chamoni's children's story would well introduce any story about science, including this one.
Abner Chamoni did not know how he had ended up receiving a preprint of this paper of bells, and as he sat in his office reading it, the purple ink smearing on his hands, it did not immediately strike him as good fortune.
Some friends of his at Brandeis, where Bell had written an early draft of the paper and delivered a talk on it, must have put him on the preprint list.
He had not heard of this J.S. Bell from CERN, and already he was finding arithmetical errors that made him suspect it was just another kook letter.
But this doesn't sound like a kook, he thought.
Something kept him reading.
Two years earlier, in the spring of 1962, Chamoni had earned his second Ph.D. in physics from Princeton, while simultaneously teaching the subject of the first one, philosophy, at MIT.
When he started studying physics again, his professor gave him the EPR paper and told him to,
Read it until you understand what's wrong with it.
Chamoni duly read it and re-read it with the pragmatism of an aspiring physicist and the attention to detail of a philosopher.
No fatal flaw came to light.
He wanted to inoculate me, Chamoni would later relate with an amused expression, but it sometimes happens that inoculations cause the disease.
As he read Bell's preprint, the disease developed a complication.
The little arithmetical errors faded into triviality, and Bell's incredible result, with the beauty and force of a tiger emerging from the long grass where it had lain hidden, leaped up from the page.
The premises of EPR that were so plausible, that the world is not spooky but locally causal, and that it is not entangled but can be separated into objectively real, unconnected pieces, finally had met the dauntingly successful quantum theory in a place where only one could be right.
Chamoni thought, if you have an incompatibility, you'd better do an experiment.
His heart began to beat faster. He leaned forward in his chair and scanned the page again.
As the tiger paced around his mind, its tail swishing, Chamoni pondered this experiment that the author Bell had suggested would take only a little imagination to envision.
How would it be done?
He remembered a paper written by Bohm that had come out seven years earlier.
With one of his best students, Yakir Arharanov, Bohm was musing on one of the aspects of entanglement that had occupied Schrodinger's mind back in 1935.
Granted, entanglement exists when the particles are close together, for example, in the two electrons of the helium atom, or the two atoms of Rosen's hydrogen molecule.
But, in their thought experiment designed to discredit the quantum theory, Einstein, Podolski and Rosen assumed, as the theory seemed to indicate, that the particles would remain entangled while infinitely separate.
No one had ever proved this was possible. In fact, nothing remained of the EPR argument if, as soon as the particles lost touch, they also lost all memory of each other, decomposing into uninteresting and simple product states.
An entangled state, by contrast, is not the product of two individual states. Two particles in an entangled state have no individual states.
The paper by Bohm and Arharanov had stuck in Chamoni's mind because of the ingenious way the two investigators had gone about this long-fellow problem.
They had remembered a brief letter to the editor by Chen Xiang Wu, a.k.a. Madame Wu, of Columbia University, that had appeared in physical review seven years earlier.
With her grad student, Irving Shakhnov, who died soon after in the Korean War, Wu was working with positronium, the strange pair made up of an electron and its antiparticle.
Wu and Shakhnov had performed delicate experiments with the high-energy photons, gamma rays, which have even more energy than x-rays, produced when positronium annihilates itself, as it must.
Bohm and Arharanov looked at her data and re-analyzed it with entanglement in mind. The theory suggested that these two gamma rays would be entangled.
Bohm and Arharanov, said Chamoni, avoided the need to perform a new experiment by brilliantly exploiting the results of an experiment which had been performed for an entirely different purpose, an exemplary case of quantum archaeology.
Bohm and Arharanov had shown that gamma rays indeed seemed to remain entangled, but was the situation really as extreme as Bell's theorem suggested, with a direct and inexorable conflict between localized, separate particles, each with its own real state, and the quantum theory?
Chamoni began wondering if any experimentalist he knew would be willing to redo the Wu-Shakhnov experiment to greater precision and generality.
The purpose would be to test the Bell inequality, which requires really dramatic non-local correlations. When Arharanov visited MIT, Chamoni diffidently brought up the subject.
Arharanov, tall, thin, handsome, definitive, said that he and Bohm had already shown all that needed to be shown. For a while, Chamoni dropped the subject.
In Manhattan a few years later, in the late 1960s, an astrophysics graduate student at Columbia named John Clauser happened upon Bell's paper in the library of the Goddard Institute for Space Studies.
The same thing happened to me that happened to many people during that time period, Clauser said years later. It was incredible to me. I didn't understand it or couldn't believe it. The tiger had leaped into another questioning mind.
That evening, Clauser went home to Flushing Bay, where he was living on his racing yacht, with the airplanes of LaGuardia roaring overhead, and couldn't get Bell's idea out of his head.
I thought, if I don't believe it, I should be able to give counter-examples. So I tried to, continued Clauser, and failed. I realized this is the most amazing result I've ever seen in my life.
Perhaps too amazing.
I was not yet willing to accept the paper's far-reaching implications, recalled Clauser, until I saw some experimental evidence that decided between its two significantly different predictions, in essence entanglement, or local realism, locality, and separability, where the particles have states that are not dependent on each other.
Since Bell's paper is conspicuously vague on the experimental status of its prediction, but crystal clear on everything else, I suspected that Bell was bluffing.
While searching for an experiment anywhere in the books, he began thinking about how he would do one himself, re-deriving Bell's result in a more general way that could actually be realized with a real, imperfect, non-gedanken experimental apparatus.
My thesis advisor, growing impatient with Clauser's extracurricular interest, told me, you're wasting your time. He wanted me to be a real astronomer. This, however, was not to be.
Meanwhile, Shimoni was leaving his tenured philosophy post at MIT for Boston University to teach physics as well as philosophy.
The branch of physics he had focused on for his PhD had been statistical mechanics, and a friend of his at BU told him just after he arrived, we've got a wonderful stat mech grad student for you to work with.
The grad student, Mike Horn, arrived at his door soon after.
I'm not doing stat mech anymore, said Shimoni. His thoughts had turned to that purple mimeograph of Bell's paper, but something must have struck him about the tall, soft-spoken Mississippi boy.
I had been in Abner's office exactly five minutes when he showed me Bell's paper, remembered Horn.
See if you can design an experiment, said Shimoni. EPR's premises are so plausible that maybe something will happen.
Horn found that he could construct a local, hidden variables theory to explain the Wu-Shaknov data, showing, for their purposes, that there was no point in considering experiments like it.
The correlation between the gamma rays' photons was too weak. That, Horn remembered, was the first thing I gave to Abner that caught his attention.
Bell's theorem required an experimental setup that could grant them a closer look at entanglement.
Clouser, meanwhile, unaware of Shimoni and Horn, was in hot pursuit of the same goal.
A conversation with Madame Wu proved fruitless. Then he heard that Dave Prichard at MIT was doing an experiment involving the scattering of metal atoms that might fit the bill.
When he explained what he was looking for, Prichard turned to a recently arrived postdoc from Berkeley, Carl Kosher.
Carl, wouldn't your experiment test this?
Of course, said Kosher. That's why we did it.
When he got back to Columbia, Clouser raced to the library to look in the recent physical review letters for the details of Kosher's experiment, which had been performed under the guidance of a highly respected Berkeley professor, Eugene Cummins.
Clouser found that, like the EPR-Gedankin experiments it was designed to illuminate, Kosher and Cummins had measured the entanglement particles only when the analyzers were parallel and when they were perpendicular to each other.
It happens that it is only the intermediate cases, when the analyzers are not aligned at right angles, where Bell's inequality shows that all solutions that assume locality and separability fail.
But Kosher and Cummins's source, two entangled photons of visible light emitted one after the other from a calcium atom in what is called an atomic cascade, seemed perfect for Clouser's needs.
If an atom receives a jolt of high energy light, an ultraviolet photon in the case of the Berkeley experiment, it will absorb that energy and become excited.
The excited state is not stable. The atom starts to lose energy again, which it can only do discreetly in the form of a photon.
An atomic cascade takes place when the atom loses that energy in two stages, releasing one low-energy photon and then a second which is entangled with the first.
Kosher and Cummins had verified the entanglement of these atomic cascade photons by measuring their polarization.
Polarization, first noticed in the 17th century but not named until 1811, is a measure of the inclination or tilt of electromagnetic waves.
Each of these waves, unlike water waves and sound waves, oscillates in two directions, an electrical component waving up and down and a magnetic component waving from side to side.
The wave travels forward in a direction perpendicular to both of these components.
To visualize these relationships, imagine a fish whose dorsal fin represents the electric field and whose side fins represent the magnetic field.
Like the fish, the wave can tilt without changing the relationship between the electric field and the magnetic field or the direction of travel, and the angle at which it leans is its polarization.
Polarization, a wave concept, bears some similarities to spin, a particle concept.
Like spin, which always can be described in terms of up and down, polarization can be broken down into two kinds, horizontal and vertical.
Other tilts can be described by adding these two directions together.
For example, polarization at 45 degrees is one half vertical and one half horizontal.
This tilt, of course, cannot be seen directly, but certain materials called polarizers filter out either the horizontal component of the light or the vertical.
Kosher and Cummins had used Polaroid sheets, which are a translucent material holding a series of stretched and stained organic molecules in parallel lines.
If these molecules are vertical, they will absorb vertically polarized light.
Most reflected light or glare from snow or water is vertically polarized, so the molecules and Polaroid sunglasses are arranged in vertical rows to catch it.
If they are tilted on their side, they will absorb horizontally polarized light.
In either case, they let the other polarization pass through.
Kosher and Cummins found that each pair of atomic cascade photons was polarized identically, both vertical or both horizontal.
Could this experimental setup test Bell's inequality?
Clouser wondered.
His long-suffering astrophysics thesis advisor, capitulating to Clouser's enthusiasm, said,
Well, why don't you write him a letter and ask him?
Clouser sent off letters not only to Bell, but also to Bohm and to Breu, asking them all what they thought.
His proposal sounded viable to all three, and none had heard of anyone else who had already solved the problem.
For Bell in particular, this crazy American student was the first person to respond seriously to his paper, and he wrote to Clouser,
In view of the general success of quantum mechanics, it is very hard for me to doubt the outcome of such experiments.
However, I would prefer these experiments in which the crucial concepts are very directly tested to have been done and the results on record.
Moreover, there is always the chance of an unexpected result which would shake the world.
Clouser, who fully expected defined local hidden variables, could hardly have received a more exciting letter.
The McCarthy era was now in the distant past, Clouser recalled.
Instead, the Vietnam War dominated the political thoughts of my generation.
Being a young student living in this era of revolutionary thinking, I naturally wanted to shake the world.
Overthrowing the quantum establishment would certainly do it.
In Massachusetts, meanwhile, Richard Holt, a Harvard grad student with bushy hair and an unruly goatee, was painting shelves while listening to the Red Sox Lose the 1967 World Series,
completely unaware of what he was about to be sucked into.
To make space for his thesis experiment, he was cleaning out a tiny room full of disused equipment in the back of Professor Frank Pipkin's bustling basement lab.
The little room had previously been used for an experiment in Bat Sonar, with its walls covered in cork and blindfolded bats flying around obstacles placed in their paths.
The apparatus Holt was now moving into the Bat Cave, as they called it, was built to measure the lifetimes of excited states of Mercury.
This was done by timing the difference in arrival between the two visible light photons of an atomic cascade.
One emitted as the Mercury atom entered the intermediate state, and one when it lost energy again.
Breed and butter physics, said Holt.
One day, a small, kindly Boston University professor in tortoiseshell glasses, followed by a towering grad student, amiably humming into his beard, arrived at the Bat Cave.
Shimoni and Horn's year-long search, in which Shimoni recalled, we made pests of ourselves looking for a source of correlated low-energy photons, was over.
They were determined to woo Holt away from bread and butter.
Holt had already read Bell's paper, on the recommendation of a professor who had thought it was, cute.
I went to the library and totally failed to appreciate the significance, he said.
But now it came back to haunt me, with Shimoni urging its importance and Horn telling him it would be fun.
I was kind of intrigued, remembered Holt.
Then I had to persuade my thesis supervisor that this was worth doing, which I did by saying,
well, you know, look, Frank, we'll whip that off in six months and then I'll get back to real physics.
The experiment took more than four years.
All seemed set, until Shimoni's American Physical Society bulletin arrived, bearing the strange news that someone at Columbia was planning to conduct the very same experiment.
Shimoni called Horn, hard at work on their proposal, with the bad news that, we've been scooped.
Then he called his former advisor, Eugene Wigner, Dirac's brother-in-law.
And Wigner said, well, call this fella, he hasn't written it up yet and you haven't written it up yet, so who knows, maybe he'll join in.
Still upset, Shimoni placed the call.
When he got off the phone, Clouser was on the team, even thrilled that somebody was interested, as far as Horn could tell.
The peace-loving Shimoni never let Horn know, until almost forty years later, that there was a hint of shotgun to the marriage.
What finally made Clouser want to join Shimoni and Horn, was the Batcave experimental apparatus.
He had no apparatus of his own, and desperately wanted to do the experiment.
This was not Clouser's thesis work for his doctorate, said Horn. He had to hide it.
If he talked to anybody about it at Columbia, they'd say, but aren't you supposed to be doing astronomy?
After Clouser finished his thesis work, there was a two-week hiatus before he had to defend it for his astronomy PhD.
He threw himself into Horn and Shimoni's paper, and Holt showed him around the apparatus.
It was wonderful to all go at it together, Shimoni recalled. In batting things around, we discovered and refined lots of little points.
One of these little points involved an experimentalist ex machina rescue by Holt.
Shimoni, Horn, and Clouser realized that they had been making their calculations as if the photons always left the atom in exactly opposite directions.
But, as Shimoni explained, the photons go every which way.
Holt knew how to handle what Horn called the mathematical, heavy machinery of the realistic but complicated calculation.
Meanwhile, Clouser's dream of getting his hands on an apparatus of his own had taken an unexpected turn nearer to reality.
He received a job offer from Berkeley, where Carl Kosher's EPR demonstration apparatus still sat somewhere in Eugene Cummins' lab.
Clouser, of course, would not be hired to study the Bell inequality.
Charlie Towns, who had received the Nobel Prize five years earlier for his inspired role in the development of the laser, had offered him a position in radio astronomy, studying the early life of the universe.
So, after a rough draft and his PhD defense, Clouser unmoored his boat, the synergy from her birth in Flushing Bay, and set off with high hopes for Berkeley.
Planning to sail to Galveston, Texas, truck the boat across the southwest, and put back in the water south of Los Angeles to sail up the fabled California coast.
Meanwhile, Shimoni was undaunted.
At least we're making waves by this turn of events and kept Clouser in the loop by mailing him drafts as he and Horn, with the timely aid of Holt, progressed back in Boston.
Various marinas down the east coast would see a tall, blonde sailor hunched over a pay phone, arguing about arcaneities such as non-zero solid angles, until the advent of Hurricane Camille put the synergy onto a truck in Fort Lauderdale.
Clouser drove to Los Angeles and then put back into the water at Venice Beach.
The paper was done, he remembered, by the time I arrived in Berkeley.
Under the title, Proposed Experiment to Test Local Hidden Variable Theories, it came out in the mid-October physical review letters, bearing their generalization of Bell's theorem.
So as to apply to realizable experiments, the four authors declared, a decisive test can be obtained by modifying the Clouser Cummins experiment.
Cummins, however, did not consider his experiment with Clouser a starting point for modification. In fact, he had planned it merely as a nice demonstration to do for an undergraduate quantum mechanics course.
Clouser had even started building the experimental apparatus on a wheeled cart to facilitate this goal.
It turned out to be a little bit more difficult than that, remembered Cummins, but not much, and there was no surprise in the result.
Cummins was tall enough to look Clouser in the eye when they met, and confident enough to remain unfazed by Clouser's enthused explanation of why the situation demanded further explanation.
There's nothing in that, Cummins said, don't waste my time.
Help came from an unexpected source, the man who had hired Clouser not to search for hidden variables, but for the cosmic microwave background of the Big Bang.
Charlie Towns, Clouser remembered with gratitude, talked Gene Cummins, who was still grumbling about all this foolishness, into tolerating the project.
I was very, very surprised that the whole world made such a big fuss about all of this, Cummins said.
Very surprised, because, you know, it just represents an entangled state, but entangled states have existed in quantum mechanics from the very beginning.
If you try to describe the two electrons in the helium atom, they're in an entangled state. It's no big deal.
The tide was turning at last. As Bell had predicted, entanglement was moving with familiar celerity from its previous condition of impossibility to a dismissible state of triviality.
One of the first things Cummins had learned about quantum physics, however, was the existence of descent.
In particular, the existence of someone who thought entanglement was not just a big deal, but a deal breaker that disproved quantum theory by introducing action at a distance.
Cummins was sixteen when his family befriended Einstein's. For the next seven years, until Einstein died, the Cummins family would make a monthly pilgrimage to Mercer Street, where Mrs. Cummins' piano playing would accompany Einstein's stately violin.
He was very nice to us, remembered Cummins. He was sort of like a grandfather to my sister and me, but he was very emotional about quantum mechanics, felt it couldn't be right, so he kept trying to poke holes in it, and EPR was an effort of his back in the thirties.
Of course, Bohr showed he was wrong, and that should have been the end of it.
This sort of statement carried a lot of weight with most physicists, even though they would be hard pressed to explain just what Bohr showed.
But Charlie Towns had had an unusual experience that inclined him to take received wisdom, even from so august a source, with a grain of salt.
At the same time that Bohm was fighting von Neumann and Bohr with his hidden variables theory, Towns was in the early stages of developing what would become the laser.
Independently, and with crushing definitiveness, both von Neumann and Bohr told him that his project could not work because of the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, which prohibited the necessary perfect alignment of photons.
In his autobiography, How the Laser Happened, Towns wrote,
I'm not sure I ever did convince Bohr.
So, with the blessing and advocacy of Towns, and the help of a grad student looking for a thesis project, Clouser began tearing apart Kosher's old apparatus.
Cummins told me there was this guy from Columbia who had contacted him and said he was interested in doing the Kosher Cummins experiment.
The grad student, Stuart Friedman, remembered, he wanted to do it to some precision and Cummins said to me, boy, that's crazy.
With this glowing recommendation, the open-minded Friedman joined Clouser's project.
I'd never really heard of this subject before then, but I thought it was quite interesting, said Friedman, and I decided, yeah, it would be possible.
Looking back on all the labor, he smiled and recalled, John was always very optimistic, thought all we had to do was take this old equipment Kosher had built and fix it up a little bit.
It turned out that wasn't the case.
Every step, from the entanglement abstractly inherent in Schrodinger's wave equation to EPR, when Einstein imagined just what this implied, to Bell's closer scrutiny, finding a testable conflict, to Horn, Shimonie, Clouser, and Holt's blueprint for bringing that conflict into the lab, was a step closer to incarnation.
But this story had so far rested in the hands of the theorists. 1969 was the year in which the experimentalists took command of the age of entanglement.
How do you tell an experimental physicist from a theorist? asks Clouser, more than thirty years later, in his northern California desert home encrusted with sailing trophies and plaques.
Running his finger along the thick spines of schoolbooks, he begins to answer his question.
A theorist will have lots of textbooks. The experimentalist will have some engineering ones, too. He taps these with his finger.
Lots and lots of fizz-rev letters. In fact, a bookshelf taking up a whole wall is crowded with the pale green journals.
Biographies of the greats and books written by them. Clouser gestures through the door of his wood-paneled office.
But the experimentalist will have—he turns, here, in the hallway beside the kitchen door, is another floor-to-ceiling bookshelf, packed with rows and rows of narrow, shiny, soft-cover bookspines in garish fluorescent colors.
Catalogues. He grins. Anything I need to make, if I don't have the pieces already, I look for it here. I can make anything.
Mail order is usually unnecessary. Outside his rambling garage, whom machine shop, is a lean-to, filled with cardboard boxes overflowing with the remnants of electronic devices, sundry gauges of wire, the flutsam and jetsam of circuit boards, tubes, connectors, magnets, gears, bevels, and cast-off machine carcasses.
To be an experimental physicist, he explains, you need to be able to make anything. You need a mill and a lathe. But, most of all, to be an experimental physicist, you need a junkyard.
The reason for this is that the most precious and valuable commodity at any physics department is floor-space. He explains, everyone has an experiment they want to be doing, and each one needs a room for that. So, once an experiment is over, there's a lot of hasty tossing out.
Since people don't label the parts of the things they're working on, the people who are cleaning up often don't know how valuable things that they're throwing out might be. But, if you know...
Of course, it's not good enough to just have a junkyard, you need to know where things are. Every junkyard owner knows where everything is. He knows, there are two 1932 Ford engines over there, and a 57 Pontiac.
Let Clauser and Friedman, squabbling slightly, explain their rattling, rumbling 16-foot apparatus, chest high on its sawhorses. Outside, daily anti-Vietnam War demonstrations bring the National Guard and tear gas to Berkeley, while hippies hold flowers, and activists throw rocks, and the dirty word guy stands upon his right to loud and obscene free speech on the steps of the Student Union.
Friedman and Clauser's room in Burge, the new physics building, is deep down in the windowless second basement, underneath it all.
The experiment is like the house that Jack built. These are the phototubes that catch the photons. These are the photons that fly through the polarizers to be counted by the phototubes that catch the photons.
This is the atom that emits the photons that fly through the polarizers to be counted by the phototubes that catch the photons.
This is the lamp that excites the atom that emits the photons that fly through the polarizers to be counted by the phototubes that catch the photons.
This is the vacuum chamber that enables the lamp to excite the atom that emits the photons that fly through the polarizers to be counted by the phototubes that catch the photons.
Clauser starts at the heart of things.
Adam Beam. It's dirt simple. It sounds a lot fancier than it is. If you boil water on a stove, you get big, billowy clouds of steam. You could also evaporate metals, too, if you get them hot enough.
Well, if you do the same thing in a vacuum, you see something absolutely amazing.
Very quickly, when you get into even a modest vacuum, the mean free path of the metal atoms, that is, the distance they're likely to travel without a collision, becomes bigger than the chamber itself.
If you're boiling water, a water molecule comes off and it runs into air and forms the cloud.
But in a vacuum, there isn't any air in the way and it just keeps right on going until it runs into the wall.
So the easiest experiment to do is just to take a piece of tantalum foil, fold it in half, kind of crinkle it open, and you just put a little pellet of something in it.
You put this in a bell jar, a vacuum. You run a current through it and the tantalum foil gets hot.
If you put a little pellet of copper in there, or aluminum, or calcium, something with a lower melting point, after a while, it's all evaporated.
And you look up and you find you've got copper, or aluminum, or calcium, or whatever it was, all over the walls of your chamber.
If you put a sheet with a hole in it, in front of the oven's mouth, and another sheet with a hole in it, in front of that one, you create an atomic beam.
Instead of evaporating all over the walls, the atomic gas is narrowed into a beam. That's all there is to it.
Our oven is heavier duty than that, of course, says Friedman, showing a block of tantalum slightly bigger than a bar of soap, studded with heater coils.
It has a cylindrical hole in the top, which can be plugged once the element to be evaporated into a beam, in this case calcium, is in place.
The evaporated calcium will emerge as a beam from a much smaller puncture hole in front.
Clouser and Friedman cut a nice cylindrical little slug of about half an ounce of calcium, and drop it into the oven without touching it.
Once locked inside its cylindrical brass vacuum chamber, the oven takes anywhere from three to five hours to heat the calcium to its evaporation point.
When the calcium atoms begin to pour out of the puncture hole in the glowing oven, travelling at an average speed of almost two thousand miles per hour in a comfortable beam of ten billion atoms per cubic centimeter, a trillionth the density of solid calcium, they head straight for the center of the apparatus.
Here, in a second cylindrical brass vacuum chamber, a beam of light through a lens in the floor ambushes the atom beam in its flight.
Each atom, thus excited, emits its entangled photons, pale green, and then purple.
Finding a light source to trigger this excitation was not easy.
I got into a lot of the technology of making lamps, Friedman recalls, that I've mercifully had the opportunity to forget because I use lasers now.
But lasers, with their tiny, intense, perfectly tunable beams, would not be ready for several years.
Friedman shone light through a filter so that it carried exactly the right amount of energy to excite the atoms to the planned two-photon cascade.
Near ultraviolet in, pale green and purple out.
After all the work it took to find the perfect lamps, lenses, polarizers and photo tubes, those wavelengths, 2275 angstroms, 5513 angstroms, 4227 angstroms, would remain stuck in Friedman's mind for the next thirty years.
Everything had to be very big, says Friedman.
The fundamental problem is that you need a lot of light from the lamp, which meant an enormous polarizer, and, well, enormous polarizers with high efficiency. They don't exist.
Clouser had already determined that Polaroid sheets were not efficient enough to test Bell's theorem.
Holt, back at Harvard, was using calcite, an elegant natural crystal that, when looked through, shows doubled images of each object.
These doubled images occur because calcite separates the light that strikes it into two parallel, oppositely polarized streams.
But calcite does not come in the gargantuan size that Friedman and Clouser needed.
Piles of plates polarizers are essentially long stacks of ordinary glass.
Being fragile and bulky, Friedman explains in his thesis, they, are normally employed only when more convenient polarizing materials are not applicable.
When a pane of glass is tilted just shy of sixty degrees at what is called Brewster's angle, named after the inventor of the kaleidoscope, it will reflect only light polarized parallel to its surface.
The light passing through tends to be polarized at right angles to the reflected light.
The piles of plates purify this light that passes through, selecting for the perpendicular polarization.
A long enough series of such plates, reflection by reflection, pane by pane, will emit at the far end a filtered beam entirely composed of perpendicularly polarized light.
The paper-thin glass designed for microscope slides seemed right, since it would absorb very few of the precious photons in transit.
It was so thin, in fact, that the glass arrived in apparently hopelessly wavy warped sheets.
Judicious work with an abrasive saw, however, cut out from among the waves twenty flat stretches, graduated in size, up to almost a foot square, to accommodate the light beam's spread as it progressed.
In order to measure polarization at different angles, just as in the EPR paper one might measure either position or momentum, and, as in Bohm's and Bell's version, either spin in the X direction or spin in the Y direction,
the polarizers had to move.
Friedman and Clouser turned to Dave Redder, a tall, laconic-bearded machinist about their age, who had honed his inventiveness at sea on a navy radar ship, fixing equipment hundreds of miles offshore for a month at a time.
Redder produced everything from little projects like their tantalum oven to the big machine that held the glass plates at Brewster's angle while tilting the long blue plywood boxes, which Clouser called the coffins, that held them.
The machine did not rotate the coffins continuously, rotisserie style.
Using something called a Geneva gear, it was set to pause sixteen times per rotation, that is, every twenty-two point five degrees, to allow each hundred second run of the experiment.
Like a big clock, says Friedman, the idea of the Geneva gear came from a book called Ingenious Mechanisms, full of industrial age solutions to engineering problems.
A centuries-old watchmaker's invention, Geneva gears are still used in movie projection, converting easily produced rotary motion into a precisely calibrated stop-and-go.
A slotted wheel turns continuously, engaging and disengaging a peg on a smaller wheel in a visually hypnotic tango.
Inside each coffin, and attached to its Geneva gear, a frame held the polarizing plates suspended from a taut loop of wire.
Retter, who on his weekends, applied a second trade as a commercial fisherman, produced salmon line, a braided stainless steel cable, and fishing pole guides to run the lines through.
We had to do single photon counting at a time when doing good single photon counting had just been developed, remembers Friedman.
RCA had just developed these tubes called clonticons, and I got in league with them. In fact, learned a great deal about phototubes.
They offered me a job because I knew so much about phototubes.
Two of these phototubes, one on each end of the piles of plate polarizers, caught the photons.
Each photon, striking the alkali metal inside the lining of the phototube, was supposed to dislodge an electron.
Caesium, its heavenly blue spectral line discovered a century earlier by Bunsen, only halfway down the periodic table, is the largest atom of all.
Other alkali metals, like lithium and sodium, are also much bigger than the atoms that surround them on the periodic table.
An alkali metal atom is so big because of a single high-flying electron in its outermost orbit, straying far from the nucleus, whose pole the electron only tenuously feels.
A photon needs only a small amount of energy, called the work function, to free this wide-ranging electron from its atom and send it galloping down the wires to a photomultiplier tube.
The photomultiplier, in turn, sends five electrons to the counting computers.
Thus a nice, sharp pulse, five, ten nanoseconds long, as Clouser describes it, if you do the electron optics nicely, alert the computers of the arrival of a photon.
But the phototubes had to be cold to keep the dark current down.
The dark current?
Clouser smiles.
Clouser smiles.
Okay, ideally it wouldn't exist.
Students and theorists view of the photomultiplier tube.
You put photons in, you get counts out, there's some electronics, you get little pulses, you count the pulses, and you know how many photons came in, right?
He grins at the innocence.
Reality?
You put in a lot of photons, and not many counts come out.
You don't put any photons at all in, and you get counts coming out.
The latter are the dark rate.
Experimental physics, like life, is messy.
The bigger the photocathode area, the alkali coat on the inside of the phototube, the greater the dark current, so ideally you want a small photocathode.
The warmer the tube, the greater the dark current, because we have a distribution of electron energies inside.
Some of the electrons happen to have high energies.
On the tail of the distribution, some have energies that are higher than the work function, the amount of energy it takes to dislodge an outer electron.
They just will escape all by themselves.
How can I tell those apart from those that were ejected by photons?
An electron's an electron, and it doesn't take very many electrons escaping to give you one hell of a substantial dark current.
There are other things. You can get thermiotic emissions, you'll spray out electrons off any sharp spots in there.
Or, among your alkali metals in your potassium you might have some potassium-41 in there, and that's radioactive, it's gonna decay and produce electrons.
All this produces dark current, says Clouser. Anything produces dark current. There are lots of processes and lots of black arts going on inside the damn tubes.
So they set each little phototube in a horizontal pipe, soldered through a styrofoam-insulated brass tank full of ice.
The phototube that caught what Clouser referred to as the red photon, red in this case is slang for longer wavelength, needed to be chilled to minus 78 degrees.
This feat required a slush of dry ice and alcohol.
In a Boston winter, when you step off the curb, it looked just like that. Clouser laughs.
Clouser laughs. But now, boy, you didn't want to put your finger in there. And that's what it took to get the dark current down to levels where we could do our experiment.
Every step went slowly. Every component was studied, tested, rethought, rebuilt.
People always think you don't have the time to test everything, says Clouser. The truth is, you don't not have the time. It's actually the time-saving way of doing it.
It's hard when you're eager to know what nature's doing. You almost have to train yourself to be anti-curious while you're building your hardware.
People always want to slap it all together, turn it on, and see what happens. But for the first run, you can almost guarantee it's not going to work right.
There's nothing simple about doing experimental physics, especially if you're doing it with Stone Age hardware, and you're always pushing the edge of the capabilities of whatever equipment you have.
After two years spent building and testing the apparatus, the experiment took 280 hours over a two-month period.
When it was ready, it all ran without any help except for filling the liquid nitrogen traps, which maintained the vacuum by removing any condensation and making sure the capacitor hadn't blown up, as it tended to do, remembered Friedman.
At the end of each 100-second counting cycle, the machine automatically paused, and a sequencer, an old telephone relay that Clouser had rescued, would order one or the other polarizer to turn 22.5 degrees in an orchestrated cacophony of domino-like noise and action.
Vivid in Clouser's mind 30 years later.
These big mama two-horsepower motors would crank over the coffins and the teletype would clatter away, the paper tape pummeling accordion-style into a peach basket, spraying its chads across the floor to the ca-chunk of the serial printer monitoring the quartz crystal that monitored the calcium beam.
Then the apparatus recorded and realigned would start its new run, and the lamp would once again excite the atom beam, launching pairs of entangled photons in opposite directions down the angled glass stacks to the phototubes, sending electrons to the counting equipment with their white numbers turning on black wheels.
Masses and clots of vine-thick wires plugged and unplugged, snaking over front and back.
Meanwhile, Clouser occasionally got calls from towns.
We're not getting any astronomy done now, John.
But he worked on switching the budget, so I got paid.
Clouser remembered with gratitude.
Between the two bell experimenters themselves, however, Freedman remembered battles.
We had real disagreements on how this should be done and what needed to be done.
One of the first things Clouser told him, recalled Freedman, was about his entry into a paper airplane contest held by Scientific American.
Following the strict rules for the amount of paper and glue allowed, what Clouser devised was the glider that would really fly the farthest, except it looked exactly like a baseball.
He glued his paper into a block and then machined it into a sphere on his lathe, even painted the stitching onto the baseball.
He was going to have some baseball pitcher heave this.
Freedman laughed and shook his head.
They tried to disqualify him from the contest after a long discussion about whether baseballs fly or not.
And that's typical of John.
He's a smart guy, recalled Cummins later, but he's pig-headed, an iconoclast.
He was very stubborn and wanted everything done his way and sort of made life miserable for poor Freedman.
And add to it, Clouser's a big hulking guy and Freedman's sort of small and was maybe a bit intimidated.
Outside of the basement of Burge, things were easier.
We would go sailing all the time, says Freedman, and when we were sailing, everything was fine.
We had a lot of good times sailing.
Chapter 30
Nothing simple about experimental physics.
1971 to 1975.
And the first run was finished.
Just down the hall from Freedman and Clouser, filling up a room of its own, sat the computer, an IBM 1620 mainframe in its webs of electronics, printers and wires that had been rescued from some company's trash by Howard Sugart of the Atomic Beams Department.
Clouser was loading a program on the computer so it could read the results, which had emerged from their apparatus as a perforated paper tape.
The program itself was a six-foot-long deck of perforated cards, one card for each line of code.
Down the long, sloping gullet of the card reader, Clouser's deck disappeared, card by card.
Girlp.
A stew, he said, as Freedman came in the door carrying the peach basket full of paper tape, which had gotten tangled in its rush from the mouth of the teletype machine.
I just heard a great story about Cummins.
Oh, yeah? said Freedman, sitting down on a chair between the noisy printer and the big electronics rack that was the computer itself.
He started untangling the paper tape.
It's about Cummins up on the roof of this building in the middle of the night with his helium leak detector, said Clouser.
Freedman looked up from the tangled paper tape.
Well, said Clouser, he applied for permission to do an experiment that involved funneling radioactive gas from up the hill, from the target of the cyclotron.
And he was sitting around waiting and not getting any reply at all, and so finally he just decided to go ahead and do it.
So he runs this pipe fifty feet in the air, gets it all set up, and it leaks.
Clouser was bouncing back and forth between the console and the card reader while telling his story.
And he thinks, shit, I don't want to draw attention to this, so he has to fix the leak at night.
The last card disappeared into the reader.
Clouser loped back to the console.
And he fixes it, and he finishes his experiment.
Still no word from the honchos, and gets a nice little result, publishes, and then, finally, he hears from them.
Big grin.
Your permission is denied.
Freedman laughed, too.
If Gene is willing to ignore the committee, that shows how absurd it is.
All right, paper tape's ready.
Load away, said Clouser, and very slowly the paper tape reader worked its way through the spool, spitting out punch cards at the other end.
Returning to their room, they began to read their results from the neat matrix of holes punched through numbers on the punch cards.
Clouser plotted out a graph, following the changing number of photon coincidences.
The coincidences, the simultaneous detection of the green photon, the first photon to be emitted in the atomic cascade, in one phototube, and its purple mate in the other, rose and fell in number, depending on the ever-changing alignment between the two polarizers.
When the polarizers are parallel, there are many coincidences.
There are fewer when they are at slightly different tilts, there are almost none when they are at right angles to each other.
Quantum mechanics predicts for this relationship a smooth, snake-like undulation, a sine wave, with a rounded peak at the origin, when the polarizers are parallel, sliding quickly past 45 degrees to its trough at 90 degrees, then rising back up to another rounded peak at 180 degrees when they are parallel again.
The photons are correlated, regardless of the distance between them, and, with parallel polarizers, learning the position of one is enough to know the polarization of the other.
But the curve that emerged under Clouser's pencil was scalloped, like the windows in a mosque, exactly what you'd expect if there were local, hidden variables, if there were no entanglement, if quantum mechanics was wrong.
The photons seemed to be following separate patterns, not the perfect straight-lined zigzag that would be a totally conclusive result, but still extremely suggestive.
Wow! said Clouser, staring at this cusped curve. As he recalled later, at that point I had just been calculating predictions from a whole bunch of ad hoc, hidden variable theories that people had come up with, and it looked like some of the stuff I'd been calculating.
Maybe we found it.
Okay, let's check it through, said Friedman, his brow furrowed, comparing the numbers from the punch card with the points on the graph.
There's always the chance you might shake the world, Clouser quoted, as he often did, from Bell's letter back in 1969. Friedman grinned and raised his eyebrows.
We'll see.
He shook his head, looking again first at the punch card, then at the graph.
Just then Cummins walked into the room.
How's it going, Stu? John? Finished your first run-through yet?
Friedman looked at Clouser. Clouser looked at Friedman. Friedman picked up Clouser's graph.
Look at this.
Cummins frowned thoughtfully at it.
You've checked this over?
Yeah, twice, said Clouser.
Said Clouser.
Of course we need more data, said Friedman.
Definitely, said Cummins, laying the graph down on the table.
Clouser picked it up again.
We're pretty marginal, but it looks like we're within the error bars.
Cummins was not excited.
Well, why don't you start that back up and get some data to compare to this?
He jerked a thumb behind him at the now peaceful machine.
I'll see you too soon, and we'll see about this.
I mean, yeah, said Clouser, as Cummins was leaving.
We've obviously got to do some more testing.
But this graph...
Friedman looked over at Clouser with a grin.
Don't worry, John. If the effect's there, we'll find it with a longer experiment.
Gingerly, they slid a new lump of calcium into the oven.
Poured more dry ice foaming into the slurry around the red photomultiplier,
refilled the liquid nitrogen traps, loaded more paper tape into the teletype,
turned off the lights, and started the whole thing on another round.
They had both become so used to the machine's periodic, sudden cacophonies
that they didn't react a minute and a half later when the motors came on with a roar,
the teletype clattered, and the big coffins slowly turned their one sixteenth of a rotation.
Then, amid the familiar chaos came a new sound of glass against glass,
and then glass against metal.
Did you hear that?
Ooh, that did not sound good.
Clouser stopped the machine as Friedman turned on the lights.
They opened the big blue plywood lid of the coffin.
Like a huge transparent spine, the thin sheets of glass lay neatly in their row,
all except one.
A skew, instantly distinguishable, its metal frame was directly in the path of the photons.
Oh, shit!
Clouser said as he pulled the frayed salmon line from out of the innards of the coffin.
Damn wires broken!
This had left its polarizer sheet flapping around inside,
sometimes obstructing the photons, sometimes out of their way, skewing hours and hours of data.
Friedman eased the loose plate out of the coffin.
That's why we got that funny-looking curve.
Back to square one, said Clouser.
He grinned.
But if we get the quantum mechanical result, I'll quit physics.
I have to get the quantum mechanical result,
Holt joked to Shimoni back in Boston.
Because if my experiment comes out for local hidden variables,
I'll get the Nobel Prize, but Harvard won't give me a PhD.
Harvard might have been hidebound,
but Holt's thesis supervisor, Frank Pipkin, was not,
with his droll attitude toward things other people took too seriously,
and his inspiring enthusiasm,
which overcame his terrible lectures,
faithfully attended by the hardcore of the physics department.
Pipkin was agnostic about these fundamental things,
remembered Holt.
He preferred to do experiments wherever they came up
and not waste too much time agonizing over things.
He supervised fifteen different grad students
with experiments ranging over the increasingly divergent realms
of elementary particle, nuclear, and atomic physics.
Still, you would walk in the door after a week or so
and he would pick up right where you left off,
remembered Holt.
Just a very, very smart guy.
Inspired by the civil rights movement,
Holt was teaching math and physics in a segregated school in North Carolina
when he got a call from Pipkin,
telling him about the Mercury cascade apparatus,
which had been designed and left behind by one of Pipkin's recent students.
Pipkin knew he would be interested in such a small, neat piece of equipment.
I liked tabletop physics, said Holt.
In those days, you got a lot of papers with a hundred names on them.
I didn't want to be part of that.
And in contrast to its west coast cousin,
Holt's apparatus took up less than a cubic foot.
Instead of using an ultraviolet lamp to excite an atomic beam in a big vacuum chamber,
Holt's experiment was a lamp.
Sealed into a glass tube full of mercury vapor was an electron gun,
which would excite the vapor like a neon sign.
The photons that the lamp emitted, a slightly paler green and deeper purple
than those in the Berkeley experiment, were entangled.
Unlike the Berkeley experiment, but like Bertelman's socks,
opposite polarizations were correlated.
Clouser, who watched Holt at work before he left for Berkeley,
recalled the creation of this glass tube as
a non-trivial glass-blowing feat.
The mercury was more complicated than calcium.
Five times as heavy, it also has an array of common isotopes,
different versions of the same atom,
ranging in weight between 204 and 196 hydrogen atoms.
Holt's source was the relatively rare Mercury 198.
So, then you have to distill into the glass tube this ultra-pure separated isotope of mercury.
You can't even see it.
The only way you know it's there is by running a radio frequency discharge on it,
so its spectral line can be seen through a spectroscope.
As at the Cavendish lab in England,
the string and ceiling wax approach was encouraged at Harvard's Lyman lab.
Some things I had to have built by the machine shop, Holt recalled,
but we were encouraged to build our own whenever possible.
Pippkin was a penny-pinsher.
But the apotheosis of this approach was the slight-framed Kenneth Bainbridge.
At this point, nearing 70, famous as the director of the test of the first atomic bomb.
He was missing part of a finger which he had cut out when a bit of radioactive material had fallen on it.
Bainbridge used to buy cheap soup pots in Harvard Square for his experiments.
As in Friedman and Clouser's experiment,
photo tubes stood at each end of Holt's apparatus and,
one very sad day, one slipped out and crashed.
Pippkin brought hold upstairs to where his high-energy physics group worked.
This was one arena in which penny-pinshing was unnecessary.
They had photo multipliers by the box load.
Pick the one with the best specs, said Pippkin.
Holt sometimes wished for an accomplice,
but the basement lab surrounding him was full of people working on interesting experiments
and able to offer practical advice when he popped out of a bat cave with a problem.
The grad student who had preceded Holt with the earlier incarnation of this apparatus
actually brought a sleeping bag to the lab,
but I definitely did not want to go as far as that.
Instead, he got into a routine of sleeping late and then working to all hours.
People called me the hidden variable.
Friedman slowly opened the door to the dark Berkeley basement lab room.
They had fixed the salmon line, re-rigged the system to run more smoothly,
and the apparatus was now on another run.
Don't worry about the light, said Clouser from behind the machine.
The red photon counter has lost it again and I'm shutting the whole thing down.
Friedman turned on the lights, discovering Clouser bent over the offending, overheated phototube,
a perturbed but interested look on his face as he examined it.
Like a tow-headed California farm boy who has just found a frog and is turning it over in his hands,
ignoring it squirming.
It's all overexcited, he said.
Time for a vacation.
Friedman nodded.
Man, that red phototube has been such a pain.
I know, said Clouser.
I'll blame it if Holt and Pipkin beat us.
Yeah, well, that won't be the end of the world, said Friedman.
Science is cooperative, right?
We're all just trying to find out what's going on.
Yeah, yeah, said Clouser.
But I'd like to find out what's going on before Harvard does.
He grinned, but he was thinking.
It would be much better if we didn't have competitors, if we didn't have competitors.
He looked down again.
Stupid phototube.
Abner called me today from Italy asking if we'd gotten results yet.
Shimoni was at a conference in Verena.
Oh, right.
Wasn't he going to talk about our experiment?
Yeah.
And Bell gave a new, more general inequality by which Abner was able to show that our experiment will test
not just local hidden variables, theories, but also,
any theory that depends on locality and realism.
Realism, in this context, is roughly the same as objectivity.
Existence, independent of the mind of the experimenter.
And separability.
Existence, independent of distant things.
Big stakes.
Friedman was nodding with interest.
It would be good to get that in my thesis.
Yeah.
Abner said Bell gave a great speech.
He started, theoretical physicists live in a classical world, looking out into a quantum mechanical world.
They both looked at their huge machine.
Experimentalists, too, said Friedman.
Clouser laughed.
Yeah, and since nobody knows where the boundary is, said Bell, that makes the quantum theory seem a little provisional.
It seems legitimate to speculate on how the theory might evolve, but of course, no one is obliged to join in such speculation.
Friedman laughed.
I'd like to hear Bell speak.
Yeah, he must be ten feet tall.
Anyway, John, I've come up with something.
Friedman looked earnest under his Neil Young-ish mob of hair.
What is it?
Said Clouser.
Sounding less interesting.
Well, the biggest violation of the inequality would occur at 22.5 degrees and 67.5 degrees.
When the polarizers were separated by these angles, the quantum mechanical sine wave would be farthest from the hidden variable zigzag.
You can make a much simpler inequality as it applies to the experiment, just using them.
He handed Clouser his jottings on a piece of paper.
Clouser peered at them, and then began to nod.
We might want to do another run just at these two angles, since they're the critical ones, Friedman suggested.
Sounds good.
I was also thinking, said Friedman slowly,
well, I know that Dick Holtz's not getting such a good answer.
Well, I know that Dick Holtz's not getting such a good answer.
Well, I know that Dick Holtz's not getting such a good answer.
Well, I know that Dick Holtz's not getting such a good answer.
Well, I know that Dick Holtz's not getting such a good answer.
Well, I know that Dick Holtz's not getting such a good answer.
We talked on the phone the other day, and you know he doesn't have the equipment we do.
His thesis advisors are real cheapskate, and I was thinking,
maybe I should tell him about my new inequality.
Might help him out a little.
Clouser looked at Friedman as if he had just spoken in Russian.
Then he shrugged.
Well, I don't know how our team's going to win if you give secrets to the other side.
The web of experimentalists who wanted to work with entanglement was beginning to spread,
meanwhile, beyond the immediate colleagues of Clouser, Horn, Shimonian Holt.
Their paper, under discussion at the informal but grandly named
Brazos Valley Philosophical Society in Southeastern Texas late in 1969,
had captured the interest of Ed Fry, a good-natured young experimentalist
and new professor at Texas A&M.
Immediately that evening, Fry said 35 years later,
he realized what he wanted to do.
Lasers were just becoming available, and one of these could be tuned to wavelengths
around 5,461 angstroms, a bright emerald green.
As it happened, that was the color that could trigger an atomic cascade in Mercury.
A violet photon would emerge, followed by and entangled with
an ultraviolet one.
The purity of the laser beam would make the experiment drastically neater,
the entanglement much simpler to produce.
Fry and Jim McGuire, a theorist friend who had brought him to the philosophical club that evening,
were thrilled with the idea.
Neither knew how unfashionable the subject was.
We fed off each other's excitement and enthusiasm, remembered Fry.
Their excitement and enthusiasm were quickly dampened by the discovery that no one wanted to fund Fry's beautiful experiment.
The reviews of his grant proposal were a clear window on the culture, as he remembered.
There were specific references to time and money already being wasted at Berkeley and Harvard.
Further experimental exploration of entanglement, it seemed, was not to be.
I was devastated.
Dick Holt and Pipkin didn't tell anyone their results, Clouser remembered.
We didn't know what was going on with them, so we just stumbled along with our experiment and finished and published it in 1972, in physics review letters.
And it was a very interesting result, said Friedman.
It excluded hidden variables by a large margin.
It was fairly conclusive.
The highly calibrated classical mechanics of the Clouser-Friedman machine had displayed a fully entangled, spooky result.
After Friedman finished his thesis in May 1972, it was the biggest thesis ever to come out of this lab, he recalls.
Everything about this project was big.
He accepted a position at Princeton, and he went to Harvard in order to finally meet Holt in person.
He first found his way to Pipkin's office a few floors above the subterranean bat cave.
There was no one in the office, so Friedman sat down to wait.
Then he spotted Holt's thesis lying on the desk, neatly stapled into its thin poster-board cover.
He picked it up with curiosity and started reading.
Holt's abstract began with the statement that he had performed the linear polarization correlation between the two.
He had performed the linear polarization correlation measurement proposed by Clouser at all.
Next, as in Friedman's own thesis, came Friedman's version of Bell's inequality, and then Holt gave his results in comparison to it.
Friedman looked at this number twice, and his eyebrows rose.
Holt had set up the inequality in a slightly different way than Friedman had,
but his result was almost as far inside the bounds of the inequality as Friedman's had been in violation of it.
This value is in strong disagreement with the quantum prediction, concluded Holt.
In direct opposition to the Berkeley results, entanglement failed.
Friedman read on, fascinated, his eyebrows now lowered.
What was going on here, he wondered. It wasn't a problem with count rate.
He had a statistically significant result, measuring at the two angles that the Friedman inequality called for.
The Two Angles
Friedman remembered his phone call, relaying his simplified version of the inequality to Holt as a favor.
In fact, after that, Holt constructed what he called a sort of Rube-Goldberg apparatus that measured the photon coincidences only at 22.5 degrees and 67.5 degrees.
When an engineer at the lab tried to persuade him to use a Geneva mechanism, as the Berkeley team had done, Holt listened politely but,
Being young and headstrong, I thought I could do it. He laughed as he told the story years later.
Simpler.
Sitting in Pipkin's office, Friedman thought,
Either he's found Clouser's world-shaking result, or I've caused him a tremendous amount of harm.
Any systematic error is harder to see when you measure in only two places.
Pipkin came in, and Friedman stood up to shake hands, feeling a little strange.
I see you've found Dick's thesis, said Pipkin.
Friedman nodded.
We keep debating whether or not we should publish. No one has come up with any satisfactory suggestions for what might have gone wrong.
But whenever he wants to publish, I'm advising caution, and whenever I think it's our duty to publish, he's wary.
Here's his most recent version of the preprint.
He handed the paper over to Friedman. The byline said,
F. M. Pipkin and W. C. Fields Harvard University.
Friedman laughed.
Just then Holt came to the door.
W. C., said Pipkin, with an ironic grin, I'd like you to meet Stu Friedman.
Hey Stu, nice to finally meet you, said Holt, proffering his hand.
Yeah, Dick, I'm working at Princeton now, and I thought I'd come by.
I see you've found us out, said Holt, gesturing toward the crimson-covered thesis in Friedman's hands.
We don't know what to do with it.
I ran into Bob Pound, one of the professors here, in the hall the other day, and he said,
So, you're going to publish that thing?
And I said, Well, we're sort of thinking of it, and he sort of looked off into the distance and said,
Ah, he was a promising young physicist.
Pipkin laughed out loud, as did Holt. Friedman still felt a little uncomfortable.
So, no one can find anything wrong? he asked.
Yes. Fields I take it you're not so keen to publish today? said Pipkin.
Oh, well, you know, if at first you don't succeed, try try again.
Then quit. No use being a damn fool about things, said Holt, grinning and shrugging.
If you were W. C. Powley right now, instead of W. C. Fields, it might be more helpful, suggested Pipkin.
Do you think Powley would have ageless words of wisdom to equal that? asked Holt.
Holt had spent the previous two years looking more or less fruitlessly for errors in the experiment.
I became pretty good at thinking of bizarre things that could be going on, he remembered.
A clear culprit never emerged. Muddying the waters further, the next year, in 1974,
a team testing bells in Equality in Sicily published results concurring with Holt's result,
sharply disagreeing with the quantum mechanical predictions.
The Sicilian experiment was actually a version of the Wu-Shaknoff experiment,
about which Mike Horn had decided back in 1968.
There was no point in ever considering that experiment again.
It was not adequate. You could reproduce it with a hidden variables scheme.
That is, the entanglement displayed in Wu's experiment was weak enough that it could also be explained in a non-quantum way by unspooky local hidden variables.
Clouser had come to similar conclusions, and, though Wu's student Leonard Kasday had argued that
two added assumptions allowed the experiment to demonstrate strong entanglement,
Shimoni found these glaringly inadequate.
In Texas, Fry had found the confusion totally re-energizing.
His experiment could no longer be deemed such a waste of money and time.
In 1974, with enough money to buy the laser, Fry started work, with the encouragement of Clouser,
but originally without the help of his student Randall Thompson, whom Fry was trying to protect from involvement in a project that it seemed could only be bad for his career.
Meanwhile, we were standing out all alone with no confirmation, remembered Clouser of himself and Friedman.
It was a funny position for me to be in, too, because I had expected just the opposite to be true. I was pretty confused by it all.
In words that are echoed by many others who have tried to deeply understand the situation that is, in the words of John Bell,
revealed or concealed by quantum mechanics, he continued a quarter of a century later.
Still am. I still don't understand it.
Horn and Shimoni were also still coming to grips with what lessons to draw from these experiments.
Horn became a professor at a little college outside of Boston called Stonehill, and
we were together all the time, Horn remembered.
We argued and argued and argued, and Clouser and I argued and argued, mainly by telephone, trying to come to an agreement about the logical underpinnings of their version of Bell's inequality and what in fact they had actually proved.
All three of us discussed it, all through 72, 73, 74, a forever paper.
In formulating special relativity, explained Clouser, Einstein noted that one cannot ask the universal questions when and where, in a precise fashion, without first defining the associated primitive entities time and distance.
Famously, Einstein found that the best definitions were operational ones. Time is what you measure with a clock, and distance is what you measure with a ruler.
The Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paper, in trying to restore objectivity to quantum mechanics, had tried to answer the question, what, in the same way?
EPR had written, if without in any way disturbing a system we can predict with certainty the value of a physical quantity, then, there exists an element of reality corresponding to this quantity.
The analysis of Bell, however, had proved this EPR definition of an element of reality inadequate.
Entanglement exists and requires guidelines for a new answer to the question, what.
Clouser recalled that he and Horn were thinking along these lines.
Does the chair exist when you're not there to look at it?
Maybe we could define, what, as, something you could put in a very large box, where, chairness, can be measured, whatever properties that might involve, like, it has varnish.
Define the properties and you've got the object, right?
No, says quantum mechanics, you can't measure the properties and expect them to have anything to say about the actual object.
This, said Clouser, is what I found infuriating.
Horn's take was, well, that's the way it is.
It's the whole Bishop Berkeley question of, if a tree falls in the forest and no one hears it, does it make a sound?
Quantum mechanics answers the Bishop? No.
If you close the box, is the chair still there?
How about a shoe?
You'd be pretty surprised if your shoes changed color in the box coming home from the shoe store.
How about ions? We make ions by chipping electrons off atoms.
They are things, we assume. You can see even just one of them.
Put it in a potential well, an electron trap, and, shine light on it, it will fluoresce.
And if you put another one in with the first one, the fluorescence will double, and so on.
So, if you put an ion in your box, is it in the box when you close the lid?
What if you have two photons in an entangled state?
Clouser raised his eyebrows with a grin, and you put one in the box you're holding, and one in the box I'm holding.
Are they there?
You can measure the impact of a single photon on an object. It seems like it's a thing.
Is it in the box when you close the lid?
It's easy to be confident about the chair, the shoes, even pretty confident about the ion.
But the photon is harder. Are they all things?
If you're a scientist, you've got to be precise in your definition.
The varnish is there on the chair whether or not you measure it, or whether you are a good or bad varnish measurer.
I may or may not know what I have measured.
In fact, it's arrogant to say that you actually know, like, I just measured the spin of this electron.
What you mean is, you got a certain result in a Stern-Gerlach device. You have no idea what you really measured.
Now, suddenly, with photons, their polarization depends on how you measure it and what you're looking for.
But if I'm wrong in any one of these places, can I be right about the chair or the shoes?
What physicists tend to say to reassure you about the chair and the shoes is,
don't worry about the fuzziness. It's so small it doesn't affect the macroscopic world.
But that's just scare tactics with numbers.
Atoms are inescapably there.
IBM has glued down atoms in a silicon substrate, spelling out IBM.
And you can read it.
Just because the guys in the 30s couldn't see them, didn't mean they weren't there.
As Clouser and Horn continued their discussion over 3,000 miles of phone line,
Clouser performed a new experiment, which Shimoni declared to be of capital importance.
Contemplating the objectivity of photons, we need to know that answer to make an airtight Bell's theorem case.
Clouser made sure that they could in fact behave as particles, either reflecting from a half-silvered mirror or passing through it,
never splitting in half like a wave.
But this ostensible object, when in an entangled state, has no definable properties on its own.
It's not a question of is the varnish made from pine trees, but is it varnish?
What is varnish? Does varnish exist? Do trees exist?
Clouser threw his hands in the air. Beats me.
So it turns out I'm in deep caca!
Clouser said, summarizing the indefinite results of his and Horn's paper, when I tried to define the interrogative what?
They finished the paper in 1974, acknowledging many valuable discussions with a Shimoni,
and the Clouser-Horn version of the Bell inequality they set forth there is still considered the gold standard.
In fact, no experiment has yet tested it, and strangely enough, experiments of this sort in the last twenty years,
though greatly improving on the Friedman-Clouser experiment in speed and beauty,
are arguably further from testing this inequality than the huge, ponderous machine now languishing in the boneyard attic of Old Lacante Hall at Berkeley.
And what of Holt's experiment?
Clouser repeated it, unscrounged equipment, discovering that the transition in mercury was much harder to work with than their calcium.
It was grim. I think I ended up with four hundred hours of counting time or something horrible.
This was twice as long as the Friedman and Clouser experiment, or Holt's.
So this went on for weeks and weeks.
But he eventually got the quantum mechanical result, demonstrating entanglement in 1976.
A few months later, Ed Frey published his own long-dreamed-of experiment, and Clouser heaved a sigh of relief.
Frey, too, demonstrated the presence of entanglement and the absence of any local, realistic explanation.
With the emerald-green beam of a laser, Frey and his student Thompson had collected their data in less than an hour and a half, the opposite of grim.
The experimentalists were beginning to get a grasp on entanglement.
Chapter 31. In which the settings are changed. 1975 to 1982.
Hanging next to the door of Bell's office at CERN was a poster of a long-necked Modigliani lady in a hat.
Her eyes, and the eyes of Bell himself, watched the twenty-seven-year-old Allah Aspect, a genial, mustachioed graduate student talking eagerly about boxes of water.
It was early in 1975, and Aspect had just returned to Europe from a three-year stint of French, National Service, teaching in Cameroon.
Soon after his return, he had suffered what he described as a coup de forge.
In October 1974, he remembered, I read John Bell's famous paper on the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox, and it was love at first sight.
This was the most exciting subject I could dream of.
Immediately, he decided to make Bell's theorem the subject of his PhD thesis at his alma mater, the University of Paris South, in Orsay.
Meanwhile, Clouser was trying to get a job.
I must have applied to at least a dozen different places, and at all of them, I was totally rejected.
Universities were uneasy about hiring a professor who would encourage the next generation to question the foundations of quantum theory.
Finally, Clouser found an opening at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in the hills east of Oakland, researching plasmas, David Bohm's first love.
I don't know anything at all about plasma physics, Clouser announced at his job interview, but I do know a lot about doing experimental physics. I'm a very talented experimental physicist.
You can learn plasma physics, was the reply.
He was hired in 1976 and stayed there for a decade.
At Livermore, his self-proclaimed skills as an experimentalist were well used, but almost wasted was an equal though unproclaimed skill.
Clouser had the gift, rare, even in the teaching profession, of explaining complicated subjects to students clearly, vividly, and patiently.
The university career where he could have combined these skills did not materialize in the three decades since he first applied for such a job.
Back in the 60s and 70s, reputable physicists did not ask questions about quantum mechanics, explained Frye in 2000.
I think that Clouser took the brunt of this attitude, in part, I believe, because he was actually doing the experiment, not just talking about the theory.
Frye himself had better luck with academia. In the midst of performing his experiment, he was granted tenure.
Thirty years later, by then the head of the physics department at Texas A&M, he learned that this open-minded institutional decision was thanks to an intervention from Frank Pipkin, Holt's advisor at Harvard.
Realizing that the tenure committee was about to reject the Bell experimenter, one of Frye's friends asked Pipkin to come to College Station, Texas.
If you had sent me just Ed's file to look at, I would have rejected him very quickly, Pipkin told the committee. However, after spending a day in his lab, I can tell you that this guy is a winner, and I would bet on his success.
Pipkin's renown in atomic physics won over the skeptical committee.
Bell himself was acutely aware of the stigma attached to the experiments his work had inspired, but thus far, Aspect was not.
Before heading to West Africa in 1972, Aspect remembered,
I had a quite good education in classical physics, and I knew my education in quantum physics was extremely bad.
The classes he had taken on the subject comprised equation solving with little discussion of physical meaning, let alone inculcation of any stigmas.
So for his three equatorial years in Cameroon, Aspect taught himself quantum mechanics, using a recent textbook by the great French physicist Claude Cohen Tenouji.
This book had two strengths.
First, it is real physics, said Aspect.
Second, it is neutral with respect to foundations. No brainwashing, no bore solved all of that.
As a result, I was able to solve the equations, but nobody had washed my brain.
I was totally convinced by Einstein and Bell, he said.
But what experiment to do?
In re-reading Bell's 1964 paper, Aspect realized that its last lines told him there was still an important test to be done.
He raced to Geneva to tell Bell his idea.
Bell had ended his paper on a cautionary note.
If there was enough time for a light speed signal to correlate the particles, then entanglement would lose much of its mystery.
Conceivably, quantum mechanics might work, wrote Bell.
Only when the settings of the instruments are made sufficiently in advance to allow them to reach some mutual rapport by exchange of signals at the speed of light.
In that connection, experiments of the type proposed in 1957 by Bohm and Arharanov in which the settings are changed during the flight of the particles are crucial.
The practical problem in this experiment was that the huge, fragile piles of plates polarizers at either end of the Friedman-Clauser experiment could not move into their settings quickly.
Aspect had come up with a beautiful and, importantly, frugal alternative idea.
Its main ingredient was water.
Each polarizer, Aspect explained to Bell, would be replaced by a setup involving a switching device followed by two polarizers in two different orientations.
At any given time, the switch would allow a path to only one of the two polarizers.
The switch would rapidly redirect the incident light from one polarizer to the other one, leaving no time for light speed signals to facilitate any kind of mutual rapport between distant ends of the apparatus.
He turned to the blackboard, where he wrote the appropriate inequality for the situation, if the two switches work at random and are uncorrelated.
Aspect's switches were two glass boxes full of water, over 42 feet apart from each other, on either side of the beam of cascade and calcium that produced the photons.
Each box of water carried a sound wave, far higher than the human ear can hear.
Transducers on either side of the boxes converted electrical signals into this ultrasonic wave.
Sound waves, unlike light waves, need a medium, hence the silence of outer space.
They move by repeatedly compressing and then relieving pressure in their medium.
Aspect's ultrasonic wave cycled between a swiftly oscillating high, striping the water in an alternating pattern of dense and thin, and a flat low, leaving the water unaffected.
The striped pattern acted as a diffraction grating, bending the light to send it to the side polarizer.
Without it, the light traveled straight through to the main polarizer.
The waves cycled between striped and flat quickly.
The switching between the two channels would occur about every ten nanoseconds, Aspect explained, four times faster than the photons would travel the twenty-one feet separating the oven from the water.
It would not, he admitted, be the ideal scheme, since the change is not truly random but rather quasi-periodic.
Nevertheless, the two switches on the two sides would be driven by different generators at different frequencies, meaning that the two boxes would oscillate at different rates, and in practice the rates would drift.
It is then very natural, said Aspect, to assume that they function in an uncorrelated way.
When Aspect finished his eager presentation, he stood silently awaiting a reply.
Bell asked his first question with a trace of irony.
Have you a permanent position?
Aspect was only a graduate student, but because of the uniqueness of the French system and in drastic contrast to his counterparts in America, his position at the École Normale Supérieure was actually permanent.
Even with this advantage, it was not easy.
There will be serious fights, Bell warned him, but the stigma was not the only thing he worried about.
One should not spend all his time on concepts.
You are an experimentalist, which keeps your feet on the ground so you are not in so much danger.
For me, I am a theorist, and this subject must remain my hobby.
If you spend all your time thinking about it, you are in danger of becoming crazy.
Friedman drifted away from Bell physics, but he found his thesis experiment haunting him even 30 years later.
The Bell experiment was a null experiment.
That's an experiment that measures no deviation from what you expected, and in my time here, I've done 24 null experiments,
finding that those things that you didn't expect to be there are, in fact, not there.
So this was sort of how I started my career.
The constant theme of Friedman's career was, as he said in 2000,
it's a really big help if you know what the right answer should be.
If you don't get it, you might suspect that there's something wrong with your equipment, and that's probably the case.
I have quite a reputation for doing this, for stepping into a field where there's something very exciting going on,
Friedman grinned, and leaving it with nothing interesting.
The last word on the subject was far from spoken, however.
Holt, too, left Bell and EPR behind for the bread and butter physics his apparatus had once been designed to do.
He went on to a career of measuring atomic lifetimes via cascade photons, measuring spectra with lasers,
and measuring energy levels in atoms too complicated for quantum mechanics, essentially any atom beyond hydrogen.
Looking back, I would say that I played a relatively minor role in the CHSH,
Clouser, Horn, Shimoni, Holt, Business, Holt said.
Then he grinned, but I did set the world on fire with my wrong result.
As it had with Friedman, the experience started him contemplating how science proceeds.
There's an interesting scientific principle that a wrong answer can be much more stimulating to the field than just sort of finding the answer that's in the back of the book.
A wrong result gets people excited, worried.
Obviously, you don't really want that to be happening.
It's OK for a theorist to come up with a speculative new theory that gets shot down,
but experimentalists are supposed to be very careful, and their error limits are supposed to be realistic.
Unfortunately, with this experiment, whenever you're looking for a stronger correlation,
any kind of systematic error you can imagine typically weakens it and moves it toward the hidden variable range.
It was a hard experiment. In those days, at any rate, with the kind of equipment I had and...
Well, what can I say? He laughed with a shrug. I screwed up.
Clarity, however, about which experiment is right is not the same as clarity about the quantum mechanics these experiments were designed to elucidate.
The thing is, Holt said, I'm a scientist, and I sort of want to believe what nature says is the answer, and not what I just think I know ahead of time.
And I've always thought that quantum mechanics was just so wonderful because it's a surprise.
It's sort of this hidden knowledge that we high priests of science, in a way, he laughed, can find.
Which isn't to say I want to keep it secret, he explained, but if everything were just obvious, if you could just look around and see how the universe is, well, that wouldn't be very interesting.
Quantum mechanics is very subtle. That's its fascination.
For me, well, all of my interest in physics has been because I personally wanted to know the answer to these questions.
And, he said, simply and a little wistfully, I still don't know the answers.
That's the frustrating thing. I think it's going to be a long time before people know what quantum mechanics means.
All these modern experiments clearly show that you have to at least provisionally accept the quantum mechanical way of thinking about states of unobserved things, and yet it's a very unsatisfying kind of thing.
Quantum mechanics, how you talk about it, that is, still remains unfinished business, but I believe something will come up from an unexpected direction.
We may not have to solve the problem as originally posed at all. The problem will just disappear one day because we'll find out we were asking the wrong question.
In 1975, Mike Horn thought he was leaving bell physics behind, too.
He and Shimoni had become fascinated by a beautiful new experimental apparatus, a neutron interferometer, just invented by Helmut Rauch in Vienna.
In contrast to Clouser's experiment exhibiting the particle nature of light, Rauch's machine dramatically displayed the wave nature of matter.
In the first years of the nineteenth century, as Horn vividly describes it, the great physicist Thomas Young showed experimentally that the addition or superposition of two equally bright light beams can make darkness and, under slightly different conditions, can make light four times brighter than either original beam.
Horn smiles. That is, one plus one equals zero, and, under other conditions, equals four.
This is called interference, and it signifies the presence of a wave. But Rauch was displaying these hallmark wave phenomena with particles of matter.
Beams of neutrons, particles produced from the seething hot core of a nuclear reactor, were interfering with each other like waves.
The neutron interferometer offered these neutrons two alternative V-shaped paths, like a child choosing to throw a ball to his friend by bouncing it off the floor or off a low ceiling.
Whether, after entering the interferometer a neutron hit the floor or the ceiling, its final destination was the same.
So, two neutrons, starting at the same point but taking alternative paths, would meet again afterward. These alternative paths, seen together, traced out a diamond shape. When they met, the neutrons would interfere with each other.
Dramatically, even a single neutron in the interferometer would interfere with itself.
This, like so many quantum mechanical conundrums, is impossible to picture. It is as if one neutron had traveled down both paths simultaneously.
Horn and Shimoni had been immersed for a decade in the mysteries of two particle entanglement. Now, they were distracted by this magical, single particle effect.
Abner and I both thought, this is going to be a very valuable device. People are going to play with it for years, remembered Horn.
Just for starters, Horn and Shimoni realized it could be used to show that a spin one-half particle, like a neutron, returns to its starting position only when it is spun in place to complete rotations.
The exciting possibilities of this machine were not lost on others interested in elementary quantum mechanics.
Before Shimoni and Horn could publish their paper, Herb Bernstein, just down the Massachusetts turnpike from them and Amherst, had also proposed the experiment, and Rausch lost no time in performing it in Vienna, with a young Austrian physicist, Horn's age, named Anton Zeilinger.
Zeilinger turned up again soon afterward at a Bell physics conference in Eris, Sicily. Horn remembered that of the fifteen or twenty in attendance, including Bell and Shimoni, only one person came who wasn't talking about two particles. He was talking about one particle, and that was Anton.
Horn was now also interested in one particle.
We hit it off right away, he remembered. The soft-spoken Southerner and the charismatic Ustereiker. Two, tall, bearded men, bent together, deep in conversation.
We spent many days talking. He was initiating me into the details of neutron interferometry, Horn remembered, and I told him about things he was not particularly in on at the time.
This was my first real encounter with the international scientific community, remembered Zeilinger. There, I heard for the first time about Bell's theorem, about the EPR paradox, about entanglement and the like. Needless to say, I did not get any real understanding of what this was all about, but I got the hunch that it was something very important.
Fascinated, he tried to learn from Horn everything he could about entanglement.
When Horn returned home, he went straight to Cliff Shell's lab at MIT, where he had heard rumors of neutron interferometry.
Not much more than half Horn's height, the beloved and distinguished Shell had essentially founded the field of neutron diffraction, that is, utilizing the wave nature of the apparently particulate neutrons.
Shell's Nobel Prize for this work was still, in 1975, another twenty years in the future. His collaborator, Ernie Wallin, would not live long enough to receive it with him.
I hear you're building a fundamental quantum toy called a neutron interferometer, and I'd like to play, Horn said to Shell. Can I play?
Sure, said Shell, take that desk right there.
So I just sat down, Horn remembered, and from then on I went over there every Tuesday, the day I didn't teach classes at Stonehill, and often on the weekend and every holiday and all the Christmas breaks and all the summers for about the next twelve years.
And they were a fun twelve years. For someone who wasn't a theoretician or an experimentalist, I'm just sort of a middleman. I'm just around, so when they wanted to move lead bricks, I joined in with them, moving lead bricks.
But when they wanted insightful help in planning the details of experiments, the easygoing Horn was good at that too.
Soon after Horn set up shop in Shell's lab, Zeilinger showed up too, with his family, intent on doing neutron interferometry and buying, as a laughing Horn remembered, the biggest American car he could get, some sort of Oldsmobile Land Cruiser, a humongous station wagon the size of a yacht.
Next to arrive, actually he was returning to his alma mater, was Danny Greenberger, a witty, stocky New Yorker from the Bronx, who had been on the trail of the neutron interferometer since a few years before it had been invented.
He had wanted to learn the effect of gravity on the interference of a neutron, an experiment that was performed almost immediately after the neutron interferometer was turned on.
He had met Horn and Zeilinger at one of the first neutron interferometry conferences, and, we hit it off wonderfully, Greenberger remembered.
So I started going up regularly to MIT, and Cliff supported all three of us.
Shell was a lovely person, and Greenberger called that decade visiting at his lab, the high point of my professional career, in terms of having fun and doing interesting things with great colleagues.
It would also lead, by a decade long path, to the discovery that entanglement of three particles was stranger than anything that had gone before.
Entanglement comes of age, 1981 to 2005.
Chapter 32, Schrodinger's Centennial, 1987
Bell had become one of the premier theorists of one of the premier centers of physics in the world.
He was called the Oracle of CERN, Bertleman remembered. There was a certain aura around him in his office.
This reputation had little to do with Bell's theorem.
If you went to CERN, remembered Nicolas Guissin, who, in 1981, had just received his PhD in quantum mechanics nearby at the University of Geneva,
and asked at random about John's contributions to physics, his work on the foundation of quantum physics would barely be mentioned.
The people who came to the Oracle, teetering on the wobbly visitor's chair in his office, or meeting him at exactly four o'clock in what Bell referred to as the CERN canteen for a cup of Verviene tea,
encountered Bell's goodwill in all respects, as one of his collaborators described it. But Bell was not only a man of goodwill.
There was with John also this feeling of energy and strong engagement under the usually peaceful surface.
To do physics was a challenge of basic importance, and there were matters that could at rare occasions increase his temper to a point that was felt like a small eruption.
Bertleman has a sketch Bell drew of his own profile, winter hat, beard, glasses and all, tossed off in a few confident, spare and exactly right lines.
He wrote like that too, said Bertleman. He could frame a sentence perfectly, straight from his stomach.
People were scared of him. He could be very fierce. To me, he was like a father. We would joke around.
But he never told me about his work with the quantum mechanics, though I knew he dabbled in it a bit. I was a typical physicist, not interested.
At CERN they thought he was a little mad with the quantum mechanics. That shows a very strong character. He knew instinctively what the right time was and to wait for that right time.
Immediately after the socks paper came out in 1981, I was an expert in quantum mechanics, remembered Bertleman with irony, so I read up quickly.
He found that John Bell was not the only person a little mad with the quantum mechanics. What amazed me was the way Einstein and Schrodinger felt about it.
Not, we have these different models to try. They felt it in their blood. They were searching for an inner truth. I was shaken by their letters.
And you know, in those days it was thought of as a sin to question the orthodox quantum mechanics.
At CERN this attitude remained strong throughout the 80s.
One evening in 1987, the bells in the Bertlemans were sitting on the flagstone patio outside the CERN cafeteria amid groves of young saplings.
The sun was falling down where the Eura met the Alps, Bertleman remembered, and this lovely red light was everywhere, the long wavelengths of the sun matching John's red hair. It was a beautiful evening.
John and Mary were about to go home for dinner. Reinhold and Renata were about to go back to his office where Renata's artwork was spread out in one companionable corner.
It was a peaceful, paused moment. Everyone languidly stretched out on their chairs, feeling the last warmth of the sun on their skin.
John, whether or not they end up giving it to you, said Bertleman, I think you deserve the Nobel Prize for your quantum mechanics.
John did not move. His eyes closed.
No, I don't. He said matter-of-factly.
He mentioned a highly technical experiment that his friend Jack Steinberger, a slight-framed, good-natured experimentalist, had recently performed at CERN.
It's like Steinberger's experiment. It is a very beautiful experiment, very beautifully done, but it's a null experiment, and you don't get the Nobel Prize for a null experiment.
He was silent, thinking about Steinberger, and then said, His work is so good, he should get the Nobel Prize, and he will.
But for me, there are the Nobel rules as well. It's hard to make the case that my inequality benefits mankind.
He squinted at the sun on the mountains.
Bertleman said, I disagree with you.
Bell looked over at his friend with an amused expression on his face.
It's not a null result. You have proved something new, non-locality, and for that, I think you deserve the Nobel Prize.
Bell's forehead furrowed, his chin on his chest. He seemed pleased at Bertleman's insistence, but then, raising one sunset-reddened arm, his legs splayed out in front of him, he shrugged his shoulders.
Who cares about this non-locality?
The sun sank lower and lower, and the mountains got darker and darker, and the moment was over.
Steinberger received the Nobel Prize Bell had predicted for him less than a year later, not for his beautiful null experiment, but for work from almost thirty years before.
Even sooner, however, Bell would meet someone who was to play one of the starring roles in a drastic change of physicists' attitudes toward non-locality.
In August 1987, in one of the University of Vienna's collinated and embellished rooms at a conference celebrating the hundred-year anniversary of Schrödinger's birth, Bell found himself on a panel with another charming and confident Austrian, Zeilinger, whom he had last met in Sicily a dozen years before as an enthusiastic neutron physicist coming to grips with entanglement for the very first time.
Insisting that physics should explain how events happen, Bell said that quantum mechanics was missing something crucial.
He found himself faced, as usual, by polite complementarian disagreement.
Zeilinger, though unusually appreciative of Einstein, Schrödinger and the man sitting beside him for their clear understanding of the radical changes in our worldview that quantum mechanics necessitates,
liked the austerity of the Copenhagen interpretation.
He was drawn to the idea that the wave function might be simply a description of knowledge, or even, in soon-to-be popular terminology, information,
at which point the paradoxes mostly disappear, and it depends on the theorist whether any reality or causes should be sought in the non-locality or non-separability beneath this curtain of processing information.
Zeilinger, for his part, was beginning to suspect that the lesson of quantum mechanics was that there is no difference between epistemology and ontology, being and knowing are intertwined.
Bell was quite conservative and wanted to be as careful as possible, Zeilinger later said.
It was a point of view that he had great respect for.
But I, he went on, amoromantic, and I wanted to be as radical as possible.
Rather than suppressing the extreme nature of the Copenhagen interpretation as the generation of physicists after the death of Bohr had tended to do, Zeilinger recognized and embraced it.
He doubted individual events would ever be explained, a perspective that was anathema to Bell.
But in Zeilinger Bell was introduced to the new wave of quantum theorists who, whatever their views on the reality or ineffability of the world that the wave function described with such mathematical precision and physical vagueness,
would center their whole careers on affirmative and joyful investigations of Bell's long-neglected non-locality.
All Zeilinger needed was the perfect source of entangled particles, and 1987 was the year he would find it.
Chapter 33. Counting to 3. 1985-1988
Mike Horn plays a stand-up bass that belonged to his brother, who never came home from Korea.
In the summers between semesters at Ole Miss, before he took up the bass, he had drummed for a lounge trio.
Now he applies that sense of timing and syncopation to the bass, which is almost a percussion instrument as the bassist's fingers walk up and down the neck in complicated rhythmic patterns.
Anton Zeilinger is also a bassist, in what Bohr would call a complementary way.
As a boy, he learned to play classical music on his bass with a bow, its voice speaking deeper than a human's.
While Horn had internalized the striding and stepping rhythms the instrument could produce as his fingers walked its neck, Zeilinger knew its voice.
He knows what it's going to sound like before he plays it, says Horn, but his timing is too square for jazz, while me? I can walk, but I can't talk.
Danny Greenberger, in physics if not in music the third member of the trio, loves to play standards of the World War II era on his piano.
One winter's day, a few years before Zeilinger's appearance with a bell on the panel at the Schrödinger Centennial, the two complementary bassists were sitting in Schull's lab when they saw a poster advertising a conference the next summer near the Soviet border.
Fiftyth anniversary of EPR, Jonsu, Finland, July 1985.
Gee, have you ever been to Finland? asked Zeilinger.
No, Horn said. I've never been to Finland.
Well, let's go to Finland! said Zeilinger.
But after a decade of beautiful one-particle experiments.
We don't have anything to say about two particles, said Horn. You know, this is about two particles, right?
They were silent.
Ben Zeilinger said. There must be a connection.
Horn began to nod. Between two particle polarization correlations and neutron interferometry.
That afternoon, they found that two connected diamond-shaped interferometers could test Bell's inequality.
If two entangled particles departed in opposite directions, entering two opposite interferometers, the results would display entanglement in a way similar to those of the Klauser-Friedmann experiment.
If the experimenter looks for interference, he will find that each particle traversed both sides of its interferometer, interfering with itself.
But, if the experimenter instead decides to measure which path, floor or ceiling, one of the particles took through its interferometer, he will know, without measuring it, that the other particle took the opposite path through the other interferometer.
This insight took Horn and Zeilinger to Finland and Greenberger to another conference at the World Trade Center in New York City.
But at neither place did anyone come up with a source that could produce entangled particles that moved in exactly opposite directions, as was necessary for the double diamond to work.
We couldn't do neutrons, Horn explained. We had no way of making a pair of neutrons. Neutrons just come out of the reactor, and we couldn't use the cascades like Klauser and Holt did, because the atom that emits the photons is left behind, carrying off some of the momentum so the photons don't leave back to back.
So, we returned to the old positronium annihilation as a possibility, where nothing is left behind as a remnant.
This was particularly interesting, because positronium sometimes decays into three gamma rays.
As anybody ever tried to look at what happens with Bell's theorem for three particles? Greenberger asked a little while later.
I don't know, said Horn. No, I'm sure they haven't.
I'm going to work on that, said Greenberger. Good! said Zeilinger, whose curiosity had been peaked by the anomalous positronium decay.
Cliff Schull had hoped that Zeilinger would succeed him when he retired in 1987.
But MIT had other plans, remembered Greenberger. They wanted to rip the whole lab apart.
So Zeilinger returned to Vienna, but he arranged for a Fulbright Scholarship for which Greenberger was the only person in the world who fit.
One day, Horn, now alone, was wandering through Schull's lab when he saw a recent physical review letters lying on someone's desk.
Thumbing through it, he came upon their double diamond experiment, turned from theory to fact by Rupa Manjari Ghosh, working on his PhD with one of the pioneers of quantum optics, Leonard Mandel, in Rochester, New York.
Ghosh and Mandel had discovered the entanglement latent when light strikes a crystal in a beautiful process laboring under the ungainly name of spontaneous parametric down conversion.
This down conversion turned out to be the ideal source to perform the two-particle interferometry experiment that Horn, Zeilinger, and Greenberger had been seeking.
When a beam of light shines through a certain kind of crystal, a very tiny number of its photons split in two. It is not understood why. Each carrying half the energy of the parent.
If the light is ultraviolet, the daughter photons are visible as a lower energy, many-colored nimbus emerging on the other side of the crystal. Mandel and Ghosh discovered that each pair of daughter photons is entangled, both in their colors and their directions of flight.
Horn called Zeilinger.
Go get this paper, they're doing our experiment, and it looks like a thing that you might want to get into.
Up to that point, as Horn remarked, Zeilinger had never plugged in a laser, but he saw the excitement inherent in such an easy source of entanglement, and he picked up the phone and called Rochester.
There's undoubtedly a lot of art, a lot of trade secrets in setting up those down conversions. You'd never know, looking at a physical review letter, exactly how they do it, explained Horn.
What laser do you recommend I buy? Zeilinger asked Mandel. Where do you get these crystals? How do you cut them? How do you illuminate them?
Zeilinger had found his source, and in a decade he would be taking the world of physics by storm.
Meanwhile, for the spring and summer of 1987, Greenberger was sharing Zeilinger's office in the Atom Institute in Vienna, looking at interactions between three particles. And they were very complicated. Slowly, however, I started getting a feeling for it.
He discussed strategy with Zeilinger, got long-distance suggestions from Horn, and every morning I'd come in and say, I have a better Bell's theorem than yesterday.
Horn was less than riveted by Greenberger's new obsession.
Did Adner ever tell you that much of the seventies and eighties was spent refereeing papers? The journals sent a mountain of them. I'd seen a gazillion inequalities.
So when Greenberger came home, and we'd visit, say, in his kitchen or my kitchen, and he'd say, I have a new inequality, I was not attentive enough because I was through with that stuff.
One morning in Vienna, Greenberger came into the office with a furrowed brow.
Anton, I am so confused. There's nothing left. We've got such a good Bell's theorem that there's no freedom at all for the particles.
There was no inequality needed any more. Just a single yes or no question.
Bell's inequality, stated roughly, is that a local hidden variable's explanation of entanglement requires certain kinds of outcomes to occur more often than they actually do.
Greenberger, with the help of Zeilinger and Horn, had found that such a local, objective, separable explanation of three particle entanglement requires something that never happens.
In an ordinary, two particle Bell's theorem experiment, the case against local hidden variables is built up slowly, over thousands of measurements.
But in a three particle case, a single measurement would judge against objective local realism in favor of quantum mechanics. The inequality had vanished.
Well, that can't be right, said Zeilinger.
We started thinking about it, remembered Greenberger, and that's when we realized what we had done. But it had to hit us over the head.
In 1989, at a conference in Sicily in honor of Heisenberg's principle, aptly titled, 62 Years of Uncertainty, David Merman listened to Greenberger,
making incomprehensible remarks about why it might be interesting to think about a particle decaying into a pair of particles, each of which then decayed into a pair of its own.
Merman, who a few years earlier had written such a lucid description of Bell's theorem that it was praised by Feynman, had been a friend of Greenberger's for years. They had met as Cornell English Department Husbands.
At the 62 Years of Uncertainty conference, Greenberger started by announcing that he was going to show something that Merman was quite sure was impossible.
Danny said he was going to show a version of Bell's theorem in which all the relevant probabilities were one and zero.
A probability of one means something will certainly happen. A probability of zero means it will never happen.
So I stopped listening. I decided that there had to be a mistake somewhere, and I was tired anyway, so I paid no attention.
Also present was a mathematical philosopher from Britain named Michael Redhead.
With two colleagues, he then wrote a sixty-page paper purporting to improve upon the mathematical rigor of the now three-year-old Greenberger-Horn-Zeilinger result, which its authors had never gotten around to publishing.
A preprint of this paper had two salutary effects. First, it spurred Greenberger into publication, three pages of Dot Matrix font titled Going Beyond Bell's Theorem.
Second, it annoyed Merman into alertness.
Mathematical rigor, it seemed to me, was irrelevant to the argument, he said. I mean, either Danny had a physical point or he didn't have a physical point.
All of the Bell's theorem arguments were really very simple from the point of view of mathematics and very subtle from the point of view of physics.
And somewhere in the sixty pages, Merman finally realized that Greenberger, Horn, and Zeilinger really had come up with a striking simplification of Bell's theorem.
As it happens, Merman, whose day job at Cornell is solid state physics, writes an occasional column for the magazine Physics Today, ubiquitous in physics departments and labs.
Under the title What's Wrong with These Elements of Reality, his piece for June 1990 described Greenberger, Horn, and Zeilinger's new and beautiful twist on the EPR paradox. It's spookiness more vivid than ever before.
In analogy to EPR, measuring two particles gives enough information to predict the results for the third.
In the absence of spooky actions at a distance or the metaphysical cunning of a Neil's boar, notes Merman,
the two far away measurements cannot disturb the particle we are about to measure.
Hence, EPR would accord an element of reality to the result for this measurement.
Now, with three particles, we are dealing with six elements of reality. Each particle's spin measured horizontally and vertically.
All six of the elements of reality have to be there, observes Merman, because we can predict in advance what any one of the six values will be by measurements made so far away that they cannot disturb the particle that subsequently does indeed display the predicted value.
This conclusion, he notes parenthetically, is highly heretical, because, as far as quantum mechanics is concerned, two components of the spin of the same particle cannot exist at the same time.
To assert that they do is a form of local hidden variables.
Heresy or not, continues Merman. Since the result of either measurement can be predicted with probability one, that is, one hundred percent of the time, from the results of other measurements made arbitrarily far away,
an open-minded person might be sorely tempted to renounce quantum theology in favor of an interpretation less hostile to the elements of reality.
As in Bell's version of EPR, however, the elements of reality do not survive. The straightforward quantum mechanical predictions for some additional experiments, entirely unencumbered by accompanying metaphysical baggage.
In the G.H.Z., Greenberger-Horn and Zeilinger case, the demolition is spectacularly more efficient.
Farewell elements of reality, trumpets Merman, and farewell in a hurry. The compelling hypothesis that they exist can be refuted in a single measurement.
The first thing Merman did when he understood the Greenberger-Horn-Zeilinger argument was to write a letter to John Bell about it. Bell wrote back,
This fills me with admiration.
Chapter 34. Against Measurement
At the 62 Years of Uncertainty conference in 1989, John Bell, born one year after uncertainty, gave the speech of his career.
Merman rated it close to being the most spellbinding lecture I have ever heard. The only competitors are Richard Feynman's 1965 messenger lectures at Cornell, where, in six lectures, he walked his non-scientific audience through the natural laws.
Titled Against Measurement, it was, as it turned out, Bell's parting shot against the science he had lived with all his life.
It remained, in his opinion, inexcusably vague in its formulation, its physicist inexcusably complacent about this vagueness.
Published a year later in Physics World, the article, Merman comments, conveys his brilliance and his wit, but not, of course, the music of his voice.
Surely, after 62 years, we should have an exact formulation of some serious part of quantum mechanics, Bell began.
By exact, I do not, of course, mean exactly true. I mean only that the theory should be fully formulated in mathematical terms, with nothing left to the discretion of the theoretical physicist, until workable approximations are needed in applications.
By serious, I mean that some substantial fragment of physics should be covered. Non-relativistic, particle quantum mechanics is serious enough, for it covers a large part of physics and the whole of chemistry, as Dirac liked to say.
I mean, too, by serious, that apparatus should not be separated off from the rest of the world into black boxes as if it were not made of atoms and not ruled by quantum mechanics.
The question, should we not have an exact formulation, is often answered by one or both of two others. I will try to reply to them. Why bother? Why not look it up in a good book? Perhaps the most distinguished of why botherers has been Dirac.
Bell explained Dirac's system of differentiating between second-class difficulties, problems that, in his opinion, should be solved as soon as possible, and first-class difficulties, not ripe for solution at the present time.
Dirac gives at least this much comfort to those who are troubled by these questions. He sees that they exist and are difficult. Many other distinguished physicists do not. When they do admit some ambiguity in the usual formulations, they are likely to insist that ordinary quantum mechanics is just fine for all practical purposes.
I agree with them about that. Ordinary quantum mechanics, as far as I know, is just fine for all practical purposes.
Even when I begin by insisting on this myself and in capital letters, it is likely to be insisted on repeatedly in the course of the discussion, so it is convenient to have an abbreviation for the last phrase. For all practical purposes equals FAPP.
Bell could imagine the impatience of these physicists who understood the theory in their bones, but is it not good to know what follows from what, even if it is not really necessary, FAPP?
Suppose, for example, that quantum mechanics were found to resist precise formulation. Suppose that when formulation beyond FAPP is attempted, we find an unmovable finger obstinately pointing outside the subject to the mind of the observer, to the Hindu scriptures, to God, or even only gravitation.
Would not that be very, very interesting? Why not look it up in a good book?
But which good book? In fact it is seldom that a no-problem person is, on reflection, willing to endorse a treatment already in the literature.
Usually the good unproblematic formulation is still in the head of the person in question, who has been too busy with practical things to put it on paper.
I think that this reserve, as regards the formulations already in the good books, is well founded.
For the good books known to me are not much concerned with physical precision. This is clear already from their vocabulary.
Bell's list of words that have no place in a formulation with any pretension to physical precision included all the words that physicists use all the time that imply an artificial division of the world, like system, apparatus, and environment.
Observation and information are similarly imprecise.
Einstein said that it is theory which decides what is observable. I think he was right.
Observation is a complicated and theory-laden business. Then that notion should not appear in the formulation of fundamental theory.
Information? Whose information? Information about what? On this list of bad words from good books the worst of all is measurement. It must have a section to itself.
Bell quoted several sentences from Dirac's quantum mechanics in which the concept of measurement appears in the fundamental interpretive rules of the theory.
For example, Dirac writes, A measurement always causes the system to jump into a specific state of the variable that is being measured.
The system, in this context, is whatever object we are measuring, for example a particle. The variable is the attribute we are measuring, for example the position of the particle.
Dirac's statement, one of the fundamental rules of quantum mechanics as described by one of its most matter-of-fact literal practitioners, says that to measure the position of a quantum particle is not to find out where it is, but to cause it to be somewhere.
This jump into specificity, the famously vague collapse of the wave function, is related to Bohr's quantum jump when an electron disappears from one atomic energy level to emerge in another.
Jumps are not described by the quantum theory. They merely happen, pushing us briefly off the map of what we understand.
It would seem, Bell concluded, that the theory is exclusively concerned about results of measurement and has nothing to say about anything else.
What exactly qualifies some physical systems to play the role of measurer?
Was the wave function of the world waiting to jump for thousands of millions of years until a single-celled living creature appeared?
Or did it have to wait a little longer for some better qualified system with a PhD?
If the theory is to apply to anything but highly idealized laboratory operations, are we not obliged to admit that more or less measurement-like processes are going on more or less all the time, more or less everywhere?
Do we not have jumping then, all the time?
The first charge against measurement in the fundamental axioms of quantum mechanics is that it anchors there the shifty split.
Bell was echoing Heisenberg's term for the same thing, the cut or schnit, of the world into system and apparatus.
A second charge is that the word comes loaded with meaning from everyday life, meaning which is entirely inappropriate in the quantum context.
When it is said that something is measured, it is difficult not to think of the result as referring to some pre-existing property of the object in question.
Even in a lowbrow practical account, I think it would be good to replace the word measurement by the word experiment, which is altogether less misleading.
However, the idea that quantum mechanics are most fundamental physical theory is exclusively even about the results of experiments would remain disappointing.
In the beginning natural philosophers tried to understand the world around them. Trying to do that, they hit upon the great idea of contriving artificially simple situations in which the number of factors involved is reduced to a minimum.
Divide and conquer. Experimental science was born. But experiment is a tool. The aim remains to understand the world.
To restrict quantum mechanics to be exclusively about piddling laboratory operations is to betray the great enterprise.
But how is measurement to be squared with the equations of quantum mechanics which are famously silent on the subject?
Bell dived into three good books for the answer, starting with the famous and hallowed quantum mechanics of Lev Landau, written with his longtime collaborator, Effgeny Lifshitz.
I can offer three reasons for this choice.
One, it is indeed a good book. Two, it has a very good pedigree. Landau sat at the feet of Bohr. Bohr himself never wrote a systematic account of the theory. Perhaps that of Landau and Lifshitz is the nearest to Bohr that we have.
Three, it is the only book on the subject in which I have read every word.
This last came about because my friend John Sykes enlisted me as a technical assistant when he did the English translation. My recommendation of this book has nothing to do with the fact that one percent of what you pay for it comes to me.
Landau and Lifshitz agree with Dirac that a measurement always causes the system to jump into a specific state. Moreover, the possibility of describing the attributes of an atom requires the presence of physical objects which obey classical mechanics.
This is not merely because the atom is too small to see otherwise, but because the atom actually has no specific attributes unless it interacts with something else that has.
The classical apparatus, briefly and without explanation, loans to the quantum atom its decisiveness, describability and specificity. And we call this a measurement.
But the apparatus itself, a machine or computer, is made of indecisive quantum atoms. How does their fogginess add up to the normal classical behavior of the machine?
The question is unaddressed in Landau's textbook, beyond the statement that the relationship of quantum theory to the outdated yet necessary classical physics is very unusual among physical theories.
Landau's vaguely defined wave function collapse when used with good taste and discretion is adequate FAPP, bell continued.
It remains that the theory is ambiguous in principle about exactly when and exactly how the collapse occurs, about what is macroscopic and what is microscopic, what quantum and what classical.
We are allowed to ask, is such ambiguity dictated by experimental facts, or could theoretical physicists do better if they tried harder?
He turns to another quantum mechanics, this one written by an old CERN friend, Kurt Gottfried.
Again, I can give three reasons for this choice. One, it is indeed a good book. The CERN library had four copies. Two have been stolen, already a good sign. The two that remain are falling apart from much use.
Two, it has a very good pedigree. Kurt Gottfried was inspired by the treatments of Dirac and Pauley. His personal teachers were Julian Schwinger, Victor Weisskopf, et al.
Three, I have read some of it more than once.
This last came about as follows. I have often had the pleasure of discussing these things with Vicky Weisskopf, who arrived at CERN as its director at the same time as Bell did.
Always he would end up with, you should read Kurt Gottfried. Always I would say, I have read Kurt Gottfried. But Vicky would always say again the next time, you should read Kurt Gottfried. So finally I read again some parts of KG, and again, and again, and again.
A particle is mathematically described by a wave function. This wave function is almost always a summation of many apparently incompatible states, all simultaneously true, and interfering with each other in a way that boggles common sense.
Gottfried explains in his book how this is to be understood. Intuitively, uninterpretable mathematical terms involving interference between macroscopic states must be removed, he writes, or the theory will be an empty mathematical formalism.
This new summation, created when the weirdest terms are removed, is then interpreted as a simple list of options. That is, one would look at mystifying statements like, the cat is both dead and alive, or the particle is both here and there, and read them as understandable ones.
The cat is either dead or alive, and the particle is either here or there.
But this, declared a skeptical bell, suggests that the original theory, an empty mathematical formalism, is not just being approximated, but discarded and replaced.
After disposing of one more good book in similar form, Bell finished by describing two attempts to bring us towards a precise quantum mechanics. Dispensing with the shifty split, these two theories can handle system and apparatus alike.
The first, the de Broglie-Bohm non-local hidden variables theory, posits a world of real particles that have real positions and momenta, regardless of whether or not they are observed, and are guided by the mysterious spooky pilot wave.
In the second, the Girardi-Rimini-Weber theory, the collapse of the wave function is turned from metaphysical puzzlement to mathematical precision.
Giancarlo Girardi and his colleagues, doctor the Schrödinger equation so that it will collapse into specificity of its own accord.
For a few particles the effect is small, but this allows the theory to handle larger things better than ordinary quantum mechanics does.
Pointers very rapidly point, said Bell, and cats are very quickly killed or spared.
Bell staved off his audience's automatic dismissal of these theories by closing with Feynman.
We do not know where we are stupid until we stick our necks out.
At least two physicists left sixty-two years of uncertainty, with the hearty sound of,
Don't be a sissy, ringing in their ears.
Hearing these words over the crowd-noise of a conference reception, Mirman looked over to see,
John Bell, encouraging a younger physicist not to let the scope of his speculative investigations be overly constrained by the wisdom of his elders.
The next June, in the green and welcoming hills of western Massachusetts, two Amherst College professors, George Greenstein and Arthur Zions,
brought a dozen quantum physicists interested in the foundations of the subject together to live in a fraternity house for a week, with a professional chef.
Greenstein, the son of a physicist, was a gentle, white-bearded astronomer with an unusual gift for translating science for the layman.
Zions was a contemplative physicist with an interest in the big picture.
The attendees included Bell, Greenberger, Horn, Zeilinger, Shimoni, and Mirman.
Since the best part of any conference is always the conversation over coffee or beer, the chance meeting in the hall, the argument over dinner,
Greenstein and Zions decided to organize their conference to be nothing but these events.
No prepared talks, no schedule, no proceedings, remembered Mirman, just wonderful conversations.
During that idyllic week, many details of the proper Greenberger, Horn, Zeilinger paper were hammered out.
This time, with all three present, plus the help of Shimoni as co-author, and the critical input of Mirman, who had just sent his,
what's wrong with these elements of reality, to the editor.
Halfway through the conference, Zions arrived at lunch with the new Physics Today in his hand.
Mirman's article had made its dramatic entrance, surprising physicists across the country with the drama of three-particle entanglement.
When Horn arrived home, there was a postcard from Clouser, who did not know anything about the G.H.Z. paper until he read Physics Today,
even whether it was in preprint or reprint stage.
You old fox, he wrote, sent me a preprint of G.H.Z.
Mirman seems to think this is super hot stuff.
In Amherst, Kurt Gottfried got his chance to respond to Bell's wonderfully barbed attack on his book in Against Measurement.
I was delighted that the most profound student of quantum mechanics since the founding fathers and an old friend from CERN had paid close attention to what I had written.
But he found, John's critique of orthodoxy to be rather less overwhelming than his superb rhetoric.
Thus started the central debate of the conference, in which, as Mirman remembered,
Bell claimed that in some deep way quantum mechanics lacked the naturalness that all classical theories possessed.
There was no problem with the interpretation of classical physics.
For example, as Gottfried granted Bell, Einstein's equations tell you, their own interpretation, you do not need him whispering in your ear.
In quantum mechanics, on the other hand, Gottfried admitted, even the greatest classical physicist would need help.
Oh, I forgot to tell you that, according to Rabbi Born, a great thinker in the Yeshiva that flourished in Göttingen in the early part of the 20th century,
the amplitude squared of the Schrödinger equation is to be interpreted as a probability, despite all indications to the contrary.
Bell felt it was obvious that something profound was missing from quantum mechanics.
Kurt, Mirman said, never felt this in his bones.
Shimoni remembered that Bell pressed Gottfried severely about confusing FAPP with a full theoretical solution, while Vicky Weisskopf, the two men's old friend from CERN, acted as moderator.
Gottfried's answers met neither Bell's standards nor his own, starting him on a decade of honing his thoughts on the subject that would culminate in an entirely rewritten textbook,
which actually begins with the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox.
Of all the people who played in this area, he seemed to give the least.
Horn commented about Bell in Amherst.
He was totally dissatisfied with quantum mechanics and very strongly committed to an objectively real view of the world. Greenstein remembered.
It was a really knocked-down drag-out fight, and it mattered to everybody what they were arguing about.
He was in particular struck by Bell's burning intensity and seriousness in the midst of his very gentle demeanor, an almost otherworldly, very different kind of person.
Mirman and Gottfried compared Bell's wrath against superficiality to that of an Old Testament prophet.
Late one afternoon as the conference spread out for a picnic, Shimoni, propounded on the rules and strategy of croquet, remembered Greenstein, with the same thoroughness he has brought to the study of quantum mechanics.
And Mirman and Weisskopf played piano forehands.
But Greenstein noticed the combatants Bell and Gottfried standing apart.
With concern he drew near, only to see them companionably comparing their cameras.
Mirman and Gottfried, on the long drive back to Cornell, agreed that John was truly unique in the world of physics, as a personality and as an intellect, at once scientist, philosopher, and humanist.
He was a person to whom deep ideas mattered deeply.
He belonged, also, to that small company of physicists whom either of us would walk miles to hear lecture on any topic whatsoever.
Three months later, on October 1st, 1990, Bell died of a stroke in his kitchen in Geneva, so suddenly and unexpectedly that Bertelman couldn't even come to the funeral.
He was only sixty-two, never having given anyone except Mary a hint of the terrible migraine headaches that he had suffered from all his life.
Over the years between 1964 and 1990, Bell's theorem had gone from an unknown result to a respected one, albeit one with roots in an unloved quantum subculture.
Unlike Clouser and Friedman's 1972 experiment, or Fry's 1976 one, aspects in the early 80s had achieved some fame.
About entanglement over long distances, it was felt that all had been said and done that needed to be said and done.
But a decade later, at the turn of the millennium, quantum optics labs in Innsbruck, Geneva, and Los Alamos, to name a few, would be full of new excitement about the possibilities of using entanglement in increasingly dramatic, long distance, and potentially useful ways.
For those who now work in these newly wide open fields, it is a frustrating and poignant irony that, if only Bell could have lived out his biblically allotted three score years and ten, he would have seen such wonderful things begun by his half-secret hobby.
Just before he died, however, Bell took a trip to Oxford. He met there, the postdoctoral student whose idea about entanglement, though neither one knew it at the time, would set in motion the sea change.
Chapter 35
Are you telling me this could be practical?
1989 to 1991
In the library of Oxford's Clarendon lab, sat Arthur Eckert, a postdoc who might have been mistaken for a young Yule Brenner. The famous shiny paint would come later, reading EPR for the first time.
Born in Poland of a family from all over Europe, Eckert had known where he wanted to go to college ever since a friend had given him a few papers written in 1985 by Oxford's most brilliant and reclusive physicist, David Deutsch.
At the time, there were probably two or three people in the world who were interested in quantum computing, Eckert remembered. David was one of them, and he wrote those few papers which no one actually really read seriously at the time.
A quantum process could simulate any classical computation, Paul Begnoff showed in 1980. A year later, Feynman famously threw down the gauntlet to computer scientists in his, Simulating Physics with Computers, speech.
Bell's inequality shows that only a quantum computer would be able to fully imitate nature, because only a quantum computer can capture entanglement.
Though the young Feynman had dramatically sped up the computing in the Manhattan Project, done on cumbersome multipliers and sorters, by using computers working in parallel, it was Deutsch who took the third step toward the quantum computer, describing the undreamed-of computing speed inherent in what he called quantum parallelism,
the superposition principle of wave mechanics in which two waves added together produce a new wave, where many possibilities can be simultaneously explored.
Deutsch was a wispy and fragile-looking man who was awake only at night, rarely left Oxford, and felt that quantum mechanics, and in particular the quantum computer, prove that the universe is constantly splitting into many different worlds.
Quantum parallelism meant, to Deutsch, the power of a machine that could compute in all parallel worlds simultaneously. He became an advisor and friend to the sunny, down-to-earth Eckert.
Eckert's hobby was cryptography.
I just liked public-key cryptosystems. I was fascinated by them.
In the 1970s, a lovely piece of number theory developed by Pierre de Fermat in the seventeenth century had been co-opted by the British Secret Service for Cryptography.
A big surprise, said Eckert laughing, to many mathematicians who thought the field was so pure it would never be tainted by any practical application.
The system, called RSA, after the three civilians at MIT who rediscovered it a few years after the classified version, elegantly solves the problem of the eavesdropper.
An unbreakable code is, after all, only as secure as its key, and the key has to be distributed by means of a courier or over some line of communication, never fully safe from eavesdropping.
The idea behind RSA is that the key does not need to be top secret if the mathematical function, part of an equation, that encodes the message, is very hard to reverse.
For example, it is easy to multiply two numbers together. These two numbers are called factors of the bigger number they produce.
It is much harder to start with only the bigger number and work backward to find out what the factors were.
A slightly more complicated, hard to reverse function was provided by Fermat's discovery of a tidy relationship between prime numbers and modular arithmetic.
Modular arithmetic is essentially a form of division where the important part of the answer is not the number of times one number goes into another, but the remainder.
11 modulo 2 equals 1 because 2 goes into 11 five times with remainder of 1. Alternatively, 11 modulo 5 also equals 1 because of the same argument.
In RSA, the sender, Alice, encodes a message to Bob in a series of long numbers.
Taking one of these at a time, she raises it to the power of an encrypting exponent, then divides it by a very large number created by multiplying two prime numbers.
Neither the exponent nor the very large number needs to be secret. The remainder of this division is the code.
Given the code and the public key, it is almost impossible to recover the plain text by factoring the product of the two primes, even with a herd of computers, particularly if the very large number is on the order of 200 digits.
Amazingly enough, however, if that code is raised to the power of the decrypting exponent, the private key that only Bob knows, and divided by the same very large number, its remainder is the plain text.
The problem of the eavesdropper can be staved off.
But, though hard, factoring large numbers into primes is not physically impossible. It just takes a hugely long time using existing computers.
If any malicious eavesdropper ever worked out a faster way to factor large numbers, the RSA code would fall apart.
So it happened that Eckert, in the quiet of Clarendon's library, sat back in his chair in shock when he read for the first time the famous EPR definition of, an element of reality.
If without in any way disturbing a system we can predict with certainty the value of a physical quantity, then there exists an element of physical reality corresponding to this physical quantity.
It just clicked in my brain. Wow, this is about eavesdropping.
An eavesdropper just wants to learn the value of the code without in any way disturbing the system.
If the code shows traces of prying, then Alice and Bob won't use it, and the eavesdropper's work would be in vain.
Local realism, Eckert realized, allows you somehow to incorporate the definition of perfect eavesdropping into the formulation.
His mind was whirling. Ha, but I know it was refuted.
An entangled code would be an uneavesdroppable code.
He leaped up and began to search the Clarendon library for Bell's 1964 paper.
What if Alice and Bob shared a long series of entangled photons?
If the Clouser, Horn, Shimoni, Holt inequalities are violated, meaning that Alice and Bob's photons remain entangled, Eckert began to realize then there's no chance that the eavesdropper touched the particles on the way.
Any prying would destroy the entanglement.
The inequality is like a signature that the particles were not touched.
I was very happy about it, Eckert remembered.
But then he found that, aside from the intellectually fearless Deutsch, hardly anyone wanted to talk about this. People were just very dismissive about the whole thing.
Then Bell himself arrived to give a speech at Oxford.
After the speech, Eckert, overflowing with excitement, came up to Bell and explained his idea, in his likable accent, a combination of several different European languages, including the Queen's English.
Bell stared at the elated young graduate student.
He had always firmly discouraged students from delving into the foundations of quantum mechanics, a subject so unfashionable and esoteric could only make them unemployable.
He had never expected to hear anything like what Eckert was saying.
Are you telling me that this could be of practical use? Bell asked.
I said, yes, I think it can.
And he said, well, it's unbelievable.
They did not have long to talk.
I was just a student and there were many people who wanted to whisk him away, said Eckert.
But Bell left Oxford knowing that a new chapter in the history of entanglement was about to begin.
Chapter 36 The Turn of the Millennium, 1997-2002
If you had lived high above Lake Geneva as one millennium turned into another and you scanned the city and its surroundings once in a while with your high-powered Swiss binoculars, you might have noticed some interesting activities of certain physicists, on bicycles, in fiat, making their way to Swisscom telephone central stations.
This phenomenon was not entanglement exactly, but it was definitely correlation of the kind that might be achieved with a few mobile phones.
Up there in your castle you might have wondered what the source of this suspicious correlation might be and why physicists would want access to the phone lines of the entire city of Geneva.
Other odd things had been happening in other places.
In Innsbruck there was a mysterious, fully coded transmission of a photograph of the divinely spherical Venus of Villendorf, the world's first known sculpture.
And in Los Alamos physicists, using an equation that they referred to as the inequality, repeatedly caught an amorphous and pernicious eavesdropper known only by her semi-mythological codename, eave.
Obviously, something strange was afoot.
In the second half of the 90s Anton Zeilinger had emerged as the world leader in bringing entangled theory into experimental life.
Down conversion, where a crystal-split high-energy laser photons into a halo of lower-energy entangled photons, made it possible.
No longer a career killer, these investigations into entanglement now drew brilliant postdocs and graduate students from all over the world to his lab in Innsbruck, in the Austrian Alps.
It was easy in the early 90s to make a list of great things that could be done, now that there was such a convenient source of entangled pairs, explained Horn, characteristically downplaying his own role.
Anton's claim to fame is that he went and did them.
Reliably, each year news of one or even two landmark explorations of entanglement would emerge from Zeilinger's Bauhaus barracks in the midst of the snowy mountains.
Quantum teleportation, which Zeilinger and his team achieved in Innsbruck in 1997, is slightly subtler than its spectacular name.
Alice in Wonderland has a photon whose state she wants to send to Bob in Milwaukee.
She entangles that photon with her member of an already entangled photon pair.
This causes Bob's member of the previously entangled pair to fall into the desired state.
The coiness of quantum mechanics allows this perfect result to happen only about a quarter of the time, but the rest of the time the photon is a trivial flip or phase shift away from perfection.
Flipping the photon or shifting its phase, our operations Bob can easily perform.
As an analogy, imagine Alice has sent an unmarked paper cut out to Bob through the mail.
When Bob opens the envelope, he does not know if he is looking at it upside down or backward.
To complete the otherwise spooky process of quantum teleportation, Alice will have to tell him whether or not he should flip the result to have a photon identical to the one she started with.
Without classical communication, for example a phone call, nothing is gained.
In 1998 entanglement swapping, or teleportation of entanglement as Zeilinger sometimes calls it, was the next piece of theoretical magic that Zeilinger and his team incarnated.
This time Alice in Wonderland has two entangled photons, so does Bob in Milwaukee.
If they meet in Innsbruck, each carrying only one of their photons and entangle them together, these newly entangled photons lose all memory of their erstwhile partner photons and vice versa.
Meanwhile, the two forgotten photons back in Wonderland and Milwaukee are now entangled with each other, even though they have never met.
In 2000 Zeilinger sent an encrypted photograph over optical fibers from Alice, in this case a computer in one building, to Bob, a computer a few buildings away, of the Venus of Villendorf.
The encrypted photograph was composed of random looking speckles and garish hues, but after Bob decrypted this, he was left with an almost perfect image of the little round fertility goddess, in shades of clay brown against a black background.
Meanwhile, among the red rock and pine trees of the Sangra de Cristo Mountains of New Mexico, Paul Cuiot, an endearingly bird-like man in glasses and suspenders with boundless energy and encyclopedic knowledge, led his team in attempting various eaves-dropping strategies on their Alice and Bob.
The clouser, horn, shimony, Holt inequality did indeed reliably signal the presence of the wily eve, just as Eckert had imagined back in 1991.
I am a quantum engineer, but on Sundays I have principles.
Nicolas Gassin began his speech. It was a decade after Bell's death, and the occasion was a celebration of Bell in the form of a conference in Vienna, organized by Bertleman and Zeilinger, who had just moved there from Innsbruck.
That is how John Bell opened his underground colloquium in March 1983, Gassin explained, smiling in his Swiss-French accent.
Words which I will never forget.
John Bell, the great John Bell, presented himself as an engineer, one of those people who make things work without even understanding how they function, whereas I thought of John Bell as one of the greatest theoreticians.
In March 1983, the Association Vaudois des Châchères in Physique organized their annual one-week course in Montana, an excellent combination of ski and physics, on the foundations of quantum mechanics.
For one of these reasons peculiar to the community of people interested solely in these foundations, John Bell was invited, but without any time slot for a presentation.
With some friends, we, that is, the PhD students, managed to convince him to give us an evening lecture, after dinner, while the professors enjoyed the local wine.
The talk took place in the basement. The ceiling was too low, and the students sat on the ground, a perfect underground atmosphere.
When John Bell started, you could hear the silence.
I am a quantum engineer, but on Sundays I have principles.
With grey hair and a gaunt, intelligent face, Cassin looked like a wizard transplanted into the real world and dressed in a mefty.
He had started his career in a way that Bell would have cautioned him against, with degrees in physics and in mathematics.
He wrote his PhD thesis in 1981 on an alternative version of Schrodinger's equation that did not require an observer or apparatus to collapse the wave function.
For this, the De Broglie Foundation, who stated mission is to encourage the questioning of quantum dogma, gave him a prize.
With a young family to support, Cassin went to work for a telecom startup.
Shimoni had advised him that an optical career could bridge the industry and the academy.
Cassin continued to publish his heretical papers on the side, while enjoying the dawn of the fiber optic revolution in telecommunications.
By 1988, the erstwhile mathematical quantum philosopher was also an expert on the hardware-software interface of fiber optics,
and the University of Geneva asked him to head the optics section of its applied physics group, essentially a research arm of the Swiss telephone company.
Gissin transformed this lab into a cutting-edge center of quantum cryptography.
His goal was to bring quantum cryptography out of the lab, and by 1997, he and his group were demonstrating entanglement between photons separated by six miles as the crow flies.
The entangled photons started in the Swisscom Central Station in downtown Geneva, and traveled down a total of nearly nine and a half miles of the commercial phone lines
before meeting either Alice, in Little Station southwest of the city in Bairnex, or Bob, north along the lake in a village called Bellevue.
The two sides of Gissin's life had come together, the quantum philosophy and the telecom engineering, the principle and the practical.
In these experiments, classical communication had an even greater role than usual.
When you do this experiment, first you have to make sure, is the guy there?
explained Gissin with a smile.
Maybe he's going there with his bicycle.
Is he late?
Did he go out for a coffee?
These kinds of trivialities have also to be organized and just get a little more complicated than when everyone is in one lab.
But it's fun also.
Codes two played a non-quantum role as the only way to enter the locked telecom central station.
Then you have thirty seconds to give your name and all that to the police, over the intercom, Gissin explained.
If you fail to do so or go out to smoke a cigarette and come in without respecting these rules, the police is there in a few minutes.
That makes sense because once you are in there, you have access in these fibers to all the data, the boring data and...
He paused and then said, the other data.
In less than two decades, he had watched fiber optics go from a lab-based toy to a web of glass and light spanning the globe.
And, Gissin expected to see entanglement follow a similar path.
Now that it had sloughed off the cloak of vagueness and negativity it had worn for so long.
Quantum mechanics has now existed for about eighty-five years, said Gissin.
And has mainly been considered as a theory of paradoxes, of mathematics and strange counter-intuitive ideas.
So it was actually looked at from a quantitatively negative point of view.
With rules like, you cannot measure this and that simultaneously, you should not draw pictures of elementary quantum processes, you cannot clone a photon.
All these are negative rules.
Gissin saw entanglement-based quantum cryptography as the turning point.
In 1991, Arthur Eckert's discovery changed the physicist's world.
Entanglement and quantum non-locality became respectable.
What was negative became positive, ushering in a kind of psychological revolution among physicists, and actually only, of course, a fraction of the physicists.
Young ones mainly, also computer scientists, who began to realize that quantum mechanics being so different from classical physics also opens up the possibility for doing something that is radically new.
I think this is the really important thing, this psychological revolution.
It is changing the view that physicists have about quantum physics in general.
I am a quantum engineer, but on Sundays I have principles.
That statement had given Gissin, as a new PhD, a wider sense of the possibilities of his career.
His Vienna speech dedicated to Bell, titled, Sundays in a Quantum Engineer's Life, was a portrait of an experimentalist taking a weekly Sabbath to think about the big picture, which he described in the form of conversations between a physicist and an engineer.
These archetypes symbolized not only Gissin and his team, but also the unconventional Swiss cognitive scientist, philosopher and physicist Antoine Suarez, who, after meeting John Bell in 1988, had become possessed with the idea of a dramatic experiment to investigate in depth the tension between quantum mechanics and relativity.
Relativity is adamantly a local theory about separable, real objects, while entanglement seems to deny that these attributes can actually all coexist in nature.
Yet no one has been able to catch the two in an out-and-out contradiction.
To speak of the locality, or lack thereof, of quantum mechanics is to speak of this still unplumbed and mysterious relationship.
On a really nice Sunday in Gissin's story, the physicist thought about testing the speed of what Einstein called the spooky action at a distance, the non-local collapse of the wave function, where the vast and vaporous quantum wave upon measurement becomes a miniscule particle in a specific place.
In entanglement it seems as if the measurement of one particle collapses the wave function of the other.
If cause must precede effect, and if Alice's measurement of her entangled particle affects Bob's entangled particle at a distance, then the correlation should disappear if they measure their particles at exactly the same time.
But the theory of relativity makes, at exactly the same time, an extremely loaded phrase.
One of Einstein's great insights, of course, was that time is merely what we measure with a clock, and not absolute, godlike, and unalterable, as we tend to think of it.
Further, clocks in motion tick more slowly than clocks standing still. The faster a clock moves, the slower it ticks, until, at the speed of light, time stands still.
Depending on an observer's state of motion, and thus how quickly his clock was ticking, he might report events as occurring in a different order than would another observer standing still.
Physicists refer to observers in different states of motion as being in different reference frames.
The classic example compares the moving train reference frame with the platform reference frame, and the concept of simultaneity, two things occurring at exactly the same time, has meaning only for observers in the same reference frame.
Gissin continued,
Well, hum, I do not really know, admits the physicist. Let's try the most obvious choices, the reference frame in which the Swiss Alps are at rest, and also the reference frame of the cosmic background radiation, center of mass of the universe.
OK, says the engineer, but what exactly should be aligned? The beam splitters, the detectors, the computers, the observers? The physicist is amazed. Now that he dared to consider the assumption that the collapse is real, so many questions arise and each hypothetical answer can, in principle, be tested.
The following Sunday, our physicist goes for a walk with his friend David Bohm. They spoke about the engineer's question. What should be aligned? Clearly, it should be the device that triggers the collapse, but what could one reasonably assume as the trigger?
After a few minutes of silence, the physicist states,
It must be the detector. That's where the irreversible event happens.
Possibly, replies Bohm, but I bet it is the beam splitters.
Indeed, in Bohm's pilot wave model, the irreversible choice is made at the beam splitters. In this model, the detectors merely reveal this choice.
This experiment has really been performed in 1999 in Geneva. The referee reports are interesting, ranging from fascination to desperation. No doubt that, for many physicists, the collapse is taboo, but certainly not for John Bell.
The experimental result established impressive lower bounds on the speed of the spooky action. Thousands of times the speed of light, Gesson noted.
He reminded his listeners that, after all, for a long time the speed of sound was the fastest measurable speed, while light was assumed to be instantaneously everywhere.
There comes yet another sunny Sunday. The physicist rests in his armchair and thinks,
Oh, this is quite exciting, but what if we let relativity enter the game even deeper? What if the detectors are in relative motion such that each detector, in its own reference frame, analyzes its photon before the other?
It would seem, then, that each photon detector pair must make its choice before the other.
This renews the tension between quantum physics and relativity, says the physicist to himself. Abner Shimonie, a good friend of John Bell, termed this tension as peaceful coexistence, because the tension does not lead to any testable conflict.
However, continues loudly the physicist, although he is alone. Once one assumes that the collapse is a real phenomenon, and once one considers specific models, then the conflict is real and is testable.
If both measurements happen before the other, then the quantum correlation should disappear, however large the speed of the spooky action. Very excited, the physicist starts to evaluate some orders of magnitude.
This was Suarez's dream experiment, for which he had been fundraising and seeking an experimentalist since 1992. His search took him to Innsbruck to talk with Zeilinger and Quiot, who was there at the time, but they did not have the long-distance capabilities necessary for such an experiment.
Finally, in 1997, he was introduced to Gissin, with his lab encompassing all the fiber-optic phone lines of Geneva, and the experiment began.
Suarez realized that about 112 miles per hour would be a high enough speed to see the effect.
A Ferrari can do it, exclaimed Gissin, recounting the train of thought in his speech.
So, my dear engineer, let's perform the experiment.
But, complains the engineer, do I really need to activate this bloody moving detector? This requires liquid nitrogen and is a real mess.
Once the engineering was made feasible, this experiment was also performed in Geneva in the spring of 1999, reported Gissin.
The two photon interferences were still visible independently of the relative velocity between Alice and Bob's reference frames.
Alice, in her reference frame, measures her photon first.
From Bob's point of view, he has measured his photon first, yet the correlation is still present.
What would John Bell have thought of this?
Later, Gissin explained privately.
Indeed, quantum mechanics just predicts that these correlations are there, but it doesn't really describe how they come about.
If you have a natural picture that one happens first and influences the other, which is the kind of vague idea that I guess many physicists have just to be comfortable with this correlation,
this kind of naive explanation simply doesn't hold in the face of our experimental results.
So you have to abandon this kind of mental picture.
But then, which picture should you have?
I don't have a good picture, I have to say.
I find these results quite puzzling and I'm not very comfortable with the idea that we should just give up any picture at all.
Most physicists will always have some kind of mental picture to complement the mathematical tools.
Gissin's response to puzzlement was to plan further experiments to explore every nook and cranny of entanglement that he is able.
The main lesson I learned from John Bell led me, on the one side, to become a quantum engineer, and on the other side, not to forget about the principles.
He concluded his speech.
There is nothing wrong with metaphysical assumptions, but the good ones are those that can be tested.
Chapter 37
A Mystery, Perhaps
1981-2006
The idea of quantum computing met the idea of entanglement almost immediately, back in 1981, at an MIT conference on the physics of computation.
Feynman gave the keynote address to the assembled computer scientists.
Might I say immediately, so that you know where I really intend to go, that we always have had...
Feynman stopped and looked around with an expression of joking paranoia.
Secret, secret, close the doors.
We always have had a great deal of difficulty in understanding the world view that quantum mechanics represents.
His expression was frank.
At least, I do, because I'm an old enough man that I haven't got to the point that this stuff is obvious to me.
Okay, I still get nervous with it.
Feynman was famous for iconoclasm, but this was still not what the audience was expecting.
Quantum theorists had rarely been so candid on this subject since the deaths of Einstein and Bohr.
You know how it always is.
Every new idea, it takes a generation or two until it becomes obvious that there's no real problem.
It has not yet become obvious to me that there's no real problem.
I cannot define the real problem, therefore, I suspect that there's no real problem, but I'm not sure there's no real problem.
So, that's why I like to investigate things.
Can I learn anything from asking this question about computers, about this may or may not be mystery as to what the world view of quantum mechanics is?
Well, could a classical computer simulate a quantum system?
If there's no hocus pocus, the answer is certainly no.
This is called the hidden variable problem.
He proceeded to walk the audience through his version of Bell's theorem.
I've entertained myself always by squeezing the difficulty of quantum mechanics into a smaller and smaller place, so as to get more and more worried about this particular item.
It seems to be almost ridiculous that you can squeeze it to a numerical question that one thing is bigger than another, a Bell inequality.
What I'm trying to do, he told the computer scientists, is get you people to digest as well as possible the real answers of quantum mechanics and see if you can't invent a different point of view than the physicists have had to invent to describe this.
In fact, Feynman looked up at his audience, his brow wrinkling.
In fact, the physicists have no good point of view.
He grinned at the surprised faces in the crowd.
So, I would like to see if there's some other way out.
I don't know.
He shrugged.
Maybe physics is absolutely OK the way it is.
He paused.
He wanted to know for sure, not maybe.
He had been discussing the subject with the organizer of this conference, the great computer scientist Ed Fredkin.
The program that Fredkin is always pushing about trying to find a computer simulation of physics seems to me to be an excellent program to follow out.
He and I have had wonderful, intense and interminable arguments.
Another grin.
And my argument is always that the real use of it would be the challenge of explaining quantum mechanical phenomena.
And I'm not happy, finished Feynman in a rush of words, with all the analyses that go with just the classical theory because nature isn't classical, dammit.
And if you want to make a simulation of nature, you'd better make it quantum mechanical and by golly.
It's a wonderful problem because it doesn't look so easy.
In 1993, while a post-doc at Los Alamos, Seth Lloyd, the ponytailed, mountaineering scion of a western Massachusetts family of madrigal singers, doctors, chamber musicians and university presidents, proposed a breakthrough design for a quantum computer, one that could actually be built with current technology.
At the turn of the millennium, Lloyd's once and future colleague, Isaac Chuang, himself also a rock climber and violinist, was one of the people who actually managed to perform a quantum computation using the molecules in a vial of liquid as one of these Lloyd machines.
The molecules factored the number 15 into 3 and 5.
Two men from Bell Labs with large mustaches and unusually fine writing styles, Peter Shore and Love Grover, found algorithms for a quantum computer to run that are far, far faster than any classical computer could ever be.
Shores, in 1994, for factoring large numbers, and Grovers, in 1996, for searching a database.
If computers that you build are quantum, Shore explained in a science news poetry contest, then spies of all factions will want them. Our codes will all fail and they'll read our email till we've crypto that's quantum and daunt them.
All our banks, all the internet, all of a hundred daily operations of little or huge importance, depend on modern cryptography, mostly RSA.
Deutsche Eckert explained,
In contrast, quantum computers could factorize thousand digit numbers in a fraction of a second.
If, as the great teacher John Wheeler put it, it comes from bit, if things, it's, are made of information, bits, then as the universe stores and processes that data, it is computing.
In Lloyd's book, Programming the Universe, he reminds his readers,
The universe is a quantum system, and almost all of its pieces are entangled.
So, he explains, if it's a computer, it's a quantum one.
Uncertainty provides the seeds from which new detail and structure emerge, and through entanglement, quantum mechanics, unlike classical mechanics, can create information out of nothing.
This pervasive entanglement is both the blessing and the bane of quantum computer scientists.
If the quantum computer entangles with its environment, it will produce random results, that is, results that are correlated with things the computer programmer doesn't want and can't control.
Quantum error correcting involves fighting unwanted entanglement with more entanglement, a shell of entangled particles that protects the important computing particles inside.
When we started working with quantum computing seriously, we learned a lot about the nature of entanglement, explained Eckert in 2005.
In the last six years, we learned much more about the whole entanglement business, about the structure of entanglement than we learned in the previous 70.
So, there's been enormous progress, mostly mathematical, in trying to quantify entanglement, in trying to find ways of measuring it, finding ways of detecting entanglement.
When people ask, what's entanglement good for, Eckert tells a story.
James Clerk Maxwell, the greatest theorist of the nineteenth century, who spent his career at Cambridge University where Eckert now works, was once asked, what's electricity good for?
Eckert repeats Maxwell's reply.
Well, I do not know, but I'm pretty sure that Her Majesty's government will tax it soon.
Michael Nielsen, the co-author with Isaac Chuang of the first graduate-level textbook on the subject, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, explains,
He remarks on the parallel between now and the eighteenth century, when steam engines and other new machines spurred a deeper understanding of energy, and helped lead to the laws of thermodynamics that govern it.
Now, the quantum computer spurs us on to a deeper understanding of another resource, entanglement, and will, we hope, lead us to insights into its currently inexplicable ways.
Those of us unburdened by physics graduate degrees are always wanting to know the answers to questions that have no answers, hence Bell's ironic name for his book, Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics.
Consider the question of Rutherford's friend, who had just read of his lectures,
After such a reading, my mind always fastens on the proton. I wonder what you have in your head, in your mind's eye, when you think of it. I don't know whether anyone has invented any guts for it.
Now, years later, there is a quick, superficial, and correct answer to that question. The, guts, of a proton or neutron, are quarks.
But Rutherford's friend's question remains essentially unanswered. Is there any way to understand what a quark is?
These things are not particles. They are not waves. In some ways, they are utterly deterministic. In others, completely random. They always confound instinctive understanding.
All these fifty years of conscious brooding have brought me no nearer to the question. What are light quanta?
Nowadays every Tom, Dick and Harry thinks he knows it, but he is mistaken.
Einstein wrote this to his best friend Besso in 1951, four years before he died.
Bohr's mind could bend around complementarity, duality, uncertainty, but, still, Rutherford, who was always on Bohr's side in the arguments with Einstein, once thundered at him,
Bohr, my boy, you are too complacent about ignorance.
The great experimental physicist I. I. Robbie described this problem in an interview with Jeremy Bernstein.
There's the miracle of doing something like making an electron-positron pair. One actually creates a remarkable thing like an electron. It's a marvelous thing.
I don't see how it's made, it just appears. It's a kind of materialization. The ghost shows up in reality. There it is.
You can calculate how many electrons will be produced and, with what probability, but how was it born? What was it made of?
It's this kind of question that, as an experimenter, I would like to see answered. The theory doesn't answer the sort of question that led me into physics in the first place.
I wanted to know what the thing really was.
And so, of course, did Bell. He wanted to know not how a particle responds to a measurement, but what it really is.
While still at Stanford in 1964, after writing his paper on the non-locality of hidden variables, Bell wrote another paper in collaboration with a professor there named Mike Nauenberg.
Their paper, The Moral Aspect of Quantum Mechanics, ends with these resounding paragraphs.
It is easy to imagine a quantum state described by a huge Schrodinger equation for the whole universe, quietly pursuing its linear evolution through all of time and containing somehow all possible worlds.
But the usual interpretive axioms of quantum mechanics come into play only when the system interacts with something else, is observed.
For the universe, there is nothing else, and quantum mechanics, in its traditional form, has simply nothing to say.
It gives no way of, indeed, no meaning in, picking out from the wave of possibility the single, unique thread of history.
These considerations, in our opinion, lead inescapably to the conclusion that quantum mechanics is, at the best, incomplete.
We look forward to a new theory which can refer meaningfully to events in a given system without requiring observation by another system.
The critical test cases requiring this conclusion are systems containing consciousness and the universe as a whole.
Actually, the writers share with most physicists a degree of embarrassment at consciousness being dragged into physics, and share the usual feeling that, to consider the universe as a whole, is at least, immodest, if not blasphemous.
However, these are only logical test cases.
It seems likely to us that physics will have again adopted a more objective description of nature long before it begins to understand consciousness, and the universe as a whole may well play no central role in this development.
It remains a logical possibility that it is the act of consciousness which is ultimately responsible for the reduction of the wave packet, in other words, the collapse of the wave function.
It is also possible that something like the quantum mechanical state function may continue to play a role, supplemented by variables describing the actual, as distinct from the possible, course of events, hidden variables, although this approach seems to face severe difficulties in describing separated systems in a sensible way.
What is much more likely is that the new way of seeing things will involve an imaginative leap that will astonish us.
In any case, it seems that the quantum mechanical description will be superseded. In this, it is like all theories made by man. But, to an unusual extent, its ultimate fate is apparent in its internal structure. It carries in itself the seeds of its own destruction.
Epilogue Back in Vienna, 2005
Sitting on a bench are Shimoni and Gesang. Gesang with a question for the man Greenberger calls Mr. Quantum Mechanics.
It is now banal for two photons which have never met to be entangled. Do you think John Bell would have guessed this?
Bell had no idea that was possible, says Shimoni.
Bertelman sweeps by. The careful observer can see a green and black striped sock under the cuff of one trouser leg and a red and black striped sock under the other cuff.
Gesang tells Shimoni that it was his review article with Clouser in 1978 that pulled Gesang into this field.
I read it in a hotel in India drinking tea. He was on a trip to go scuba diving with his brother, an expert diver.
In 1997, Clouser wrote a paper in honour of Shimoni's birthday, titled, Debroy, Wave Interference of Small Rocks and Live Viruses.
With one of Ed Frye's students, he had developed an atom interferometer and the technique they had used he believed could someday demonstrate the quantum nature of something as large in quantum terms as a virus.
He sounded the call to the neutron interferometers and other fundamental quantum investigators to pay attention and Zeilinger was listening.
His group has just sent a knobbly, fluorinated, fluorine molecule, a 60-carbon atom's soccer ball brandishing fluorine atoms from every seam, through a two-slit experiment, dramatically displaying the wave nature of matter.
Zeilinger is fast chasing down Clouser's dream of interfering small rocks and live viruses, believing that a careful enough experiment can show anything existing in a placeless, quantum-mechanical limbo.
Careful experiments are expensive, of course, and the bigger an object is, the less willing it is to display quantum behaviour.
The boundary between quantum and classical is just a question of money, is Zeilinger's slogan. It seems that the University of Vienna is listening.
Gissah also has an amazing new experiment. Two entangled photons start out together. One enters a box full of noisy, uncorrelated photons, while the other bypasses it. The photon that emerges from the box is still entangled with the photon that went around it.
This is a change, Gissah is saying to Shimoni. I was told entanglement is very ethereal, very fragile. Don't study it. But entanglement is robust. We routinely send an entangled photon down a kilometre of fibre.
A student says, Schrodinger and De Broglie would love this stuff. Says Gissah, yes, but they would still ask, where's the boundary? When does it become classical?
Anton would say that there is no boundary. We are quantum.
I do not know what that means.
He pauses and then says, I think that as we continue we will find it. I don't believe that I will find it, but my experiments.
They contribute, says the student.
They contribute, says Gissah.
Though Gissah stopped scuba diving after his brother tragically drowned, Eckert has, as of a few years ago, become a serious scuba diver himself, spending more and more time in Singapore where he holds a second professorship.
The conference photo on the long and wide front steps is taken with Eckert standing behind everyone else, present but totally invisible to the camera's eye, enthusiastically discussing entanglement with some students.
In the photo, Quiatacine climbing on the building, hanging by one arm from a square pillar in the last row.
He has just moved from the plateaus and canyons of Los Alamos to the plains of Illinois and the title of his speech is Scaling Mount Entanglement, or What to Do If You Live Somewhere Where All the Spatial Derivatives Are Zero.
He looks back at Eckert.
Being a hidden variable, I see.
Deep in conversation under one of the soaring arched windows of the university are two young professors, members of the new generation, studying and arguing about quantum theories foundations.
They are quantum information theorists, who focus on the deeper lessons that can be drawn from quantum cryptography and quantum computation.
The older of the two, a charming and energetic Texan named Chris Fuchs, works at Bell Labs.
He has just published his Sommys dot text, Notes on a Paulean Idea, which has been for a long time circulating on the Internet, a book of his email correspondence full of the stylish prose with which he argues, cajoles, and teaches everyone else in the field.
The Paulean Idea of its title encapsulated in the epigraph, quoted from the great man himself.
In the new pattern of thought, we do not assume any longer the detached observer, but an observer who, by his indeterminable effects, creates a new situation.
The book begins with a beautiful forward by Merman.
As he explained in his piece for the Bell Conference a few years earlier, until quite recently I was entirely on Bell's side on the matter of knowledge and information.
Words, Bell said, that should not appear in any serious formulation of physics.
But then I fell into bad company.
I started hanging out with the quantum computation crowd, for many of whom quantum mechanics is self-evidently and unproblematically all about information.
Because of the arguments of the old and new guard of the Copenhagen interpretation, his friends, Gottfried and Fuchs respectively, Merman has become much more sympathetic to its tenets.
The past decade has seen the growth of intense interest in applications of quantum mechanics to information processing, brought about by its deep intellectual richness.
In fortuitous but sociologically significant resonance with our cultural obsession with keeping secrets, Merman writes in the forward,
Chris Fuchs is the conscience of the field.
He never loses sight of the real aim of these pursuits, and if you yourself thought it had to do with secure data transmission, RSA code cracking, fast searches, fighting decoherence, concocting ever more ingenious tricks and such,
you should look up from your beautiful algorithms or candidate qubits, quantum bits for quantum computers, for a few hours every now and then, to browse through these pages.
Quantum mechanics is a law of thought in a world that is sensitive to the touch, is Fuchs's motto, which resounds throughout the work.
It is that zing in the system, that sensitivity to the touch that keeps us from ever saying more than sigh, the answer to the Schrödinger equation, of it, as he explains in his speech at this conference.
This is the thing that is real about the system.
It is our task to give better expression to that idea and start to appreciate the doors it opens for us to shape and manipulate the world.
He suspects that we will someday be able to point to some ontological content, content about being as opposed to the knowing that the theory clearly covers, in the quantum theory.
But that ontological statement will have more to do with our interface with the world, namely, that in learning about it we change it, than with the world itself.
Then he laughs. Whatever that might mean.
His tall, long-haired blonde friend, standing by the window with him in the black AC-DC t-shirt, is named Terry Rudolph.
Now a professor at Imperial College London, he grew up in Australia.
He is more than capable of holding his own in conversation with a reincarnation of Pauli, but he is not a reincarnation of Heisenberg.
I belong to the crazy group that believes Einstein was right, he says.
In his senior year in college, as a twenty-year-old math and physics major at the University of Queensland, who was feeling lukewarm about physics,
I went to this lecture because I thought the professor was going to talk about the exam. Instead, he gave us Merman's paper on Bell's inequality.
I almost failed the exam because I was so sure it was wrong. I went off for two weeks trying to see where the mistake was.
It's the most important, profound feature of modern physics that this is the way the world is.
When Fuchs says that he thinks the ontological content of the quantum theory will be that it reacts to us, Rudolph says,
it could still be that there is an underlying reality, because, you know, if the wave function is knowledge, then you still have the question, knowledge about what?
I like the word belief better than knowledge, says Fuchs. The unique thing about the quantum world is that it never lets people's opinions get so aligned that they can jump to the conclusion of a freestanding reality.
This is captured by the fact that the best that can be said of almost all measurements can only be couched in statistical language.
All right, statistical language about what, if not a freestanding reality, asks Rudolph.
Belief about the answers to the questions we can ask, about what will win our bets for us, who could want more from a physical theory, says Fuchs.
Then he relents, yeah, yeah, I know, you want more.
With an impish grin he says, but I suspect you can't get it.
It's too anthropocentric for me, says Rudolph. It's all to do with me and how I'm describing the world, but I actually believe his Australian accent gets stronger.
That if we had ever evolved, you know, if the earth had been a bit closer to the sun and these human monkeys had never come out, that the universe would have still been here, and that something would have been going on.
And whatever that theory is, it certainly doesn't depend on the betting strategies of a bunch of glorified monkeys.
Fuchs and Rudolph's argument is one of the central ones of the quantum theory, and has been so in various forms ever since the beginning.
But the point on which they agree is even more interesting.
Almost all the formal structure of the quantum theory is not really about physics at all, Fuchs wrote in 1998.
It is about the formal tools for describing what we know.
Many oddities of quantum theory show a strong similarity to information theory.
A powerful set of ideas developed alongside the theory of computation to explain the transmission of information.
Rudolph and Fuchs agree that what we call the quantum theory is actually mostly information theory.
Theory about our knowledge of quantum entities, rather than about the entities themselves.
If information theory could be shorn from quantum mechanics, what would be left?
What we need to do is remove from quantum mechanics all those information theoretic aspects that are due to how we perceive the world,
and find a quantum mechanics that conforms to the world when I'm not around, is how Rudolph puts it.
The distillate that remains, the piece of quantum theory with no information theoretic significance,
will be our first unadorned glimpse of quantum reality, is how Fuchs puts it.
How would someone go about this task?
One approach is to see if I impose very simple information theoretic restraints on a classical theory
how much of quantum mechanics the resulting theory looks like, explains Rudolph.
Essentially, playing with hidden variables models and seeing where they fail, as John Bell once did.
You know, there's no underlying principle to quantum mechanics in the same way there is for relativity.
In relativity, you've got a simple principle that the laws of physics look the same to all inertial observers, and bang,
you can derive huge amounts from that.
So, here's an information theoretic constraint.
The observer can never know precisely the position and the momentum of a particle, bang,
and we look and see how constrained the resulting theory must be, and how similar to quantum mechanics it must be.
The task, agrees Fuchs, is not to make sense of the quantum axioms by heaping more structure, more definitions,
more science fiction imagery on top of them, but to throw them away wholesale and start afresh.
We should be relentless in asking ourselves, from what deep physical principles might we derive this exquisite mathematical structure?
Those principles should be crisp, they should be compelling, they should stir the soul.
When I was in junior high school, I sat down with Martin Gardner's book Relativity for the Million,
and came away with an understanding of the subject that sustains me even today.
The concepts were strange to my everyday world, but they were clear enough that I could get a grasp of them knowing little more mathematics than arithmetic.
One should expect nothing less for a proper foundation to the quantum.
Until we can explain the essence of the theory to a junior high school or high school student, the essence, not the mathematics,
and have them walk away with a deep, lasting memory, I well believe we will not have understood a thing about quantum foundations.
A year after Rudolf Redmerman's paper on Bell's inequality, he finished his honors thesis in physics, making the first major step toward becoming a physicist.
He decided to celebrate by wandering around the world for a year.
He wanted to see Africa, where his grandmother and mother had once lived.
In Europe, where his aunt and uncle made their home among the gorgeous peaks of the Austrian Tyrol, and North America, where he himself would ultimately get his PhD,
and work at Bell Labs, and where he would meet Chris Fuchs.
When he was about to leave Australia to set out on this journey, his mother told him an incredible story.
His own mother had been a very innocent, 26-year-old Irish Catholic who had become pregnant after a relationship with a brilliant and much older man.
The young woman gave her baby to the father of the child, as he had asked.
But after two years of missing her daughter, when she came across the toddler with a nanny in a park in Dublin, she snatched her out of the baby carriage and took her across the globe to South Africa.
And it was thus, that the 21-year-old Rudolph, who had only a year earlier encountered the idea of entanglement for the first time, and as a result dedicated himself to studying physics, learned that his grandfather was Schrödinger.
