Hello everyone, I'm Juanita and in this video I'm going to show you how to open
Spyder and go over the basics of Spyder's interface. We will learn about Spyder's
four paints that you'll likely be using most often, as well as really explore the
others that are open by default. If you don't have Spyder installed and would
like to follow along, you can download it at the link below this video.
The easiest way to open Spyder is by opening Anaconda Navigator and clicking
on Spyder application once it is open.
In case you have another version of Spyder in Navigator, open the command
lined or the Anaconda prompt in the case of Windows and type the commands
conda-update-anaconda and conda-install-spyder-equal-4.
To launch Spyder without opening Navigator, open your command line and
type Spyder. If you follow the installation guide, you should have
everything necessary to open Spyder 4.
This is what Spyder 4 looks like in its default configuration, though you can
terribly customize it, which we'll get to in a later tutorial. You can see that it
is divided into three sections showing three different paints, the editor, the
console, and the help viewer. These three, along with the variable explorer, are the
four core paints you'll work with the most in Spyder. On the left we have the
code editor, where you can open, edit, and run files. Bottom right is the ipython
console, which you can use both interactively and to run your code in the
editor. It shows you which version of Python you are using. Above it, you'll
find a help pane, where you can get more information and documentation for any
object in the editor or console by pressing Ctrl I or Command I in Mac OS.
We'll see how to do this in our next video. For the two sections on the right,
you can switch tabs to see the other paints that are open by default when
launching Spyder. In the top section, you can switch to the variable explorer, which
shows you the name, type, size, and value of the variables that you have
previously defined in the editor or the console. You can also modify the value of
these variables directly from this pane by double-clicking them right under the
value column. The plots pane will show you the figures you generated with Math.Lift
and other libraries. And the files pane allows you to browse the files in your
computer and open them in the editor with just a click. Finally, in the bottom
section, you can also access the history pane, which shows you the commands you
have entered in the iPython console, including those from previous sessions.
I hope you're now familiar with the basics of using the Spyder interface. In the
next video, we will start working with Spyder's core paints. Happy Spydering!
