Welcome to lecture six music to your ears. You may notice that I've put my tie back on that's because we're having a concert
little boys into this lecture. Sound is in some ways kind of a poor cousin to light. We certainly get much of our information about the world
most of us do from light. But sound is also important. Sound is a little more local to us because sound unlike light requires a material medium
namely air to propagate through. So we don't get sound from the external universe at least not directly. But we do get sound from things
here on earth and it's hearing is an important sense for us. It's a particularly important sense for animals. Some animals use it to find
their prey to determine distances and so on. Sound also does actually have some cosmic applications very recently astrophysicists have
detected what they think are evidence for sound waves that existed in the very early universe that give a sense of how big the universe was
and what the processes that were occurring when the universe was much earlier than a second old in a more local but still cosmic neighborhood
astrophysicists solar physicists particularly for a number of decades now have been studying sound waves in the sun. We don't see these
or hear these sound waves directly but we can infer their presence and they tell us a lot about the interior structure of the sun and sound
both audible and inaudible plays a major role in a lot of technologies particularly medical imaging testing materials a whole range of other
technologies. So what sound well like any other wave it's some kind of propagating disturbance that carries energy but not matter. In the case of
sound the medium that's being disturbed is typically air it need not be sound also propagates in water it also propagates in solid
materials. There are even some complicated materials like ionized gases in which the distinction between sound waves and electromagnetic
waves kind of breaks down but we won't go there in this course. We'll think of sound primarily as we hear it which is sound waves that are
propagating through air. So I have a picture here of sort of what a sound wave might look like. It's a region of air in which the air is
alternatively compressed and rarefied and what happens in these compressed and rarefied regions is that the air molecules are moving back and
forth temporarily as the sound wave goes by and that back and forth motion propagates on through the wave. A sound wave is different in that way
than the ocean waves we talked about earlier or the waves I had with my wave machine. In the case of those waves the disturbance was at
right angles to the direction the wave was propagating in. That's called a transverse wave. Sound waves are said to be longitudinal. The
disturbance is in the same direction the sound wave is propagating and you can see that in this picture which indicates the regions of greater
compression and rarefaction in the sound wave. This picture is highly exaggerated in normal ordinary speech like I'm talking right now. The
disturbance of the air is a deviation of about one part in 10 million from its ordinary pressure. So these are very, very tiny variations and our ears
are remarkably sensitive. So here's our sound wave. Here's a region where it's compressed. Here's a region where it's rarefied. Another region where it's
compressed. Another region where it's rarefied. The speed of sound in air is determined by, again, the properties of air. It has to do largely with how
rapidly the air molecules are moving and that depends on their temperature. We'll get to that more in Module 5. But that means the speed of sound is
temperature dependent. But under normal conditions, it's about, as I said earlier, 340 meters a second, 700 miles an hour, about 1,000 feet per
second. And I explained already that's the reason for the 5-second rule in determining the distance to lightning strikes. Sound can come in all kinds of
frequencies and all kinds of wavelengths. The wavelengths and frequency, again, are related through the speed of the sound. Our ear is sensitive to sounds
that vibrate at a rate of about 20 to 20,000 hertz. Remember, hertz is a cycle of the vibration of the wave each second. So from 20 cycles per
second to about 20,000 cycles per second is what we can hear. If you have medical ultrasound done on you, that may be at much higher frequency.
Maybe at millions of cycles a second. You can't hear those sound waves, but they're still sound waves. Bats, as I indicated, use ultrasound at frequencies
maybe four times as high as what we can hear. Your dog can probably hear sounds higher than you can. So we hear a range of about 20 to 20,000 cycles
per second, 20 to 20,000 hertz. Our threshold for amplitude of sound is remarkably broader. It's a factor of about a trillion between the very
faintest sound you can hear, the very faintest whisper you can just detect. And the loudest sound that begins to cause you pain, that's a factor of
about a trillion in the amplitude of that pressure variation. It's remarkable. Now we can make sound with any process that begins to introduce a disturbance in the air.
Clap my hands together. There's a sound. Talk, the vibration of my vocal cords, magnified and amplified and altered by the shape of my larynx and my mouth and so on and my tongue moving and all those things.
Disturbs the air and that gets the sound wave propagating out. Again, it's not the air that moves from me to your ear, or in this case to the microphone that's picking up the sound
and then coming from your loud speaker to your ear. It's just the energy, the disturbance of the air. What determines what kinds of sounds are produced?
Well, that's determined by the geometry of the structure that's producing the sound. And I have some demonstrations here that suggest that. First, let's look at a couple of simple little movie clips that show what's happening.
If I have a piece of string and that's what this depicts, the red line is a piece of string. It's clamped tightly at the two ends. I actually have a string like that here and I'll make some waves on it shortly.
Here I have a piece of string clamped between two fixed points and I'm going to set it vibrating. Now I can do that at lots of different frequencies, but I can't do it at just any old frequency or wavelength because the two ends of that string are clamped.
So I have to fit the waves on there in such a way that naturally those endpoints would be places where the wave was not vibrating. Waves that exist on structures like strings or columns of air in a wind instrument, for example, are called standing waves because what they do is basically exist without going away somewhere else on that string.
You can actually think of them as two waves propagating back and forth in opposite directions and interfering with each other. So let's get this particular wave going. Here it goes.
And that's the lowest frequency, longest wavelength wave that could exist on that particular string. I've rather largely exaggerated its amplitude. It's length, it's extremes of vibration, but there it goes.
So that's a standing wave on a vibrating string. That's not the only standing wave that could exist on that string. For example, here's another standing wave. This one has, in fact, half the wavelength and twice the frequency as the first one.
And it fits because, again, its ends, the points that are secured at the ends of the string are naturally fixed points. This frequency works. The first frequency, which was half as great, works and nothing in between does.
Here's another frequency that would work on this wave. It's a higher frequency, about one and a half times the one we saw before, three times the original one, a third the wavelength. So those are three different strings that could exist on this wave pattern.
And that's a classic example of the way a stringed instrument works. In a stringed instrument, the strings are fixed. The tension in the string coupled with the length of the string is what determines what notes can be made.
And a violinist, for example, varies what notes are played in part by moving his or her fingers along the strings to increase or decrease the length of the strings.
Let me do a quick demonstration here that shows you exactly how this works. So I have here a elastic cord. So it's somewhat elastic. It can vibrate. In fact, there I am setting it in that first vibration mode.
Let me suggest that to you. I'm going to hold this blue thing up so you can see it better. And there it is vibrating in pretty much that first mode of vibration.
I've got it connected over here to basically the innards of a loudspeaker, which has been taken apart and a little metal rod has been placed on it.
And I'm going to drive that loudspeaker, and it's going to set this string into vibration. And we'll see that those vibrations can occur again only at certain fixed frequencies.
So let me crank that up. And as I hold the blue against it, you can see very clearly that we have a pattern of vibration.
The string is basically fixed. Nothing is holding it fixed there, but it's not moving there. Here it's moving back and forth a lot.
Here's another fixed point called a node. Here it's moving back and forth a lot. Here's another node and so on.
And if I change the frequency of the loudspeaker thing that's driving it, I can change the number of these patterns, just as I did in those movies I showed you.
Here we go to a higher frequency.
And there you see it picking up a little bit of vibration at that frequency.
There's a frequency at which it wants to vibrate substantially. Bring it down again.
There's a substantial amplitude of vibration at that frequency.
So this string, and this is what's going on when a violin or other stringed instrument is played, the string is being made to vibrate at a frequency naturally that it would like to vibrate at, a frequency that's determined largely by the properties of the string, how tense it is, how massive it is,
and how long it is between the points where it's forced to be fixed. So that's an example of how a stringed instrument might work.
Now if you had a wind instrument, a wind instrument works in a similar way, except instead of having a vibrating string, you've got a column of air inside a hollow tube.
And if the column is open at the end, as it is, say, at the atmosphere, at the end of a oboe or a flute or something like that that has an open end, at that point the pressure is forced to be atmospheric pressure.
The normal atmospheric pressure exists there, and so you can't have a compression or rarefied region at the end.
So a stringed instrument, or a wind instrument, might look something like this. Here's a wind instrument.
Here is a region showing at the end where it's basically normal atmospheric pressure, and we've got some regions of compression in between.
At that point air is moving together to make the compressed region. Air is converging, that's what's causing the compression.
At other points air is diverging, that's what's causing the rarefied region, so the air is moving back and forth in different directions at different points.
The air is diverging. There's these points where the air is not moving. Those are the points where the convergence is occurring or the divergence is occurring, and there are a number of points like that.
And in a wind instrument, the length of the instrument then fixes where those points have to be, and that in turn fixes the frequencies of that wind instrument can play, the notes it can play.
And in this particular case I've drawn a wind instrument that is closed at the ends, so at the ends the air is forced to be fixed in place rather than moving.
If the end of the instrument were open, the air would be allowed to move, but it would be forced to have a fixed pressure.
Either way the condition at the end of the instrument determines what the wavelength will be and what the frequency will be, what the pitch of the note will be,
but there are many possible wavelengths in pitches just like there were many possible wavelengths that could excite this particular string into vibration.
So there's a relatively short wavelength in that wind instrument, there's a longer wavelength in the same wind instrument, both of those are possible,
and which one gets played depends on how the musician blows into the instrument and how they may have their fingering on different holes and so on.
So there's a wind instrument, and that's how that would work.
Now life would be rather dull if the only notes we could play were these single frequencies with these nice smooth sinusoidal vibrations.
In fact what makes sound and particularly music interesting to us is the fact that different instruments produce simultaneously all these complex notes at once.
All these complex vibrations are occurring at once, and it's the particular distribution and arrangement of those different complex frequencies that gives each musical instrument.
It's particular sound, and I'm going to give you a demonstration of that.
I have two fine musicians here, Dina, who's a flute player, and Jennifer, who's a violin player, and I'm going to invite them to come up here and we're going to do some experiments with their music.
So I'm going to have the oscilloscope here, this is the very same oscilloscope we were using before, and I've taken this oscilloscope,
here's the microphone they're playing into, the chord from the microphone is going down here, it's going off to the teaching company's recording equipment, which is how you're going to hear it,
but it's also going off through an amplifier and into my oscilloscope, which again displays as a function of time electrical signals and again by extension any other quantity that can be converted into an electrical signal.
And what a microphone is, we're on this later in module three, is a device that converts the vibrational motion of the air and sound waves into electrical signals and in they go into my oscilloscope.
So I'm going to ask Dina to play A440, 440 means 440 cycles per second or 440 hertz into the microphone and we'll try to capture it on the oscilloscope.
Beautiful, thank you. Now I'm going to save that note, you can see the pattern on your screen, I'm going to save that note, that's a picture of the variations in the pressure of the sound as a function of time along here,
it's happening very rapidly, those cycles are occurring 440 times a second and the oscilloscope is capturing that information fast enough to do that.
So I've taken a flute signal and I've put it there and I'm just going to move it up to the top of the screen and then I'm going to go back and look here and I'm going to ask Jennifer to come up and play exactly the same note but on a very different instrument,
a wind instrument, a stringed instrument, very different instrument, go right ahead.
And there we have it.
Now you'll notice something about that pattern, if you look on your screen, those two patterns are repeating in exactly the same way, they each have peaks, in fact the peaks happen by coincidence to be nicely lined up,
you can see that the frequencies are exactly the same, they played exactly the same note but Jennifer's violin note is a much more complicated structure meaning it has many more overtones, many more of the higher frequencies that are allowed.
In both cases the A440 is probably the lowest frequency that's allowed on that particular string or setting on the flute, I'm not sure of that because I'm not a musician,
but definitely in Jennifer's case the complexity of that waveform indicates that there are more higher notes included in there, many more higher notes and that's what makes the distinctive sound of the flute and the violin.
Okay, thank you very much ladies, appreciate that.
Let me give you one other example of this, I've made a movie here of a mathematical calculation of a vibrating drum head, so the picture on your screen shows a mathematical representation of what a vibrating drum head might look like,
this is just one particular mode of the many possible ways in which this drum head could vibrate and the vibrations are greatly exaggerated, a drum head like a violin string only moves a very small amount so this is quite exaggerated
and this is a little movie of what this looks like so here it goes and this will take the drum head through a few cycles of its vibration, that's what's actually happening in this particular complex, it's quite asymmetrical,
you would have to strike the drum in just the right place to get this particular sequence of vibrations and they would give the drum a particular sound if you did that.
There are other examples of these so called standing waves, the sun provides an interesting example, this is a picture of the interior of the sun and it's made for measurements of the vibrations of the sun,
the sun vibrates with making sound literally with periods of typically about five minutes, very low frequency sound if you will and these sound waves propagate down into the sun and depending on their frequencies some of them go all the way to the interior core,
some of them reflect by refractive effects lowered at layers relatively near the surface and the way these things propagate around in the sun gives us a good sense of what the interior structure of the sun is,
this field which is fairly new is called helioseismology, sort of like seismology earthquake studies but on the sun, I'll say a little bit later how we actually get a look at these vibrations,
in fact I'm going to give you now another phenomenon that involves sound waves, in fact any kind of waves that in fact is part of the way we measure the sound on the sun.
So I have a little demonstration here which I'm going to bring over near this microphone, I've got a little nerfy football looking thing but it's got a buzzer in it, I'm going to turn the buzzer on and I'm going to whirl this thing around.
Now I don't know what you heard, well I do know what you heard but what I heard was simply the same steady note of that buzzer or that tone,
but I was standing in the middle of that thing going around in a circle and for you, you being the microphone because that's where you're getting your sound,
sometimes that thing was coming toward you and sometimes it was going away from you and when it was coming toward you, I guarantee you, you heard a higher pitch of sound and when it was going away from you, you heard a lower pitch of sound.
That's called the Doppler effect and it's a very important and common effect in waves of all sorts and I want to give you a sense of how that Doppler effect works so I have another few of these simple movies I've made.
So in a picture like this, what you're seeing is a black dot, that black dot is some source of sound waves and it's going to emit periodic sound waves and just like if I were dipping my finger into a pond or throwing rocks in a pond at the same place,
those would spread out as ripples on the surface of the water, here they're spreading out as spherical sound waves in three dimensions or in my two dimensional picture as circular sound waves and as usual the little stick figure over on the right is you the observer listening to these sound waves
and here's what happens if the source is stationary with respect to you. The sound waves spread out, they travel toward you, they're leaving the source at a certain frequency and there you hear one bing, bing, bing, bing, the wave crest cross you at exactly the same rate at which they're leaving the source.
That's what happens when the source is at rest with respect to you. Now what happens if the source is moving with respect to you?
So here we're going to have the source moving with respect to you. You can already see that because I've shown that the source is a little bit to the right of the center of that circle.
So we'll start the movie. And now as the source moves along, subsequent wave crests are emitted more and more to the right because of the motion of the source and look what happens to me, the observer.
I hear them much more frequently. So wave crests cross me much more frequently and consequently I hear a higher pitch.
Finally, what happens if the source is going away from you? So here's the source heading away. Same thing. Now the waves are crammed up in the direction the source is moving.
They're spread further apart in the direction the source is away from the which the source is moving and you see a longer wavelength or lower frequency for the sound waves and you hear therefore a lower pitch.
That's the Doppler effect. The Doppler effect in sound is an important technology and enables us to do a lot of things including particularly some medical diagnostic techniques.
We use it to measure blood flows, injecting sound waves into veins and arteries. The sound bounces off particles like blood corpuscles and the Doppler shift in the bounced off sound gives a measure of the blood flow speed.
If you've had an echocardiogram, an echocardiogram uses high frequency sound wave bouncing off the moving wall of the heart muscle to determine the beating of the heart.
So the Doppler echocardiogram uses the Doppler effect instead of the normal electrical measurements used in an electrocardiogram.
The Doppler effect also occurs for light. The description is a little bit different because of the fact that light doesn't require a medium and relativity comes in a little bit.
But it's basically the same idea and it covers everything from our understanding of the expansion of the universe.
We know about that because we see all the galaxies are moving away from us. How do we know that?
Because all the light from them is shifted toward the radar end of the light spectrum.
Doppler shifted by the motion of all the galaxies away from us.
We don't see any galaxies, at least those beyond our immediate cosmic neighborhood, that have a blue shift that are moving toward us.
On a more humble note, if you've ever got a speeding ticket, you've probably gotten it because a police car bounced its radar beam off your car.
The radar beam was reflected with the motion of the moving car. It was Doppler shifted and a measure of that Doppler shift is what tells the police how fast you're moving.
By the way, that measurement is a pretty sensitive one because the Doppler effect depends on the ratio of your speed to the speed of the waves.
That's why I could whirl that object around on a string here and you could actually hear the Doppler effect in sound because I can get a speed, not close to the speed of sound, but not insignificant compared to it.
But light is a different matter. So when you're clocked going 55 miles an hour in a 40 mile an hour zone, that measurement is made against the speed of light.
We don't actually measure it and compare it with the speed of light, but that Doppler shift provides a very, very sensitive measure of your speed compared to the speed of light.
I also mentioned our use of sound in the sun. How do we actually hear the sound that's going on in the sun? We can't hear it because there's empty space between us and the sun.
But what we do is watch the Doppler effect of light emitted from the surface of the sun as the sun undergoes these pulsations, which are basically the sound waves.
So we use the Doppler effect there also.
Now sound also exhibits these other properties that we've discussed for waves, other behaviors like reflection and refraction.
I mentioned that concert hall acoustics are determined in part by the reflection of sound waves. You don't want too much sound to be absorbed.
You don't want too much to be reflected. You don't want it to reverberate too long and so on. Music generally sounds fuller if it comes at your ears from different directions, which is part of the reason for stereo sound.
Another example of sound undergoing reflections we saw on my demonstration over here with various optical pieces that light sometimes is partly reflected in an interface between two materials and partly refracted.
The same thing happens to sound and when it's propagating through the tissues of your body, it will be reflected in an interface between two different materials between, say, intestine and surrounding tissue or whatever.
And so medical ultrasound image uses the reflected sound and its ultrasound, very high frequency sound it needs to be to image these relatively small structures.
That's how medical imaging works. And I have a picture here, a wonderful picture of some twins recently born to a teaching company employee, a picture taken in utero with medical ultrasound.
I also mentioned diffraction as a wave behavior and diffraction occurs in sound as well as it does in light. Sound covers the range of about 20 to 20,000 hertz, 20 to 20,000 cycles per second.
The speed of sound is about 400 meters a second. And if you work that out, that means the wavelength of sound ranges from about 60 feet, 20 meters, for the lowest waves you can hear to about 2 centimeters, roughly an inch, for the highest pitch sound waves.
And that's an enormous range. And that means that objects like doors and windows and corners and hallways are very small compared to the wavelength of long wavelength sound waves.
And consequently, those waves diffract around the corner. That's again, as I said in an earlier lecture, why you can hear the bass notes from somebody playing loud music, but the high pitch notes that may have much shorter wavelengths don't diffract easily around the corners.
It's also the reason why we explored earlier that bats use high frequency to image the tiny insects they see.
A couple of other behaviors of sound. Sound waves exhibit interference. And one remarkable thing that happens is interference between two waves of almost the same frequency.
I'm going to give you an example of that. I have a couple of loud speakers here. I'm going to turn on one. There it is. I'm going to turn on the other. There it is. They sound identical. I'm going to turn them both on.
And now I'm going to vary the frequency of one of them slightly.
What's going on there? Well, if I have two sound waves of almost the same frequency, and here's a picture of two sound waves of almost the same frequency, one drawn in red and one drawn in blue, because they have almost the same frequency.
They are almost together. Their crests are in step for a while, but then they gradually get out of step. And after quite a while, they're way out of step so that crest meets trough and we have destructive interference.
A while later, it's constructive. When you put those two sounds together, as I did when I played these two loud speakers at once, you get a pattern that looks something like that in which the sound amplitude is large and then small and then large and then small.
And there's an overall frequency associated with that, and it's simply the difference between the two frequencies. So these were both 500 hertz, 500 cycle of second sound waves, and I varied one of them by a few cycles a second.
And so that's why you heard the wall, wall, wall, wall, wall beating sound. Those are called beats at a few cycles a second. By the way, that's how airplane pilots adjust the engines of a two-engine airplane to be running at exactly the same speed.
And once in a while, they have a little off, they're all this kind of droning sound as the airplane goes on.
Finally, let me end with a question that I'm sure you've asked, and I've addressed this question in my course on relativity and modern physics. And it's a question, can anything go faster than light?
Well, that's a touchy one, but let's ask the simpler question for sound waves. Can anything go faster than sound?
And the answer is yes. You've probably heard of sonic booms, so-called shock waves, that occur when an airplane goes through the air at faster than the speed of sound. Why do those occur?
Well, let's take a look. Here's a little movie. Again, the same kind of picture I had before, a source of waves and the waves it's emitting, except in this case, the waves are going to be moving slower than the source.
And look what happens. The source is leaving the waves behind, and there it goes.
And you'll notice something else is happening. The wave crests are meeting each other and piling up on a wedge-shaped pattern that, if we look in a little more detail, looks like that.
And those intense waves right along that triangle are called shock waves. You see the same thing if you watch a boat plowing through the water at a speed higher than the speed of water waves in the water.
You'll see it trailing waves that head back like this, and there's actually a very simple mathematical relationship between the angle those waves make and the speed of the source of the waves relative to the speed of waves in that medium.
As soon as you see those so-called shock waves, those high-intensity waves caused by this piling up, you know you've got an object that's moving faster than the speed of the waves in that medium.
By the way, can you ever go faster than light? Not in vacuum, but in material media, like for example water, in which the speed of light is about two-thirds what it is in vacuum.
One can actually have waves going faster, have particles going faster than light does, and in that case they form literally shock waves of light.
But perhaps for you, the most common example of a shock wave is a sonic boom, and there's a lot of misunderstanding about a sonic boom.
People tend to think sonic booms occur at the moment an airplane breaks through the sound barrier, and then it's over.
That's not true at all. An airplane moving faster than the speed of sound is very much like the source in this picture I've drawn here, and as long as the airplane is moving along, it's dragging behind it these great big shock waves,
and they drag along, reach the ground eventually, and as the airplane passes by, that shock wave passes by, points on the ground, and that picture might look something like this.
So here's an observer, again standing on the ground. Here comes an airplane. It's moving faster than the speed of sound in air, and so it's dragging these big shock waves behind it.
By the way, the pressures associated with those shock waves and the extra energy it takes to plow that big shock wave forward are what makes the aerodynamics of supersonic aircraft quite different from those of subsonic aircraft.
And then a while later, the airplane has moved on, right now it's passing you, the observer, and you are experiencing that point, the shock wave.
Maybe the windows on your house are rattling, maybe your eardrums hurt momentarily as the big shock wave goes by, and then it's gone.
So sound exhibits a wide variety of wave behaviors, a much wider range perhaps than simply the notes of music or the sounds of speech, and they all contribute to our understanding of the physical universe
and also to be able to measure and understand and diagnose things that are happening in that universe. And that's the end of Module 1.
