Welcome to lecture seven. May the forces be with you. This is the first lecture in module two, whose title is going places.
And as that title implies, module two is about motion, about all things that move, how they move, why they move, what is the nature of motion.
If you were taking a regular standard introductory physics course, this is probably where you'd start.
Not with CDs and how they work and DVDs and optics and waves, although a few courses have tried to do things that way, but you'd probably start with a study of motion.
Partly because motion is a very much everyday commonplace occurrence, sometimes it seems a little bit boring.
Students get a little tired of solving problems about if I throw a baseball at this speed and this angle, how far does it go, and things like that.
But if you think about motion a little bit more, motion is ubiquitous. Without motion, there would be nothing happening in our universe.
That's how it would be if there were no motion. Motion, in a sense, is what causes everything to happen.
Motion is the essence of change, of evolution. And if you think about motion, it occurs at all scales throughout the universe.
At our everyday scales, we walk, we drive cars, we whiz on the highway, we round the corner, how does that happen?
We climb hills, how does that happen? Frogs hop, snakes slither, birds fly, we get in airplanes, they go up, they go down, they turn.
How does all that work? What causes motion? Why does motion change?
These are everyday questions because motion is very much a part of our everyday lives.
But it's also a part of the everyday life of physical reality at all levels.
Electrons whiz around the nuclei of atoms.
Electrons and molecules, atoms join together to make molecules. How do they come together? What makes them join?
In our cells, DNA winds and twists and unwinds and replicates itself. That's all motion.
Ultimately, the mechanics of life involves tiny little motions that are occurring within the innards of our cells.
In the atmosphere around us, air is moving. It's bringing us new air systems that carry with it new weather.
Sometimes air congeals in large rotational systems that we call hurricanes or smaller ones that we call tornadoes.
Motion of the air, motion of the currents in the ocean that carries warm water, for example, to northern Europe
and makes northern Europe a much more habitable place than it would otherwise be.
Motion is occurring on all these scales. On a larger scale, there's planetary motion.
Our Earth is rotating on its axis once every day. It's revolving around the Sun once every year.
The Sun itself is revolving around the galaxy, taking the planets with it once every 250 million years, roughly.
And our galaxy, in fact, is speeding toward other galaxies in the great cluster of galaxies of which we're apart.
And on an even more cosmic scale, the more distant galaxies are all rushing away from us, participating in the cosmic expansion.
These are all examples of motion. And so if we're to understand physical reality, we need to understand motion.
And that's the topic of Module 2, Going Places.
Let's take a look at an outline for the six lectures that comprise Module 2.
Today's lecture is called May the Forces Be With You, Lecture 7.
We're going to look in particular at Newton's understanding of motion and why most of us have, rather than Newton's understanding,
a misconception that dates back more than 2,000 years to Aristotle.
And we'll try to dispel that misconception.
Lecture 8 is called Aristotle's Revenge.
Looks a little more at a particular kind of force that's active in our everyday lives,
that is part of the reason why we're so eager to believe Aristotle rather than Newton in the description of motion.
Lecture 9, Going in Circles, describes circular motion of all levels.
Again, an electron whirling around in an atom, an airplane banking as it goes around a turn, a car turning a corner,
an ice skater spinning. All these are examples of motion in circles, a planet going around the sun, a satellite going around the earth.
All examples of motion in circles. Circular motion is actually very easy to understand.
It's also very, very easy to misunderstand.
And some of the greatest misconceptions about motion come with circular motion.
Lecture 10, Taking Flight, particularly about how airplanes fly,
but we'll also look at lighter-than-air craft like hot-air balloons and how they work.
Lecture 11, Into Space, we'll look at motion in space, in particular the motion of satellites we launch around earth,
motion of space probes to distant planets, that sort of thing, and the motion of the planets themselves.
And finally, Lecture 12, A Conservative Streak, sounds like it might belong in a political science course,
but it's here in this course because some of the most powerful statements in physics, particularly statements about motion,
are statements about quantities that we find remain the same before and after some incident has occurred.
For example, if a collision occurs between two objects, in the chaos of that collision,
is there anything that makes sense throughout the whole action?
And the answer is yes, there are quantities that are conserved, and if we identify and understand those quantities,
we've gone a long way toward understanding how motion occurs.
So that is the outline of our Going Places module, Understanding Motion.
And I want to begin by thinking a little bit about motion and what it means for things to move
and the question of why it is that things move, and I want to convince you that that question is in fact not quite the right question.
We have a lot to blame Aristotle for in this point.
Most of us are still closet Aristotelians.
We believe what Aristotle believed about motion, and here's what Aristotle believed.
He believed the natural thing for an object to be doing was sitting at rest.
So here's this bowling ball, and it's just sitting here at rest, and that seems perfectly natural,
and it seems not to require an explanation.
If this bowling ball were to be moving, that Aristotle says would require an explanation.
Something would have to happen to make it be moving, and in particular, in Aristotle's point of view,
something would have to happen to keep it moving.
I would have to keep pushing on it, for instance, to keep it moving.
I would have to apply what physicists call a force, and I'm going to use the word force over and over again,
so I'll just stick with that physics word, but a force simply means a push or a pull.
It may be a visible push or pull, like my hand on an object.
It may be an invisible push or pull, like the pull of gravity,
or the electrical repulsion, a push of two likely charged objects repelling each other.
So Aristotle raised the question, well, what should things do naturally?
And the answer was they should be at rest, and in particular, for Aristotle, they should be at rest,
at least objects down here in the base lowly world of us terrestrial beings on earth.
They should be at rest as close as possible to the center of the earth,
so that was also an Aristotelian theory of gravity.
What did it take to make things move, to keep things moving?
It took a force, a push or a pull.
So in Aristotle's notion, and the notion most of us still carry with us in our everyday lives,
it takes a force to keep something moving.
If you ask what causes motion, the answer is force.
Now, there are many reasons why we still hold to that view,
and the next lecture we'll go into them in more detail, but that view is, in fact, not correct.
And it was up to Galileo and the Newton to refine the idea of why that notion is incorrect
and what, in fact, is the correct description of motion.
And I want to give you a little picture here of what Galileo did in a so-called thought experiment.
He didn't actually perform this experiment, but he thought about what would happen if.
And so Galileo imagined taking a kind of trough-shaped track and rolling a ball down it.
And he knew enough about this track and about the behavior of objects rolling on tracks in earth's gravity
to know that that ball would eventually rise on the other side of the track to the same height it has started from.
Now, that isn't exactly perfectly true in the real world, but ideally that should happen.
And then Galileo said, OK, what if I make the right side of the track longer, less steep, more gradual?
Well, the ball should still rise to the same height it started from, and therefore it should go farther.
And then Galileo said, what would happen if I made the track perfectly horizontal
and his reasoning was that the ball, once it reached the bottom, would then roll basically forever in a straight line in horizontal motion.
Now, Galileo was confused about some of this and the curvature of the earth and various other things,
but conceptually this is the essence of his experiment.
And Galileo's conclusion was the following, that motion itself is natural, that it doesn't need explanation.
Motion in a straight line at a constant speed is what objects would like to be doing.
It's no different really than being at rest, in fact.
And this is a big point in my other course on Einstein's relativity in the quantum revolution because it's the essence of relativity.
What's at rest and what's moving are relative terms, relative to whom is something at rest or moving.
So Galileo came to the point that there was nothing special about the so-called state of rest relative to earth.
Rather, the natural state for things to be in was to be moving in a straight line at constant speed.
And if an object was moving in a straight line at constant speed, it would continue to do so unless some force acted on it to change that state of motion.
So Galileo was the first to articulate what we call the law of inertia.
It's also called Newton's first law.
The law of inertia says if an object is at rest, it will stay that way.
But if it's in motion, it will stay in motion.
That is, in motion at constant speed and in a straight line unless something happens to change that,
that's something being a force acting on it.
And there's the big conceptual leap from Aristotle to Galileo and Newton.
And the conceptual leap is this.
Aristotle says, forces cause motion.
Galileo and later Newton elaborating on this say, no, forces cause motion to change.
Forces cause change in motion.
And if you ever take an introductory physics course, that is the single most important concept to understand.
And if you really grasp that, all the peculiarities of motion, all the things that seem strange and counterintuitive even, will fall immediately into place.
If you realize that forces do not cause motion, they cause changes in motion.
Ask a question, why doesn't the satellite fall down, for example?
That's a difficult question for an Aristotelian.
It's almost a meaningless question for a Newtonian.
There's absolutely no reason for a satellite to fall down.
There's a force pulling it toward Earth?
Sure.
But forces don't cause motion.
They don't cause things to move toward Earth necessarily.
They cause changes in motion.
And we'll talk about that more in the lecture on going into space, because I'll describe gravity in some detail there.
So, forces don't cause motion.
They cause change in motion.
And I want to emphasize that change in motion means any change in motion.
Galileo and Newton say the natural state is to be moving a straight line of constant speed.
Any deviation from that is a change and requires a force.
If you see a car at a stop light and then it speeds up as the light turns green,
there's clearly a change in its motion.
It's sped up.
If you see a car moving along and it comes to a stop, that's clearly a change in its motion and clearly a force has been involved.
But if you're in a car and it's going around a corner and the whole while the speedometer reads 50 miles an hour,
you might be inclined to say your motion isn't changing, but it is, because it's changing in direction.
And one of the single biggest misconceptions, again, in trying to understand motion,
is in not recognizing that a change in direction, as well as a change in speed, constitutes a change in motion,
and therefore requires a force.
Let me give you an example. Here I have a tennis ball attached to a nice shiny yellow string.
I'm going to whirl it around in a circle over my head.
Okay? That tennis ball is moving at constant speed.
It's not speeding up or slowing down, and yet its motion is changing.
And because its motion is changing, there must be a force acting on it.
And I think you can see that the force in this case is the string pulling on it.
In fact, it's pulling it toward my hand.
By the way, it's not moving toward my hand, but its motion is changing toward my hand,
and it's going around at constant speed, and nevertheless its motion is changing
because it's changing the direction in which it's going.
This is not uniform motion, motion at constant speed in a straight line.
This is motion in which a force has to be acting.
So that's the law of inertia. Newton elaborates further.
He says, well, okay, forces cause motion to change.
Let's get quantitative. How do forces cause motion to change?
How much change does a given force cause?
Now, I argued on day one that this was not a mathematical course,
but I am going to speak a little bit about an equation.
It's a famous equation, and many of you have heard it.
And the equation simply says this.
It says, if I have a given object and I apply a force to it, what I will do is change its motion.
And in particular, the rate at which I change its motion will be proportional to the force.
Bigger force, bigger rate of change of motion, and we call rate of change of motion acceleration.
Acceleration is a measure of how fast your motion is changing.
So if you've got a new car and you say, oh, this car can go from 0 to 60 miles an hour in 10 seconds,
you're not telling me how fast the car can go.
You're telling me how fast it can change its speed, and that's a measure of its acceleration.
So Newton says in his famous second law, f equals ma, force equals mass times acceleration.
If I apply a given force to an object, I will produce a given acceleration.
If I apply twice as much force, I'll give it twice as much acceleration.
So here's my bowling ball.
Right now, it's at rest on the table.
I'm going to apply a force to it.
I'm not going to apply a force for a long time.
I'm just going to give it a temporary force.
And that changed its motion from rest to a rather slow roll across the table.
Here it is again.
I'm going to apply a bigger force, and I gave it a bigger change in motion.
And so it ended up moving.
Once the force ceased to be applied, once my hand ceased to have conduct with it,
the ball just rolled along in a straight line at constant speed.
So there is an example of Newton's second law that says force equals mass times acceleration.
If I apply the same force to a much smaller object, a much less massive object,
I give it a much greater change in its motion.
So Newton's f equals ma simply says the force you apply to an object causes its motion to change at a certain rate,
and the rate depends on both the force and the mass.
The bigger the force, the bigger the rate of change of motion for a given object.
The less mass of the object, the bigger the rate of change for a given force.
So that's Newton's second law.
In what direction does the motion change?
In what way?
That's one of the harder things to grasp, and it's very simple.
The motion changes in the direction of the force you apply to the object.
And let me give you some examples of that.
Here again is the bowling ball.
It's rolling along, and I'm going to apply a force to it in the same direction it's already moving.
It goes faster.
I speed it up.
Here's the bowling ball.
It's rolling along, and now I'm going to apply a force to it opposite the direction it's moving.
It slows down.
In fact, it's stopped, and in this case, reversed.
Here's the bowling ball again.
It's rolling along.
This time I'm going to apply to a force to it that's at right angles to the direction it's moving.
And I didn't change its speed significantly, but I changed the direction in which it was going.
The change in the motion is in the same direction as the force,
and that's crucial to understanding things like why satellites don't fall down
or why that tennis ball that was whirling on the string didn't fall toward my hand, as it were.
The direction of the change in motion is the same as the direction of the force,
and I have a picture here that kind of illustrates this.
So here we have some object.
It could be my bowling ball or whatever moving along in some direction.
I'm going to apply a force to it in that same direction, and the object speeds up,
and I've indicated that by the blue arrow which represents its velocity, its direction,
and its speed increasing in size.
On the other hand, here it is rolling along,
and I'm going to apply a force in the opposite direction,
and that's going to diminish its speed.
It's going to reduce its speed, decelerate it, if you will.
Those are sort of obvious cases.
Here's the less obvious case.
Again, I'm going to apply a force at right angles to the motion of the ball.
That's what I did here on the table,
and later I'm going to find it going at the same speed, but in a different direction.
Depending on how long I apply the force and if I can keep it always at right angles,
I will send it, in fact, in a curved path, and there will be no change in its speed.
So that's Newton's second law.
It talks about how forces cause changes in motion.
Now there's some other things to Newton's laws.
I've talked about Newton's first law, the law of inertia.
I've talked about the second law.
It talks about how forces cause changes in motion.
The first law is really a special case of the second.
It says if an object is at rest or moving a straight line at constant speed and there's no forces,
there's no acceleration, there's no change in its motion.
But here's the third law.
If I hit the bowling ball and I'm going to kick it,
that hurt my toe.
Why did it hurt my toe?
What does that have to do with the bowling ball?
It hurt the bowling ball, but why should it have hurt my toe?
Here's a wall.
I'm going to lean on the wall.
Now if I just did this here, I would fall over.
But somehow the wall is smart enough that it keeps me from falling over.
How does that happen?
How does it do that?
Everybody's trying to tip me over and pull me down.
How does the wall know to prevent that from happening?
Here's one other example.
Here's a big, nice, squishy Nerf ball.
I'm going to squeeze down on it with this board.
And clearly the board is going to push on the ball.
It's going to compress it.
But if you look, you'll notice also the ball is compressing not only at the top where the board is squeezing on it,
but from the bottom.
Because if the table is doing to the ball exactly what I'm doing to it by squishing it on the board.
And if you don't believe that, let me do the same thing with a styrofoam ball.
OK, and I flattened the styrofoam ball at the top because I pushed on it with the board.
But the styrofoam ball is also flattened at the bottom where the table pushed up on it.
All of those are your examples of Newton's third law.
Newton's third law says simply this, if one object pushes on another,
the other object pushes back on the first with an equal force, but in the opposite direction.
It's a very, very simple statement.
It's a universal statement about forces.
Forces always come in pairs.
If you have object A pushing on object B, then object B pushes back on object A.
And that always, always happens.
The table does not have to be intelligent.
The wall did not have to be intelligent.
It just happens.
That's the nature of forces according to Newton's third law.
Newton's third law is sometimes summed up by saying for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction.
I find that a very archaic language.
It doesn't really talk about forces, and Newton's third law really is about forces.
And furthermore, it causes people to think it applies universally to all endeavors in the universe,
and that certainly isn't true.
So I prefer to say forces come in pairs if one object exerts a force on another,
the first exerts a force back on the second.
A beautiful example of Newton's third law is the rocket, one of the classic examples.
And here's how a rocket works.
Here I have a sort of symbolic picture of a rocket.
You see in it a lot of air molecules.
They're all moving around, and occasionally an air molecule bounces off the rocket,
the walls of the rocket.
And let's look at that one in particular that happens to be heading forward.
It's going to bounce off the wall of the rocket, and that means its motion has changed.
And for its motion to have changed, that means something has to have exerted a force on it,
and that something is the end of the rocket engine chamber.
Well, if Newton's third law says if the rocket chamber exerted that force on the molecule,
then the molecule must have exerted a force on the rocket chamber,
and that force is ultimately the force that propels the rocket forward.
You might say, what about all the other walls?
Well, same thing is happening on all the other walls,
and if the rocket motor were completely closed, if it didn't have an exhaust hole,
then all those forces would cancel out, and we'd go nowhere.
But in fact, the back of the rocket is open,
and so there is a net force on the rocket that tends to accelerate it forward.
It isn't what's going on at the back that's important.
It's what's going on at the front of the rocket that's significant.
And as Auguste, a body as the New York Times back in 1920,
got this wrong in criticizing Robert H. Goddard,
one of the rocketry pioneers in this country in the early part of the 20th century,
the Times talked about Goddard's proposal for spaceflight based on rockets,
and said, how could he not know the relation of action and reaction,
and you need something more than a vacuum to push against?
The Times was arguing rockets wouldn't work in space,
because there was nothing to push against.
That's nonsense.
Newton's third law is happening at the front end of the rocket
in the bouncing of molecules of gas off the front end,
and that's what makes the rocket go forward.
Now, often there's more than one force acting on an object.
For example, if you're standing on the ground right here, as I am,
there are in fact two forces acting on it.
I'm not accelerating.
My motion is not changing.
Gravity is pulling down on me.
Something else is happening, and that something is the floor pushing up on me.
And that's a Newton's third law force in response to me pushing down on the floor.
So in this case, those two forces balance each other out,
and I'm not undergoing any change in motion.
But often I might be undergoing change in motion,
and a nice example are the feelings you have in an elevator.
If you're in an elevator and it starts upward,
you suddenly feel as if you're heavier.
Why is that?
Because your motion is changing in the upward direction,
so there must be a force on you that totals to an upward force.
And there are only two forces acting on you.
There's the force of the floor of the elevator pushing up on you,
and the force of gravity pulling down,
and the force of the elevator floor must be bigger than the force of gravity
in order for your motion to change in an upward direction.
And if you were standing on a spring scale in the elevator,
the scale would actually read a reading greater than your weight,
because the scale would then be providing that upward force that is accelerating you upward.
On the other hand, when the elevator is moving at constant speed on its way up,
your motion is not changing.
There's no force on you, no net force anyway,
and the force of the scale or the elevator up
must be equal in size to the force of gravity downward,
and your weight reading is normal.
Then the elevator comes to a stop at the top,
and here's an important point about motion and acceleration.
Motion and change in motion.
They need not be in the same direction.
You're still moving upward, but you're slowing down,
and that means your direction of change of motion is downward,
and so there must be a bigger force downward,
and so the force of the floor or the scale must be less,
and in that case, as you're slowing down at the top,
there's actually a lower scale reading in that case.
And if you understand that, you have a good sense of Newton's laws.
I actually asked this question like this about three times
in a recent introductory physics course
to make sure students really understood that point of the relation
between change of motion and force.
Force causes change of motion,
and the direction of the change of motion
is the same direction as that of the force.
Now, let me introduce just a couple of other terms that involve motion
because they'll come up again and again in this course,
particularly in this module.
I haven't said anything yet in this course about energy,
and that will be the topic of a number of subsequent lectures,
so let me begin just with a hint of what the idea of energy is.
Here, again, is my bowling ball,
and I'm now going to, again, take the bowling ball, which is at rest,
and I'm going to set it into motion.
Ah! Okay?
I gave a big force.
I kind of grunted as I pushed on it.
It was hard work for me, and that's a real physics word, work.
I was doing work on the bowling ball, and I gave it motion,
and I gave it something else. I gave it energy.
A moving object has energy.
It has energy that depends on how massive it is
and how fast it's going.
In fact, if you want a formula, it's a half times its mass
times the square of its speed.
So if I push this twice as fast, it has four times as much energy.
That, by the way, is why driving a car at twice the speed
is not just twice as dangerous.
It's about four times as dangerous
because the car then has four times as much energy.
In contrast, forces don't always have to do work
and don't always involve changes in energy.
If I place the ball as initially at rest, and later it's moving,
but here's another case.
If I simply hold the ball here,
now I may tire of this after a while,
because my muscles are constantly spasming back and forth,
but I could set the ball just on the table,
and the table will never get tired of holding it.
It's not doing any work, and it's not changing the energy of the ball.
The ball's energy is not increasing.
If I do this, simply walk along with the ball horizontal.
Now, it's not something I would want to do all day,
but in physics terms, I'm not doing any work on it,
and I'm not changing its energy.
So the kind of energy I've just introduced,
which is the energy that goes along with motion,
which is, again, the topic of this module,
is called kinetic energy.
It's the energy associated with an object that is moving.
So let me summarize with Newton's three laws
and give a sense of what we've gone through.
Then I'm going to look a little bit about where Newton's laws work
and where they don't work.
So here are Newton's laws.
The first law says an object remains in uniform motion
and a stationary object remains at rest,
unless some force acts on it.
And I'm putting in that word net force,
because all that counts is the sum of all the forces
that are acting on the object.
They may be pushing and pulling in different directions,
but if you add them all up and that net force is zero,
no change in the object's motion.
If it's a rest, it stays a rest.
If it's moving, it continues to move.
The second law says, OK, an object's motion does change
if the net force acts on it.
That's kind of what the first law says,
but the second law quantifies that.
It says at what rate does it change?
And the rate of change is greater if there's a bigger force
and smaller if the object's mass is greater for a given force,
and that's all summarized in this equation f equals ma
that you probably have seen somewhere in a high school physics course
if you took one.
I should point out that equation should really be written
with vector signs that indicate these forces and accelerations
have direction, and the force and the acceleration
are in fact also in the same direction.
And finally, there's the third law.
And the third law says if one object exerts a force on another,
then the second object exerts a force of equal magnitude
back on the first, but in the opposite direction.
And the second and third law aren't distinct.
They together are required for a consistent description of motion.
And I'm going to give you an example of that.
Here's a couple of bowling balls now.
Here's going to be a collision between them.
Now, you'll notice something happened to the first bowling ball.
It changed its motion as a result of the collision.
Why?
Because the second bowling ball exerted a force back on it,
and that would not have occurred if the third law hadn't been true.
The second law and the third law are required for consistency.
They must both be true for a consistent description of motion.
Now, as I indicated in the first lecture,
when I talked about the scope and realm of physics,
Newton's laws work very well in the everyday realm.
There are realms where they break down,
and they break down in particular when objects are moving relative to
whoever's studying that motion at speeds that approach the speed of light.
Then Newton's laws break down,
and they have to be replaced by more generalized laws
that grow out of Einstein's special theory of relativity.
So that's one restriction of Newton's laws.
They don't work at very, very high speeds.
There's another more significant restriction for everyday physics,
and that is Newton's laws apply strictly if you,
the experimenter, the person who's discovering Newton's laws,
are yourself in uniform motion.
They do not work if you're in a state of motion that is changing.
For example, if you're sitting in an airplane
and you're trying to eat the little peanuts on your seatback tray,
and the airplane is flying through smooth air,
I don't care that the airplane is going 600 miles an hour,
Newton's laws apply perfectly well for you there,
and if you want to do something crazy,
like pick up one of those peanuts and throw it in the air
and catch it in your mouth, and you know enough physics
or you have enough intuition to understand it will describe a nice arc
and land right in your mouth, that will work.
But now the pilot turns on the seatbelt sign,
turbulence coming up, and the airplane is bumping all around,
and not only can you not do this and get the peanut in your mouth,
if you look at the peanuts on the seatback tray,
they aren't even staying still.
They're not obeying the law of inertia.
They're not obeying Newton's first law.
It appears there's no forces acting on them,
and yet they're not staying still.
What's going on here?
Well, that airplane moving through turbulent air
is not moving uniformly.
Similarly, if you were on a merry-go-round
and you were trying to apply Newton's laws,
you wouldn't get the right results.
Why? Because your point of view,
your frame of reference as a physicist would say,
is in a state of non-uniform motion,
and I have a picture here that illustrates that.
So here we are, here are two observers,
little people here, one of them is on a rotating turntable,
and they're going to do some simple physics experiment
like throwing a ball.
That's a real simple physics experiment.
So I'm going to throw the ball,
and the question is, is the ball going to describe the path
it would describe?
In this case, it's a very simple path.
It's kind of a parabola.
It's described by Newton's laws when you figure about
the force of gravity that always acts downward.
You can calculate just what that path should be.
The observer on the turntable says,
oh, I know Newton's laws.
I know f equals ma, so I'll apply f equals ma,
and it'll all work out.
No good.
It doesn't work.
Newton's laws do not describe motion in that situation.
The observer on the ground who correctly calculates
that this ball should go in this nice parabolic trajectory,
that's OK.
But you're abusing Newton's laws if you try to apply them
in non-uniformly moving frames of reference.
Now it's a very subtle philosophical point
about how you know whether or not you're
in a uniformly moving frame of reference.
That's a point that ultimately led Einstein
to general relativity.
And I go there in the modern physics course,
but we aren't going to go there here.
But I simply want to point out there are cases
where it seems at least obvious to you
that you're in non-uniform motion.
And in those cases, you better not apply Newton's laws.
Now if the non-uniform motion isn't too bad,
such as the relatively slow rotation of the Earth,
the deviations from Newton's laws there are subtle,
and only people like climatologists and meteorologists
and oceanographers usually have to take those distinctions
into account.
For us, the Earth is approximately in a state of uniform motion.
And so here on Earth, in everyday physics,
we can get away with applying Newton's laws
as I've introduced them in this lecture.
