Welcome to lecture 8, Aristotle's Revenge.
In the previous lecture, I pointed out that many of us are closet Aristotelians.
We believe, as Aristotle did, that forces are required to keep objects moving.
Motion is, in some ways, an unnatural state that requires explanation.
We don't believe, as Newton and Galileo taught us, that forces cause only change in motion,
that there is no cause needed for motion itself.
And there's a very good reason why many of us are closet Aristotelians.
And that's because in our everyday lives, we are governed to a large extent by a force
that we don't notice, that makes it look like Aristotle is correct.
And that force is friction.
Friction is a force that acts any time we have two surfaces in contact, trying to move
relative to each other, whether they are moving or, in fact, our stationary, is beside
the point.
There is a force of friction acting between those surfaces.
And that force requires us to apply a different force, another force, in order to keep the
object moving.
And so it looks like Aristotle was right.
And I want to give you an example here.
With a system I have hooked up with a block of wood, sliding on another piece of wood.
And I have here a scale that simply reads the force in what happens to be the metric
system unit of force, which is the Newton, by the way, the named after Newton, obviously.
By the way, the unit of force in the English system that we use is the pound.
So a pound and a Newton are measuring the same thing, they're measuring force.
Your weight is actually a force that gravity exerts on you.
And what I'm going to do is take this block, I'm going to take the scale, and I'm going
to start scale, originally read zero, and I'm going to start pulling on it.
Right now, there is no force at all on the block, at least in the horizontal direction.
There is a force of gravity acting down on the block, and there's a force, the Newton's
third law reaction force, if you will, pushing back up from the board and the table pushing
on the board.
So there is no net force acting on that block, its motion is not changing.
And now I'm going to start pulling on it with this scale, and you see the scale reading
increasing and increasing, it's up to about four Newtons.
And still the block isn't moving.
Now, how is that possible?
If it's not moving, its motion is certainly not changing, it's at rest and staying at
rest, there must be no net force on it.
But the scale is pulling on it, and the scale is reading the force of four Newtons.
So there must be another force pulling back the other way to keep the block's motion from
changing.
And that force is the force of friction between the block and the tabletop or the board it's
resting on.
So even though I can't see that force, it's there, and everybody is happy, and everybody
is obeying Newton's law, there is no net force on the block, and its motion is not changing.
Now I'm going to pull a little bit harder and a little bit harder, and notice what happened.
Let me do that again.
I'm going to pull a little bit harder and a little bit harder and a little bit harder
and a little bit harder, and suddenly it starts to move.
This time when I pull it, I'm going to keep it moving.
Notice what happens.
The force goes up and up and up and up to about four or five, over four or five, maybe
six Newtons, and suddenly it goes down, and then as I pull the block along at a constant
speed, the force is quite a bit less.
It's about three Newtons.
What's going on here?
Let's do that again.
The block starts out, it's at rest, I apply a force, the force gets bigger and bigger
and bigger, the block still doesn't move, the frictional force is countering the force
I'm applying and keeping it from moving, but there comes a point where the force suddenly
goes down, the frictional force goes down, and now I can pull the block along the table
at a constant speed, applying a lesser force.
But I still have to apply a force, so I still feel like an Aristotelian, I've got to apply
a force to make that block move.
Why do I have to apply a force?
Because there is still a frictional force acting the other way to oppose that motion, and while
the block is moving at constant speed, let me ask you to think about this, as the block
is moving along at constant speed, what's the net force on it?
Well, we know that an object remains in motion, uniform motion, constant speed in a straight
line, as long as there's no net force on it, so there must be no net force on the block
right now, and that means the three newtons of force I'm pulling with my scale is balanced
by a three newton force the other way, the force of friction, and so there's no net force
on the block as I'm pulling it along.
So part of the reason we are closet Aristotelians is because when we tend to move objects around
like dragging a trunk across the floor, pushing a piece of furniture along, many kinds of things
we might try to move, we seem to have to apply a constant force to keep them moving in a
straight line at constant speed, and that's exactly what Aristotel would say.
But in fact, when that's happening, there is no net force on the object, and so it is
moving in a straight line at constant speed, exactly as Newton's first and second laws
say it should, because there's no net force on it.
There is that hidden force of friction that's opposing the force we're applying.
So friction is a force that is invisible, but there it is, and we need to overcome it,
and that's why it seems to us with many, many kinds of objects we deal with, that we have
to apply a constant force to keep them moving.
It seems like Aristotel's right, but he isn't.
Newton's right, the net force is zero, the object is moving in a straight line at constant
speed just as it should, it's just our force, the force we apply is only one of two forces
acting on the object, and the other is this frictional force.
Now you notice something a little more subtle when I did this experiment.
When I first started pulling on the block, the force built up and built up and built
up, and it built up to five close to six Newtons before suddenly the block began to move,
and when the block began to move, the force dropped down dramatically, and that illustrates
an important point about friction.
There are in fact two kinds of friction.
There's so-called static friction, the friction that exists between two objects when they
are at rest with respect to each other, and that force can actually be bigger than the
force of sliding friction, the force of friction that exists when two objects are sliding with
respect to each other.
There's a reason for that difference, and when the objects are at rest with respect
to each other, there's time for the molecules in the two surfaces to kind of bond together
and lock together, and that makes it, you have to break those bonds to get the two objects
moving relative to each other.
Once they're moving, those bonds don't have time to form, and the friction is less.
So there are two kinds of friction.
Static friction, the friction of two surfaces are at rest.
Right now I'm pushing and pushing, but I'm not going anywhere because static friction,
which is pretty big, is opposing that push.
Once I push hard enough, then it takes less force to keep it moving along because now
I'm dealing with the force of sliding frictions, also called sometimes kinetic friction.
And this is, of course, in physics in your life, so let me give you a very, very important
everyday example, and that is putting on the brakes in your car.
What the brakes in your car do is not stop your car, and if you're a good driver, this
is something you keep in the back of your mind.
The brakes do not stop the car.
They simply stop the wheels from turning.
The brakes have a couple of little frictional pads, they grab onto a spinning metal disc,
these are disc brakes that most of us have these days, and they stop the wheel from spinning.
That doesn't necessarily stop the car.
What stops the car is the frictional force between the wheels and the road.
And there are two kinds of friction, as I just showed you.
There's static friction, the friction of an object that isn't moving relative to the
surface it's in contact with, and the force associated with an object that's sliding.
And those two frictional forces are different, and the static friction force is bigger.
And to understand car braking in a little bit more detail, let's talk about the invention
of the wheel, which is one of the most important inventions in humanity's history, certainly
buried into the ancient past.
It's a little bit more subtle and ingenious invention than you might think.
So here I have a wheel, and I want to point out what happens when a wheel rolls.
When a wheel rolls, the very bottom point of the wheel, right down there, is actually
instantaneously at rest.
Whoa.
It is.
Here's the wheel rolling along.
The middle part of the wheel is moving along with the speed of the car, or whatever this
wheel is attached to, bicycle, whatever it is.
The top of the wheel is actually moving twice as fast in that direction.
And the bottom of the wheel is momentarily at rest.
By the way, if this were a railroad train wheel that has a kind of part that sits down below
the rail to keep the train on the track, that part is actually moving backwards relative
to the ground when the train is moving forward.
But the bottom point of a wheel is instantaneously at rest with respect to the ground.
Now, if you don't believe that for a wheel, it's a little bit easier to see for something
like the tread of a bulldozer, or if you want to get militaristic, a tank.
If you watch an Aura snowmobile, if you watch an object like that that has a belt-like device
instead of a wheel that serves basically the same purpose, you'll see that the part in
contact with the ground is at rest.
And then it gets clunked up by the mechanisms that are driving it.
It moves along forward and comes back down again, but the part that's in contact with
the ground is at rest.
And I have a little movie here of a bobcat loader with treads, and we'll see exactly
what's happening there.
So here goes the movie.
Here's our little bobcat coming along, carrying a load of dirt.
You can see it's treads, and we'll take a close-up look at the treads in just a moment.
There it is, dumping its dirt.
And there go the treads.
Now look at those treads, and look at the bottom.
We'll get some closer pictures in just a minute.
There we go.
It's a little bit hard to see because we're following the bobcat as it moves, so it looks
like the ground is moving in these pictures.
But if you look closely at the bottom of the treads, it's going to come by again.
Here it is more slowly.
Look at the bottom of the treads.
You'll see the bottom of the tread is not moving with respect to the ground.
It is moving with respect to the machine, but it's not moving with respect to the ground.
Follow a little rock or something on the ground, and it's sitting right next to a piece
of tread that's going along until the tread comes out at the end.
That bottom of the tread is at rest with respect to the ground.
It isn't going anywhere.
Here it goes.
Here it comes again.
Nice picture there.
Follow any of those rocks you see on the ground right next to the tread, and you'll see the
tread and the rocks are moving in the picture the same way.
That means the tread is at rest with respect to the ground.
So an object like the tread of this bulldozer, there it goes, bye bye bobcat.
And the bottom of this wheel, which is just a rounder version of that tread, are in fact
at rest with respect to the ground.
If the wheel is doing what it's supposed to be doing, namely rolling.
Now a wheel doesn't have to roll.
If I slammed on the brakes on this wheel as it was moving along, it could skid like that.
And that's what happens in your car if you slam on the brakes too hard.
And if the wheel is skidding, then the bottom of the wheel is not in fact at rest with respect
to the ground.
It's sliding along the ground, and so the kind of friction that's acting is sliding friction,
kinetic friction, and that kind of friction is less effective.
It's less large of a force.
Once you set your wheels skidding, the force of friction becomes less, and your ability
to stop your car becomes significantly less.
Something more important happens too, if a couple of wheels lock up like that because
they're on a part of the road that's got a different kind of surface than another part
of the road, then the car can go out of control by turning, and that's even worse.
So you want to avoid situations in which the wheels of the car are not rolling.
That is, the bottoms of the tires are not at rest relative to the road.
How do you do that?
Well, if you're an older driver, you were probably taught to pump the brakes in an emergency
stop.
Why?
Because that, just as a wheel started to go into a skid, you let off, and so it didn't
go into a skid, and so you were able to slow the wheel down while keeping it always rolling
while keeping the bottom part of the wheel at rest with respect to the road, and therefore
keeping static friction active.
Nowadays, cars have anti-lock brake systems, and in anti-lock brake systems, a computer
monitors the motion of each of the four wheels, and if it senses that one wheel is beginning
to skid, to slip, not to be rolling, it applies the brakes in such a way, turning them on
and off, and that's why you're supposed to slam on your brakes hard in an emergency
stop with anti-lock brakes and let the computer do that, and you hear that terrible chattering
sound, and you actually feel the brake pedal kind of fighting against your foot, and there's
an instinct to try to let go, but you shouldn't do that.
You should just keep that brake pedal down and let the computer modulate that because
the computer will keep all four wheels rolling, and therefore keep the maximum possible friction,
and there are two great advantages of that one, which you would think is perhaps the
most significant, but it isn't, is the fact that the stopping distances become shorter,
and here, for example, are some stopping distances calculated from the frictional coefficients
on dry asphalt, packed snow, and ice, and here we are with conventional braking systems,
and this is the distance in yards, so on ice, for example, it's about 100 yards to stop
with a conventional braking system.
With ABS, it's considerably shorter in all those cases, and the advantage is even greater
on the ice than it is on the dry asphalt.
So there is an advantage in stopping distance, but that's not the real reason we have ABS
brakes.
That's one reason, but the more important reason, again, is if two of the wheels are
one of the wheels locks up, the car can go out of control, it can steer in a direction,
you don't want it to go because that one wheel is suddenly locked with respect to the road
and the car veers.
By keeping all four wheels rolling, even in an emergency stop, even on ice, where you're
not going to stop in a very short distance, even if you have anti-lock brakes, at least
you will tend to go forward in a straight line instead of swerving maybe into the ongoing
traffic.
So a very real part of physics in your life is stopping your car, and that involves the
difference between static friction and kinetic friction, static friction and sliding friction,
and ABS braking systems take advantage of that.
If you want to look at an ABS braking system, it looks something like this.
Here are your four wheels.
Each wheel has a brake disc, a metal disc that the brake pads grab.
There are brake calipers and friction pads.
They're all connected together to a central reservoir.
There's a brake pedal, and when you step on the brake pedal, you're squeezing a fluid
that goes out and compresses those discs against the rotors, and that's what stops
the wheels, but it doesn't stop the car.
In an anti-lock brake system, each wheel has a rotation sensor at the wheel.
It's sensing what's going on.
It's feeding that information back to a computer, and the computer is then going back and modulating
the brake pedal and telling it what to do.
And each wheel is controlled independently.
Well that's a practical use of friction, certainly in our everyday lives.
Where does friction come from?
Well friction ultimately comes from the contact between the two surfaces.
Surfaces tend to be rough, and that roughness results in jagged projections that interlock
between the two surfaces, and that's ultimately the origin of friction.
If you want to get really philosophical, it's ultimately an electrical force that's going
on there.
So if we look close up at friction, here's an example of a block sitting on a surface,
like my block here, and I'm going to blow up the region between that surface and the
surfaces, the block and the surface.
And it looks something like that, there's that jaggedness.
Now you might think, gee, the friction ought to depend on how much of those two surfaces
are in contact.
You might think, well, if I put the block up like this, there should be a lot less friction,
because there's a lot less surface area.
And in a way you're right, and in a way you're wrong, there isn't any less surface area in
this case than in this case.
And that's because if you look at the picture again, you see that the two surfaces are largely
not in contact.
It's only at those jagged projections that they're in contact.
And depending on how the weight of the object is oriented, those two objects squeeze together
somewhat, if I add additional weight, put an additional weight on the block, then they
squish the surfaces together, then there really is more surface area in contact, and then
the frictional force increases.
Let me do a demonstration of that.
Here's a second block.
I push on my first one, takes a little bit of force to get it moving, and then a smaller
force to keep it moving.
I put a bigger block on, and now there's a greater frictional force, because there's
more weight pushing down, the blocks and the board are squished more closely together,
and as I push, it takes a bigger force to get it going, and then a smaller, but still
significant force to keep it going.
So the force of friction depends on how tightly these two surfaces are squeezed together.
If I were to push down with my hand on this block, now I really hard time getting it going,
because I've increased that force that squishes the two of them together.
Let me give you another example of that.
Here's a book, big heavy book.
I'd like to hold this book on this smooth-ish vertical surface.
How to do that?
Well, if I don't push very hard, it's going to slide down.
If I let go, of course, it's just going to fall.
If I don't push very hard, it slides.
Why?
Because there's a force of gravity downward, and the only force that can hold it up is
the force of friction.
But if I push harder like that, then I'm squishing those surfaces together enough to make the
frictional force big enough to overcome the force of gravity, and the book stays in place.
So right now, there's a frictional force acting up, and that frictional force is big enough
to overcome the force of gravity or to balance the force of gravity, and the book's motion
is not changing.
Make that frictional force weaker by taking away some of this perpendicular force that
I'm applying, and the frictional force isn't big enough, and the book begins to slip downward.
So the frictional force depends on the relative force that's pushing the two surfaces together.
Ironically, that force is perpendicular to the motion that is involved, the motion that
we're trying either to stop or make happen.
Now friction really plays a major role in our everyday lives.
It's not just a nuisance force that gets us confused and makes us think like Aristotelians.
As I argued before, it not only starps our cars, but it also helps us get our cars started.
And I'd like to do a little demonstration for you that shows how that happens.
Okay, so over here I have a car, not a real car, but a little radio-controlled car.
It has four wheels, rear ones are driven by a motor, so it can drive, and it's resting
on a road.
Now it's not a normal road.
It's a road that's made of styrofoam, and the road itself is on rollers.
And in doing this demonstration, we're going to see friction at work, and we're going to
see Newton's third law at work, and both of them are necessary to understand how one
starts and stops a car.
So I'll do the demonstration, then we'll talk a little bit about what's been going
on, and I'll show you some pictures that analyze the forces involved.
So I'm going to now accelerate the car forward.
So here we go.
There it was.
Okay, car went forward, road went backward.
Newton's third law at work.
Doesn't happen by the way to a real road, or does it?
Well actually it does.
When you start to drive, this is a little hard to believe, the entire earth rotates a little
bit in the opposite direction.
It's just that the mass of the earth is so huge compared to the mass of your car that
the effect is almost insignificant.
In this demonstration where I had a styrofoam roadway on roller bearings, the effect was
very dramatic because the car had a greater mass than the road, and so the backward kick
of the road was actually probably bigger than the forward motion of the car.
Let's take a look at how that all works.
How do you in fact drive?
So here's a picture of a car, and here's what happens when the car starts up.
Some force has to push on the car in the forward direction.
Well that's not what starts the whole process.
What starts the process is you're applying force to the wheels of the car, and here we
have a modern front wheel drive car, and so there is a force as the wheel starts to spin
pushing backwards against the road, and it's a frictional force between the tire and the
road.
Well, we know Newton's third law.
If the tire exerts a force on the road, what does the road have to do?
It has to exert a force back on the tire, and so there is a force forward on the tire,
and that force ultimately transmitted up through the wheels and the suspension system
and the mechanics of the car is what ultimately drives the car forward.
It's the Newton's third law reaction to the force of the tire pushing against the road,
and of course if there is no friction, if you're trying to get started on ice, you simply
don't get anywhere.
What if you want to stop?
Well the opposite has to happen.
There has to be a force acting backwards on the car to slow it down.
Well there's a frictional force on the road from the tire, and that force is acting forward
because when you put on your brake, there's a forward force on the road from the tire,
and there must therefore be a backwards force from the tire on the road, and that's the
force that ultimately stops the car.
Well, now you know everything there is to know about driving, and you know it because
you know Newton's third law, and you understand the force of friction, both static friction
and sliding friction.
Well actually that's not quite true.
You don't understand everything about driving because I haven't told you how to steer, I
haven't told you how to round a corner.
We'll get to much more on that in the next lecture, which deals with circular motion
because turning a corner is a piece of circular motion, but let me just point out right now
what you ought to know if you're a true Newtonian, and that is to steer, that is to change the
direction your car is moving, whether or not you're also changing your speed involves
a change in your motion, and any change of motion requires a force.
And the only way your car can have forces exerted on it is through those tiny points
of contact of the four wheels on the road, and the only force that can act there basically
is the force of friction.
That was a few other forces, we'll get to them in the next lecture, but normally on
a horizontal surface, basically it's friction.
If there is no friction, for instance if you're trying to round a curve on ice, you simply
do what Newton's first law says in the absence of a force, you go in a straight line and
that means going off the road.
So friction also plays a major role in steering, and we'll get to that more in the next lecture.
Friction also plays a significant role in another everyday activity, namely walking.
You couldn't walk without friction.
If I were doing this on frictionless ice, I would simply be going like this, and I wouldn't
be getting anywhere.
How exactly do you walk?
Well, you learn as a young infant to walk, and nobody talks to you about forces and friction,
but in fact, forces and friction are what are working on you as you learn to walk and
as you walk throughout the rest of your life.
So here's a picture of someone walking.
What's happening?
Well, this is the state where one foot is in the contact with the ground, the other foot
is up behind them, a little while later as the person swings forward, the second foot
will come forward and come down on the ground, and the first foot will go up, and that's
how the walking will progress.
Well, what is going on here?
Well, ultimately when you're walking, you are pushing back against the floor with a
frictional force.
And because you're pushing back against the floor, the floor must be pushing forward on
you with an equal but opposite force, and it's that force, again, transmitted up through
the musculature and the skeleton that ultimately propels your body forward.
So I push back against the floor, my body is propelled forward, I then put my other
foot down and repeat the process.
That's how you walk.
So the frictional force is acting on the floor from my foot, and so there's a frictional
force from the floor on my foot, equal but opposite force as required by Newton's third
law.
By the way, you'll notice something else about this picture.
The person is leaning, and if you watch me walk, I've got a very slight lean to my body,
and if you see someone walking fast, they've probably got quite a bit of a lean, and if
they're running, they may even have more of a lean.
It's very difficult to exert that backwards frictional force if you're standing straight
up.
You can do it, but it's very difficult.
If you're leaning a little bit forward, all the forces down along your body then have
a component to them in the backward direction, and it's much easier to do that, so one naturally
tends to lean when one is walking forward.
By the way, people who understand Newton's third law often get in a dilemma and it's
exemplified by the famous horse and cart dilemma, and now that you understand Newton's third
law and you understand friction, we can resolve that.
And here's the issue.
You have a horse pulling a cart, so let's take a look.
Well, we know that the horse is pulling on the cart with some force.
But we also know Newton's third law, and that says that the horse is being pulled on
by the cart.
The cart is exerting a force on the horse, and the forces are equal and opposite.
So how can the pair of them, if they're initially at rest, ever get moving?
This is a real dilemma, and people who are just learning Newton's third law really scratch
their heads about this and can't figure out what's going on.
And the answer comes from two points.
First of all, we need to look at the net force on the entire system consisting of horse and
cart.
Unless we look at the net force, we don't have a picture that's valid in the context
of Newton's second law.
So we need to look at the net force.
Second of all, we need to recognize that the Newton's third law forces never act on the
same object.
If object A exerts a force on B, then object B exerts an equal but opposite force back on
A. There is never the same force acting on a single object.
Now in this case, those two forces are internal to the system consisting of the horse and
the cart together, and they exert no net effect on that system.
We need to ask, what is the net external force acting on this system?
And here's the answer.
How do these things get moving?
Well, here we go.
The horse, in fact, is exerting a force on the road, just like I was in the picture showing
me walking.
That's a frictional force backwards.
The road exerts a frictional force on the horse, and provided that force is big enough,
big enough to overcome the backwards force that the cart exerts on the horse, then there's
a net force in the forward direction on the horse, and on the whole horse cart system,
and the system accelerates forward.
So there's no problem.
Newton's third law does not say things can't get started moving.
Equal and opposite forces do not act on the same objects, and in this case, the system
has a net force on it that is in the forward direction, and it accelerates in the forward
direction.
And it all works out because the Newton's third law forces are equal but opposite, but
they're acting on different objects.
And the net force is coming from ultimately a combination of all those forces, including
particularly the force that the horse exerts on the road.
Now, in some cases, friction is very useful, as I've just showed you.
It helps us walk.
It helps us start our cars.
It helps us stop our cars.
In some cases, friction is a nuisance.
When you have pieces of machinery, particularly rotating machinery, in close contact friction
is very bad.
It generates a lot of heat.
It slows the machinery down, and we tend to use lubricating oils that put a thin film
of fluid that actually literally separate the surfaces and allow them to spin relative
to each other or to slide relative to each other without much friction.
In some cases, we'd also like friction to work in some ways, static friction and kinetic
friction to work differently.
We want the friction to work in different ways.
For example, if I'm out cross-country skiing, I would like to be able to push back against
the snow with my ski stationary and have a big force so I can propel myself forward.
Again, pushing back against the snow, the Newton's third law reaction force, is going
to push me forward.
Or if I'm climbing up a hill, I want to be able to plant my ski and have the force of
static friction hold me there.
On the other hand, when my ski is gliding forward, I don't want there to be much friction.
So I'd like some kind of substance on my ski that has a very high static friction, but
a very low sliding friction.
And that's why, at least in the old days, here's a nice old wooden ski, and some newer
skis still are waxable.
One takes a wax, and the wax is typically different for different temperatures because
the frictional properties of the wax vary dramatically with temperature as do the frictional
properties of the snow.
And one applies the wax to the ski, and one rubs the wax down.
And then one has a ski whose frictional properties are suited to the particular conditions of
the snow and the air temperature on that day, and those conditions are large static friction
that allows the ski to clamp down and be held tight to the snow, and yet when the ski is
gliding forward, very low kinetic friction to allow the ski to slide forward without
slowing down.
Other examples include the rosin that you put on a dance hall floor, or the rosin that
a violinist applies to her bow, which makes it hard to get the bow started going, but
once it gets going, it slides easily across the strings.
I should mention also, in addition to the friction between surfaces, there's a related
quantity involved in motion through fluids, like through the air or through water.
And that doesn't arise from quite the same mechanism, it's a little more subtle how that
friction arises, but nevertheless it acts pretty much like friction, and it exerts a
force that opposes the motion of objects.
And in some cases at least, particularly motion through the air under certain conditions,
the force of air friction actually increases more rapidly than the speed does.
It typically quadruples for a doubling of speed.
That's one of the reasons why in the 1970s, the United States instituted a 55 mile an
hour speed limit in response to the oil crises of that time, because the small increase from
say 55 miles an hour to 65 miles an hour is accompanied by a much larger increase in the
air resistance, and at those high speeds, it's air resistance, this kind of fluid friction
that is the dominant effect in the dominant loss for a car.
The main reason you're burning fuel to go at 55, 65, 70 miles an hour is to overcome
that air resistance.
There's a lot of internal friction in the car to the air overcoming, and some of the
effect of the tires on the road, but most of that is not frictional because they're
at rest with respect to the road, is not using up your energy.
So most of the energy you're burning up to keep a car going is overcoming the air resistance.
That's why it's important to build cars somewhat streamlined.
And let me end with one last comment about the friction of fluids, either in air or water.
If you jump out of an airplane, it's good if you have a parachute on.
Why?
Because the parachute slows you down because the fluid friction on the large surface area
of the parachute is very large.
The fluid friction depends on the surface area exposed to the moving air or the air
moving relative to the object that's moving through it.
Again, why you streamline cars.
So if you build a parachute, that's sort of the opposite of streamlining.
And if you jump out of an airplane and put on your parachute, you quickly come to a relatively
small speed going downward.
Gravity is pulling down on you, but the force of friction, air friction, air resistance up
on you is equal and opposite.
It takes a little while for that to happen.
And eventually you reach a constant speed because there's no net force on you.
Force of air resistance up, force of friction down, a force of gravity down.
No net force.
You move at constant speed.
At first, when you jump out of the airplane or I drop an object, it accelerates.
Its motion changes in the downward direction, but the faster it goes, the bigger the force
of air resistance.
And consequently, depending on the relative weight of the object relative to its surface
area, different objects reach eventually a terminal velocity, which is very different.
When I drop this baseball and this piece of Kleenex, the Kleenex is almost immediately
going to reach its terminal velocity.
The baseball will hit the floor rather long before it reaches its terminal velocity.
It would be going much faster if I dropped it from higher up.
And there they go.
So in addition to the friction that we've talked about between surfaces, there is also
this fluid friction that affects objects moving through air or water.
