Welcome to lecture 9, Going in Circles.
A lot of the motion that we participate in is circular motion.
We sit in our car and we turn the steering wheel and we're going around a curve.
That's circular motion.
Our planet is rounding the sun at a rate of once a year.
That's circular motion.
As we stand here on Earth, once a day our planet rotates.
That's circular motion.
It's whiz around the Earth.
That's circular motion.
Our television dish antennas are pointed at satellites that are going around the Earth
once every 24 hours.
That's circular motion, even though they don't seem to be going relative to us.
Circular motion is everywhere.
And circular motion, as I indicated in the first lecture on motion, is both very simple
to understand if you're really a Newtonian and really believe Newton, but if you persist
in being an Aristotelian and believing that things move because of forces on them and
they move in the direction of the forces, then you will continue to be bewildered about
circular motion.
Given what we know about Newton's second law, we know that motion in a circle, or even part
of a circle as in a car rounding a curve, is motion that is changing.
The direction of the motion in this case is changing even if the speed is not.
And we know from Newton's second law and Newton's first law, the law of inertia, that
there must therefore be a force acting on that ball.
In this case, the origin of that force is obvious.
It's the force of the string pulling on the ball.
So circular motion requires a force.
And we want to explore in a little more detail what the direction of that force is, what's
going on, how big that force has to be, and so on, because that will help us to understand
how circular motion occurs.
So here's a picture that shows a circular path, and I'm going to have an object moving
around that path.
So initially it starts out at the top, and we could picture this circle to be in a horizontal
plane, so we're not going to worry at this point about gravity.
So initially the object is moving like that.
Little while later, it's moving in a different direction because it's moving in a circular
path.
Little while later, there it is, and I've left the arrow showing its previous states
of motion, so you get a clear sense here that the motion is continually changing as the
object goes around the circle, and eventually it gets back to its starting point.
Now the question I want to ask is, clearly the motion is changing.
I want to ask in more detail, what's the direction of the change in motion?
In what direction is that motion changing?
The reason I want to ask that question is because Newton's second law says the force
and the change in motion are related to each other, and in particular they're in the same
direction.
And Newton's second law also says something about their sizes, but we won't go there right
now.
We're going to talk about in particular the direction of that change in motion.
So here we are in our initial position, in our initial velocity, we were at the top of
the circle and we were moving to the right.
A little while later, we're moving a little bit downward to the right.
The speed in this motion is constant, that's why those arrows representing the motion have
the same length in all cases.
And so I want to ask, how have those arrows changed?
They haven't changed in size, the speed has not changed, but they've changed in direction.
And the question is, what would you have to do to the first arrow, the horizontal one,
to make it into the second arrow?
By how much would you have to alter it?
What I would like to argue, what you would have to do is rotate it in that direction
toward the center of the circle.
Now when I have these arrows a little distance apart, that isn't absolutely rigorously true,
but in the limit where I get them infinitesimally close together, this is where calculus would
become very handy, the change in the motion is directed exactly toward the center of the
circle.
And for that reason, the force must also be in the direction toward the center of the
circle, because Newton's second law says force causes change in motion.
If there's a change in motion toward the center of the circle, there must be a force acting
toward the center of the circle.
In the case of the ball whirling around on the string, again that force is clearly the
force caused by the tension in the string in this case, the string is actually tense,
and that force is pulling in fact toward the center of the circle, which is my hand.
So indeed the force is toward the center of the circle.
So if we were to look at this picture again, sewing both the motion, the blue arrow, and
the force, the red arrow, initially things would look like that.
The object is moving to the right, but there is a force on it at right angles to that direction,
and that force is toward the center of the circle, and that force is continually pulling
the object, whatever it is, out of the straight line motion it would like to go in absent
any forces acting on it, and the net result is it goes in circular motion.
So there's the motion, there's the force a little while later, the motion is in a different
direction, the force also is in a different direction.
The force is continually changing in direction, it's not changing in strength, and the speed
isn't changing either, but the directions of both of them are changing, and they remain
mutually perpendicular, the force always pointing toward the center of the circle.
And because the force points toward the center of a circle, the force on an object undergoing
circular motion is called a centripetal force, that means a center seeking force, a center
directed force.
Be very careful of that word, I don't like the word centripetal very much, a word I
like a lot less is the word centrifugal, and I think you ought to ban the word centrifugal
from your vocabulary, I think the word centrifugal force causes much confusion in physics and
gets people very mixed up about circular motion, I want to say a little bit about that term
centrifugal force because I'm going to have to use it, it is sometimes said oh, I got
a ball whirling around in circular motion, or I got a moon, the moon going around and
orbit around the earth and they say well what holds it there, well there's a force pulling
inward in this case it's the force of the string and in the moon's case it's the force
of gravity, but it's balanced by a centrifugal force pushing it outwards, nonsense.
If the force pulling inward on the ball or the force of gravity pulling downward toward
earth on the moon were balanced by some other force, then there would be no net force in
those objects and think for a minute about how an object moves when there's no net force
on it.
It moves in a straight line at constant speed, that's what the law of inertia says, that's
what Newton's first law says, that's what Newton's second law implies.
There is no such thing as a centrifugal force, a centrifugal force is a fiction, it's an
artifact and in the wrong hands it gets people horribly muddled about explanations of motion
particularly circular motion because it makes you think circular motion is occurring and
yet there's no force on an object.
And how can that be?
If you believe that forces cause change in motion and that absent forces there is no
change in motion, then how can something be going in circular motion while at the same
time having no force on it?
There is no such thing as a centrifugal force.
When an object is moving in circular motion there is a net force on it and that force
is toward the center of the circle and that force is not balanced by any other force.
By the way it's often argued that the centrifugal force is pushing outward and some people think
well because of that if I let go of the string when I was whirling the ball around in the
circular path it would fly off in a straight line directly outward from the center of motion.
That's not true, that's not what happens.
If I let go of the string while the ball is whirling around at the instant I let go of
it it continues in straight line motion in the direction it was going at the minute I
let go of it and that direction was tangent to the circular path not radially outward.
There is no such thing as a centrifugal force.
Centrifugal force is a fiction.
Let's do this experiment, I'm going to let the ball go and it flew off tangent to the
circular path.
It flew off in the direction it was going at the moment I let go of the string.
There is no such thing as a centrifugal force.
Why does people conjure up this word?
Well in the right hands centrifugal force is sometimes a useful term.
There are a few people, give me some examples, oceanographers who worry about the fact that
they're dealing with vast oceans of water, movable fluid water on a planet that is in
fact not in uniform motion but is rotating.
If you were an airplane propeller designer it might be much more convenient for you to
think about the object you're designing in the frame of reference in which it's rotating.
And remember those frames of reference which are not uniformly moving are not valid places
for doing Newton's laws.
It feels like there are strange forces acting, there aren't.
It's just that you're in a frame of reference in which Newton's laws don't apply, the proper
Newtonian description of what's going on in your frame of reference is to be given by
someone who's in a really uniformly moving reference frame.
But if you're an oceanographer on planet earth it's easier to do your work on planet
earth in the frame of reference of planet earth.
If you're designing an airplane propeller it's easier to think about the propeller,
it's a little easier to write the equations in a frame of reference where you're stationary
with the propeller blade rather than going around all the time.
And in those frames of references Newton's laws don't hold and you can make them seem
to hold by inventing fictitious forces that aren't there.
And there are a number of such forces, the most common of which is the so called centrifugal
force.
So the centrifugal force if you're in a rotating frame of reference, if you're in a car going
around a corner it may seem to you like you're being thrust to the outside of the car.
That is not what's happening, that's not a valid description of what's going on and
you shouldn't be talking about Newton's laws from the point of view of somebody inside
a car that's not moving uniformly.
But if you insist on doing so then you kind of have to introduce a fudge factor to make
Newton's laws seem to work in a place where they shouldn't work and where they don't work.
And that fudge factor is the centrifugal force.
I prefer my students never to use the word centrifugal force, it doesn't appear once
in my textbook except to say don't use it.
And the reason it's not there is because I would like people learning physics for the
first time particularly those who aren't yet oceanographers or airplane propeller designers
or whatever to understand Newton's laws and Newton's laws work only in uniformly moving
reference frames.
They are very good at describing non-uniform motion, that's what they do, f equals ma is
about the change in motion caused by forces.
But the laws themselves must be applied from the point of view of a non-rotating, non-accelerating,
non-motion changing frame of reference.
So forces when objects are in circular motion are not balanced, there has to be a net force
on the object and it's that force that is continually deviating the object from what
would otherwise be a straight line path at constant speed.
Here's a beautiful picture of the Trans Sahara Highway, it doesn't matter that it's the Trans
Sahara Highway except with no trees or buildings or anything around, it's a very nice picture
of a car rounding a curve.
And in this picture the curve is very obvious, the car is coming straight at us and you might
ask the question is there any force on this car?
Well in the vertical direction there's a force of gravity down on it but there's also
a force from the road, the third law reaction force of the car pushing down on the road,
the road pushes back up on the car, we understand that force.
But what about in the horizontal direction?
Well that car is going around that curve and if it's successfully navigating that curve
there is a net force on it in that direction, toward the center of the curvature.
That force is provided by the friction of the wheels on the road in this particular case
of a flat horizontal road.
It's the centripetal force, not centrifugal centripetal.
There is no arrow being drawn in the outward direction, there is no force acting outward,
there is only an inward force.
There has to be an inward force because the direction of the car's motion is changing
toward the center of that curve.
By the way I even don't like the word centripetal and the reason I don't like the word centripetal
although it does correctly describe the force in circular motion is that if you think about
centripetal force, you say ah, centripetal force, that's a special kind of force that
holds objects in a circular path.
What holds the moon in its path?
The centripetal force.
What holds the ball in its path?
The centripetal force.
Well you're right, but centripetal isn't the name for some physically real force that
acts on objects.
In the case of the moon, the force that's holding the moon in its circular orbit around
the earth is gravity.
That is what provides the centripetal force.
Gravity is the centripetal force in that case.
In the case of my ball whirling around on the string, the centripetal force is the tension
in the string.
There has to be a real physical force acting to hold objects in circular paths.
In the case of the car rounding the Trans-Saharan highway, the centripetal force is the force
of friction of the tires on the road.
There is no mysterious centripetal force that suddenly springs into existence anytime
something is in circular motion.
If something is in circular motion, a real physical force is acting on it and continuously
deflecting it from what would otherwise be a straight line path.
You're welcome to call that force the centripetal force, but that doesn't explain what's going
on.
You have to find a real physical force to provide the explanation for why the object is in circular
motion.
Well I've talked about the direction of the force that keeps an object in circular motion.
It's center directed or centripetal, and it's caused by some real physical force.
But how big is it?
Well I don't want to go into detail of the mathematics, and I promised this would not
be a mathematically oriented course, but I want to point out one thing about this force.
The fact is this, suppose I'm going in a curved path, suppose I'm going around part of a
circle.
So here I am starting out the blue arrow represents the motion, in this case horizontally on this
screen.
Let's say again we're all talking about a horizontal plane, so we're not going to worry
about gravity here.
And a while later, the motion is in a different direction.
It has the same speed, but a different direction.
I want to ask how much that motion has changed, because Newton's second law and the whole
explanation of motion is not about forces causing motion, again, but forces causing
changes in motion.
So what is the change in motion involved in this curved path?
Well the object is moving relatively slowly, the change is somehow the difference, what
you would have to do to the first arrow to make it into the second arrow, and because
those arrows are fairly short, because the motion is relatively slow, that difference
is not very big.
Furthermore, the object is moving relatively slowly, so that difference took place over
a substantially long time.
And remember Newton's second law doesn't just talk about change in motion, it talks about
rate of change in motion.
It says the force depends on the rate of change of motion, or the rate of change of motion
depends on the force.
So in this particular case, the rate of change of motion is rather small, and it's small
for two distinct reasons.
Because the speed itself is small, so it doesn't take a very big change in the first
arrow to make the second arrow, and that tells us about the change in the motion, second
that change takes place over a fairly long time.
So putting it all together, we've got a low speed, there's not much change in the velocity.
Velocity is simply a name for motion that gives both the speed and the direction.
The change takes a long time, so the acceleration is small, and Newton's second law says f equals
ma, and therefore the force is relatively small.
So the force that was acting on the object as it went around that curve was toward the
center of curvature of that curve, even if it isn't a full circle, all these considerations
still apply.
And the force is fairly low.
What if I increase the speed?
If I increase the speed, same situation, it's going faster now, its subsequent motion is
at the same speed, but in a different direction, there's already a substantial change in those
two motions.
The change is twice as big as it was in the other case, if this speed is twice as great.
But something else is happening.
Because the object is moving twice as fast, it makes that change in half the time.
So two effects are at work here.
The change is twice as great, because the speed is twice as great, and the time in which
that change takes place is half the size it was earlier, and that conspires to make the
rate of change, the acceleration, four times as big.
Twice the change in velocity, half as much time to make that change, that means four
times as much acceleration, and that means four times as much force.
What that means practically is that the force scales as the square of the velocity, the
square of the speed.
If you double your speed, it requires four times as much force to hold you in the same
circular path of the same radius.
That's important when you're driving, because if you're going fast around a curve, you need
a lot more force, not just twice as much if you're going twice as fast, but four times
as much to make it successfully around that curve.
The force scales as the square of the speed.
By the way, highway engineers, if they're doing their job, protect you from your own
stupidity by going too fast.
Well, not quite from your own stupidity.
They also design the road carefully so it will be safer, and what they typically do
is bank the turns on the road.
And to talk about why roads are banked, or why airplanes bank when they turn, or why
bicyclists lean when they steer, I'll give you examples of all of these, I need to introduce
a concept which is bordering on the quantitative, but we'll have to talk about it a little bit.
Here are two towns.
I want to ask, how do you get from town A to town B?
Well, you could go that way.
But a way of describing that path, that nice diagonal path from town A to town B, is to
say, OK, suppose I talk about northeast, south, and west, I could describe that path in terms
of two components.
I could say, I have a component of motion in the eastward direction, and then a component
of that motion in the northward direction, and one description of how to get from town
A to town B is go four miles east and then three miles north.
That will have exactly the same effect as if you walked along the diagonal path.
It might take you longer and so on.
But the point is that diagonal path can be thought of as made up of two trips, one four
miles to the east and another three miles to the north.
Those red arrows are the components of that path that takes you from town A to town B.
And I'm going to be talking now in the next few pictures about components of forces, because
a force in a diagonal direction like from A to B there, although that's not a force,
that's a change in position, can be thought of as having a horizontal component and a
vertical component.
And it's often convenient to analyze situations to break things up into those two components.
So I'm going to talk about that first in the context of why it is that we bank highways.
Here's a banked road.
Let's think about all the forces that are acting on that car because if we're to understand
its motion, we need to understand the forces that are acting on it because Newton's law
says the net force on an object is what causes the change in its motion.
Now in this banked road, I'm assuming the road is curved and the center of the curvature
is toward the left.
So the car is now coming straight at us, but a little while later it's going to be veering
toward the left because it's on a curved but banked road and I can't show all of that in
a nice two dimensional drawing here.
Let's think about what forces are acting on the car.
Well, one force is always acting on things around earth and that's the force of gravity
and it always points downward absent any other forces.
Gravity does have a component down that slope and the car would in fact begin to slide down
that slope.
But there are other forces acting on the car because the car is pressing down on the road.
The road must be pressing back up on the car and it's always the case that when one object
presses on another, the other presses back with the equal and opposite force.
In the case of this tilted roadway, the force the road exerts on the car is in fact in the
direction that the road is contacting the car, that is a perpendicular direction.
The force is actually exerted on the individual wheels, but I'll sum up those four forces
and talk about a force that the road is exerting on the car.
Now don't tell me that those two forces balance, they can't possibly because the force of the
road has a component in the horizontal direction as well as in the vertical direction.
So what's happening here, if I break that force up into components as I just showed
you how to do, it's got a vertical component and a horizontal component.
Now if the car is not sliding down the curve, the vertical component will be exactly equal
but opposite in direction to the force of gravity.
That keeps the car from accelerating in the vertical direction even though it's on a
sloping road.
But there's still the horizontal component of the force on the car and that component
is not balanced by anything.
There is in fact a net force on this car pointing in the horizontal direction that way and that's
exactly what you need to keep the car moving in that circular path.
So Newton would tell us, hey this is a situation in which there is a net force on the car to
the left.
The car's motion must be changing toward the left and we already understand that circular
motion and this again is a head on picture of a car moving around in a circular track
or circular highway or circular curve.
There must be a force toward the center of the circle and that's exactly what there is.
Notice what there isn't in this picture.
I haven't argued that there's a force of friction.
In this particular case there could be glare ice on that slope and the car would happily
round the corner not sliding down the slope, not sliding up the slope, not sliding out
of the curve if its speed were such that the rate of change of its motion were exactly
given by that net force.
Now if the car were going a little bit too slowly, might slide down.
If the car were going a little bit too fast it might still fly off the curve upward.
These bank turns are designed for a particular speed and the speed by the way is related
to the banking angle.
The steeper the angle the faster you can go and require absolutely no effect of friction
to keep you on the curve.
So a banked road is a road that does not require at least at one particular design
speed does not require any friction to get you around the curve.
You just go around them naturally with the force of the road on you providing all the
force that's needed to accelerate you.
Of course there still is friction usually and it can help you out and that means if
you're going a little too slow or a little too fast you'll still make it around the curve.
But in principle with absolutely no friction with glare ice you'd still get around the
curve in that case.
By the way if you drive on an unbanked road you may often find yourself doing something
like this.
There's a big wide curve on my way to Middlebury College every morning and I see cars all the
time doing this.
Here you are you're coming into this curve and you kind of find yourself cutting the
corner like that.
Describing a path with a larger curvature radius because a larger curvature radius means
you need less force to hold you there and the way you achieve that unfortunately is
by cutting into the wrong lane.
So when you see cars doing that the driver is sort of compensating for the fact that
they've hit a curve.
They instinctively recognize even if they don't know Newton's laws that there's a problem
here that there may not be enough force or friction between tires and road to change
the motion as rapidly as your speed and the curvature radius of the curve dictate and
so you instinctively broaden out that curve and do something like that instead.
Dangerous but that's what happens and it happens because a force is needed to keep you
in a curve and if you can make the curve more gradual the force you need becomes less.
So that's why highways are banked and why you tend to cut corners on roads that aren't
banked especially at high speeds.
Here's another example.
Here are some bicyclists and these bicyclists I can tell from this picture are in fact steering
to what's the left on your screen and they're all leaning.
Why are they leaning?
Look at that lean.
What's going on there?
Well, again, just as with the car there are forces acting on the bicyclists.
There's the force of gravity downward.
There's a force the road exerts up on the bicyclist and in this case that force consists
of two parts.
It consists of a directly upward force countering the fact that the bicycle is pushing on the
road and there's also a frictional force, a horizontal frictional force.
The bicycle is trying to, the wheel is trying to slip out to the right and so there's a
frictional force to the left and so the net force of the road is in fact in that direction
and if I again add those two forces up, the force of the road has a vertical component
that balances gravity so the bicyclist does not fall over or fall down and there is a
horizontal component that is providing again that centripetal force that's required to
bring the bicyclist around the corner.
By the way, if there were no friction in this case, this is an unbanked roadway, the bicyclist
is going around.
If there were no friction, the tires would simply slide and the bicyclist would indeed
fall over but the bicyclist there is leaning, you say, why doesn't the bicyclist fall over?
The bicyclist doesn't fall over.
There's no reason for the bicyclist to fall over.
Again, as long as Newton's law is satisfied, as long as the force and the change in motion
are consistent, there is no reason to say, well, why doesn't the bicyclist fall over?
Because motion does not occur in the direction of forces.
The change in motion occurs in the direction of forces.
By the way, you might wonder how bicycles even work at all, how come you don't fall
off a bicycle?
We'll get to that much later in module 6 when I talk about rotational motion.
But for now, that leaning is enough to keep the bicyclist going around in the corner.
By the way, if you watch an ice skater going around a turn, they're also leaning.
In their case, although ice is generally frictionless, the blade of the ice skate is digging in to
the ice and providing the force that accelerates the skater around the turn.
A similar example, if you watch a ballet and a bunch of ballerinas are running around in
a curve, you'll see them all leaning into the direction of the curve for the same reason.
If you're in an airplane and the airplane needs to turn, well, you'll find the airplane
banks and you may look out the window in the ground to suddenly right down there outside
the window and yet you don't feel anything funny and your peanuts stay happily right
there in the seat back tray.
You don't feel like you're tipping over.
You only know it because you're looking out the window.
Why?
Because you and the plane are all going in circular motion.
There's a force of gravity downward on the plane.
There's a force upward on the plane.
That's the lift force provided by the air as the wings move through it.
That's what keeps the plane aloft, more about that in the next lecture.
And those two forces, again, when the plane is going around a curve, do not balance.
The plane doesn't really need its rudder to steer.
If it simply banks itself like this, then the force that's needed to steer it, in this
case the plane is turning to the right in your picture, the net force is toward the
right and that's the force that's steering the plane.
It's a component of the force due to the air and because the air force is perpendicular
to the wings, the wings have to tilt for that force to have a horizontal component and run
the plane around a horizontal curve, around a curve on a horizontal plane.
Some slightly more bizarre issues involving circular motion are things like this loop-to-loop
roller coaster.
How does that work?
How come you don't fall out at the top of that thing?
Don't tell me there's some centrifugal force holding you up.
There isn't.
Another example of that is this bucket of water.
If you've got a bucket, you can see the water in it.
I'm going to spin the bucket around over my head like this.
Why doesn't the water fall out?
Oh, a centrifugal force is holding it up there.
Nonsense.
If I slow down too much, the water does fall out.
The reason the water doesn't fall out is because the water is happily obeying Newton's law.
The reason you don't fall out of the loop-to-loop roller coaster is because you are happily
obeying Newton's second law.
What's that say at the top of the roller coaster?
You are in circular motion.
There needs to be a force on you toward the center of that circle.
Well, there is at least one force acting on you directly downward, and that's the force
of gravity.
And if you're going at just the right speed, the force of gravity will be exactly the right
value to be completely the entire centripetal force, the force that keeps you in that circular
path, and you will happily go in that circular path, and the force of gravity will be the
force that's holding you in that path, and there is no question of your falling.
Once again, you do not move in the direction of the force on you.
You move in the direction, your motion changes in the direction of the force on you, and
when you're at the top of that loop in the roller coaster, or the water was at the top
of the loop with the bucket, the direction of the change in its motion was downward,
and there needed to be a downward force.
Now if you're going too fast, and I hope the roller coaster designers have designed it
so you're going too fast, then there needs to be an additional force pushing downward
on you in addition to gravity to keep you in that circular path, and that force becomes
the force of the track.
Pushing in that case down on you, normally the track pushes up on you when you're moving
in an upright position, but now the force is pushing down on you, and there's a little
margin of safety there if that's happening.
If you go just barely slow enough that gravity alone will provide the force to keep you in
a circular path, then if you go a teeny bit slower, then you really will fall out of the
circular path.
You won't fall straight down, but you move out of the circular path.
Here's an example.
I'm going to swing this ball around in a vertical circle, and things are a little more complicated
in a vertical circle because I've got the gravitational force and also the force of
the string, and if I slow down, then the force needed to keep the string, the ball in a circular
path gets less and less, and eventually it gets small enough that gravity alone is enough,
and if I go less than that, then I no longer need any tension in the string, and the ball
falls out of its circular path, although it certainly doesn't fall straight down.
It describes a parabolic path of any object moving under the influence of gravity near
the earth.
So what objects do is move in such a way that the forces acting on them cause the change
in their motion, and I want to end with one last example, which is a little more subtle
and one I've talked to my students about, and that is what happens if you try to stand
on a spring scale at either the equator or the pole of the earth.
Here we are standing at the pole, and the earth is rotating, but that has negligible
effect on us.
Here we are on the other hand standing at the equator.
Now if I'm standing still at the equator, there needs to be, and I'm going to talk about
this from the point of view of somebody from beyond the earth, not on the rotating earth,
there needs to be a force that keeps me in circular motion because the earth is rotating,
and that force needs to be directed toward the center of the circle, which when I'm at
the equator is downward toward the center of the earth, and there are two forces acting
on me, the force of gravity downward toward the center of the earth, and the force of
the scale or whatever I'm standing on pushing up.
And if there is to be a net force downward, which there has to be to keep me in that circular
path on the earth's equator as the earth spins, then the force of gravity has to be bigger
than the force of the scale, and therefore the scale has to read less than my weight.
And if you understand that more complex example, which is really no different than the example
I gave earlier about the elevator, then you really understand circular motion and how
to apply Newton's laws to understand circular motion.
