Welcome to lecture 10, Taking Flight.
Flying is probably our fastest way as human beings of going places, at least getting around
our own planet.
How do we fly?
And how do birds fly?
How do bats fly?
What we need to do in all cases if we're going to fly is to overcome the ubiquitous force
of gravity that acts on us and on all other objects.
So I'd like to begin exploring just a few simple properties of the force of gravity.
First of all, gravity is a force that acts downward toward the exact center of the Earth.
It's a force that acts on all objects.
And it's a force that remarkably as Galileo is reputed to have showed us by dropping objects
off the Tower of Pisa, that may not really have happened, but he had good theoretical
reasons for believing this also.
It affects all objects equally.
What I mean by that is gravity doesn't exert the same force on all objects, it exerts
a bigger force on a more massive object, and the net result is all objects end up falling
with the same acceleration.
That's really crucial to understanding what goes on in space flight, which we'll deal
with in the next lecture.
But I'd like to do a couple of demonstrations of that here.
So here I have a tennis ball and a baseball.
The baseball is significantly more massive, not just a few percent more, but several times
as massive as the tennis ball.
And yet when I drop them, there's a force of gravity on them.
Their motion is going to change, they're going to accelerate, they're going to go faster
and faster, and they're going to go straight downwards toward the center of the earth.
And here they go, and they hit the ground at exactly the same time.
Why?
Because they had exactly the same acceleration.
As with other aspects of Aristotle's revenge, the force of friction that I talked about
before, the force of air resistance also sometimes hides the fact that all objects fall with
the same acceleration.
And to give a more dramatic showing of that, I have here a hollow cylinder, plastic cylinder,
out of which, just before this lecture, I pumped out all the air with a vacuum pump.
And I have in it a feather and a stone, and I'm going to turn it upside down and let them
fall under the influence of gravity alone without any significant air resistance.
And they fall with essentially the same acceleration.
That experiment, by the way, was done by astronauts on the moon who dropped a hammer and a feather,
and again, they hit the ground at exactly the same time.
Now if I let the air back into this cylinder, and do the experiment again, there you see
the obscuring aspect of air resistance that makes a think that lighter things fall less
rapidly.
That's not true.
Gravity has exactly the same effect on all objects regardless of their mass, and that
effect is to give them exactly the same downward acceleration.
If we're to fly, we have to somehow overcome that force of gravity.
If we're to be maintaining a constant altitude so we're not moving upward or downward, or
at least not accelerating upward or downward, then there has to be no net force on us in
the vertical direction.
We somehow have to provide a force that overcomes gravity.
And there are basically two ways of doing that.
Either way, in the case of flying, involves the air.
The air provides the force that overcomes gravity.
In one way, we do it with objects that in fact have less mass than a comparable volume
of air would have, hot air balloons, helium balloons, things like that.
And in the other case, we use the dynamics of an object, the motion of an object through
the air to provide forces that lift the object off the ground and keep it up there.
Obviously, there I'm talking about airplanes, helicopters, flying birds, bats, and other
objects that fly and yet are heavier than air.
So I want to begin by explaining how lighter than aircraft work.
And before I do that, I'm going to turn to an even simpler example of the same phenomenon
and that is objects that float in water to understand how that works.
Where does that come from?
And to begin, I want to begin with a picture here of a fluid.
It could be air, but it's easier to think about it like the water in this aquarium I
have in front of me.
So here's a fluid and let's just consider a hunk of that fluid.
So what I've drawn here is a cylindrical shape.
It happens to be cylindrical.
It's not important.
What is important, its top and bottom surfaces are basically parallel to the horizontal direction.
That isn't really important either, but that's going to help us to understand this a little
better.
So this cylinder I've drawn isn't anything real.
It's just an imaginary cylinder that's enclosing some of the water in that body of water or
air if this were air.
Now that particular chunk of water or air, that particular chunk of fluid is not accelerating.
It's not moving.
In fact, it's not going anywhere.
And so there must be no net force on it.
Yet there is a force of gravity downward on it.
And given that it's not moving and not accelerating, and given that we understand Newton's laws,
we know that if there is no change in its motion, and there isn't any change in its
motion, then there must be no net force on it.
So there must be some force acting upward on this chunk of water.
And that force must be exactly equal in size to the force of gravity acting downward.
That force is called the buoyancy force, and I want to show you where it comes from.
If you were deep down in the bottom of this aquarium or in the bottom of the ocean, you
would have bearing down on you the weight of all the water above you, and that weight
causes the water to have a pressure, and that pressure is greater the deeper you go.
Similarly, when I stand here at the bottom of the roughly 100 mile deep, quote, ocean
of air that constitutes our atmosphere, there is on me the weight of all the air in a column
above me 100 miles up.
On every square inch, that column of air weighs about 15 pounds.
That's atmospheric pressure, about 14.7 or 15 pounds on every square inch, and it's simply
due to the weight of the air above me.
If I go up a high mountain, there is less air above me, and so there's less weight and
there's less pressure.
So in any kind of fluid, at least in the presence of gravity, this wouldn't be true if gravity
were absent, but in the presence of gravity, the weight of the overlying fluid provides
a pressure force, and that force gets greater.
The pressure of the force per unit area, the force per square inch or per square meter
or whatever, gets greater as you go deeper down, and that's going to help us to understand
this buoyancy force.
So what happens?
Well, here at the top of this cylindrical chunk of water, there is a downward pressure
force on that chunk of water due to all the water that lies above it, but that isn't very
much water, so that force isn't very big.
There are also pressure forces at the sides, and they get increasingly greater as we go
downward, and by the way, this points out something important about pressure.
Pressure exerts its forces in all directions, although the pressure in water is due to the
weight of the water above you, the pressure exerts itself in any direction, on any surface
you put in there.
So these pressure forces are pushing sideways on this cylinder of water.
On the other hand, there's pressure in the water that's pushing back out, and further
more, these horizontal pressure forces you see, even though they're getting greater as
you go down deeper, are completely balanced all around.
There's forces pushing to the left, and forces pushing to the right, and they balance out.
What's happening at the bottom?
At the bottom end of this chunk of water, things are deeper, we're deeper down, therefore
the pressure is greater, and the pressure is exerted in equally in all directions, and
so on the bottom surface of the cylinder I've drawn, the pressure force is exerted upward.
And if you add up all those forces, you see the horizontal forces completely cancel each
other out, but the downward pressure forces on the top are smaller than the upward pressure
forces on the bottom, and the result is there is a net upward force on that chunk of water
that I have just artificially isolated from all the rest of the water surrounding it.
I could have made the same analysis on any bit of water I had there.
That force is the buoyancy force, and you can immediately see that the buoyancy force
is exactly equal to the force of gravity acting on that chunk of water.
But in another way, the buoyancy force is equal to the weight of that chunk of water.
Weight is simply a measure of the force gravity exerts on something.
Now what if I take that cylindrical chunk of water and replace it with a solid object?
That has no effect whatsoever on the pressure of the surrounding water, so all the pressure
forces are exactly the same, and the buoyancy force is therefore exactly the same, the upward
buoyancy force, but now the downward force of gravity becomes the weight of whatever
object I put there, and if that object is heavier than the corresponding chunk of water,
there is a net downward force, and it will accelerate downward.
So let me put in an object which is denser than water.
Gravity is now bigger than it was before, there is a net downward force, and the object
will sink.
It will in fact start to accelerate downward pretty soon, those forces of air resistance
that I talked about, or fluid resistance in this case that I talked about in an earlier
lecture will give it a terminal velocity, it will sink with that terminal velocity.
On the other hand, if I put there an object that's less dense than water, the pressure
force becomes, the pressure force stays the same, that's what gives us the buoyancy force,
but now the gravity force is less because the weight of the object is less, and there's
a net upward force, and the object will float.
So that's the origin of the buoyancy force, and all objects experience that.
You and I experience a buoyancy force right now from the air around us, but it's insignificant
compared to our weight, so we don't go floating upward.
If you've ever walked along the bottom of a lake or swimming pool carrying, say, an
anchor or other heavy object, you know it seems to weigh less down there than it does
at the surface.
That's because there is a buoyancy force on it, it's not enough to overcome gravity
so the heavy thing doesn't float, but buoyancy forces are always there, and they always affect
us.
The things they affect most are things whose density is almost the same as the fluid around
them, or less than that of the fluid around them.
So what happens with this buoyancy force?
Well, in the liquid, then the object will eventually float to the surface.
For example, if I take this block of wood, push it down under the water, there's a net
upward buoyancy force, right now I'm suppressing that buoyancy force by pushing down with
my hand, I let go and the object comes to the surface, and eventually some of the object
breaks free from the surface, there's no longer pressure forces on that part of it, and how
much floats free is determined by the balance of the upward buoyancy force on the part that
remains submerged versus the downward force of gravity.
So this piece of wood, which is a little bit less dense than water, well significantly
less dense than water, is floating somewhat out of the water.
On the other hand, if I put this styrofoam block in, it barely penetrates the water because
it has very little weight, and it needs very little buoyancy force to counteract its weight.
If I push it down too far, the buoyancy force increases because now the bottom of it is
lower down, and now there's a net upward force I let go, and it finally reaches an equilibrium
at just the right height above the water so that the buoyancy force balances the gravitational
force.
By the way, this is also the reason for the tip of the iceberg phenomenon, ice is about
90% the density of water, so ice floats, I'll get to this more in a subsequent lecture,
that makes water by the way a very unusual substance, but because that difference is
relatively small, it's almost the same density, ice is almost the same density as water, ice
floats with most of it submerged, and that's why the tip of the iceberg is what you see
above the surface is only a small part of the overall iceberg.
Now these explanations were for water, and similar explanations hold for air, but their
things are a little bit different.
In the case of water, we have a very clearly defined surface, and buoyant objects float
up to that surface and float on that surface.
In the case of the air, this 100-mile ocean of air that extends above us, the density
of the air decreases substantially as we go upward.
That doesn't happen as much for a fluid like a liquid, which is said to be incompressible.
That happens a little bit, but not nearly as much.
So as an object rises through the air, a buoyant object rises through the air like a balloon,
the air around it is getting less and less dense, and eventually the balloon will reach
an altitude where its density is the same as the surrounding air, and it will stop there.
It will be in what's said to be neutral buoyancy.
Neutral buoyancy is a situation in which an object has exactly the same density as its
surroundings, and so it neither floats nor sinks.
It has exactly, the pressure forces have exactly the same effect on it that they would
on a chunk of the water or air or whatever other fluid it is, and the object just comes
into this state of either moving upward or downward.
If I cut the string on this balloon, up it goes, and it's stopped by the ceiling of this
room, but if there were no ceiling there, again, it would rise into the atmosphere,
and one of two things would happen, eventually it would reach an altitude where its density
was exactly equal to that of air, and that would stop, or more likely as the pressure
around it decreased, the balloon would expand and eventually burst, so that's what's most
likely to happen to it.
On the other hand, it might drift somewhere in the wind, gradually lose the helium in
it, and eventually come down again somewhere.
Let's look at a couple of situations involving neutral buoyancy.
If you're piloting a hot air balloon and you want to be cruising at constant altitude,
you keep changing the density of the air in the balloon by firing your propane heater that
heats the air in the balloon, and on average, you keep the density of the entire balloon,
the hot air in the balloon, the shell of the balloon, the fabric of the balloon, the
basket and all its passengers, the overall average density of that system remains exactly
the same as that of the surrounding air, and then the balloon is in neutral buoyancy.
On the right hand frame of this picture, you see a number of fish.
Fish are equipped with a thing called a swim bladder that adjusts the amount of gas in
it to keep the fish basically in neutral buoyancy so they can swim through the water
without either floating up or going down, and a scuba diver by means of weights basically
tries also to achieve neutral buoyancy in many applications.
So the phenomenon of neutral buoyancy allows us to move through a fluid without any upward
or downward motion.
Hot air balloons, helium balloons, they fly because they are lighter than or at constant
altitude exactly the same density as air.
But most of us don't fly much in hot air balloons, and we certainly don't travel that
way.
What we travel in our airplanes, birds like airplanes are heavier than air, bats like
airplanes are heavier than air.
How do these things work?
These are much denser than air, so the gravitational force overwhelms the buoyancy force, and the
buoyancy force plays very little role in the behavior of an airplane.
Now you may have heard an explanation of how airplanes fly.
It involves complicated things about air flow past the wing, and oh, the wing has to be
shaped just this way, and so on.
And I will get into that at the end of this lecture, and you may have heard of Bernoulli's
principle, and I'll show you how Bernoulli's principle works.
But I think that's really far more complicated than it needs to be.
You understand now from the beginnings of this module the laws that govern motion.
Those laws are Newton's laws.
And winged flight does not need to be explained in complicated terms involving Bernoulli effects
and carefully shaped wings and helicopter blades and airplane and bird wings and all
kinds of things like that.
It needs to be explained most simply in terms of Newton's third law.
Because if there is a force that is holding an airplane up, and that force can only come
from the air, because that's the only thing the airplane is in contact with, then the
airplane must be exerting a downward force on the air.
And it's the Newton's third law effect of the airplane exerting a downward force that
causes the air to exert an upward force on the airplane.
And that is really the simplest explanation for flight.
We can talk about Bernoulli and any aircraft engineer who wants to design a really good
airplane, one that flies well, safely, and efficiently, had better pay attention to more
subtle details.
But the first explanation of how an airplane flies and the simplest is an explanation based
in Newton's third law.
The force of the air on an airplane wing or a bird's wing is called aerodynamic lift,
aerodynamic because it's a force that comes from the air, dynamic because it's a force
that occurs because the wing or whatever object it is, is moving through the air and force
lift because it's a force that lifts things upward.
And probably the easiest thing to understand at first is not an airplane, but a helicopter.
And actually, the motion of a helicopter blade through the air is exactly like the motion
of an airplane wing through the air.
So if you understand a helicopter, you understand an airplane, and yet it's very easy to understand
a helicopter without going into all kinds of complicated motions involving complicated
explanations involving the dynamics of fluids.
So let's look at a helicopter.
Suppose Newton's third law that holds up a helicopter.
What's going on?
A helicopter is just a great big fan.
And that great big fan is pushing air downward.
Well, if the air is being pushed downward, the air originally was stationary, suddenly
it finds itself moving downward.
That means its motion has changed.
In what direction has it changed?
In the downward direction.
So that tells us that the helicopter blades are exerting a downward force on the air.
And we know Newton's third law, and so if the helicopter blades are exerting a downward
force on the air, the air must be exerting an equal but opposite force upward.
So there's the downward force of the blades on the air, and there is the equal upward
force of the air on the blades, and it's that force that's holding the helicopter.
The whole helicopter is hanging on that little shaft that holds the blades.
The weight of the helicopter is supported by that shaft, and what's supporting that
whole arrangement is the force of the air on the blades.
And it's exactly the same kind of force that's exerted on the wings of an airplane.
In this case, the blades are what are moving.
That's why a helicopter can stay stationary.
We get an aerodynamic force, a force associated with the motion of the blades, even though
the helicopter itself isn't moving.
By the way, you'll notice that the helicopter has a little tail blade.
We'll get to that more in a subsequent lecture in Module 6, but basically because of the
rotary motion of the blades, there would be a rotary motion of the helicopter also unless
we put this extra little blade in the tail to exert a force, actually a torque as I'll
describe later, that prevents that from happening.
Now the wings of an airplane perform exactly the same function as a helicopter.
And I want to begin with a picture that has appeared in some textbooks and other books
explaining, purporting to explain, how airplanes fly.
And one will see a picture that looks like this.
This is a picture.
We're looking at the gray object is a wing looked at in cross-sectional profile.
So the wing is coming in and out of your screen.
And the idea is, well, the wing has this very carefully shaped design, sort of elongated
teardrop with the curved edge at the front and then it tapers off.
And so the air goes above it and goes faster and Bernoulli's effect and all kinds of things
happen.
This picture is completely wrong.
I'd like you to turn off your or stop your DVD player or your video cassette player for
a second and look at this picture and tell me what's wrong with it.
What's wrong with this picture is the following.
This wing could not fly because this wing has done nothing to the air.
It has not changed the air's motion.
The air motion coming in before the wing is horizontal.
The air motion after the wing is horizontal.
There has been no deflection of the air downward.
The wing has not exerted a downward force on the air.
And therefore, by Newton's third law, the air has not exerted an upward force on the
wing.
This is not a correct picture of a flying airplane wing, even though this picture has
occurred in books purporting to explain how airplanes fly.
In fact, a correct picture looks something like this.
And in this picture, although we could use a complicated explanation based on Bernoulli's
effect and fluid dynamics and so on, in fact, the correct explanation is much simpler and
it's based on Newton's third law.
What has happened to the air?
Initially, it was moving horizontally.
After it's gone past the wing, here I'm talking in the frame of reference of the wing, the
air is moving downward.
The air has been deflected downward by the wing.
And that means the wing has exerted a downward force on the air.
In fact, that force is downward and a little bit forward.
And that means the air must have exerted by Newton's third law an equal and opposite
force, largely upward and a little bit backward on the wing.
And that is the correct, simple Newton's third law explanation of how an airplane flies.
Now, that's all well and good.
That tells us what holds an airplane up.
But there's a little subtlety here in the fact that the force I've drawn here is not
entirely vertical, but it involves this horizontal component.
The airplane wing is exerting a force downward and a little bit forward on the air.
The air is therefore exerting a force upward and a little bit backward on the wing.
And if I break that force up into components, I can think of a vertical component.
That's what's holding the airplane up.
That's called the lift force.
And in addition, a horizontal component, which is going backwards, that's called the drag
force.
And it's that force.
That force is necessarily there.
You can't deflect the air downward like that when it's flowing past without there being
some drag force.
It's impossible to do that.
And that drag force is unfortunate because it means you need to supply a force in the
horizontal direction to overcome that drag force.
That's what the airplane's engines are doing.
They're overcoming the drag force, and they're burning up all that fuel to overcome the drag
force.
The drag force and the lift force go together.
You can't have one without the other.
And so you need to propel the engine forward.
And the name of the game in making a good airplane wing, and this is where the subtleties
come in, is to minimize the drag force and maximize the lift force.
That's what you'd like to do.
But there are compromises involved there.
You could, in principle, fly an airplane with a flat board for its wing.
If that board were moving to the right horizontally, that board would deflect air downward.
You don't need those fancy curves.
Even the Wright brothers figured out about those curves when they looked at bird wings.
But you don't need them.
You could, in principle, make an airplane that simply had a tilted board.
And if you rammed it through the air with enough brute force, it would fly.
You've probably experienced that if you've ever stuck your hand out of a car window while
you're moving, tilt your hand a little bit sideways, so it's not horizontal.
And you'll feel the lift force that tends to push your hand up and, of course, backwards
also.
That's the drag part.
But the lift force tends to lift it upward.
And again, this works perfectly well and is perfectly explainable by Newton's third
law.
Because what we've done here is deflected the air downward.
The wing has exerted a downward and forward force on the air.
And therefore, the air has exerted a force upward on this flat board wing.
It's not a great wing.
There's a big drag force, but nevertheless, that thing would, in principle, fly.
Birds, by the way, have very carefully engineered wings.
Evolution has engineered their wings so that they fly quite gracefully and with a substantial
ratio of lift force to drag force.
And here's just a quick clip showing an eagle flying.
Here it goes.
It's flapping its wings.
Notice that downward and forward motion of the flapping wings that results in a third
law force upward and backwards on the bird.
So a bird flies in the same way an airplane does, although it moves its wings for propulsive
force rather than having an engine attached to it.
What about things like gliders?
How do we fly things like gliders that don't have any engines to them?
Well, a glider is released from an airplane.
It gains some speed by the fact that it literally falls downward.
It eventually will go downward, but gliders are designed with an enormously large ratio
of lift to drag.
They have very, very large wings and very, very light weight.
And so it takes a long time for them to glide downward.
But absent any air motions, either upwelling motions or winds that would give them some
lift, a glider will eventually, over a very long time, return to Earth.
It's just it will happen slowly.
And if there is upwelling hot air, then a glider can stale off indefinitely.
But it couldn't do that without some other air motions going on.
If you were an airplane designer, you would want to design wings so that you minimized
drag, but you maximize lift.
And that, again, is where the subtlety and the engineering comes in.
So here are a couple of wing designs.
The first one is my board wing that I talked about, and that really is not a very efficient
wing design.
Why not?
Because for the same lift, that one has quite a big drag force.
You wouldn't want to go into competition for an aircraft contract with that wing.
The other wing is more efficient.
It's more efficient because it produces the same lift, but with far less drag.
That's the subtlety.
But the explanation for why both these wings flies is perfectly adequately given by Newton's
third law.
Now I've been all this lecture talking about Newton's third law and how simple it is to
understand airplane flight in terms of the third law.
I should do, and I've been disparaging this Bernoulli principle.
I should do a little bit of justice to the Bernoulli principle.
The Bernoulli principle is a law of physics of fluid mechanics that talks about what happens
to the pressure of a fluid as it moves.
And it basically says this, in regions where a fluid is moving rapidly, its pressure will
be lower.
And you might say, oh, this is some brand new law of physics, but it isn't.
This really follows from Newton's laws applied meticulously to fluids.
And if you want to know the details, what Bernoulli's principle is really saying is
there's a trade-off between two kinds of energy.
Pressure represents a kind of energy in the fluid, and so does motion.
It represents that kinetic energy I talked about in an earlier lecture when I first
introduced Newton's laws.
So there's a trade-off.
So if a fluid moves faster, it gains energy, kinetic energy.
It does so at the expense of this energy that's represented by the pressure.
So where the fluid is moving faster, the pressure is lower.
Again, there is no complicated new physics here, but there is a nice way of thinking
about the physics of the motion of fluids.
And that principle, that the fluid pressure goes down where the fluid speed goes up, is
a principle that applies and can be used to explain flight, and usually is.
And I want to give you a quick demonstration here of Bernoulli's principle.
By the way, we'll come back to Bernoulli's principle much later in a lecture on physics
in the human body, physics in your body, and we'll see how that can cause your arteries
to collapse under certain conditions.
But here we're talking about Bernoulli's principle as it applies to flight.
So what I have here to demonstrate this is a blower, basically like a vacuum cleaner,
but blowing out, out instead of in.
It's going to make a lot of noise, so let me tell you what I'm going to do first.
I'm going to take a styrofoam ball, and I'm going to suspend it in this column of air
coming up.
You might say, well, that's understandable.
What's going to happen is the air is pushing up on the ball, gravity is pulling down on
the ball at some height.
Those are equal.
If I put it too low down, the air pressure is greater.
It's going to go up.
If I put it too high up, it's going to fall down.
No problem.
We understand that in terms of Newton's third law.
But then I'm going to do something a little different.
I'm going to tilt this blower so the air is blowing out that way, and the ball is nevertheless
going to remain suspended here.
How is that going to work?
So here we go.
Eventually, if I had tipped it over far enough, the ball would indeed have fallen over.
But I had quite a steep angle, and it was still suspended.
What was going on there?
Well, air was coming out of the blower.
It was flowing around the ball farther away from the center of the air stream.
The flow speed was lower, and so the pressure was higher.
The air flowing right past the ball, in the immediate vicinity of the ball, was nearest
to the center of the air stream.
It was going fastest, and it therefore had the lowest pressure.
So where the ball was was in a region of low pressure, and on either side of it there was
high pressure, and that was true regardless of whether I was upward vertically or tilted
to one side like that, and those pressure forces, higher pressure pushing inward from
the sides, is what held the ball stably in place even though the air column was not pushing
up vertically.
So that's Bernoulli's principle in action, and Bernoulli's principle can be used to explain
airplane flight, and this is the kind of picture you more normally see.
Here is again that same picture of the airflow past the wing.
I used this picture earlier to give you a Newton's third law explanation of why the
airplane flies.
In this case we would say, oh, there's higher speed and therefore lower pressure, at the
top of the wing the air is going faster over the top of the wing, and that's partly the
shape of the wing, and it's partly the fact that the wing is slightly tilted to make a
so-called angle of attack to the air.
There is lower speed and therefore higher pressure on the underside of the wing, and
so there's a net upward pressure force.
This is not new physics, it's not some new and different explanation, it's not something
else that's going on in addition to Newton's third law.
This is simply another way of couching Newton's third law.
Now I'm not going to spend a lot of time in this course on the Bernoulli principle, but
I just want to point out that in addition to being one way of explaining how airplanes
fly, it's also a way of explaining a number of other interesting phenomena, and I'm just
going to choose one to talk about here at the end, and that is the motion of a baseball.
Here's a top view, we're looking down on a baseball that's moving horizontally, we're
looking in the baseball's frame of reference, so the air is moving past the baseball from
this point of view, and if the ball is not spinning, everything is perfectly symmetric.
There's no force on the ball in any direction, there are Bernoulli effects, the air is moving
faster right by the ball, there's lower pressure on either side, but those balance out completely.
On the other hand, if the ball is spinning, then it imparts due to its spin and the friction
of the surface of the ball with the air, imparts a spin that deflects the air in this
picture downward, but remember we're looking down from above, so this is just like what
the airplane did, there's a so-called lift force, there's a force of the ball on the
air and a force of the air back on the ball, and again this is happening in a horizontal
plane, we call that a lift force nevertheless, but it's in the horizontal direction, and
the ball therefore is deflected sideways, and that's how a curved ball works.
You can also explain the sailing of a sailboat in very similar terms, the sail acts like
a wing and there are lift forces and drag forces, but again they're in the horizontal
direction.
So let me end by simply saying the air around us provides not only the oxygen we need to
breathe to live, but also a means of elevating ourselves and birds and bats and other things
above the surface of the earth.
