Welcome to lecture 11, Into Space.
Relatively few humans have actually gone places, the title of this module, in space,
unless you count the motion of the Earth around the sun or the sun around the galaxy.
Motions were all partaking in through space.
But even if we haven't traveled in space as astronauts have,
almost all of us are connected to spaceflight in what are now really essential and important ways.
If you watch satellite TV, you're watching signals that are coming from objects somewhere out in space.
We'll see a little later in this lecture exactly where.
Today, spaceflight satellites are used for everything from tracking Alzheimer's patients to freight shipments to lost pets.
They're used for research on biomedical applications, particularly new medicines and the effects of the seemingly weightless,
although we'll see not really weightless environment of space on human organisms and other organisms.
A host of other industrial applications, growing crystals, building new materials, all these involve spaceflight.
So spaceflight is very much a part of physics in your life, even if you yourself don't travel into space.
And the key to understanding spaceflight is to understand the one significant force that's acting most of the time on objects that are in space,
and that force is gravity.
I talked a little bit about gravity in the previous lecture, and I showed you an instance of the fact that gravity has the same effect on all objects.
It gives them exactly the same acceleration.
I showed you that with the Feather and Stone experiment, and we'll talk much more about that later in this lecture.
How did we come to know about gravity?
Well, legend has it that Isaac Newton, pictured here, was sitting under an apple tree and an apple fell and hit him on the head and he discovered gravity.
Before I talk more about that myth, let me just say that the reason Isaac Newton was under the apple tree, if in fact that was the case,
is that he had gone home to his home of Woolsthorpe, England, when the plague years shut down the university.
And although Isaac Newton is usually portrayed as this distinguished elderly fellow in a wig,
in fact, he was in his early 20s when that happened, and he made some of his most seminal discoveries, including inventing calculus and developing the law of gravity
and his laws of motion during that time, a remarkable achievement for such a young person.
So the apple tree may or may not be a myth, but if it's true, here's what happened.
The apple fell, the apple hit Newton on the head.
Now people say, ah, he discovered gravity.
Well, if you think a minute, that's kind of absurd.
Probably our cave ancestors sitting happily outside their cave on a nice warm sunny day and having a rock come over the edge of the cliff or something and bonk them on the head, they discovered gravity.
In fact, our ancestors knew instinctively about gravity because we're descended probably from creatures that went swinging through trees,
and those creatures had to know instinctively about gravity.
So it's nonsense that it took an apple-striking Newton on the head to discover gravity.
If the myth is true, and there's no evidence that it is, then I think what Newton was doing at the time he was sitting under the apple tree being struck by the apple was looking at the moon.
And the brilliance of Newton's realization about gravity was that the motion of the apple falling from the tree straight down and hitting him on the head,
and the motion of the moon in its stately, once every 27 or 28 day orbit around the earth, were one in the same motion caused by one in the same force.
And that was a real stroke of genius. There are enormous philosophical implications of that idea because for the first time Newton linked the behavior of objects here on earth with the behavior of objects in the celestial realm.
A distinction that earlier, before Newton's time, was kind of a religious distinction. Everything up in the heavens was perfect, obeyed one set of laws.
Everything down on earth was kind of imperfect in base and obeyed a different set of laws.
Newton and the stroke of genius linked the two realms and he said the same force that governs the motion of the moon governs the motion of the apple.
And he went beyond that to say, and that same force governs the motion of the planets around the sun and the motion of the observed moons of Jupiter that Galileo had observed around Jupiter.
And Newton was moved to formulate a universal law of gravitation. And Newton's universal law of gravitation says that every object in the universe attracts every other object in the universe with a force,
the strength of that force depends on the masses of the two objects. The more massive they are, the bigger the force.
In fact, the force depends on the product of the two masses. It turns out gravity is a relatively weak force as forces in the universe go.
So it's only large agglomerations of matter like the earth or the sun that have significant gravitational effects.
Although we can actually measure in the laboratory the gravitational attraction of a couple of lead spheres say the size of roughly a grapefruit.
One other point about gravity, it falls off with the distance between the objects. In fact, it falls off as the inverse of the square of the distance.
So if you double the distance, the gravitational field strength gets to be exactly a fourth as strong as it would have been otherwise before you move the objects apart.
That distance for spherical objects like the earth and the sun, the kinds of objects we mostly deal with when we're talking about gravity, is measured from the center of the object.
So don't get perplexed thinking the strength of gravity should be infinite where you're standing at the surface of the earth.
There you're standing about 4,000 miles from the center of the earth and that's the distance you use for your distance from earth.
Now the important point I want to make about gravity for understanding spaceflight is that gravity works exactly like any other force.
It's one of the forces that we talk about when we talk about Newton's laws and that means the gravitational force does not make objects move.
If you think that, then you're being Aristotelian again. So get out of that Aristotelian closet, get into that Newtonian point of view.
The Newtonian point of view says forces cause change in motion and that's what the gravitational force does.
And let me give you some examples. The direction of that change is in the direction of the force and the direction of the force is toward the center of the gravitating object, the earth, the sun, whatever it is that's exerting the gravitational force we're talking about.
So for example, if I do a very simple experiment of dropping a ball, the ball is initially at rest, the force of gravity is acting downward on it and therefore the ball's motion is going to change in the downward direction.
And so in this simple case, the ball actually falls down, straight down.
Gravity didn't make it move. Gravity changed its motion and it changed it in the downward direction.
And so the effect since gravity was was acting on it downward was to make it go faster downward.
And since the force was then in the same direction, the ball was moving as I showed in a previous lecture, that meant the force simply increased the object speed without changing its direction.
Now here's a slightly more subtle case. I'm going to throw the ball up in the air. The ball is moving initially upward.
But the gravitational force on it is acting downward. Since the force is opposite the motion, just like in a previous lecture when I stopped the bowling ball rolling along the table with a force directed against its motion, that gravitational force slows down the ball.
Eventually it stops and then it turns around and comes back down, just as it did when I initially dropped it.
Now all the while during that whole path up at the instant it stopped and back down again, the force of gravity is downward and so the ball's motion is changing in the downward direction.
The ball is accelerating. This by the way is a hard point for students of physics to grasp sometimes. First of all, this is a little bit difficult.
The ball is moving up, but it's accelerating downward. What does that mean? It means its motion is changing in the downward direction. That's sometimes hard to swallow.
The second point is this. Motion and change in motion are two different things and they can even be in two different directions and we've already seen many instances of that, particularly with circular motion.
So the ball moving up is nevertheless accelerating down. At the instant the ball is at rest at the top and it is instantaneously for a second at rest there, it's still accelerating downward.
How can it be accelerating when it's not moving? Well, acceleration is about change in motion, not about motion itself.
The moment before the ball came to rest it was moving upward and at instant afterwards it's moving downward and no matter how small you make those instances, that's still true.
The motion is continually changing even right at the top. So all the while the ball is being accelerated downward, its motion is being changed in the downward direction.
Now here's another example which is more relevant to spaceflight. I'm going to throw the ball horizontally. It's going to leave my hand horizontally.
There's a force acting on it downward, perpendicular to the way it's moving, at least initially. And so all gravity is going to do initially is deviate it from the path it was moving in horizontally by changing its direction.
As soon as the ball acquires a downward component of its motion, gravity is then going to increase its speed in the downward direction and it goes in a rather complicated, well it's not that complicated, it's a parabola.
It goes in an arcing path as the gravitational force affects its increasingly downward velocity. But here's the point. The gravitational force does not immediately speed this thing up.
The gravitational force changes its motion in the downward direction. Initially that's only a change of direction, but as the object starts moving downward it's also a change in its speed and so it gains a speed in the downward direction.
So here goes. And the important point in that again is that the gravitational force changes only the motion. It doesn't cause the motion. And the change in motion is in the direction of the gravitational force.
So here's what Newton did. This was Newton's genius. Some 300 years before we first put spacecraft in orbit, Newton conceived of the idea of an orbiting spacecraft.
And he, in fact, considered that we could do this. So he imagined an earth. Here's the earth. He imagined an earth with a large mountain on the top of it, so high that it stuck up above the atmosphere, which is a hindrance in making spacefully happen.
And he imagined throwing an object, a ball or something, shooting a cannonball or whatever, horizontally off this mountaintop, just like I did a minute ago with the tennis ball.
And what happens? Well, the object goes in an arching curved path. You might say it's a parabola. It actually isn't quite, and we'll talk about that in a minute.
But there it is. It goes in an arching path and eventually falls to earth. Why? Because even though it had an initial horizontal velocity, gravity is acting on it to change its motion in the downward direction.
So that's very simple. Throw it a little faster. This could have happened if I had thrown my tennis ball a little faster and it would have gone in a more shallow arc and hit the ground further away.
So there's an example. Throw the ball a little faster and it goes a little further. But here's where Newton's genius came in. Notice what's happening. Gravity is pulling this object out of what would have been the straight line path it would have followed in the absence of gravity.
Meanwhile, the curvature of the earth is becoming a little bit significant. That second path I've drawn there lands a little further away than it would have on a flat earth because the earth is curving away underneath.
Newton said, what if I threw the ball fast enough that the change in its motion, the deviation from the straight line path it wanted to follow was exactly at the right rate to compensate for the curvature of the earth falling away underneath it.
So I throw it a little bit faster and then I throw it one more step. And now the deviation from the straight line motion it would like to go in in the absence of gravity is such that it's pulled around in a circular path around the earth and it comes right back to its starting point.
And if it doesn't hit the top of that mountain, it will continue going around forever in circular motion, which we understand completely from the lecture on circular motion.
This is circular motion. Thus, the centripetal center directed force is the force of gravity. That's an orbit. And Newton had the genius to recognize that there would be circular orbits.
What is holding the spacecraft or the ball or the cannonball or whatever that thing is that we launched? What's holding it up?
For an Aristotelian, that's a puzzling question and you need to know the answer. But if you're a Newtonian and you've come out of that Aristotelian closet and you recognize that forces do not cause things to move,
and particularly things don't have to move in the direction of the forces acting on them, but forces cause change in motion and things have to move in the direction of those changes,
then the question what holds the satellite up or what holds this orbiting object up becomes almost a non-question.
There's no issue. The object is doing exactly what Newton's laws say it should do. It's undergoing a change in motion and the change in motion, the acceleration, the rate of that change of motion,
is given by the force that's been applied to it, in this case the force of gravity. And for just the right speed, throwing a ball horizontally off the top of that mountain will give it a circular orbit.
It's exactly like my whirling the ball on the string. Except the string now is playing the role of gravity. It's exerting a force toward the center of the circle, which is where my hands are.
And you don't ask, well, why doesn't the ball fall toward my hand or move toward my hand? Because I am after all exerting a force on it toward my hand.
Nonsense. That force is exactly what's needed to keep it in that circular path. And I talked a bit more quantitatively in the circular motion lecture about exactly how big that force has to be and so on to provide that circular motion.
But that's no different from what's happening in an orbit. So the question what holds the satellite in orbit is really a meaningless question if you understand Newton's laws.
The satellite is obeying Newton's laws, its motion is changing in the direction of the force on it and the direction of that force is downward.
It takes no effort to remain in that orbit. Once a satellite or spacecraft is up in orbit, there's no rocket engines firing to keep it there.
That's a natural state of motion. It goes happily around. Gravity provides the force that shapes the orbit. The object is neither speeding up nor slowing down.
It's neither rising or falling. Very simple situation. It's energy at speed. All that stays exactly the same and no spacecraft, no rocket engines or anything are needed to keep it there.
Now, I should point out that this circular orbit is only one of many possible orbits. For example, if I threw the ball a little bit faster, there's the straight line path it's deviating from as it goes into those different orbits.
If I throw it a little bit faster, it's a little harder for gravity to pull it out of that straight line path and it describes in fact an elliptical path.
And Newton in fact showed something that Kepler had previously discovered by astronomical observation, namely that the paths of objects moving in under the influence of gravity are in general ellipses.
So there's an elliptical orbit and in fact if we shrunk the earth down smaller, even those earlier paths that crashed to earth where the ball landed on earth would have been complete ellipses.
It's just that the earth got in the way. The path of my tennis ball was no less an orbit than the path of the space station. It's just it's an orbit that happened to intersect the earth.
And if I had shrunk the earth to the size of a grapefruit and I had sucked all the air away so we wouldn't have air resistance and the only force was gravity, then the tennis ball too would have gone into an orbit around the earth and we would have been perfectly happy with that orbit.
It would have been a long elongated elliptical orbit. So there are some elliptical orbits from those same shots off the mountain. I haven't bothered to show them out and I've showed the greatly shrunken earth and those are all elliptical orbits.
Now we don't have mountains that stick up out of the earth to go up and launch spacecraft from. So what we do in fact is launch spacecraft upward with rocket engines.
And when we get them to the altitude where we want the orbit to be, we tilt them and we fire the rockets to give them just the right speed to put them in the kind of orbit we want, circular or elliptical or whatever.
I'm going to talk only about circular orbits in the rest of this lecture because they're simpler to understand. And the speed needed for circular orbit is something any first year student, physics student could easily calculate.
Let's talk first about orbits that are near the surface of the earth. By near, I mean altitudes that are relatively small compared to the 4,000 mile radius of the earth.
It turns out if you do the calculation for earth, different for different astronomical objects, the speed required for circular orbit is about 17,000 miles an hour if we're relatively near the surface of the earth.
That's about three miles a second. It gets you around the earth in about an hour and a half. So when the astronauts are up there in the space shuttle or in the International Space Station or other low earth orbit satellites, they're going around in about 90 minutes.
And we have no choice in that matter. If we want a circular orbit at an altitude anywhere from, in principle, earth surface up to a few hundred miles or so, it's going to be roughly 90 minutes.
Go further away than that and the orbital speed begins, the orbital period begins to lengthen. But we'll talk first about low earth orbit.
By the way, absent mountains and topography and atmosphere, if I could throw a ball horizontally at 17,000 miles an hour right here at the surface of the earth, it would go into a circular orbit a few feet off the ground and be perfectly happy doing so.
Again, there's nothing magic about space. It's just the pesky resistance of air that gets in the way.
So how do we launch satellites? Well, you may notice that most of the places we launch satellites from are at low latitudes and there's a good reason for that.
That's because the earth is turning to the east. We invariably launch the satellites to the east and by doing so, we get the rotational motion of the earth added to the motion of the rocket and we need a lot less energy to do so.
And the lowest energy orbits for us are equatorial orbits with objects launched to the east in the equatorial direction.
And I have here a picture of an equatorial orbit. In equatorial orbit, an object remains always over the equator.
It simply goes around the equator and it can be launched again from very low latitudes, equatorial latitudes, and it takes relatively little energy to get into that orbit.
We can also launch at an incline. There's an orbit that's inclined at 30 degrees to the equator and the advantage of that orbit is that as the earth rotates beneath it, beneath the satellite in that orbit,
the satellite basically covers the entire globe to within plus or minus 30 degrees of latitude.
And the most versatile orbit in that context is a polar orbit in which this one takes a lot more energy because we don't have the rotational motion of the earth helping us.
In the polar orbit, the satellite is going around the poles and as the earth rotates under it, we get complete coverage of the entire planet.
Some of our spacecraft that observe, for example, auroral phenomena, which I'll show in an upcoming lecture, are polar satellites.
Now as you go to higher altitudes, the strength of gravity begins to weaken and you begin to get a lengthening of the orbital period.
Let me give you an example. The moon, which is about a quarter of a million miles away, orbits once a month, roughly.
Satellites in near-earth orbit, orbit roughly every 90 minutes. Somewhere in between, as there's a continuous increase in the period of the orbit, there must be a point where the orbital period is 24 hours.
And that point is one of the most significant points in space, one of the most important expensive pieces of real estate in space, if you will.
It's called geosynchronous orbit because if you put a satellite above the equator at that place, and it turns out to be about 22,000 miles above the equator,
the satellite will go around once in 24 hours, the earth is rotating once in 24 hours, and the satellite will appear to stay fixed over a point on earth.
And that's where our communication satellites are.
If you have a satellite dish like this one, if you look at the direction it's looking in, I guarantee you it's looking somewhat southward,
because that's toward the point above the equator, maybe looking a bit east or west, depending on where the satellite you are viewing is located.
But it's looking at a satellite, which is somewhere 22,000 miles above the equator, going around the earth once in 24 hours, and therefore appearing to be fixed above the earth.
Here's a picture of kind of what it looks like. The orbit is circular, but I've drawn it in this perspective drawing.
It's about 22,000 miles up, and your satellite dish on earth is looking up to a satellite, which is fixed above you, or above the equator, rather, at that 22,000 mile distance.
So that's geosynchronous orbit.
I've talked about orbits involving two bodies, like the earth and a satellite.
There are more complicated orbits involving three objects, and they're very difficult to solve mathematically.
But one particularly interesting one is an orbit called the L1 Lagrange point.
And the L1 Lagrange point is an interesting place. It's located between the earth and the sun.
There's some point between the earth and the sun where the gravity of those two just cancel out completely, and there'd be no force on an object, and its orbital period would be infinite.
And that's not the point I'm talking about.
But if you go a little bit sunward of that point, the orbital period heads downward.
You get to Venus, and you've got an orbital period of somewhat less than a year, which is Venus' orbital period.
Somewhere, there's an orbital period of exactly a year again.
So there's a point where the influence of both the earth and the sun conspire to give you an orbital period of a year.
And that's the L1 Lagrange point.
And if you put a satellite there, it and the earth go happily around each other, happily around the sun, keeping always in step.
That's where we put some of our satellites, particularly satellites that are used to observe the sun, because then they're never eclipsed by having to go around the earth.
It's a point that's about a million miles away, about 1.5 million kilometers, about 1% of the distance from the earth to the sun.
Gravity and spaceflight result in some rather counterintuitive points, because as you move outward in an orbit, the period of the orbit gets longer.
And even though moving outward requires more energy, that causes a remarkable phenomenon when you want to maneuver in space.
And here's an example. Here's a space shuttle trying to catch up with the Hubble Space Telescope to do some repairs on it.
How does it catch up? Well, if it fires its rocket engines, it's going to give itself more energy.
It's going to rise to a higher orbit, but a higher orbit is a slower orbit. It's actually going to fall more behind.
So what the spacecraft has to do is turn around, fire its engines to break itself, to slow itself down.
It drops into a lower orbit. The lower orbit is a faster orbit.
It goes around in the faster orbit. When it gets near the Hubble Space Telescope, it fires its rockets again in the direction it's going.
Instead of speeding it up, that raises it to a higher orbit, and then it can turn around and rendezvous with a space station.
Very counterintuitive. And interplanetary space travel requires even more elaborate maneuvers, and I'm going to talk about those at the end of the next lecture.
I finally want to end with one of the most significant aspects of spaceflight and one of the most confusing.
Astronauts in space are said to be weightless, and we see pictures of astronauts floating around in space stations and spacecraft and so on.
They are not weightless. Weight means the force that gravity exerts on you.
Frequently people say, well, there's no gravity in space. That's why astronauts are weightless. That's absolute nonsense.
If there were no gravity in space, there would be no force acting on a spacecraft or astronaut, and they would happily move in a straight line at constant speed forever.
Bye-bye. We would never see them. It's not that there's no gravity in space.
It's that, as I showed last time with the feather and stone, all objects fall with the same acceleration.
And that means if you're in a situation, a falling elevator, a spacecraft, whatever, and you have objects around you, they are all undergoing exactly the same acceleration.
So I'm going to stand up in the stool, and I'm now under a situation where there are two forces acting on me. The stool is pushing up, gravity is pulling down.
I'm going to put myself temporarily in a state of free fall, where gravity is the only force acting on me, and as I do so, I'm going to let go of these balls.
And I would like you to concentrate not on the surroundings, the room, the studio here, but on me and the balls and what we see.
And as we're falling for that brief moment, we're all falling with the same acceleration, and I look around and those two balls are standing right next to me.
They're stationary relative to me. And I don't feel the big, heavy forces I feel pushing on me normally.
I feel weightless. I'm not weightless. I'm accelerating downward. And unfortunately, that situation ends abruptly as I hit the earth.
Let's look at this example with an elevator. Here's an elevator whose cable has unfortunately broken. Here I am in the elevator.
I take some objects out of my pocket. We're all accelerating downward. I'm accelerating downward. The elevator is accelerating downward.
I take a ball out. It's accelerating downward. In that environment of the falling elevator, things seem weightless.
Now, unfortunately, that elevator is going to crash into the ground and then non-gravitational forces act, and that's a disaster for me.
And that's unfortunate, and that means I'm no longer weightless. In fact, I get crushed by those non-gravitational forces.
But what if the elevator instead were in orbit? Falling. And that's the right word. Falling around the earth.
Falling because it's always deviating from that straight line path it would like to go in, but it's never getting any closer earth.
Falling toward earth, but not falling to earth. There's the distinction again between Newton and Aristotle.
Newton says motion changes in the direction of the force. The satellite is falling toward earth. It doesn't have to fall to earth.
Toward earth means its motion is always changing in the direction toward earth.
It's always deviating from the straight line path it would go in if you turned gravity off. It's falling around the earth.
Now, in this case, I've drawn it just like an elevator, but I could have drawn a spacecraft. It's in orbit around the earth.
But the situation is still exactly the same. The purple arrows here represent acceleration, change of motion.
They don't represent motion itself. In the case of the elevator with the broken cable, that elevator is indeed falling straight down.
Its motion is in the same direction as its acceleration. But as I showed at the beginning of this lecture, when I threw a tennis ball sideways,
the direction of motion and the direction of change in motion, the direction of acceleration, don't have to be the same and frequently aren't the same.
And in the second picture here on the right, the elevator, quote, falling around the earth in this circular orbit,
the direction of motion at the point the picture is showing it, is horizontally to the right.
The direction of the acceleration of the elevator and of every object in the elevator is directly downward.
And I take the ball out of my pocket in the elevator and I hold it up there and there it is.
It appears to float weightless relative to me. If I gave that ball a little push, so I gave it a little horizontal motion
or a little vertical motion or a little downward motion, it doesn't matter, it would move away from me in a straight line at constant speed relative to me.
It's appearing to be weightless. My whole environment, things appear to be weightless. There appears to be no gravity.
In fact, the remarkable thing about gravity is the way to make it seem like it's not there is to get yourself into a situation,
a form of reference, an orbiting spacecraft, a falling elevator, whatever, and gravity will appear to be gone.
Einstein, by the way, recognized that and was one of the key recognitions that led to the general theory of relativity.
Now, we would like on occasion, spaceflight is expensive. You've got to spend a lot of money to fire those rockets to get up there.
We'd like to be able to understand this, quote, apparent weightlessness without having to go into space, and we can do that.
Any time you are truly in free fall and the only force acting on you is gravity, you feel temporarily weightless.
NASA, for example, has built these large drop towers where they take the air out because you don't want air there, you don't want air resistance because that's a non-gravitational force,
and they drop objects and during the time the objects are being dropped, they are in a, quote, weightless environment.
They are in apparent weightlessness. Unfortunately, they hit the bottom and you stop that process.
NASA has also developed an aircraft, it's called the vomit comet because of what happens to people in it, and it flies in arcing parabolic trajectories that at their peaks, near their peaks,
simulate the motion of an object falling under the influence of gravity alone, moving under the influence of gravity alone in a parabolic arc.
Because an aircraft is subject to aerodynamic forces, that trajectory has to be carefully engineered so the aerodynamic forces exactly basically cancel out in a way that makes the trajectory be exactly what would happen under the influence of gravity alone.
In that case, for a brief time, 30 seconds or so, the interior of the vomit comet aircraft becomes as weightless an environment as that of an orbiting spacecraft.
I remember when the movie Apollo 13 came out, that movie was filmed in the vomit comet part of it to simulate, they said, the weightlessness of outer space,
and I remember reading reviews of this film which said, this film was very clever because it simulated the weightlessness of outer space.
Well, I think simulation is not quite the right word there because simulation implies that there's something real going on in outer space,
namely, you're really weightless in outer space because you're in space, whereas inside this aircraft, that's only a simulation of the weightlessness.
Nonsense, the weightlessness associated with free fall, whether it's happening right here at the surface of the earth, or in that vomit comet aircraft,
or in a spacecraft in orbit around the earth, or in orbit around the sun, or on its way to Jupiter, or wherever,
so long as its rockets aren't firing, so long as no non-gravitational forces are acting,
and that state, which I'm about to put myself into, is as truly a, quote, weightless state as anything any astronaut feels.
And by the way, it didn't matter that I jumped up first, that was irrelevant, once I left the stool, there were no forces acting on me except gravity,
and I seemed truly to be weightless.
So if you really understand gravity, and you understand it from a Newtonian perspective, you will not make the mistake of thinking there's no gravity in space,
and that's why astronauts are weightless, because if there were no gravity in space again, Newton's first law says straight line motion, constant speed,
bye-bye astronauts, bye-bye spacecraft. They're in orbit, they're held there by gravity, and in low earth orbit, the strength of gravity is almost the same as it is here at the surface,
it's just because they're in free fall, no other forces are acting, and that's all we have.
And let me end with a little movie clip here of an astronaut floating around in the interior of the space station,
and we see dramatically the effects of that apparent weightlessness.
Floating around, no up or down, very simple environment, everything just obeys Newton's law as very simply as if there were no forces acting,
he has to apply forces to get himself going anywhere.
So space plays a big role in your life, and there is gravity in space, and remarkably the presence of gravity and the motion under the influence of gravity alone
is what gives rise to this wonderful phenomenon of apparent weightlessness.
