Welcome to lecture 12, a conservative streak.
No, you haven't strayed by mistake into political science 101 or some such thing.
Conservative here has a physics meaning.
It's somewhat similar to its meaning in politics.
It means keeping things the same, conserving.
If you look at Newton's Laws, which we've talked about at length in this module,
Newton's Laws in principle describe all of motion.
We can solve any problem involving motion in principle by applying Newton's Laws.
But it turns out that becomes a very difficult thing to do.
And it turns out to be much easier to understand motion frequently in terms of specific quantities that turn out to be conserved,
that turn out not to change from one episode in a sequence of events to another episode.
And in this lecture, I want to identify two such quantities, energy and momentum,
and talk about them at some length.
Let me give you an example of a kind of physics problem that could be solved easily using Newton's Laws
and one that would be much harder to solve.
On the left in this picture, I show a skier going down a mountainside.
It's a straight, smooth slope.
If I turn that problem over to an introductory physics student who had been in my course for two weeks,
or maybe three weeks, and had the beginnings of an understanding of how to apply Newton's Laws
and how acceleration describes motion and how to get the motion you have from the acceleration
that's been acting for so much time and so on.
And I ask the student, how fast is that skier going at the bottom of that slope?
That would be an easy problem for them to solve.
On the right, I show a skier on a more realistic slope, a bumpy slope,
a slope with a lot of ridges and bounces.
It's the same distance down, both those slopes.
If I asked my students after a couple of weeks to solve that second problem
to tell me how fast the skier was moving at the bottom of that slope,
they would throw up their hands because they couldn't do that using Newton's Laws.
The reason they couldn't is because the slope is continually changing,
the acceleration is continually changing, it's a very difficult problem.
It would take calculus, that branch of mathematics that Newton was one of the two inventors of,
to solve that problem in all its detail, to understand exactly what's happening at each instant.
But I'm not asking my students for that detail.
I'm simply asking, how fast is the skier going at the bottom?
And it turns out, if you understand these conserved quantities,
these quantities that don't change, regardless of what's going on in a sequence of events,
then it becomes as trivial to solve that problem as it is to solve the first problem.
In fact, using conserved quantities makes the first problem even a little bit easier to solve.
Now, these conserved quantities are also going to give us a number of important insights
into the way the world works, and when we combine them with Newton's Laws
and combine them with some ideas about how composite objects behave and rearrange themselves,
we're going to find some very remarkable observations about everyday events
like jumping, leaping, dancing, and so on, and understand how these things work
in simple but rather surprising ways.
Now, all of us have a fairly intuitive feeling for energy,
and energy is the first of the two conserved quantities I want to discuss,
and the one that's probably more familiar.
I actually introduced the idea of energy in an earlier lecture in this module,
at least kinetic energy, but we have sort of a more gutsy, intuitive feeling for energy.
You see a volcano erupting. There's clearly a lot of energy there.
Some people might describe me as a high-energy teacher.
In fact, I'm feeling a little bit constrained by this small stage here at the teaching company.
I move around a lot. There's a sense of energy involved.
You talk about a person who has a lot of personal energy.
We have a sense of energy, and we kind of let that sense go beyond the realm of straight physics
into other areas. We have an intuitive sense of what energy means.
Energy is really one of the two basic, and I'm going to put it in quotes here,
substances that make up the universe.
The other is the more obvious substance, good, hard, solid matter.
But they're really these two things, and they're really equally important.
And in fact, as an aside, and this is covered in much more detail
in my Einstein's Relativity and the Quantum Revolution course,
matter and energy are really two aspects of the same thing.
There's really only one basic substance that makes up the universe.
It's sometimes called mass energy.
And Einstein's famous equation, E equals MC squared,
provides the link between those two and tells us that matter and energy are really interchangeable.
So there's really only one stuff that makes up the whole universe.
But again, in the realm of everyday physics,
the interchanges of matter and energy, which are going on all the time,
actually, are so slight as to be unnoticeable.
They're there, but they're so slight.
And so for us in the everyday world, we can think of matter as one kind of stuff,
and energy as another kind of stuff.
And I'm going to be talking today about energy.
But if you take a bigger picture, mass and energy are really, in a sense,
not quite the same thing, but they're aspects of the same underlying universal substance.
Now, energy comes in a lot of different forms.
And in a later module, in module 5, in fact,
I'm going to elaborate on those different forms
and about the conservation of energy to a much greater extent.
For our purposes, there are two forms that we're going to be concerned with.
There's kinetic energy, and I introduced this idea before,
and that's the energy associated with the motion of macroscopic sized objects, typically.
Objects like cars or baseballs or planets.
You can also talk about the kinetic energy of individual molecules.
But for now, I want to leave that aside and we'll get into that more in module 5.
So we're talking primarily about macroscopic sized objects, human sized objects,
balls, planets, stars, and so on.
It's the energy associated with their motion.
There's another kind of energy.
It's called potential energy, and it's stored energy.
It's energy that's been put into the configuration of some object or system of objects
and is somehow stored and ready to be released.
Let me give you an example.
I have here two bowling balls.
One's on the floor and one's up on the table.
They're identical bowling balls.
They have identical properties, identical radius, identical mass, so on.
But this one has more potential energy than this one because it's higher up.
And if you were sitting on the floor right below this table with your head about here,
you wouldn't be worried about this bowling ball,
but you sure would be worrying about this one because it has the potential to do some damage to you.
It has potential energy.
By the way, as a philosophical aside here,
I should mention that potential energy is really not something that lives in the bowling ball.
It's rather a more complicated property of a system of objects.
In the case of the bowling ball on the table,
what's really the case is that the bowling ball and the earth system together have potential energy.
And if you really want to know philosophically where it's stored,
well, it's stored in the gravitational interaction, the gravitational field between them.
I don't want to go into that in details,
but I want to point out that the potential energy is really a property of a whole system of interacting objects.
In this case, the potential energy is stored somehow in the earth bowling ball system,
but I'm going to talk loosely and say the bowling ball has more potential energy when it's there than when it's there.
Now, I can alter the potential energy of an object by changing that configuration.
Again, to be technically correct, I should say I'm altering the potential energy of this whole system,
but I'm going to just talk about this one object.
So I'm going to reach down, I'm going to pick up this bowling ball,
and I'm going to put it on the table.
And in so doing, I'm going to do work on it.
And that work that I do, which is coming from burning up the oatmeal I had for breakfast
and all kinds of complicated reactions that themselves involve transformations
among different kinds of energy,
I'm going to do work on that bowling ball and I'm going to increase its potential energy.
So here I go.
That's a heavy bowling ball.
And I put it over on the table.
Don't do any more work to move it to the table, and there it is.
So in lifting the bowling ball off the floor, I did work on it,
and I increased its potential energy.
And now it's as scary to you sitting under the table as that bowling ball is,
because it's got potential energy.
I can do other things with this bowling ball.
I can, for example, give it a whack, exert a force on it, and give it kinetic energy.
And I also did work on it in that case.
So either way, doing work on an object changes its energy.
I somehow supply energy to the object, and I can supply that in either the form of kinetic energy,
and that's the case here where I exert a force on it that accelerates it and gives it kinetic energy,
or I can supply energy by doing work against the force of gravity,
which is trying to pull this ball down and going,
and giving it even more potential energy.
So by doing work, I change the energy of an object,
either the potential energy or the kinetic energy.
There are other things I can give energy to.
For example, here's a piece of bungee cord.
It's an elastic medium.
Right now it's kind of loose.
If I go, I do work on it, and there's clearly energy stored in that system.
If I release it, you can feel that energy.
You can kind of feel the tension in that thing.
You've got to be scared of that thing if I brought it up and held it near your head, for example.
It's got the potential to do some harm.
It's got the potential to turn into, if you will, kinetic energy.
So there's the bungee cord.
A spring is very similar.
Take a spring.
Again, it's loose.
Stretch it.
I've put work into it.
I've done work on it, and that work is now somehow stored as potential energy in the spring.
Well, there are a number of forces in the world,
one of which is the force of gravity,
and one of which is the force that exists in things like springs and bungee cords,
and that force is ultimately, as we'll see in the next module, an electrical force,
but we aren't going to go there quite yet.
Those forces are said to be conservative,
and they're said to be conservative because if you do work against them,
as in lifting the bowling ball against gravity,
or stretching the bungee cord,
that work you've done isn't gone,
but it's available to come back as ultimately kinetic energy.
Those forces are said to be conservative.
There are non-conservative forces that don't conserve energy.
You can't get the energy back.
For example, if you pushed a trunk along the floor doing work against the force of friction,
you would not worry about the trunk letting go and coming rushing back and crashing into you.
You would worry if you lifted this bowling ball and pulled it over your head
about the possibility of that energy coming back and doing damage,
but you wouldn't worry about that if I simply pushed the bowling ball
and not letting it roll with friction across the table.
The bowling ball isn't going to come shooting back.
Why? Because the frictional force is not conservative.
But forces like gravity, the forces in springs,
the fundamental forces of the universe, the electrical force,
and that's why the spring force, which is a manifestation of the electrical force,
is conservative, they all give back the work that you do against them.
You do work, that work is stored as energy,
and you can get that energy back as kinetic energy.
Let me give you another example.
Here I have a spring, it's been stretched across here,
and here I have a little flying object, which I'm going to attach to the spring,
and I'm now going to pull the spring back and I am storing energy in the spring.
Here I go doing work.
Not too much work, so I didn't have to grunt too hard.
And now that work has been stored in the conservative force of the spring,
ultimately again an electrical force acting between the individual molecules that make up the spring.
And when I let go, that energy is going to be recovered as not the energy of my muscles
that put that work into it in the spring, but rather the kinetic energy of this object.
So there it goes.
And a member of my audience did a wonderful job catching it.
By the way, the spring did not put all of its potential energy into the object that it launched.
It had some of it left over, which went into its own kinetic energy,
and it's happily vibrating back and forth, exactly like that vibrating string I had going,
or a violin string, when I talked about making sound waves.
So some of that energy has been stored in here.
And in fact, this is vibrating rather slowly, so you don't hear the sound it's making,
but it's in fact making very low frequency sound waves that we can't hear as it pushes the air back and forth.
So that energy that I put into here that came ultimately from metabolizing my breakfast
went into a number of places.
Most of it went into the kinetic energy of that launched object,
but some of it went into other forms of energy, including ultimately the vibration of the spring,
and then subsequently sound.
Now, here is the big deal about conservative forces.
If you have a conservative force, a system involving conservative forces,
it will happily change energy back and forth from kinetic to potential to kinetic to potential,
and in principle, none of that energy will be lost.
Now, in real systems, some non-conservative forces act also.
There's always some friction present, at least in macroscopic systems,
and so eventually that motion dies down.
But one can set up a system where energy is transferred back and forth from kinetic to potential to kinetic to potential.
And I've got a couple of examples of that.
Here's a mass hanging on the end of a spring.
Right now, happily in equilibrium, the spring is stretched a little bit because of the weight of the mass.
It's exerting an upward force that balances the gravitational force on the mass.
But I'm going to displace this spring from its equilibrium position by pulling the mass downward and letting go.
And that's a very simple system.
You see it in every single physics course, though, because it's kind of a paradigm of all kinds of systems
from a variable star that pulsates somewhat like that to an individual molecule
that vibrates and absorbs infrared radiation and causes the greenhouse effect or whatever.
Many systems, from the guy's scale of atoms to galaxies, in fact exhibit motion
which is mathematically essentially identical to this.
And what's going on here?
Well, at the bottom, the spring is stretched a lot, and so we have a lot of spring potential energy.
At the top, the spring isn't stretched much, so we don't have much spring potential energy,
but we have some gravitational potential energy because we've lifted the mass upward.
In between, the mass is moving most rapidly, so we have a lot of kinetic energy.
So this is a rather complex system in which the energy is being interchanged between three possible forms.
Spring potential energy, kinetic energy, gravitational potential energy.
At either extreme, the mass is momentarily stopped, it has no kinetic energy,
and all its energy is potential, and it's some combination of the spring and the gravitational potential energy.
But to the extent that this is truly a conservative system, that conservative forces are acting,
that process of transfer of energy back and forth between those two forms will continue essentially uninterrupted forever.
Now, there's a little bit of friction with the air and friction in the spring, and so it isn't perfect,
and so if I wait 10 or 15 minutes, that will probably stop vibrating, but it's going to go on for quite a while.
Well, I'm going to move this thing aside and show you another example of a conservative force in action,
and that's a pendulum.
And just to make this demonstration a little more dramatic,
I'm going to call the producer for this show, Alicia, to come up here.
She's the person, by the way, who takes my incoherent babblings here and makes them all into a nice coherent lecture for you to listen to.
I'm going to ask Alicia to stand right up against the wall, head right up against the wall as tight as it was so there's no place she can move her head.
And here we have a pendulum, and on the end of the pendulum is a bowling ball.
I just painted it yellow, so it's a little more obvious for you.
I'm going to ask Alicia to hold the bowling ball right to her nose.
Now, she has lifted the bowling ball by swinging it back from its equilibrium position, so she's given it potential energy.
Right now it has no kinetic energy.
If you believe in conservative forces, you believe the total energy of this system has to stay the same.
So when she lets go, it's going to gain kinetic energy, it's going pretty fast, it's going to swing by, it's going to have potential energy,
and then it's going to come swinging back.
And if she has enough faith in conservation of energy, she will understand that this ball certainly cannot go any higher than it is now,
because right now all its energy is potential, it has no kinetic energy, and it's going to come back.
Actually, it's a little bit of friction, so it might not come back quite so far.
If she didn't believe in conservation of energy, she is going to see that 15-pound bowling ball coming at her pretty fast,
and she's going to move out of the way, and there's no place for her head to go.
So, Alicia, let's do the experiment.
Thank you. Excellent job. Thank you very much.
Let me give you one more example, a little more cosmic, to talk about conservation of energy.
Here I've got a picture of the orbit of a satellite, which is moving very fast when it's close to the Earth,
and moving very slow when it's far away from the Earth, because it's in a big elliptical orbit.
In an elliptical orbit, the kinetic energy doesn't stay the same, unlike in a circular orbit.
The object is moving fastest, closest to the planet, or wherever it's in orbit around, and slower when it's further away.
So, here is the satellite, and we'll just watch it going around.
It's going relatively slowly, it's traversing a relatively small distance in each time interval when it's far from the Earth,
but when it gets closer and closer to the Earth, the distance it's traversing is much greater.
It's exchanging gravitational potential energy for kinetic energy.
When it's far away, it's potential energy mostly, still moving a little bit.
When it's in close, it's kinetic energy, it's moving a lot faster.
Same thing happens for a comet in its long elliptical orbit around the Sun.
It spends many years in the far reaches of the solar system, and then comes whizzing in, falling in this case toward the Sun,
changing its motion, but also going faster, and whizzes around the Sun in a short time, and back away it goes.
That takes care of energy, a quantity that's conserved at least when conservative forces act.
The other quantity, momentum, is perhaps a little less familiar in a physics sense, but it's certainly a word you use regularly.
We talk about a political candidate who's got momentum going into the election.
We have a sense of what momentum means.
If I have an object moving along, Newton wanted to understand, how can I quantify, how can I measure how much motion it has?
He hit on the idea that, well, if I take the object's mass, how big it is, how much stuff is in it,
and multiply that by its velocity, how it's moving, that gives me a measure of the quantity of motion.
The product of the mass with the velocity becomes the momentum.
Unlike energy, which is just a single number, momentum has associated with it a directionality.
A momentum in this direction is different from a momentum in this direction.
In fact, Newton originally wrote his second law, not F equals MA, but F equals the rate of change of momentum.
And for an object whose mass is fixed, that becomes F equals mass times the rate of change of velocity, which is its acceleration,
so F equals MA.
But initially, Newton invented this concept of momentum and talked about that.
And the interesting thing is that momentum is conserved unless a force acts.
That's what Newton's second law says, force is the rate of change of momentum.
Momentum is interesting when applied to single objects, but it's particularly interesting when we apply it to systems of objects,
like a human body, a dancer, a diver, an ice skater, or we apply it to something like an exploding firecracker.
And the reason it's interesting in these contexts is because the forces between the particles that make up the system,
the force of my muscle on my arm, the force of the exploding particles moving apart in a firecracker,
the force of legs lifting on a ballet dancer against the body, those are all forces that are internal to the system.
And by Newton's third law, for every such force, there's an equal and opposite force, which is also part of the system.
So those forces can't change the momentum of the entire system.
So the beautiful thing is a system of particles, and you can define a system any way you want.
My body could be a system, two bodies together could be a system, whatever, your choice.
You look at a system, and the forces between objects that make up that system are internal,
and so they can't change the momentum of the entire system.
And that becomes a very, very powerful statement about how systems behave.
And I want to give you a couple of examples here on video that show you how this works.
Here I have a video clip of a couple of teaching company employees who happen to be rollerbladers,
and we're going to start the clip. They're going to be standing next to each other, facing each other, with their hands touching.
And since neither of them is moving, the system has no momentum whatsoever.
They're going to push off on each other, and because they're on rollerblades, which are essentially frictionless,
there's going to be no external forces acting on that system, and so the total momentum of the system has to be conserved.
One of the rollerbladers is going to go off in one direction, the other is going to go off in the other direction.
You'll notice they have different masses. The more mass of one is going to move more slowly,
so the product of her mass and velocity is equal but opposite in direction to the product of the other one's mass and velocity.
Let's take a look. Here they go.
Starting, no momentum, pushing off. Here they go, and the total system still has zero momentum,
and you can very clearly see the differences in speed. Let's run it once again.
There they go, pushing off. That internal force does not change the momentum of the entire system.
Very powerful concept. Let me show you another example.
Here's a cue ball coming in and hitting a bunch of billiard balls and breaking it up.
Initially, that system does have some momentum. The momentum is all entirely in the cue ball.
As soon as the cue ball has hit all the others, the same momentum is there,
but now it's been dispersed among all the other balls, and if you added up their individual momenta,
carefully multiplying each one's mass by its velocity, it would be exactly the same as what initially came in,
provided everything is frictionless and no external forces are acting. So let's take a look at this one.
And there it goes. The momentum is still in the system of all those billiard balls.
Now, even if there are external forces acting on a system, all they affect, in principle,
is a single point where the object acts like all its mass is concentrated.
That's a remarkable fact about an object. Any composite object, no matter how complicated it is,
has a single point, and as far as Newton's laws are concerned,
the application of external forces to that system might as well have been a single force applied to a single object at that point.
Let me give you an example. If I take a tennis ball, which is just really a single small point like object,
so we really don't have to talk about it as a complicated system,
its point where it acts like all its mass is concentrated is right at its center. That's called the center of mass.
If I throw the tennis ball, the ball, particularly at center of mass, describes that simple parabolic trajectory.
We expect of an object that is moving under the influence of gravity near Earth.
Here's a more complicated object, a croquet mallet. I'm going to throw it also,
and most of the parts of this croquet mallet are going to undergo trajectories that are anything but simple.
They're going to be rotating around and moving simultaneously, and this is going to be complicated.
But there's one point, and I've marked it here with this yellow tape, that is the center of mass,
where all the mass acts like it's concentrated, and that point is going to simply follow that single trajectory.
So watch this. You may want to play it over a couple of times.
Watch what happens to the croquet mallet, and focus your eye on the yellow tape,
and you'll see that it describes that simple parabolic trajectory.
It obeys Newton's law directly.
So there's the croquet mallet, and I'm going to do one other thing with this croquet mallet.
I have another object here, a very complicated looking object, a weird shaped piece of wood.
It happens to have some magic markers stuck in it, and I'm going to pull the caps off those.
I'm going to put the object down on this piece of white paper on the tabletop,
and I'm going to whack it with the croquet mallet, and it's going to move in some complicated kind of motion.
And there it goes.
And you can see after that motion that most of the markers, which were located at different points on this object,
describe complicated paths.
There were complicated forces due to the wood acting on other parts of the wood,
and so on, very complicated motion. I wouldn't want to describe those.
But one of the markers, the red one, describes the path you would expect for an object moving in a straight line
at constant speed, just as Newton's law says this thing should do after I gave it that initial whack.
That's the point of the center of mass.
So each system has a center of mass, and that center of mass obeys very simply Newton's laws
and moves as a single point object would move.
And that gives us some remarkable insight into some of the motions that flexible objects
like the human body can undergo.
For example, I have a center of mass right now.
It's probably somewhere around here.
Take the effect of the weight of my legs, my arms, and so on.
But if I do this, my center of mass has changed.
I've raised my center of mass, and we flexible objects like human beings
have the ability to change the positions of our centers of mass,
and that's employed in a number of athletic and artistic events.
And I want to give you a couple of examples here.
Here we have a ballet dancer in this picture.
It's Candace Ulbrich from the Loudon Ballet Company,
and she's going to execute for us the maneuver that's called a grand jeté.
And in a grand jeté, a ballerina or a male ballet dancer appears to float through the air in almost a horizontal trajectory.
How do they make that happen?
So let's watch Candace here do the grand jeté.
So here's how it looks.
Starting out, she's coming along and into the jump, and there she goes.
Grand jeté right there.
See her flying across the air, seeming to move horizontally for a brief moment.
How did that happen?
How did that work?
Well, let's analyze it.
Here she is starting out her jump.
There's her center of mass.
A little while later, her arms and legs are higher up,
and that means her center of mass is risen with respect to her body.
At the peak of her trajectory, they're higher still.
And then she starts down and begins to lower them.
Now, what has to happen?
The center of mass obeys Newton's laws.
It describes the parabolic trajectory we expect for any object moving under the influence of gravity.
But look at her head.
Her head doesn't describe that trajectory.
Her center of mass does, but her head moves relative to the center of mass as she raises her center of mass up.
Her head doesn't go up as much, and consequently, her head describes this nearly horizontal path,
which gives the illusion of her floating.
Another example of the same thing from athletics is a high jumper.
Here's a high jumper clearing the bar.
But remarkably, and one of the reasons high jumpers nowadays go over the bar backwards like this,
is that high jumpers do not really clear the bar in some sense.
Their center of mass never clears the bar.
This high jumper contorts his body so that even at the peak of his trajectory,
his center of mass has described that nice parabolic path that we understand,
but his center of mass remains below the bar.
So he manages to get over the bar without, in some sense, actually clearing it.
His center of mass does not clear it.
Well, let me end by pointing out what happens if I combine these two laws of conservation of energy and conservation of mass.
And what they do in particular is give us a very powerful way of describing collisions,
which are violent short interactions that occur between two objects.
If the forces between those objects are really big, bigger than any external forces,
we can neglect the external forces and just look at what happens between the two objects.
And I have here some examples of that, a couple of examples showing you what happens.
In a so-called elastic collision, energy is conserved,
and what happens is during the collision the objects deform,
but they do so storing that energy as potential energy, and again, they come apart.
So let's look at a couple of examples of that.
The first one shows a racquet ball colliding with the racquet,
and the second one shows a water balloon bouncing off the floor,
and in both cases you'll see the objects deforming as the potential kinetic energy is stored as potential,
and after the collision it's back to kinetic energy again.
Racquet ball coming off, and there it is back in kinetic energy.
Water balloon bouncing, deformed, back it goes, again, it's kinetic energy.
Those are elastic collisions, they've conserved the kinetic energy,
it's become temporarily potential and goes back to being kinetic again.
What happens in a collision depends on the relative masses of the objects,
and I want to give you a couple of examples of that.
For example, here I have some carts, this one's much more massive because it's got these two heavy weights on it.
So the first thing I'll show you is what happens if a more massive object collides with a less massive object.
So the less massive object is initially at rest, in comes the more massive object,
and the less massive object, let me do that again, bounces off at a much higher speed.
I can give you another example of that, a remarkably fun example.
I'm going to drop this tennis ball on top of this rubber kickball,
and the collision is going to occur after the kickball rebounds from the floor,
it's a less massive object colliding with a more massive one.
There it goes, it came off much, much faster.
What happens if it's the other way around?
If a more massive, if a less massive object combines with a more massive one,
the less massive one bounces off and the more massive one picks up a little bit of its speed.
And finally, what happens if the two masses are the same?
This actually plays a significant role in engineering nuclear reactors
because it tells us how to slow down the neutrons that sustain the reaction.
So I'm going to have this car now with the same mass as the blue one, initially at rest.
The blue one comes in and stops completely, gives all its energy and momentum to the red one.
This popular executive toy here, sometimes called Newton's Cradle, shows exactly the same thing.
I pull one of these balls aside, let it go, and one ball comes off the other end.
If I pull two balls off and let it go, two come off the other side.
Again, illustrating the conservation of matter and of energy and momentum being applied at the same time.
And finally, let me end with an example which is more celestial,
and it's the example of how we navigate spacecraft to distant planets.
Here I have a picture of a spacecraft coming in near a planet.
It's founded a stationary.
What's going to happen is later the spacecraft is going to be going out the other way,
describing some kind of trajectory around the planet.
But what if the planet is moving, as in fact, planets are?
Well, then the spacecraft comes in and as it goes around the planet,
it picks up some of the planet's own motion and it gets moving out faster.
And we use this effect, it's sometimes called gravity's slingshot, although it isn't really a slingshot-like effect,
to take energy from moving planets, a very tiny bit of their energy,
and use it to boost spacecraft to the energies they need to get to the outer reaches of the solar system.
We don't have enough powerful rockets to do that and we can't launch them safely from the space shuttle anymore.
So this is a common maneuver.
And let me just give you one example, which I'll end with here.
Here is the trajectory of Cassini, which arrived at Saturn in July of 2004.
It was launched in 1997, October, and it went in toward Venus, came around Venus,
picked up some energy from Venus, went around Earth, picked up some energy from Earth,
repeated this a couple of times, and then headed on out to Saturn for its encounter.
Conservation of energy, conservation of momentum, make it all happen.
