Lecture 15 A Magnetic Personality
Your most familiar use of magnets is probably doing simple things like sticking notes to your refrigerator door,
or those magnetic sticky photograph printing papers you can now get,
print a picture and stick it on your refrigerator, or some other metallic surface.
Well, not quite metallic, but iron-containing surface.
I'm going to say relatively little about magnetism in that context,
because using magnets to stick things on refrigerators or thinking of magnetism
as a property of metals like iron and steel really misses the point.
Magnetism is a much deeper and more fundamental phenomenon,
and as I hinted in the very first lecture, it's intimately connected with electricity.
We use magnetism and magnetism in relation to electricity in a huge number of ways.
Electric motors are at the heart of a whole bunch of devices we use from our CD players,
again our watches, our subway trains, our electric clocks, and so on and so on and so on.
All kinds of devices use electric motors.
Our loudspeakers are basically magnetic, or I should say electromagnetic devices.
All kinds of things in our lives involve magnetism and magnetism in relation to electricity.
So I want to cut right to the point and talk about magnetism in relation to electricity.
Before I do, I just want to mention briefly a conceptual leap we're going to make with magnetism
that we did for gravity and also for electricity.
And that is to talk not so much about an interaction directly between two magnets,
a repulsion and an attraction, or between other things that respond to magnetism,
but we're going to talk about a magnetic field.
So I have here a big bar magnet, and I'm going to talk about it creating in the space around it
some kind of influence, which I'll call a magnetic field,
just like I talked earlier about an electric field and a gravitational field,
and that magnetic field exerts an influence on other things that respond to magnetism,
particularly other magnets, but not limited to other magnets.
Here on the tabletop, and we'll take a look at it from above,
I have an apparatus which I'm going to use later.
Don't worry about the green wire coil at this point.
More important, I've got a bunch of compass needles there,
and they're all pointing more or less in the north-south direction.
This table has iron supports underneath it, so some of them have deviated somewhat from that direction,
but they're pointing basically north and south.
Now, I approach with this magnet,
and those compass needles sweep around in different directions,
and what's going on there is they're responding to the magnetic field, the influence around this magnet.
So I'm going to frequently talk in terms of magnetic fields,
and what I mean by that is the influence that a magnet or other source of magnetism exerts in the space around it.
And again, let me get right to the point.
The fact is the other source of magnetism or the only source of magnetism really is electricity.
Electricity and magnetism are so intimately related that the source of all magnetism in our world is electricity.
And very particularly, I mean this, we talked about electric fields before,
and electric fields arise from electric charges.
There's actually another place they arise from, but we'll get to that in the next lecture.
Where do magnetic fields arise from?
They too arise from electric charges, but they arise from moving electric charges.
When an electric charge is at rest with respect to you, you see its electric field.
When it's moving with respect to you, you also see a magnetic field.
Magnetism is intimately associated with moving electric charge.
That's the really big idea.
And we tend to lose sight of that fact when we think about magnets, this big hunk of metal, bar magnet,
that doesn't look like it's got anything to do with moving electric charge,
or the little magnets we stick things to the refrigerator with.
They don't look like moving electric charges involved, but it is.
And I want to begin with a picture here of, in fact, what is the origin of magnetism in magnets?
Here's a picture at the left of the screen of an atom.
And I've used the old solar system model of the atom,
and this particular atom has just a pink nucleus at the center,
and then it's got a single electron going around it.
That electron constitutes a moving electric charge.
And I've just told you that moving electric charge is ultimately the source of magnetism.
So that atom constitutes a little tiny bar magnet.
It looks conceptually just like this bar magnet.
In fact, the north end of this particular atom, as I've drawn it, is downward.
That's because the electron is spiraling in a counterclockwise direction
as I look down from above, and that tells me that the south pole is up and the north pole is down.
So that individual atom constitutes a magnet.
And many, many, many atoms constitute magnets.
Now, this picture is very oversimplified.
The magnetism of atoms comes partly from the motion of the electron around in its orbit,
but also partly from the electron spinning.
Some atoms are more magnetic than others because some atoms have paired electrons
whose spinning and direct motion is opposite, and so the magnetism cancels out.
But in some of them, the magnetism is prominent because there's a single electron that is spinning
and also going around, and that gives rise to magnetism.
So what's a magnet?
Well, a magnet is simply a piece of material in which most or all of those individual little atoms,
those little atomic magnets, are lined up in the same way to give a bulk magnetism of the whole material.
This magnet is a piece of iron or iron-containing compound that has most of its atomic magnets
lined up together to produce a large bulk magnetic field coming from this structure.
Why is it that magnetism seems associated only with things like iron?
Well, that's because only in iron and a few other materials is there a cooperative interaction
between these little atomic magnets so that if one of them tends to line up in a particular direction,
the others near it sense that and they all line up in that direction too.
And that's what gives iron and a handful of other materials the ability to become permanent magnets.
Permanent magnet is simply an iron or other related material that has all its atomic magnetic little magnet magnets lined up
and they all give this bulk magnetism a hunk of aluminum or a hunk of plastic.
The atoms in it may themselves be magnetic, but they don't have that cooperative interaction that makes them all line up.
So a material that's not a magnet and it could be a material like iron that just doesn't happen to be magnetized
or it could be a material like aluminum or copper or plastic or glass that simply doesn't have much magnetic properties
is a material in which there are still these atomic magnets, but they're all oriented in a different direction.
So there's no bulk magnetism. So that's what a magnet is.
A magnet is simply a special instance of moving electric charge.
By the way, why does a magnet pick up something like iron?
Well, here I have some paper clips on the table and if I put this magnet near them, they all get picked up.
Why does that happen? They weren't magnets to begin with.
Well, again, in the iron, the magnetic field of this magnet causes individual atomic magnets to line up.
They all do that cooperatively and momentarily these paper clips have in fact become magnets.
And in fact, depending on what kind of material they're made of, that residual magnetism may exist after I take the magnetic field away.
So I'm going to put them aside and not use them for further demonstrations because they may have acquired a little more magnetism than I want.
But iron containing substances or your refrigerator, when you stick a magnet on your refrigerator,
they become temporarily magnetized in the presence of that magnet because again, they consist of atomic magnets,
little tiny atomic magnets that can all line up. Actually, it's a little bit more complicated than that.
There are whole domains of little atoms that are all pointing in the same direction,
others that are pointing in different directions and bringing a magnet near causes them all to flip into the same orientation.
So the point of all this is magnetism results from moving electric charge.
And because magnetism results from moving electric charge, if we make electric charge move or any situation in which electric charge moves
is a situation in which magnetism is being created. It does not take iron to make magnetism.
That's how you make permanent magnets, but any situation in which there's moving electric charge results in magnetism.
And that's what an electromagnet is. If I pass electric current through a wire, any wire, any electric current,
a magnetic field develops around that current carrying wire.
And I can make that effect a little more dramatic by passing many, many turns of wire.
And what I have here is simply a piece of iron rod with a lot of wire wound around it.
I just put a little tape on the ends to hold it there, connected a few clips to it so I can connect it to a battery.
And right now, this is not a magnet. But when I connect it to these two batteries, or even to one of them would do,
but I'll connect it to two of them. I've got 12 volts here, two 6-volt batteries in series. It becomes a magnet.
And it's getting very hot very quickly, so I'm going to disconnect it and it stops being a magnet.
So that was an electromagnet, and that is no different from this big bar magnet.
The only difference is I can turn its magnetism on and off because its magnetism is not intrinsic to this piece of iron or steel,
but instead is caused by the electric current flowing in the coil around it.
By the way, I didn't really need the iron core. That greatly amplifies the magnetism because when the current flows and makes its own magnetic field,
that causes all the little atomic magnets again in the iron to line up, and so I get a stronger effect.
So that's why electromagnets are typically, but not always, wound on iron cores.
So that was an electromagnet.
Here's another example of a case where I don't have an iron core. I simply have, and let's again take a look down from above.
This is the same demonstration I just showed you when I wave the magnet near these compass needles, but now I have a single coil of wire.
That's what the green coil is. It's coming in and out of a piece of plastic that's holding it in place, and these compass needles are arrayed near it.
And right now, again, all the compass needles are pointing approximately north, slightly distorted by the iron of this table,
and slightly distorted by the fact that there are a couple strong magnets nearby.
But again, I'm going to connect this system to these two batteries.
There's one connection. I haven't made a complete circuit yet. Watch the compass needles closely as I make the complete circuit.
And you see them lining up with the magnetic field produced by that coil.
If I reverse the connections, they swing the other way.
And you perhaps can see that the ones right down the center, they're a little bit obscured by the coil, are lined right up with the coil,
and the ones outside tend to be veering outward.
If you've ever seen the demonstration done where a magnet is put near iron filings,
they all line up to make this nice pattern of the magnetic field, and that's exactly the pattern we're seeing here.
That pattern is being produced by this coil of wire. It produces exactly the same kind of magnetic pattern that a bar magnet would.
So this basically is exactly like a bar magnet. It doesn't look like a bar magnet, but it works on exactly the same principle.
It involves moving electric charge. In this case, the electric charge is moving around in that spiral path of those turns of wire,
just like it was in this tightly wound wire I had over here.
The same thing is happening inside the bar magnet, except there's no continuous flow of electric current along here.
The electric currents are the individual spinning and orbital motions of the individual electrons.
So magnetism and electricity are intimately related, and magnetism involves moving electric charge, moving electric charge.
I've showed you several examples, simple examples of electromagnets you've probably seen.
Electromagnets are pictures of electromagnets picking up scrap iron or junked cars, things like that.
That's a sort of obvious use for electromagnets where we'd like to turn on and off the magnetic field so we can pick up the junk car and move it over here and drop it.
But there are many, many, many other uses for magnetism that we produce with electric currents.
I'm just going to give you one important example, and that's magnetic tape recording.
Those of you who, again, are still fairly old fashioned and are watching this course on VHS tape, how does that work?
Well, we'll talk a little bit later about how you view the tape, how we read the information from the tape.
That'll come in a couple of lectures. But how did we get the information on the tape? That comes right now.
Remember I put some of those paper clips aside because I didn't want the residual magnetism that may have remained in them to affect my next demonstrations.
I put out some new paper clips.
In fact, some magnetic materials, if you put a magnetic field near them, they respond to the magnetic field, they get magnetized and they stay magnetized.
Other magnetic materials, if you put a magnetic field near them, they don't stay magnetized.
Well, with magnetic tapes and with magnetic disks that we used to use until just a few years ago for data storage and computers, now the disks work in a slightly different way.
With magnetic storage, the magnetic field is imposed on some kind of magnetic medium like this piece of VHS tape, for example.
And that magnetic field imposes little regions of north-south pointing magnetism of varying strengths.
And it does so according to whatever signal, whatever movie we're trying to put on this piece of VHS tape, and this becomes a magnet.
And a magnet with varying directions of its magnetic field.
And we'll talk later about how we play that back, but I'll show you in just a moment how we impose the magnetism on it.
But before I do, let me simply point out that this is indeed magnetic material.
I can pick up that tape with the magnet.
It's not terribly strongly attracted, but it's clearly a magnetic material.
By the way, I wouldn't want to do this with a nice, with my favorite home video or my favorite movie because this bar magnet is strong enough to wipe out all the information on the tape.
So we don't want to do that, but this tape we have sacrificed for this purpose.
So how does magnetic tape recording work?
It doesn't really matter whether it's audio recording or video recording.
The principle is the same, although with video recording, as we'll see again in a couple of lectures, it's a little bit more complicated to get all that dense information of a video picture on.
So here is something called the tape head.
And the tape head is just like my electromagnet.
It's just a coil of wire around, around a piece of iron.
And that iron has a little gap in one end.
There's the gap.
And that wire coil has an electric current flowing in it.
And that electric current is not just flowing in one direction, but it's flowing back and forth.
And it represents basically the back and forth electric current that's associated with the back and forth vibrations of, say, the sound waves if we're recording an audio tape.
And if we're recording a videotape that represents more complicated information storage for the video information.
And if we're recording digital information on a computer disk, which would also have a head something like this, or digital information on a digital audio tape or a digital camcorder recording to tape,
then it would be imposing either current one direction or current another direction to correspond to the ones and the zeros.
So how does this work?
Well, we take the tape, we run the tape by, and as the electric current varies, it imposes regions of different magnetization, one direction or another,
different strengths on the tape.
And that's how we then record the tape, produce the tape.
I've talked about electromagnets made by passing electric currents through wires.
And typically we do that by connecting the wires to sources of power.
In this case, I connected it to a battery.
I connected my electromagnet to a battery.
In the case of the recording tape, I connect that recording head to the output of an amplifier,
which is ultimately connected maybe to a microphone or something.
Somebody's singing, the microphone signal goes in, gets amplified and gets sent as electric current to this tape head.
There are cases, however, where we really don't want to spend a lot of power, waste a lot of electrical energy, heating up those coils,
which in fact happens because they have, as I argued in the previous lecture, electrical resistance.
And so there are some cases where we make electromagnets out of superconducting materials.
These are those materials that have to be at low temperature but have absolutely no electrical resistance.
And an example of that is an MRI machine.
Here's a picture of one.
I'll talk much more in a subsequent lecture in Module 6 about exactly how MRI works.
But an MRI machine has a very strong magnetic field, and the patient is put in that strong magnetic field.
We'll see later how that gives us a diagnostic image of what's going on inside the patient's body.
But the magnetism of an MRI machine is almost always produced by a superconducting coil.
There's liquid helium in there.
The liquid helium has to be maintained.
There's some energy involved in that.
But once you start the current in that superconducting coil, you never need to stop it.
It never goes away.
It's the superconductor.
It continues to conduct forever.
There are other places where magnetism is important.
For example, stars and planets typically have magnetic fields.
At least they do if they have fluid, liquid, or gas interiors.
And there's a very complicated interaction, which we still don't understand fully
between the rotation of a planet or star and the boiling convective motions
as the inner heat drives itself toward the surface that gives rise to the magnetic field.
We understand sort of how it happens, but not completely.
Here's an example of Earth's field.
Earth has a north magnetic pole and a south magnetic pole.
They don't quite correspond with the rotation poles, but almost.
By the way, Earth's north magnetic pole right now is actually a south pole, but we won't go into that.
There's Earth's magnetic field, and it's like the field of a bar magnet.
And you can think of it as arising from a loop of current flowing in the interior of the Earth.
Again, it's not as simple as a single loop of current in a wire,
but it's the same idea, and its current's flowing in the liquid iron outer core of the planet.
The inner core is solid, but the outer core is liquid, and that's what's causing that.
For reasons we don't fully understand, the direction of that current reverses
every roughly million years, and that reverses Earth's magnetic field.
And those patterns are recorded in the sea floor as it spreads with plate tectonics,
and oceanographers and geologists actually use that as a giant tape recorder
to trace out the Earth's magnetic history.
The Sun also has a magnetic field.
It reverses every 11 years, and it's much more complex and variable,
and it results in some remarkable effect that can have consequences for us here on Earth.
Here's an example. Here's a picture of the Sun showing a few sunspots.
These sunspots are regions of intense magnetic field.
If we look at a blow-up of them, they actually look dark on the surface of the Sun
because they're places that inhibit the outflow of heat from the interior of the Sun.
And sometimes the Sun's magnetic field goes really wild,
and we have these eruptive events, huge bursts of material spewed out into space.
If they come near the Earth, they actually influence the Earth's magnetic field,
and they can cause auroras, they can disrupt power lines, and so on.
So let me just show you a movie of what's going on here.
This is a movie clip taken with a spacecraft that's actually parked out of that L1 Lagrange point,
and this is from a period in October and November of 2003 when the Sun was particularly active.
And we're going to see huge, there's one, there's one, there's one,
a huge outburst of material from the Sun.
By the way, that thing moving across from right to left is the planet Mercury,
which passed very close to the disk of the Sun during that time.
So there's a period of very much activity, and this is all huge magnetic arches containing material
being released. That last burst of kind of snow was high-energy radiation from that same incident,
hitting the instrument and causing it to wipe out for briefly, causing it to overload.
Now, not only does magnetism arise from moving electric charges,
but the fundamental magnetic interaction is an interaction with moving electric charges.
That is, moving electric charges respond to magnetism.
When I pick up two magnets and they repel each other, I can't push them together,
or wham, they go together, that interaction is ultimately an interaction in which the moving electric charges
in one magnet respond to the magnetic field of the other magnet.
There are many, many instances where we use this effect.
If you have an old-fashioned, again, tube TV or tube computer monitor, the beam, electron beam,
I've referred to before, that's coming from the back to the front to paint the picture,
that beam is steered by electromagnets that are wrapped literally around the glass neck of the tube
and cause the beam to sweep back and forth and paint the picture where you want it to be.
When we use a microwave oven, the microwaves are produced ultimately by a device called a magnetron.
It's a special vacuum tube in which electrons go around and around and around under the influence of the magnetic force
of, in fact, some permanent magnets, and they do that 2.4 billion times a second,
and that's what generates the microwaves.
On a much larger scale, when we do particle physics experiments,
we want to accelerate electrons or protons or other particles to very, very high speeds.
We do it in these giant ring-shaped accelerators.
Here's a picture of one. This is the Tebitron Fermilab outside Chicago.
On the left is an aerial shot. You see that big ring-like structure?
That's four miles in circumference, and particles are accelerated to very, very nearly the speed of light in that thing.
And if you look on the right here, this is a picture inside the tunnel underground in which this happens,
and you can just barely notice the curvature of that four-mile circumference device.
And these two scientists are working on one of the tubes that actually carries those very high-energy particles around.
Similarly, Earth's magnetic field exerts forces on charged particles that come at us from the Sun.
Some of those particles get trapped in the Earth's magnetic field.
One effect of a magnetic field and a charged particle.
The simplest effect is to make the charged particle want to go around the magnetic field direction, spiral motion like that.
So particles coming from the Sun get caught by the Earth's magnetic field, spun around,
and some of them actually go bouncing back and forth between the northern and southern hemispheres
on a time scale of about ten minutes to get from one hemisphere to the other.
And they come down into the Earth's atmosphere at the regions where the Earth's magnetic field is most strong
and comes down most strongly to the Earth, and that's near but not quite at the poles.
And in those regions, as these high-energy particles barrel into the atmosphere,
they excite the molecules and atoms in the upper atmosphere,
and that's what produces the northern lights, or auroras.
Here's a picture on the left from the ground of what an aurora looks like,
a pattern of colored lights in the sky, looking like a shimmering curtain often.
You're more likely to see it the farther north or way south you live,
but you may see it almost anywhere in, say, the continental United States under a period of intense solar activity.
On the right, you see a picture from space.
This particular picture is taken from a satellite that's in one of those polar orbits I talked about before,
and there it is in sort of a quiet time.
You see the aurora as a sort of oval around the polar region.
There is an aurora taken from the same satellite during one of those intensely stormy periods.
Now, it's not just individual charged particles that respond to magnetic fields.
It's also electric currents because they constitute moving electric charges,
and that is the basis of a lot of very, very important technological applications,
and I want to just discuss a few of those before I wrap up here.
Here's a diagram showing how an electric motor works.
An electric motor is really a pretty simple device.
It's a conducting loop of wire or other conductor.
Typically, it's many, many turns of wire.
Typically, it's wound on an iron core to enhance the magnetism,
but conceptually, it looks something like this, a rotating conducting loop in a magnetic field.
That loop itself becomes a little magnet.
It doesn't look like a magnet, but it becomes one because it has current flowing through it.
The current is coming in from a battery.
I show at the lower left, and the current is going through a set of rotating contacts
and things called brushes, which are just little contacts that are stationary
but make contact with these rotating parts,
and what would happen if I just passed current through this thing
is it would line itself up with the magnetic field of those permanent magnets,
and then it would stop, but there's a very clever arrangement,
and if you look carefully at that thing marked commutator, that little ring,
there are two little gaps in it, and what happens is those gaps cause the contacts
from the positive and negative terminals of the battery to go to different parts
of that conducting loop as it rotates, and that causes the current direction to reverse.
And so just as the magnet gets to the point where it wants to line up,
the rotating electromagnet where it wants to line up with the external magnet's field,
the direction of it flips, and it's no longer lined up right,
it wants to line up the other way, and it spins around the other way,
and just as it gets to the other alignment, it flips again, and it spins around the other way.
And I have here a demonstration of an electric motor that shows that principle.
So what I have here is a device which has two big magnets attached there.
You would not build a real motor this way, by the way.
There are many, many turns of wire wrapped around this wooden frame that's free to rotate,
and if you take a close look here, there's a couple of bent paper clips,
there's a crude motor, bent paper clips, and they are touching some pieces of metal
that are connected to the two ends of this wire,
and only a little bit of that metal is exposed, most of the time it's covered by tape.
But as this device rotates, whether this wire or this wire is connected
to make current go in a particular direction, changes each time.
So I'm going to turn on the power to this thing.
I've got a power supply, and there it goes, it starts to rotate,
and you'll notice it gets a little kick when it goes by those magnets,
and it swings around, sometimes it needs a little push to start it out.
Let's see if it's going to make it.
There it goes around, keep going, keep going, keep going, keep going, keep going,
goes around, and it gets near the magnets, and it gets a little bit of a kick.
Let's give it a little push, get it started.
There it goes, and now watch it each time it goes by those magnets.
It gets a little kind of kick as it goes by,
it gets a little bit faster, and then friction slows it down again,
and now it would keep going like that for a good long time.
That's an electric motor.
And again, the trick to making it keep going rather than just freeze up
aligned with the magnetic field of these other magnets
is that the direction of the current is reversed at that point.
By the way, a motor that runs on alternating current doesn't need that,
and it works slightly differently.
And now I'm going to reverse the direction of the current.
And you'll see the motor start to slow down, slow down,
keep going, motor, slowing down, slowing down, slowing down, slowing down.
If it gets close enough, it will feel that kick.
It may not quite do it, I may have to give it a little push.
Give it a little push, it's slowing down, and there it goes, reversing.
And now it's going in the other direction,
and that's in fact how you reverse the motor.
You reverse the way the two leads are connected,
and it will go in the opposite direction.
Now it's going to get that kick as it goes by the,
there's a big kick, and here it goes, watch it again.
It turns better in this direction, there's that big kick,
and away it goes very happily.
Electric motors are used in a wide variety of applications.
There are tiny little electric motors,
there are great big electric motors.
For example, at the upper left there's an old fashioned electric motor.
At the right is an industrial motor that might be used to run a big saw
or something like that, or some conveyor belt in a factory.
It's a little bit bigger than the motor that's in say your washing machine.
Below is a motor for a, actually that's for a Toyota hybrid minivan.
It's the electric motor for a hybrid minivan.
Other examples of technologies where we pass a current
through a coil of wire in the presence of a magnet
and use that to produce motion are the loudspeaker.
And I have here a loudspeaker.
A loudspeaker works something like this, let's look at a picture of one.
There's a cone, which is flexible,
made of typically cardboard or some other material.
There's a coil of wire wound around or connected to the bottom end of the cone.
That whole thing is around a magnet.
We pass electric current through the magnet,
and that causes forces, again on the moving charges in that wire,
that causes the wire coil to move back and forth taking the cone with it.
And because the cone is in contact with the air,
that makes the sound waves that we hear.
So here's a loudspeaker.
At the back, this big black thing is the magnet itself.
Here's the flexible cone.
It's actually attached in this speaker.
This is a woofer, a low-frequency speaker from the speaker system.
It's attached by this rubber membrane to the outside,
but I've detached it so I can pull the cone off,
and there you see the coil at the bottom.
That little coppery thing here is a tight coil of wire.
So current from your amplifier goes into that,
this cone back and forth and produces the sound waves that you hear.
By the way, your DVD or CD player, you might wonder,
how do we keep that beam that I've talked about so many times
actually focused so well on the spot that we're trying to pick up off the CD or DVD?
Well, if it goes out of focus slightly,
there are optical sensors that notice that,
and they drive a current through a coil in a mechanism very much like the loudspeaker,
except instead of being attached to a cone like that and making sound waves,
it's attached to a lens, and the lens moves in such a way that it gets back in focus.
And so there's an electronic circuit that tells how much current to pass
in such a way as to correct for any out-of-focus condition.
And finally, let me suggest a very simple but commonplace device
that may have saved your lives many times.
In your house, down in the basement or somewhere,
you have a breaker box full of circuit breakers,
and they look like this, and they're essentially switches
that you yourself can turn on and off.
But they also have a coil in them, a magnetic coil,
and if too much current passes through that coil,
that coil pulls on an iron piece and flips the switch into the off position
and breaks the circuit.
And that keeps too much current from flowing.
If something fails in one of your appliances, there's a short circuit or something,
too much current would flow.
It would heat up the wires and make a fire, for example.
The circuit breaker protects you from that.
You solve the problem, you go back downstairs,
you flip the breaker on, and everything's okay again.
They replace fuses, which are devices that simply burn out
and then aren't available to use anymore and have to be replaced.
Finally, let me mention that magnetic technologies will probably play
an increasing role in our future, and here's just two examples.
This is a maglev train.
This is actually the first commercially operable maglev train.
It went into operation in December of 2002 in Shanghai.
This is a device in which currents passing through conductors
at the bottom of the train actually cause a force
that levitates the train very slightly, a matter of inches,
above its guideway, so it literally flies,
and these things can go 200, 300, maybe more miles per hour,
literally flying just a few inches held up by magnetic forces.
That may be our transportation future,
particularly if we can figure out a way to get the costs down.
It's certainly working today in Shanghai.
Finally, one of the biggest challenges we human beings face is energy.
I'll talk much more about that in subsequent lectures,
but one of the most promising ways to get additional energy
is to use the nuclear energy that results from fusing hydrogen atoms together.
Hydrogen nuclei, I should say.
If we could do that, we'd have enough energy to supply us for 300 billion years,
which is many, many times as long as the sun is going to shine,
just with the water in the oceans.
A device that does that is a nuclear fusion reactor.
Here's an experiment called the International Tokamak Experimental Reactor,
which is going to confine these very, very hot particles
that need to be at 100 million degrees or so,
confine them with magnetic fields in a donut-shaped magnetic chamber,
which you see here in Cutaway.
So it may well be that these ideas about magnetism in charge particles
play an increasing role in our future.
