Welcome to lecture 17, credit card to power plant.
Actually, we're going to go the opposite way from power plant to credit card,
but it doesn't really matter because it's exactly the same principle behind both of them.
In the previous lecture, I talked about ways we make electricity,
and I argued that our dominant source of electricity comes from the process of electromagnetic induction.
And I want to describe that process in more detail now as it's used, in fact, to generate electricity.
Fundamentally, remember, electromagnetic induction is the process in which a electrical conductor moving in the vicinity of a magnet
or a magnet moving in the vicinity of a conductor or a changing magnetic field of any reason
causes a current to flow in the conductor that's experiencing that changing magnetic field.
And that's the essence of what's behind an electric generator.
Electric generators play a really vital role in our society.
They produce virtually all of the electricity we use, and electricity is about a third of our total energy use.
And as I've indicated before, it's by far the most versatile source of energy we have.
It can be used to do almost anything.
So how do we make an electric generator?
Well, here I have a picture of one.
A typical electric generator, conceptually at least, looks very similar to my picture of an electric motor.
And I'll argue shortly that that's not a coincidence.
It's essentially a motor in reverse, in fact.
Here we have a coil of wire.
Actually, it'd be many turns of wire typically wound on some kind of iron-containing core.
It's mounted on some bearings that allow it to spin between the poles of a magnet.
That induces a current, and that current is taken off by stationary brushes that contact the rotating coil.
Depending on whether those brushes have one of those split mechanisms I talked about in connection with my motor
or whether they're simply two brushes, two rings that rotate continuously,
one gets either direct current or alternating current out of the generator.
Most of our generators make alternating current for reasons that I'll show shortly.
So here's this generator.
It has permanent magnets in the one I've drawn here in the picture,
but many large generators actually have electromagnets which are powered by electricity
produced by either that generator or some other generator.
And that's one of the reasons, incidentally, during a massive power failure,
we have such a hard time getting things started up again because there's no magnetic fields
in any of the generators to get started because the generators use electromagnets instead of permanent magnets.
It's very difficult to build large permanent magnets, so we tend to use electromagnets.
Now, at the end of the previous lecture, I argued very strongly that there's no free lunch.
That is, if you move a magnet near a conductor or a conductor near a magnet
and you produce electrical energy in the process, you do something useful like light a light bulb
or turn a motor or run a heater or whatever else you might do,
you don't get that energy for nothing.
Somebody's got to do work.
And so I'm going to give you a demonstration of how that happens right now.
And so we have with us Jamie from the teaching company, and she's going to come up here.
And over here we have a device which actually right behind here is a, right about behind here is a,
it's actually an electric motor, but it's going to serve as an electric generator.
And again, I'll emphasize exactly why that works.
There's a crank here, and the crank is connected to a belt that drives that generator.
There are a couple of meters.
Here's a volt meter that tells how many volts of difference, how much energy per charge this thing is producing.
And here's the ammeter that tells how much current is flowing.
Remember that power in electricity is the product of those two quantities, the voltage times the current.
So if we have voltage, but no current, we've got no power.
And if we have current, but no voltage, we've got no power.
Connected to this generator are three electric light bulbs, a 50 watt, a 75 watt and a 100 watt.
This happens to be a generator that puts out about 12 volts.
And so these are 12 volt light bulbs that you can use in a camper.
But as we saw in a previous lecture, that doesn't matter.
The 100 watt light bulb is a 100 watt light bulb either way.
And what I'm going to ask Jamie to do at first is to crank that generator and try to get that needle up to about 12 volts.
Because 12 volts is the voltage of these light bulbs.
So go ahead, crankway.
Very easy. Look at that.
Oh, she's so good at this.
Reading about 12.
Yep. Look at that.
It's even over to a very, very easy.
Okay.
Now I'm going to turn on a 100 watt light bulb.
Here we go.
Uh, uh, uh.
Now that meter should be reading 12 if she's laying 100 watts faster, faster, faster, faster.
Okay. That's a 100 watt light bulb.
Look how hard it was for her to start that light bulb.
Let's put on a few more light bulbs.
Okay. That's not something she's acting at.
That's a completely involuntary response.
Here we go.
Now it's real easy again.
What happens when I put on this light bulb?
You can stop turning for just a moment, but don't go away.
Uh, what happens when I turn on the light bulb?
What happens is currents flowing.
You may have noticed the ammeter jumped up and it was reading a current.
If you multiply those two together, you would be telling yourself how much power Jamie was producing at what rate she was producing energy.
So as soon as current started to flow, we were producing power.
And that energy had to come from somewhere.
And that energy came from her muscles.
She's metabolizing the food she had for breakfast or lunch.
And that is the source of that energy.
And she felt that in her muscles.
And I love to do this demonstration with my students.
I was doing some teaching company employees yesterday and they said, what's your favorite demonstration?
I said, this one, everybody should do this because every time you turn on a light switch in a room, which seems like such an effortless act,
if you had human servants, energy servants producing your electrical energy for you,
each of them would feel what Jamie felt when I turned on that hundred watt light bulb.
You would feel that in your muscles and you would know what it meant to turn on that hundred watt light bulb.
Now we don't have energy servants producing electricity for us.
By the way, if you calculated their wages, you would see that electrical energy or even gasoline at high prices is a great, great bargain
compared to what you would pay if you had human beings cranking away for you.
By the way, to produce all the energy a citizen of 21st century United States uses,
you would need about 100 people cranking 100 of these generators 24 hours a day around the clock to produce the energy that you use.
It's a remarkably large amount of energy we use and I'll get to that in subsequent lectures.
But what exactly is happening physically? Let's have Jamie crank again, get it up to 12 volts
and try to maintain 12 volts even as I turn on these light bulbs.
I'm going to turn them all on at once just to show what it's like.
She can barely move. Let's give her just a hundred.
OK, so she's producing about eight volts and about six amps.
Six times eight is 48.
So this lamp is putting out about 48 watts rather than 100 watts.
It's capable of, she wouldn't want to do that for an hour.
But that's about a reading lamp.
And she's just barely able to sustain the energy that a reading lamp would produce.
OK, I'll stop the torture.
Makes much easier.
Thank you very much.
OK, I guess you can stand down.
I appreciate your help. Thank you.
So what was happening there?
Why did she feel this dramatic force?
Well, as soon as a current started to flow through this light bulb,
that current was also flowing in the rotating coils of the generator.
And that current made the generator coils a magnet.
And they interacted with the permanent magnets that surrounded it to produce a force.
And that force made it hard for her to turn the generator.
If it wasn't that way, we would have got something for nothing.
We would be able to make electricity with no work at all.
Now again, we don't have human servants doing this,
but literally when you turn on a hundred watt light bulb at some power plant somewhere,
more something has to happen.
Maybe it's a local nuclear power plant and the generator just feels that slow down just a little bit.
And so the nuclear fuel rods move out a little bit and a little more uranium gets fissioned
and a little more plutonium gets made and a little more nuclear waste.
Or maybe you're supplied by coal burning power plants.
And in that case, when you turn on the hundred watt light bulb,
a little bit more coal has to be burned at a little bit faster rate.
There's nobody who says, oh, Jamie turned on a hundred watt light bulb,
shovel some more coal in.
It all happens automatically.
The generator begins to slow down just slightly, slightly, slightly.
And automatic valves open to keep more steam coming in to the turbine, to turn the turbine.
And that means the boiler would cool down so the boiler has to burn a little faster.
That really happens.
Something somewhere feels that oomph.
Maybe your electricity is supplied by hydroelectric.
Well, then a dam has to open a little bit more and let a little water over the dam.
And the amount is not insignificant.
It's that same oomph that Jamie felt when she started turning that generator
and then I threw on the hundred watt light bulb.
That's real energy and it really has to come from somewhere.
Turning a light switch is not an effortless act,
at least for someone or something.
It may be for you.
Think about that next time you turn on a light or leave one on.
You can see the same effect, by the way.
If you have your car, you've just started it.
It's idling kind of slowly.
The engine really hasn't warmed up yet.
Sometimes when you turn on the headlights, the car will stall.
At least you'll feel the engine slow down.
That's because there's a generator attached to your car's engine by a belt.
I'll see a picture of one shortly.
And that generator suddenly has a big load on it when you turn the headlights on.
It has to pass a lot of current and there's these magnetic forces that make it hard to turn.
Let's look at some generators.
Here are some real generators.
The one at the upper left is in a power plant, like I just described.
The generator is actually the orange structure to the left.
That typical generator in a large power plant might generate 500 million watts
or maybe even a billion watts.
A billion watts is a typical large scale power plant.
That generates a lot of power.
The big silver structure at the top is involving the steam that comes in to turn the turbine that turns the generator.
At the lower left, there is a series of generators inside a hydroelectric plant.
Their axes are vertical, their spinning coils are aligned vertically,
and they're turned by flowing water that's coming through underneath the dam,
below the dam and then turning wheels around, big turbine wheels around,
rather more slowly than the steam generator at the top.
But these are all generators.
They work on the same principle.
They involve spinning a conductor in a magnetic field and producing electricity,
and it's hard to do that because we have connected to these generators our cities,
our houses, our electric water heaters, our electric motors running our washing machines,
our electric dryers and all kinds of other things.
On the upper right, we have wind turbines.
They may involve generators with capacities on the order of a few hundred thousand to a few million watts.
These are probably several hundred thousand watt units.
They're nowadays built in wind farms.
Wind is one of the fastest growing sources of energy.
There's some controversy about the aesthetic impacts of it,
but wind turbines are beginning to generate a tiny fraction of the United States total electricity.
In some European countries, they're generating a substantial fraction.
And finally, in the lower right, there's a picture shot under the hood of a car of an alternator,
which is a small generator built into the car,
and that's the generator that recharges the rechargeable battery that I showed in the previous lecture.
Now, I've hinted several times that motors and generators are very similar devices.
They're, in fact, inverses of each other.
In fact, the so-called generator in this device is really a motor.
We happen to buy a DC motor on the surplus market and built several of these devices,
and that motor works in reverse as a generator.
Let's look at why that is conceptually,
and then I'll give you some examples where that particular symmetry between generators and motors is exploited.
Here's a picture of a motor.
What does a motor do?
Well, a motor takes electrical energy in, and it produces mechanical energy at the other end.
To end in electricity, the motor turns a rotating shaft and can do useful work of any sort you want.
What's a generator?
A generator is exactly the opposite.
A generator takes mechanical energy in, you do work against those magnetic forces,
and out the other end comes electrical energy.
And in principle, they both involve rotating conductors in magnetic fields.
If you pass current through that conductor, it reacts with the fields of the permanent magnets,
or electromagnets, as the case may be, built into that device, and it spins.
If you spin that coil, electromagnetic induction occurs, and out comes electric current.
So in principle, generators and motors are really the same.
It depends on what you do with them.
Put in mechanical energy, get out electricity, you've got a generator.
Put in electrical energy, get out mechanical energy, you've got a motor.
In most cases, we design motors to be motors and generators to be generators,
and there are differences.
But there are a number of places where it's really important that we use the same device for both.
And one of the most significant in today's world is a relatively new development automotive technology,
and that's the hybrid car.
The hybrid car uses a small gasoline engine, and sometimes that engine drives the wheels directly,
and sometimes it shares the driving of the wheels with an electric motor,
and sometimes the gasoline engine turns the electric motor backwards and uses it to charge a battery.
And sometimes the car runs on power from the battery alone.
And these hybrid cars are popular nowadays with people who really want to reduce their fuel consumption
and all the impact that has on our environment.
They get, perhaps, 50% better mileage than most conventional cars.
Here's a picture of a hybrid car.
This is a Toyota Prius, and here's a picture of what's under the hood of it.
And you see side by side two devices.
One is the gasoline engine, and the other is actually the electronic control system
that's sitting right on top of the electric motor.
Now, that electric motor serves as both a motor and a generator,
and one of the most important applications where it does that is when you bring the car to a stop.
In a normal car, if you step on the brakes, some friction pads,
we talked about this before in the context of anti-lock brakes,
some friction pads clamp onto a rotating disc,
and they basically dissipate the energy the car had as heat,
and it's completely wasted and it's gone.
In a hybrid car, when you step on the brake, at least part of the time,
instead of engaging an actual friction brake,
what you do is engage the electric motor,
but it's running in reverse as a generator.
The wheels are now turning the motor instead of the motor turning the wheels,
and the motor generates electricity and sends that electricity into the battery and stores it for future years.
So, for example, if you come to a stoplight, you step on the brake,
but instead this process of so-called regenerative braking occurs.
The kinetic energy of the car is ultimately converted back into electrical energy
through this motor acting in reverse as a generator that's stored in the battery.
You come to a stop at the stoplight, you wait a while, the light turns green,
you step on the gas, but in a hybrid car, it isn't necessarily the gas,
and that energy you just put into the battery runs the electric motor,
and that gets you up through the stoplight.
And then maybe the gasoline engine kicks in a little later.
Another example of this kind of thing is provided by so-called pumped electric storage.
Sometimes we have the problem that we have electric generating plants,
and they generate electricity when we don't really need it.
And a big plant like a nuclear or coal burning plant, you don't want to shut it down,
bring it up and down a lot, so it runs when it doesn't need to,
and then there are other times when you need more electricity have available.
And there's very few ways to store large amounts of electrical energy.
Batteries are one, but even a hybrid car is pushing the limits of battery technology.
So one storage mechanism that's been developed and is in use in a few places
is to build a reservoir high up on a mountain.
And at the bottom of the mountain, build a system of turbines,
which can be used either to pump water upward or to turn and work as generators
when water comes flowing down.
So when you've got excess electricity, you run these turbines as motors.
They pump the water up to the top of the mountain.
Its energy is stored as gravitational potential energy,
such as we talked about at the end of Module 2.
And then when you need extra electricity, you run that water back down again
through the same devices which had pumped it up, except now they're working as generators,
and you feed that electricity back into the power grid.
It's an energy storage system. It has some environmental problems, obviously.
We don't want to make the tops of all our mountains into reservoirs.
And it's about 80% efficient, which isn't too bad.
You lose some of that energy in the pumping and bringing back, but not a whole lot.
So that's the use of induction to generate electricity.
Now I want to turn to another use for electromagnetic induction,
which is not so much to generate electricity for power,
but to generate electrical signals that usually correspond to some kind of information
we either want to store or read out or transfer to an electrical form.
And let me give you some examples.
I talked before about magnetic tape, and I showed you how we record information on tape
with a little coil of wire that we pass a current through,
and then that impresses a magnetization pattern on the tape.
Well, how do we read the tape? That's exactly the opposite.
It's, again, like the motor generator distinction.
To play a tape, we start with the same head,
and sometimes in cheaper tape recorders, it really is the same head that does the recording and the playback.
It's called a tape head again. It's got that gap, and it's got a wire coil.
And this time, instead of putting a current through that coil and imposing magnetization on the tape,
we move the tape past the gap in that coil, in that little head.
That imposes a changing magnetization pattern.
The iron in that ring enhances the magnetization,
and the coil experiences a changing magnetic field,
and therefore generates an electrical signal,
which corresponds to the information we stored in the tape.
It works the same whether it's audio or videotape,
although in the case of videotape, the head is actually spinning
and reading diagonal patterns across the tape,
and it needs that high extra speed because of the huge amount of information that's stored on videotape.
Older computer disks from just a few years ago worked exactly the same way.
The computer disk was a metal disk covered with magnetizable material,
and a little head moved in and out to read and write material onto the tracks.
More modern computers use something called the magnetoresistive effect
in which the electrical resistance of a material changes in the presence of the magnetic field,
so they no longer use electromagnetic induction to read the information,
but until a few years ago they did.
Another example, common example of energy stored in a magnetic kind of medium,
is the strips on your credit card.
Every time you swipe your credit card at the supermarket checkout or wherever,
or put it in the gasoline pump and pull it out quickly like it says to,
why quickly?
Because you've got to change the magnetic field quickly enough
that the coil can sense a big enough electrical signal to read what's on the card.
And I have an example of what's happening over here with a credit card.
I've taken apart a credit card reader.
So here's the innards of the credit card reader.
It's just a little plastic track.
Inside, mounted on the plastic track, is a little coil.
The coil is on that side, so I'm going to have to swipe my card with the magnetic strip toward that side.
So here's my credit card.
And I've connected this device to an amplifier.
The amplifier is in back here.
You can't see it.
The amplifier is just going to make the signal a little stronger so that this oscilloscope can record it.
And I've also connected it to a loudspeaker so we can hear my credit card.
So here's the oscilloscope, and we'll zoom in on that bigger monitor like we did before,
so you can see what's on the oscilloscope.
But first, I'm going to just swipe the card a few times,
and you will see and hear what the card has to say.
There's the card.
There's what the card sounds like.
Sweep it slower.
There's what it sounds like.
Sweep it faster.
There's what it sounds like.
If I reset the oscilloscope, each time I get a pattern,
and the pattern may be a little bit different each time,
because the scope is recording a slightly different part of the card.
Notice the faster I swipe it, the bigger the amplitude of that pattern.
That's because the amount, the strength of the electrical signal that's being produced
depends on the rate of change of the magnetic field,
and that depends on how fast I swipe the card.
So there's a certain minimum speed that you need to make a card read or work.
If you look at the pattern you see on your screen,
it looks fairly uniform, but there are places where there are a few more ups and downs and dips.
Now, I don't know what the code is that those indicate.
I haven't figured out how to decode this,
but they're the places where there's information that is being stored on this credit card.
And if I move this trace to different places,
you can see there are different regions with different patterns on them.
Do it again.
And credit card, the electronics that decodes this signal,
has to be good enough that it doesn't matter exactly how fast you pull the credit card.
If you pull it fast enough, you'll get a strong enough signal.
It doesn't matter exactly how fast it is.
Different people pull at different rates,
so it doesn't just depend on the frequency of the signal,
but it depends on somehow the patterns of ups and downs that you see on here,
and those patterns vary from point to point on the card,
and that's how the information is stored.
So every time you swipe a credit card, think of that noise,
and think of that signal, and think particularly of electromagnetic induction,
because that's how the information is being read from your credit card.
Give you a couple of other examples where electromagnetic induction is used
to convert stored information or maybe some other physical quantity into electrical signal.
Many microphones involve a little coil of wire with a magnet near it,
and when you speak into the microphone, a little piece of iron containing metal vibrates.
That alters the magnetic field,
and that produces an electrical signal corresponding to your voice.
That's how many microphones work.
Phonograph pickups, if you've got an old-fashioned phonograph,
at least a modern phonograph pickup, typically involves a very small coil
or a very small magnet that's attached to the needle
that vibrates in the grooves of the record,
and that's either near a coil or a magnet,
depending on which was a magnet or a coil that was moving,
and that generates an electrical signal, again,
that corresponds to the audio signal that recorded those grooves.
Another example that's a little easier to picture is an electric guitar,
and I have here a mock-up of an electric guitar,
and I'm simply going to take the wires from the credit card,
and you heard that buzzing.
That was just stray electrical noise being picked up.
I'm going to put those wires connected to this little coil,
which has at its center a magnet,
and the magnetic field of that magnet is not now changing,
but stretched above that magnet is a taut steel wire,
and it's important to be a steel or other magnetic material wire,
because when I vibrate that wire,
that's going to alter the magnetic field in the vicinity of this magnet,
and that coil is wrapped around there,
and that coil is going to pick up the changing magnetic field.
So I'm going to set the oscilloscope again,
and twang that wire.
And there on the oscilloscope, you see the pattern produced by that particular twanging.
That's the music, and this is a simple guitar pickup.
Do it once more.
And depending on where I twang it,
I may get a slightly different pattern,
because that establishes the combination of different notes
that are in the particular vibration that's going on in that guitar string.
One other example where magnetic conduction is useful,
it's useful in detecting motion.
In many cases, a little tiny coil and a little magnet mounted on a rotating wheel
is all it takes to count how fast that wheel is rotating.
For example, if we have a bicycle odometer,
if you have a little odometer on your bicycle,
a little speedometer on your bicycle,
it probably has a little tiny magnet mounted somewhere on the bicycle wheel.
The bicycle wheel is rotating.
There's a little stationary coil,
and as that magnet goes by the stationary coil,
as it moves past it, its motion induces,
by electromagnetic induction, a current in that coil,
and there's a little pulse of current that comes out,
and then the current is gone as the magnet moves away from where the coil was,
and counting those pulses gives you a count
of how many times per second the wheel is going around.
If you know the diameter of the wheel, you can figure out how fast the bicycle is going.
So many, many, many applications of that sort for electromagnetic induction.
I think I'll brush my teeth a minute.
How does that work?
It's absolutely no electrical contact between the bottom of the toothbrush
and the little stand it sits on.
The stand plugs in,
but the toothbrush doesn't connect electrically with the stand.
How does that work?
Well, again, electromagnetic induction to the rescue.
It takes a changing magnetic field to induce an electric field.
This toothbrush has some batteries in its handle,
and they get charged, but how do they get charged?
How does the electricity get to them?
Well, the normal power in our households is alternating current.
It alternates direction 60 times a second, 60 hertz alternating current,
and there's a little tiny coil in that little stand that the toothbrush fits on.
That little tiny coil has that alternating current flowing through it.
That alternating current is changing direction.
There's a changing magnetic field associated with it.
Guess what there is in the bottom of the toothbrush?
Another little coil, and when they fit the two together,
the two coils are in close proximity.
The changing magnetic field of the coil that's plugged into the wall
induces a current in that second coil,
and that small current goes in and is changed to direct current
by mechanisms we'll learn about in the next module,
and that then charges the batteries in the electric toothbrush.
That's a typical example or a simple example of what's called a transformer.
A transformer is a device that involves no electrical contact
between two different circuits,
and nevertheless transfers electric power between those circuits.
I gave you a simple example of a transformer in the previous lecture.
Two lectures ago, in the previous lecture,
when I had two coils here mounted on a stand
and I changed the current in one coil and a current changed in the other coil.
When we have continually alternating current,
a continual alteration of current in one coil
creates a continuously changing magnetic field,
and that creates a changing current in the next coil.
And one useful thing we can do with transformers
is to change the level of voltage in a circuit.
Here I have a very simple example of a transformer.
What I have here is an iron core
that sort of channels the magnetic field through itself.
On your left is a coil here, this blue coil,
has a number of turns of wire in it,
and it's being supplied by a power source here,
which is producing, I think you can see,
a little less than a volt, 0.9-something volts.
On the other side, on your right,
is this yellow coil which has more turns of wire.
The same magnetic field, actually we call it magnetic flux in this instance,
the field through a particular area,
goes through the yellow coil as through the blue coil,
but the yellow coil has more turns,
and each of those turns gets an induced voltage in it,
and so there's a higher voltage at the output of the yellow coil
than of the blue coil,
and I think you can see the ratio of those turns
is something about 4 to 3 or something,
this is about 1.3 volts or so.
So that's a step-up transformer.
It takes a lower alternating voltage
and turns it into a higher alternating voltage.
If I turn the transformer around, it would be a step-down transformer,
it would take the higher voltage into the lower voltage.
Are we getting something for nothing with a step-up transformer?
No, because power, the rate at which we're supplying or using energy,
is the product of voltage and current,
and the step-up transformer has a higher current
and a lower voltage in its so-called primary coil,
and a higher voltage and a lower current in its so-called secondary coil,
and in a perfect transformer,
the product of those two would be the same
and would simply be transferring power through
while changing its voltage and current levels.
Many of the devices you use these days
have these little block transformers
that plug right into the wall,
they're step-down transformers,
they supply a relatively low voltage, it's quite safe,
that's why there's this relatively small wire
to whatever device is plugged in.
Unfortunately, these constitute a kind of power leak
because they're not perfect when they're plugged in
and you're still not using the device that they're attached to,
they still use up a little bit of electric power
and there are probably several large power plants running in the country
just to keep us heating our little block transformers.
Transformers are widely used throughout the power system
and I have a picture here of some transformers in two instances.
On the left are transformers at a large power substation.
I mentioned earlier that we tend to transmit power
across long distances at very high voltages and very low currents.
We do that because at high voltage and low current,
there isn't much loss of power to the electrical resistance
and we can get away with using thinner wires.
But high voltages are dangerous,
so when we get to near our homes,
we see transformers like there are on the right,
you probably see transformers like that
hanging on a pole near your house,
that transformer steps down the power line voltage,
it might be typically a few thousand volts
and steps it down to typically household voltage in the United States
is about 240 volts
and that 240 volts is again split into two separate 120 volt circuits.
By the way, there's a transformer in your car,
it's called the ignition coil.
We don't have AC in our cars,
but the direct current from the battery is broken
by what used to be a set of literally breaker points
and now is some kind of electronic circuit
and that changing current is sent through a coil
and then there's another coil wound around it
with many, many more turns
and that steps up to about 20 to 30 thousand volts
and that's the voltage that it takes to jump the spark gap
in your spark plugs and ignite the gasoline.
So a transformer plays an essential role in your car.
Now transformers really only work with alternating current
or current DC current that's been chopped so it's changing
because transformers rely on induction
which is the phenomenon whereby a changing magnetic field
produces an electric field.
That's one of the main reasons we use alternating current
for electric power transmission because it's so easy
to step the voltage levels up and down.
Now in the end, lest you think induction
is just an absolutely wonderful thing,
there are a few cases where it's a nuisance.
Here I have an aluminum pendulum swinging back and forth.
It's aluminum, it's not magnetic.
If I touched a magnet to it, it wouldn't do anything
and it's swinging pretty much without friction from this rod
and here's a powerful magnet with a north pole and a south pole
and I'm going to put the magnet so that the aluminum
will swing between its poles.
Now the aluminum is not being attracted to the magnet,
there's no interaction between them at all now
but now I'm going to swing the pendulum and it stops dead.
This is the same thing that happened in that previous lecture
when I dropped a magnet down through an aluminum tube.
We're getting induced currents.
Those induced currents are heating up the aluminum,
they have to get their energy from somewhere,
they get it from the kinetic energy of the aluminum
and it stops.
So magnetic fields can be a nuisance
in things like rotating machinery.
On the other hand, some trains and big power saws
and things like that sometimes use magnetic brakes
where we activate a electromagnet and the so-called eddy currents,
the currents that are induced in the rapidly rotating metal,
quickly bring it all to a stop.
Induction is truly a remarkable and very useful phenomenon.
