Welcome to lecture 18, Making Waves.
This is the final lecture of module 3 on electromagnetism.
And to me, it's intellectually the most exciting.
When I teach introductory physics,
I spend perhaps a week to a week and a half
on the material of this lecture.
And it represents, to me, one of the most intellectually
stimulating developments in all of the history of physics.
And it presents that development in an introductory physics course
more quantitatively, and I will here,
but I will present it with its full conceptual
and intellectual glory here.
As the title implies, this is about electromagnetic waves.
I've hinted a number of times in this course,
particularly in module 1 when we discussed light,
and I mentioned that light is, in fact, an electromagnetic wave.
I mentioned that electricity and magnetism come together
in a way that ultimately provides us with an explanation of the nature of light.
Light is an electromagnetic wave.
And in this lecture, I want to show you why electromagnetic waves happen,
why we live in a universe in which electromagnetic waves exist,
and then I want to show you some practical aspects of electromagnetic waves,
how they behave, what some of their properties are,
and how we go about making them and then using them.
I want to begin with a little bit of history,
which I'll go through fairly briefly,
and then I'll go into more of the details of the physics
of why this history came about.
We've seen in previous lectures in this module
that electricity and magnetism are intimately related.
In particular, it turns out that magnetism is really fundamentally
a manifestation of moving electric charge.
If electric charge moves, that creates a magnetic field,
as well as the electric field associated with the stationary electric charge.
If electric charge moves in the vicinity of a magnetic field,
the electric charge experiences what we call a magnetic force,
which I didn't go into in all its quantitative glory,
but it has rather different properties than the electrical force.
For example, I hinted that the magnetic force causes a particle
to move typically around the magnetic field lines,
instead of along the direction of the magnetic force, the magnetic field.
And then we moved on to the two lectures that dealt with induction,
one in which I described the phenomenon of electromagnetic induction
and the second in which I described everything from my electric toothbrush
to a phonograph pickup to transformers,
and then ultimately to electric generators
that work by the principle of electromagnetic induction.
And in induction, we found out that a changing magnetic field
becomes a source of electric field.
So electric fields, that influence that we introduced at first
as something that an electric charge creates in the space around it
and that other electric charges respond to,
that thing, that electric field, that entity,
one of the fundamental entities of the universe,
could also arise from another source besides electric charge
and that other source is changing magnetic field.
So we have this intimate connection between electricity and magnetism,
and I'm going to kind of forget about the moving electric charge business for now.
That's very important, but it's not important to electromagnetic waves.
What's important to electromagnetic waves is that a changing magnetic field
produces an electric field.
And we all know that, and I showed you very clear demonstrations of that
with my coils of wire and thrusting magnets around and so on.
Now I want to raise a question.
And it's a question that James Clerk Maxwell, a Scottish physicist,
raised in the middle of the 19th century.
And Maxwell said something like this.
He said, look, we have these experiments done by Faraday, Henry and others,
and these experiments show us that a changing magnetic field creates an electric field.
Is it possible that a changing electric field also creates a magnetic field?
Now it turns out in practical terms,
that's a rather harder experiment to do directly.
It has been done, but it's not easy to do directly.
It's very easy to do indirectly.
In a sense, I'll describe in this lecture.
So Maxwell asked that question.
Now that question was based partly on issues of symmetry,
and I'm going to go into the details of that in just a minute.
But it was kind of an aesthetic, almost philosophical,
suggestion that nature was giving to Maxwell.
Nature said, look, changing magnetic field makes electric field.
And that really begs you to ask the question,
might the symmetry be there?
Might a changing electric field produce a magnetic field?
And I want to emphasize that because we so often think of science as this
boring kind of, almost rote process in which scientist makes a hypothesis,
goes in the laboratory, does experiment,
tedious calculations, confirms or denies the experiment.
I'm afraid that's too often the view of the quote,
scientific method that's presented in our schools, for example.
However, and that is a true description of much of what's going on in science
and it's important science.
But some of the biggest leaps in science come from very creative,
intuitive processes that are more like art
than like this tedious process of making a hypothesis and testing and so on.
And I think Maxwell's suggestion that maybe a changing electric field
produces a magnetic field falls in that category of a wonderful intuitive leap.
Now, Maxwell had some other reasons for thinking this.
And some of those reasons included inconsistencies that
involved the possibility that electric charge wouldn't be conserved
unless this were true and a lot of other subtle details that appear
in the equations of electromagnetism that I won't go into.
So it wasn't just a brilliant intuitive leap.
He also had reasons for thinking something like this might have to be the case.
And he was able to show that the equations of electromagnetism
were mathematically more consistent if you assumed
that a changing electric field also produced a magnetic field.
And then Maxwell went on to discover something new.
In the 1860s, he discovered that those two facts,
the changing electric field producing the magnetic field,
his new source of magnetic field, originally it was moving electric charge,
now it's also changing electric field.
Coupled with the changing magnetic field producing an electric field,
gave rise to a whole new phenomenon, electromagnetic waves.
I'm going to go into the details of that in just a minute.
But there historically is what happened.
Maxwell recognized that there should be these electromagnetic waves.
He calculated their speed which followed from the equations of electromagnetism
and it came out to be the known speed of light.
And Maxwell suddenly realized that light had to be an electromagnetic wave
and all phenomena of optics were now subsumed
under the umbrella of electromagnetism for the first time.
And just to continue the history a little bit further,
although the recognition that light was an electromagnetic wave came quickly,
a little more slowly came the realization that we human beings
could generate our own electromagnetic waves that were basically like light
but with different frequencies and wavelengths.
And by 1887 Heinrich Hertz in Germany, for whom the unit of frequency, the Hertz,
is now named, Hertz in 1887 succeeded in generating electromagnetic waves
on one side of his laboratory and clearly receiving them on the other side.
So he transmitted electromagnetic waves across the empty space of his laboratory.
The Italian Marconi worked on the same problem,
but with a more practical band.
Hertz's purpose was simply to demonstrate that Maxwell was right.
Marconi said we can use this for communication.
And by 1896 he was sending electromagnetic waves over distances of several miles
and in 1901 he achieved the first transatlantic radio communications.
If you go to the Cape Cod National Seashore you can actually see a place on the seashore
where there are some remnants of the towers that were used for the receiving antennas
on that first transmission of electromagnetic waves across the Atlantic Ocean.
And today a vast array of devices involving electromagnetic waves
are a major part of the physics in our life.
The catch word today is wireless, wireless mice, wireless computer networks,
wireless remote controls, wireless garage door openers,
as well as older fashioned radio broadcasting, TV broadcasting,
radar for police to catch you speeding, microwave ovens, cell phones,
devices for tracking everything from wildlife to criminals to lost pets.
All of these are technologies that use electromagnetic waves
and they're all based on the ideas I'm going to present in this lecture.
So let me begin by talking in a little bit more detail about this beautiful symmetry
that Maxwell recognized and in his honor the basic equations of electromagnetism
of which there are only four are called Maxwell's equations.
So when I talk about Maxwell's equations I'm talking about the four fundamental equations
describe all of electromagnetism.
Everything we know about electromagnetism in the known universe
at least at the scale above the atomic scale where we need to take into account quantum physics
is described by these four equations.
Now I promised in lecture one that this was not a quantitative course
but I am going to deviate from that slightly and just show you Maxwell's equations
because to a physicist they're beautiful and I think everyone should see them once.
So here is the first Maxwell equation and they look real ugly
if you haven't had vector calculus and you haven't.
So don't worry about that.
I'm simply going to show you the equations and interpret them.
We're not going to talk about the math of them
but we are going to talk about some of the symmetries involved.
This is the first of the Maxwell's equations.
It's sometimes called Gauss's law and it basically talks about electric charge
which here is given the symbol rho, the Greek rho, that thing that looks like a P
and it produces electric field and electric field is represented by E
and the thing on the left, that funny upside down triangle
is a kind of, it talks about how the electric field varies in space.
The little E sub zero thing, epsilon sub zero on the bottom on the right side
is one of the fundamental constants of nature
and it talks about how strong electricity is in relation to other forces.
So this equation says electric charge produces electric field,
something we talked about early in this particular module.
Here's another equation that looks very similar except it has a B
and B stands for the magnetic field.
I don't quite know why it's B rather than M but it's B.
The left hand side of this equation looks just like the left hand side for electricity.
Only the right hand side is zero and that's a reflection of the fact
that we've never found isolated north and south magnetic poles.
There are no particles that we know of in the universe
corresponding to isolated north and south magnetic poles.
The way there are isolated north and south positive and negative electric charges.
All magnetic fields that we know about come from either moving electric charge
or changing electric fields but they don't come from individual particles of magnetism.
Now there's nothing in Maxwell's theory that rules out that possibility
and in fact there are some good theoretical arguments
suggesting that these so-called magnetic monopoles were created in the early universe
and we have simply never found them despite there having been searches for them.
So no one knows whether they exist or not.
If they do exist, Maxwell's equations would become a little richer.
The right hand side of that second equation would have a non-zero part
corresponding to the presence of these magnetic charges
but that wouldn't change the fundamental theory in any way.
It would just make it richer.
In fact, it would make it more beautifully symmetric.
If there's electric charge, why not magnetic charge?
But we haven't found it.
So the second equation says there's no magnetic charge,
no isolated north and south magnetic poles.
So these first two equations are about the sources, charges
and how they give rise to the fields.
The second two equations are much more interesting.
Here's an equation that talks about electric field on the left
and it's got again that funny upside-down triangle
and this time it has a cross instead of a dot
and that tells how it varies in space in a rather different way than the one with a dot does
but we won't go into that.
That's the subjective vector calculus.
On the right you see the magnetic field
and you see something that looks like a squiggly D on front of it
and on the bottom a squiggly D and a T
and if you've ever had any calculus
and you don't have to to understand what I'm saying
you might recognize that as a derivative.
In fact, that's a partial derivative.
It means the rate at which the magnetic field is changing.
So this is the equation that speaks about changing magnetic fields
giving rise to electric fields.
The term on the right is the rate at which the magnetic field is changing
and that tells you something in time,
that tells you something about how the electric field is changing in space.
So this equation which is Faraday's law,
it's basically the law of induction,
says what I described in the two lectures about induction
a changing magnetic field produces an electric field.
The final Maxwell equation called Ampere's law
because Ampere discovered the first part of it
talks about the magnetic field
in the same way that Faraday's law talks about the electric field.
You see that same upside-down triangle
that funny bat with a cross sign is called the curl.
It talks about sort of how rotational the field is
and then you see on the right-hand side two terms.
The first one involves a new fundamental constant,
that little mu thing that looks like a u.
It's called mu, mu naught, mu sub zero.
And that's the fundamental constant
that describes how strong the magnetic force is.
So we have two sort of fundamental constants of nature in here,
that mu naught and that epsilon naught.
The J is an electric current.
So the first part of this last equation, Ampere's law,
says that magnetic fields arise from electric currents
and the second term on the right side,
which looks like the rate of change of magnetic field
in the equation above,
but is now the rate of change of the electric field,
is Maxwell's contribution.
It says, aha, another source of magnetism
is changing electric field.
So here the last equation says either electric current
or changing electric field produces magnetic field.
Now these equations are rich.
They contain all electromagnetic phenomena
and they're very complicated to work with.
You take really advanced mathematically intense courses
to study them.
But there's one situation where they become very simple.
And that's a situation in vacuum.
It was nothing in vacuum.
Well, there can be electric and magnetic fields
and that's the point.
In a vacuum, there's no electric charges.
So the right hand side of that topmost equation
goes away and it looks just like the equation under it.
And I'm not going to deal with those two anymore.
In vacuum, there's no electric currents
because there's no electric charges.
So in vacuum, these equations become much simpler.
Vacuum is simply empty space.
Here we are in empty space
and we have Faraday's law.
The first equation here says a changing magnetic field
produces an electric field.
We have Ampere's law says a changing electric field
produces a magnetic field.
And there is a wonderful symmetry in these two equations.
And I want to show you that.
Look at the symmetry.
They treat electric and magnetic fields
in exactly the same footing.
Those constants mu knot and epsilon knot
are only artifacts that lost human beings.
If we had understood these equations better,
we would have developed a unit system
in which they didn't even appear.
And in fact, there are better unit systems
for doing electricity and magnetism
than the standard international system of units
that scientists use simply because they reflect more clearly
an understanding that came after we had developed
the meter's kilogram second unit system
that those mu knot and epsilon knot constants appear in.
But let me try to show you what the linkage is
between these two equations.
This is what's so wonderful.
If we have a changing magnetic field,
it makes an electric field.
That electric field is usually itself changing.
So if it is, that changing electric field
goes back and produces a magnetic field.
And that magnetic field is itself changing, probably.
And if so, it's producing more electric field.
And so this is what Maxwell recognized.
Maxwell recognized there could be these structures
of self-replicating electric and magnetic fields
that once you got one field started changing,
it would produce the other field changing
and that field would produce back the first field changing.
And that process would continue.
Even in the absence of whatever charges
there might have been that started this whole process
going somewhere in the distance,
this process would continue in empty space
with these two kinds of fields replicating themselves
and moving through space.
And Maxwell recognized that there could be electromagnetic waves
because that's what these self-perpetuating structures
that are propagating through empty space, in fact, are.
Now, I want to focus in on these two constants,
mu knot and epsilon knot, for a minute.
They were constants that came from doing simple experiments
like taking two piff balls, whatever that is,
some ancient thing, today we use a styrofoam ball,
something really insulating, put electric charge on it,
measure the force between them.
That's where the constant epsilon knot came from.
The constant mu knot came from simple experiments,
passing currents through wires and having magnets nearby
and measuring the forces and so on.
Nothing to do with light in particular.
And yet, when you work out these equations
and ask how fast do these self-propagating structures go,
well, here these fundamental constants give you the answer.
And the answer is that these self-propagating structures
move through empty space with a speed
that is given by the square root of one over the square root
of the product of those two constants.
We don't need to worry about the math,
but the fact is when you work out the numbers from these constants
that have nothing to do with light or optics,
you get the known speed of light.
And that is the brilliant realization of Maxwell
that there are electromagnetic waves,
that the universe makes them possible,
and that they travel at the speed of light
and immediately you get the realization
that light must be an electromagnetic wave.
What a stroke of genius.
The entire science of optics becomes a branch of electromagnetism.
That is a brilliant intellectual step for humankind,
and Maxwell made that step in the mid-1860s
about the time the Civil War is raging in the United States.
I'm going to say a little bit about the structure
of electromagnetic waves then and how we make them.
It turns out if you work out all the mathematics,
the electromagnetic wave in vacuum looks something like this.
It's a transverse wave.
I introduced that term earlier.
It's a wave in which the disturbance is at right angles
to the direction the wave is going.
There's an electric field and there's a magnetic field.
They themselves are at right angles to each other.
They are in phase in the sense that each peaks at the same point,
and they are both at right angles to the direction the wave is going.
This is a little movie of an electric and magnetic fields in a wave.
The electric fields in red, the magnetic fields in blue,
and here is what the wave looks like as it's in fact propagating along.
There it goes, moving through space.
That whole structure is moving,
and it's moving because the fields are each replicating the other
because of their changes,
and Maxwell's equations talk about their spatial and temporal variation.
That is an electromagnetic wave.
That's sort of a cartoon of what a wave looks like.
This is not a disturbance of some material medium.
The vertical direction here, the height of that red curve,
is simply the strength of the electric field at that point.
The blue curve in the horizontal plane is the strength of the magnetic field at that point.
Now like all other waves we know about,
electromagnetic waves can be characterized by wavelength and frequency.
And there is a whole range.
You can have electromagnetic waves of any wavelength and frequency.
Maxwell's equations don't restrict you in any way at all.
Once you know the wavelength or the frequency,
because the speed is C, the speed of light, 186,000 miles a second or whatever,
whatever unit you want to express it in,
then the other is determined.
But there is a whole spectrum of electromagnetic waves.
And today we know and use this entire spectrum.
And here's a picture of it.
It starts out on the left with radio and TV waves.
They have wavelengths as long as you want.
I mean, some of them are thousands of miles long.
Typical radio waves, radio waves for AM radio about 300 meter wavelength.
Radio waves for FM radio.
I'll get back to this a little bit later on the order of three meters.
As one goes up in frequency,
and if you look carefully at the scales on this,
this is a logarithmic scale,
each tick mark increases the frequency by a factor of 1,000
and decreases the wavelength by a factor of 1,000.
So that way we can cram an enormous range into here.
There is no clear and sharp distinction between the different wavelengths.
Eventually radio and TV give way to microwaves,
which are simply higher frequency radio waves.
They merge seamlessly into infrared.
The waves associated with hot objects,
more on that in another module.
The infrared merges even seamlessly into the visible,
and I've drawn the visible here as the spectrum of colors,
and I've enlarged it to show you the wavelengths,
which range from about 700 at the longest end,
the reddest you can see down to a little less than 400 nanometers,
400 billionths of a meter at the other end.
Beyond that, we go seamlessly into ultraviolet, x-rays, and gamma rays.
And in principle, these are all the same thing.
By the way, our atmosphere is only transparent
to some radio wavelengths and to visible light,
and as a result, great advances in astronomy got made
when we could finally put spacecraft above the atmosphere
and see this entire spectrum.
Electromagnetic waves have one other interesting property,
perhaps less obvious to you.
And if I go back to this movie, which I won't let move right now,
but I'll simply show it as a still,
notice that that particular electromagnetic wave
has its electric field oriented vertically
and its magnetic field horizontally.
I could have drawn it with the electric field turned on its side,
and then the magnetic field, the electric field,
had been coming toward you in that first lobe to the left.
The magnetic field would have been going down.
There's a definite relationship between those two directions.
They're at right angles, and they have to obey a certain rule
about right-handedness and so on.
But I could have had the orientation of the electric field anywhere
and had a wave that was basically the same,
but something was different about it.
And the direction of the electric field is called the polarization direction.
And we have substances available that will only let waves
of a certain polarization through.
They're called polarizers, or the quantity polaroid is a material
that passes waves of only a certain polarization,
only a certain direction of electric field.
And I have here a sheet of this polaroid material.
By the way, there are naturally polarizing things like certain crystals also.
And I'm going to hold this sheet of polaroid up to the window
where it's a nice sunny day outside,
and you can see through the polaroid material that, in fact,
you can see the light coming in through.
It's a little bit dim because the material isn't perfectly transparent,
but it's pretty good.
And then I'm going to hold up a second sheet of polaroid.
Now, this first sheet transmits, and I've got that marked in the horizontal direction.
That means it transmits electric fields that are the opposite of the one
that I showed you on the screen.
They're the ones that have got their electric field moving horizontally.
And now I'm going to put up this other piece of polaroid,
that's marked, so I don't know how it's going to go.
There it is.
Right now, I've got it.
And you can still see out the window where it's a beautiful sunny day.
And so you see the light coming through.
It comes through the first polarizer.
By the way, part of the reason the intensity is cut down
is because visible light from the sun is a mixture of polarizations.
And this first polarizer is cut out all but the stuff that's vertically,
that's horizontally oriented, electric field is horizontal.
But then that isn't diminished significantly by the second polarizer
because it lets through only exactly that light.
But if I turn the second polarizer the other way,
nothing gets through, and it becomes dark.
Somewhere in between, part of it gets through
because it lets through that component that's in the horizontal direction.
So two polarizers with their transmission axes at right angles pass no light.
Two polarizers with their transmission axes at the same angle pass lots of light.
That has a lot of practical applications.
Polaroid sunglasses, which used to be very popular,
but we couldn't find any today in a whole sample of sunglasses,
so I think they're less used now.
They work to diminish glare because when light reflects off horizontal surfaces
like roads and car hoods, it's preferentially polarized in the horizontal direction.
So if you put in sunglasses that are polarized the other way,
you get rid of that effect, for example.
Much more important today perhaps are LCD displays, flat panel displays
on laptop computers, on computer monitors,
on increasing on flat panel television sets.
These all involve polarization in a significant way,
and we'll get into that in the next module.
Now I want to emphasize that all the behaviors of light that we described in Module 1
ultimately follow from electromagnetism.
Give you a cosmic example.
When the universe was about 500,000 years old,
before that time it consisted of free electrons and protons largely.
After electrically charged particles,
they interact strongly with the electric fields of electromagnetic waves,
and therefore the universe was opaque.
At about 500,000 years out, those particles collapsed to make hydrogen atoms
for the first time.
Hydrogen atoms are neutral, therefore they interact less strongly with the electric field,
and the universe became transparent.
And the radiation that was given off the electromagnetic waves
when those atoms came together has traveled throughout the universe forever,
since then, and constitutes the so-called cosmic microwave background
that we use to study the early universe.
It's a kind of a fossil of times in the early universe.
Well, how do you make electromagnetic waves?
The way you make electromagnetic waves is to take either an electric charge
and wave it around, or a magnet, and wave it around in some kind of accelerated motion.
That's all it takes.
Accelerating an electric charge or a magnet makes electromagnetic waves.
You can't just move them steadily, because if you know relativity from my modern physics course,
you know that you could then jump into a frame of reference at rest with respect to that thing,
and it should look perfectly normal.
So it takes accelerated motion to make electromagnetic waves.
And as a sort of rule of thumb, if you want to make electromagnetic waves effectively,
you've got to have a system of vibrating charges or magnets, whatever usually it's charges,
or it's electric currents making magnetic fields,
that is roughly the size of whatever the wavelength you're trying to make.
For instance, visible light is produced primarily by atoms, which are pretty small.
X-rays are produced by inner electrons of atoms,
mostly gamma rays are produced by atomic nuclei,
infrared is emitted primarily by molecules, and so on.
Why is the sky blue?
I talked about that in an earlier lecture,
but in fact now you can see that in more detail.
The sky is blue, because the blue light, which has shorter wavelengths,
more effectively excites the electrons bound to the molecules in the air and causes them to re-emit.
We tend to make electromagnetic waves as radio waves, microwaves, and so on,
and we do that generally with antennas.
An antenna is simply a pattern of wires.
It's typically about a wavelength, typically half or a quarter of a wavelength in size,
and we send electric currents through it.
So here's a sort of simple diagram of how we broadcast radio waves.
Here's a transmitter.
It's a device that basically produces an alternating electric current.
It's connected to an antenna, which consists of one or two pieces of wire.
A current goes back and forth in that antenna and outcome electromagnetic waves.
I've got a few antennas here just to give you a sense of what they do.
Here in the window are some rabbit ears for television.
This is for what's called VHF television, channels 2 through 13, very high frequency,
because when it was invented, wow, that was high frequency,
but today that's a pretty low, modest frequency.
Those range from about 50 million cycles a second, 50 megahertz up to a few hundred.
That is a rabbit ear TV antenna.
Over here, hanging up, I have the kind of FM antenna
that you might have hung in your college dorm room or something.
It's about yay long.
That's half a wavelength of FM radio.
FM radio's at about 100 megahertz,
and if you figure out at 100 million times a second
what the wavelength has to be to give you a speed of the speed of light,
which is about 3 times 10 to the 8 meters per second,
it comes out that an FM radio antenna has to be on the order of a meter or so.
There's an FM antenna.
That particular antenna is called a folded dipole antenna.
It's made of that flat twin lead that you used for old fashioned TV antennas.
Finally, over here, I've got a satellite dish.
The dish is not the antenna.
The dish is simply a reflector.
Waves come in from a satellite.
We talked about that in a previous module.
They're reflected to a focus.
This is a curved mirror focusing the waves into a tiny antenna,
which is in the device here.
The antenna is probably only about that long
because the frequency of these waves is very high.
It's higher, for example, than a microwave oven.
So it's roughly that kind of range, though.
So that's a very small antenna right in there.
The antenna is actually in that end.
Another approach to producing short wavelength waves
is to spin electrons rapidly around in a magnetic field.
I mentioned this before.
That's the basis of the magnetron,
the special vacuum tube in your microwave oven
that spins electrons around 2.45 billion times a second.
And because they're accelerating,
because they're in circular motion,
their motion is changing,
they produce radio waves, microwaves of that frequency.
The atoms in any structure
at any reasonable temperature are all vibrating around,
and so they're giving off a whole range of electromagnetic waves.
That's why hot things glow.
More on that in another module.
There are other things we can do
to accelerate electromagnetic waves.
For example, when you go to the dentist or the doctor
and get x-rayed,
what's happening is electrons are accelerated in a special tube,
and they are slammed suddenly into a very hard target
made of tungsten.
They're accelerated through voltages
of several tens of thousands of volts,
and they suddenly stop,
and that sudden stop represents a very rapid acceleration.
And because it happens on a very, very short time scale,
it produces electromagnetic waves
because accelerated charges always produce electromagnetic waves.
It produces waves of very high frequency,
and those are x-rays.
So what happens?
We have an electron gun at one end of this device,
this tungsten target at the other end.
We blast that electron beam out.
It hits the target, comes to a stop,
and out come the x-rays out at the bottom of the tube.
And then they're sent through you and on to film
or some kind of electronic detector.
Now, electromagnetic waves obviously carry energy.
That's what the energy from the sun that runs the earth
is in the form of electromagnetic waves,
mostly visible light.
But they carry something else.
They carry momentum as well.
And in a famous experiment done at Dartmouth
at the beginning of the 20th century,
people actually showed that there was a tiny force
exerted by electromagnetic waves on objects.
Today, with powerful lasers,
we can actually levitate objects
with simply the force of light.
And perhaps someday we will travel in the outer solar system
or even more dramatically to distant stars
with great big sailing spaceships
which are powered by reflected sunlight
or even reflected laser light from earth.
And here's an artist's conception
of a possible laser sailing ship.
These electromagnetic waves are truly wonderful,
truly versatile, and a core part of the physics
that's every day in your life.
