Welcome to lecture 20, the 20th century's greatest invention, with a question mark after
it, because there are many candidates for the 20th century's greatest invention. As
a physicist I tend to think of things like the one in this lecture, the transistor, but
I also think of things like lasers, I think of things like the airplane, I think of the
computer, although the computer depends largely but not entirely on the transistor. Others
might argue the green revolution that has enabled us to feed a population of a world
with six billion or more people. Others might argue genetically modified organisms, cures
for certain diseases, antibiotics and so on. So there are many candidates for the 20th
century's greatest invention, but surely the transistor ranks up there among them. The
transistor is at the heart of all modern electronics. It's the single element that
does the real work in modern semiconductor based electronics. The transistor has some
antecedents in the vacuum tube and electromechanical relays and other things. More on that in the
next lecture when I talk about how we actually build this thing. But for now I want to show
you how at least one simple kind of transistor works, and it's a kind of transistor that's
widely used in electronic circuits. So this is going to get a little bit technical. This
is probably the most detailed physics you're going to see in any of my lectures in some
sense. It's not mathematical, but some pretty subtle things are going on. So try to follow
it if you have to back up and play over again, by all means do that. But you will come out
in the end of this lecture understanding exactly how a transistor works. Before I talk about
transistors, I have to talk about a general physical process that occurs that sometimes
people think of as rather mysterious or get confused, but it's really very simple. And
it's a process called diffusion. Sometimes we say nature abores a vacuum. Material expands
to fill a vacuum. I'll give you another example. What if I had a little bottle here of perfume
and I unscrewed it? Now unfortunately scent doesn't go through under the DVD that you're
watching, so this won't work for you, but other people in this room would eventually
smell that perfume. They would even smell it if the wind were blowing the other way.
Because diffusion is a process that simply does this. If I have a region where there
is a high concentration of something, air molecules, perfume molecules, electrons, whatever,
that high concentration tends over time to spread out and even out the concentration.
In particular, the things of which there are a high concentration, air molecules, electrons,
whatever they are, tend to move into regions of lower concentration. You can even see this
if you're driving on the highway and it's very crowded in one lane and another lane
is not so crowded. There is a kind of instinctive movement into that other lane. That's kind
of a process of diffusion. How does diffusion work? Well, I have a simple picture here that
suggests what's going on with diffusion. Maybe these are air molecules, maybe they're electrons,
maybe they're cars. I don't care what they are, but on the left there's a high concentration
of them and they're moving in random directions. I showed them all with the same speed, but
it could be random speeds too. On the right, I have a region where the concentration is
lower. The few molecules or whatever are moving again in random directions and of course there
would be zillions of molecules or electrons, not just a few. But here's the point. If I
imagine an imaginary dividing line between these two regions of high and low concentration
and I ask the question, what's the rate at which particles are moving from left to right
across that barrier or not barrier, but imaginary dividing line versus the rate at which they're
moving from right to left. Now, the only thing that depends on is how many particles there
are to the left that happen to be moving toward the right and how many particles are at the
right that happen to be moving toward the left. Well, there are more particles at the
left. They're moving in random directions, so there are more particles on the left that
are moving toward the right than there are particles on the right that are moving toward
the left. And as a result, there is a net flow of particles across that imaginary line
driven by the fact that there are simply more particles on the left. That's the process
of diffusion. Diffusion is a process where a high concentration, particles in high concentration
tend naturally to spread out into regions of low concentration simply because if you
draw any line between the region of high and low concentration, there are more particles
moving one way across that line than there are the other way simply because there are
more particles on one side of the line than the other. Eventually, if things even out,
there are still particles moving randomly back and forth, but when the concentrations
become equal, then there are equal numbers moving either way and there's no net flow
of particles. So if I come back to this situation after a while, diffusion has occurred and
the particle concentration is more or less even now. Nature abores a vacuum because the
random motions of the particles take them from regions of higher concentration to lower
That's a general fact of physics and chemistry and it has something to do with semiconductors,
but it has to do with the spread of pollutants, with the spread of odors, with the spread
of radioactive materials, with all kinds of other things besides semiconductors. But we're
going to deal with it in the case of semiconductors. So here is the situation. The key idea to
understanding semiconductor physics is to understand first of all that we have two different
types of semiconductors. P type in which the charge carriers are positive, they're
holes. N type in which the charge carriers are negative, they're electrons. And I want
to emphasize one other thing I told you when I first introduced those ideas. N and P stand
for negative charge carriers, but they don't mean the material in bulk is negatively charged.
Give me a random piece of N type material isolated by itself and it has no net electric
charge. It has as much positive charge in it as negative. It's just the negative charges
are free to move. Give me a random piece of P type material all by itself and it's electrically
neutral. It has as much positive charge as negative. It's just that the positive charge,
the holes, are the things that are free to move. So keep that in mind because in a little
bit we are going to start making these things be charged and in ways that may seem a little
bit counterintuitive. If you want to think, oh, P means it's positively charged. It doesn't.
P means the dominant charge carriers, the majority carriers are holes positive, N means
the majority carriers are negative electrons. And the key to semiconductor physics is to
put P and N type materials together, join them at a junction between these two very different
kinds of materials which we made different by that process of doping with pentavalent
materials like arsenic or trivalent materials like aluminum that didn't quite fit in this
crystal structure and therefore gave us additional free electrons in the case of the arsenic or
additional holes in the case of the aluminum and therefore made us N type or P type materials.
So what we want to do is examine in detail what happens when we join P and N type material.
That's called a PN junction. So here I show a hunk of P type material on the right, a hunk
of N type material on the left. They are, as I just said, each electrically neutral.
I'm going to bring them together to form a junction. Now I have an imaginary line. Well,
it's actually not so imaginary. It's a real line which is the junction between those two
materials. Of course, this is a two dimensional picture of something that's actually happening
in three dimensions. But here's the issue. On the left, there is a high concentration
of holes and holes are mobile in the P type material. They're free to move. And on the
right, there's a high concentration of electrons. So when I put this structure together, when
I first assemble a PN junction, holes are going to diffuse from the left side of the
junction, from the P side of the junction to the right side of the junction, the N side
of the junction. So electrons and electrons are going to do the opposite. Electrons diffuse
from the N side of the junction where they're in high concentration to the P side of the
junction. So now I have electrons in the P type material. This is why I didn't want
you to think P meant positively charged. P means the majority carriers are holes because
there was a high concentration of holes. They have diffused to the right and entered the
N type material. Now the N type material is full of free electrons. Well, all of a sudden
there's a lot of holes in there. There's a lot of places where there aren't electrons.
And if one of those free electrons stumbles upon a hole, it's actually energetically favorable.
It's just like something falling down. It can fall into the hole and the two of them
recombine. So here's the process of recombination. If I have a hole and I have an electron and
they get together, they join and there's nothing left. I mean, yeah, the electron's
still there. It's now part of the bonding structure and it isn't participating in this
electrical conduction. So as far as electrical conduction is concerned, this process of recombination
a hole, an electron falling into a hole, a hole in an electron coming together, removes
two charge carriers from the system. The electron is still there. The hole isn't really there
because the electron's now occupying the bond. The electron hasn't disappeared from the universe,
but it's no longer playing any role in electrical conduction. So what happens when we have this
diffusion process at the PN junction is holes have diffused into the N type material and
electrons have diffused into the P type material and then recombination occurs and consequently
right around the junction there is a region which is depleted of free charges. There are
very few free charges there because holes have migrated to the right and recombined with
electrons. Electrons have migrated to the left and recombined with holes and the junction
region becomes depleted of charge carriers, free charges that are free to move. And it's
free charges that are free to move that make something a conductor. And so the junction
region, if I just form a PN junction, becomes a poor conductor. And it makes this block
of material that with each individual part, had I tried to determine its electrical conductivity,
tried to pass current through it, either one of them would have done a fairly decent job
of passing current. Not a great job because it's a semiconductor, but a greater job than
a pure semiconductor because these are both doped to have high concentrations of either
electrons on the right in the N material or holes on the left in the P material. But
now we've got a region in this block of material that is depleted of charge carriers, so it's
very difficult for electric current to flow through this device. So great, I've taken
all this complicated technology and made something that doesn't let electric current flow. But
there's more to it than that. Even though the electrons that diffused from the right
hand side from the N type region into the positive are no longer free to conduct, they're
still there. There's still an excess of electrons. And so the right hand edge of the P type material
right near the junction in fact has a net negative charge. Again, that's why I told
you don't think about P as meaning it's positively charged. It means normally at least the majority
charge carriers are holes. But in this case, the right hand edge of the P type material
is carrying a net negative charge. Similarly, holes diffused into the N type material bringing
with them positive charge. The holes recombined with electrons so the holes aren't there anymore.
But the dearth of electrons that they represent is still there as an imbalance. And there
is a net positive charge on the right hand side of the junction. Even though those charges
are not free chargers that are free to move and carry current. And that kind of distribution
sets up something we know about from earlier lectures. It sets up an electric field which
points in that direction from the positive toward the negative. And if a positive charge
got into that region, it would want to be accelerated that way. Now one, you might ask
why doesn't this diffusion process keep happening until the N and P type materials are completely
gone? Well, the electric field exerts forces on positive charges which are in the direction
of the field that is to the left. And that means as this electric field builds up, as
more and more holes migrate to the right and more electrons migrate to the left, this electric
field gets stronger and stronger and it makes it harder and harder for those holes and electrons
to continue diffusing. The holes are having to buck the electric field, go against it
and they feel a force in the direction of the field that gets harder for them. The electrons
would have to move in the direction of the field, but electrons want to move in the direction
opposite the field because they're negative. So both kinds of charge carriers now have
trouble diffusing. And eventually what happens, and it happens very, very quickly, almost
instantaneously when I first build a P N junction is, diffusion happens, the diffusion builds
up this electric field and the electric field stops the diffusion. Now at a microscopic
level, particles are still moving back and forth, but we soon reach an equal, soon in
tiny fraction of a second, reach an equilibrium in which there are as many carriers moving
across the junction one way as the other, and the electric field has basically halted
in bulk the diffusion process. And so we end up sitting here with, although microscopic
motions are still occurring, no bulk flow of particles. There's no more diffusion, there's
an electric field established, and we're all well and good. That's a P N junction.
Now here comes the fun part. We want to do something with this device. We want to connect
it to external circuits. We want, for example, to connect a battery to it. So suppose I connect
a battery to it, like this picture shows, with the positive end of the battery, the positive
terminal of the battery, the terminal that the battery wants to drive positive charge
to. I've connected that to the N type material, the N type side. I've connected the negative
terminal of the battery to the P type material. Now remember what the N type material is full
of. N means negative. It's full of negative charges. It's not negatively charged. In fact,
this particular N type has a net positive charge near the junction, but it still has
mostly electrons, N type charge carriers. And so they're attracted by the positive terminal
of the battery, and they move away out of the N type material, and the effect of that
is to make the depletion region even bigger. And similarly, the holes in the P type material
are attracted toward the negative terminal of the battery. They can't really get there,
but they get toward the negative end of the P type material. And that causes the depletion
region to be even broader because you've sucked holes away from the junction on the left.
You've sucked electrons away on the right, and the depletion region is even bigger. So
if you connect a battery this way to the P end junction, no current flows or almost
no current flows, it's a very, very poor conductor of electricity. So we've made things even worse.
We've put a lot of sophisticated technology into this, and nothing happens. But if we
connect the battery the other way, connect the positive to the P and the negative to
the N, exactly the opposite happens. Holes are driven into that region. Electrons are
driven into the region because electrons are repelled from the negative terminal. They're
attracted, and holes are repelled from the positive terminal. And the depletion region
once again, what was a depletion region, the region around the junction, fills up with
free carriers that are free to carry current, and the whole block of P end type material
becomes an electrical conductor and electric current flows happily around this circuit.
That's what a P end junction fundamentally does. It blocks the flow of electric current
in one direction and allows the flow of electric current in the other direction. And the detailed
physics of this is in what's happening at that junction with the balance of diffusion
in this electric field, and then additional electrical effects applied by this battery.
This is called forward bias. We have the batteries positive connected to the P type material,
and current can flow. The other condition was called reverse bias. The battery was connected
the wrong way, and current could not flow. And from this point on, you can forget that
fundamental physics, but you know it, and you know how we built P and N from silicon,
and so you know, and doping, and so you know all the way back to the beginning of the atom.
But from now on, we're going to build on the fact that we have P end junctions, and this
is what they do. They are essentially one-way valves for electricity. You can have a current
flowing from P to N. That's perfectly happy. The device is perfectly happy to do that.
It's a one-way valve, but you cannot have current flowing the other direction. And that's
all you need to know about a P end junction. Now, there are some subtleties here. There's
a tiny bit of current flowing in the forward direction. The current flowing in the reverse
direction, the thing is not a perfect conductor, but it's a pretty darn good conductor in the
forward direction, very poor conductor in the negative direction. If you connect one
of these things to an ohm meter like I had in the last lecture, you would find it had
a very high resistance in one direction, and a very low resistance in the other direction.
Now these devices, just a P end junction, that's not quite a transistor yet, but a P
end junction is useful in its own right. For example, almost all our electronic devices
require direct current, steady current that flows in one direction for their power sources.
If ever that failed and you had variations at the 60-cycle AC power line frequency, all
your stereo would do is go buh, make a horrible 60-cycle noise. And I've seen that happen
when certain devices fail. The fundamental device that turns alternating current to direct
current is the P end junction diode. It's called a diode. Diode because it has two
elements to it, just two places you connect wires to it, the ends of the P end type materials.
And so that's a diode, and diodes are used for so-called rectification for turning alternating
current into direct current, and every electronic device you had has lots of diodes in it for
that well, typically four, sometimes only one will do it for that purpose. So that's
one useful, one use for these simple P end junctions. Another use which is increasingly
important is in some semiconductors, not silicon itself, but in other semiconductors
by modifying the different combinations of elements you put in to make a semiconductor,
you can actually vary that band gap that I talked about last time. And when you vary
that band gap, the not so large gap between the outermost band and the filled band in
a semiconductor, the gap across which some electrons can jump, you can vary the width
of that gap. And when electrons and coals recombine, they give off an amount of energy
equal to that band gap, and that energy comes out as a little burst of electromagnetic radiation
called a photon. And if you engineer that band gap, just write that photon will be in
the visible region of the spectrum, and it will make visible light. And so one of the
most important devices we have today is the light emitting diode. And the light emitting
diode is simply a P end junction diode. It's not silicon, but it's engineered with other
materials to give off light of particular colors. And you can engineer it for different
colors. And I have here, we'll take a close up shot at it, I have here a little circuit
board that you can build simple electronic circuits on. And I have on this end of it,
on the right, a couple of diodes, a red LED and a green LED. I also have a little resistor,
a little tiny device that has significant electrical resistance. That's because if I
connected a battery right across a diode in the reverse direction, nothing would happen.
In the forward direction, a large amount of current would flow and the diode would be
destroyed. So you always have to put a resistor in series with a diode. And I'm going to connect
the negative terminal to one end of these LEDs, that end of the LEDs are connected together
and the other ends are connected together through the resistor. So both these LEDs are
in the circuit. And right now the green LED lights very happily. And the red LED is off.
And the reason is I've connected these two light emitting diodes back to back, reverse
direction. So one of them has its P connected to the other one's N. So when I connect, try
to make current flow through them, it flows through one but not the other. Now if I reverse
the polarity of the battery, here's the negative terminal of the battery, here's the positive
terminal. If I reverse that, the other diode becomes forward biased and lights back and
forth. The green one's lighting, the red one's lighting, the green one's lighting, the red
one's lighting. Each diode is right now the red one is forward biased, the green one is
reverse biased. Now the green one is forward biased, the red one is reverse biased. So
those are light emitting diodes. Light emitting diodes also see application in devices that
you find all over the place these days. That is in these simple seven segment displays
that I have at the right hand end of this, or the left hand end of this board. There's
a little display. It has seven little segments that together can make any of the numbers.
And those seven segments are made up of light emitting diodes. And here I will light one
of those segments. I'm not going to light them all at once in a real computer circuit
or digital readout of any kind. Electronic logic circuits such as we'll be discussing
in subsequent lectures would determine which combinations of these have to light. So if
it's a three, the top one, one of the side ones, the two side ones on the other side,
the bottom one and the middle one would all light to make a three, for example. And if
I move around which one I'm connecting to, for example, I can light different segments.
There's the lower right segment being lit. Go to the other side. There's the bottom segment
being lit. There's the decimal point being lit. And so on. So that's a seven segment
display. And it basically consists of LEDs, light emitting diodes. By the way, those gray
displays, you see the sort of gray ones, those are liquid crystal displays. They involve
polarization of light more on those in the final lecture of this particular series. So
those are light emitting diodes. Another application for light emitting diodes. Here's an LED flashlight.
It produces a very bright, very white light. White light LEDs are a fairly new invention.
And so they found their way into flashlights. This flashlight is both brighter and lasts
far longer than an incandescent flashlight, partly because LEDs have no filament to burn
out. But more importantly, the battery will last longer because the LED is very efficient
at converting electrical energy to visible light. An incandescent light bulb is very
inefficient. It produces mostly heat. So sometime in the next decade or so, I can almost guarantee
you that much better engineered LEDs, which are still in the development stage, will replace
all our incandescent light bulbs. Already cities have saved enormous amounts of energy by replacing
traffic lights, which used to consist of an ordinary white light incandescent light bulb
with a filter over it that wiped out most of the light and made it come out what was
left come out red or green. Horribly inefficient. Modern traffic lights in many cities are little
tiny patterns. You can almost see the dot like pattern to the light of LEDs in the appropriate
colors and they're much more efficient and they save huge numbers on their huge amount
of money on their electric bills. So those are LEDs. The reverse can occur too. An LED
makes light. You can also bring light into a PN junction and make electricity. I showed
you outdoors the other day this photovoltaic panel. I'll give you a little more sense briefly
now of how that thing works. So let's take a deeper look at it. The photovoltaic cell
is basically just a PN junction. It's got that electric field in it. It's not conducting.
There's no electricity, no current flowing, but light comes in and the light energy can
create an electron whole pair. And now that electron whole pair finds itself at the junction
with those strong electric fields and the electric field will drive the hole downward
and the electron upward and that makes a current flow. So that's basically ultimately
the physics behind how a photovoltaic cell works. And you saw one in action the other
day actually running a little fan on a bright sunny day outside the teaching company here.
But that's not what this lecture is about. I want to end in the last few moments with
a description of the device that is really important and that's the transistor. And here's
how we start with a transistor. There are many kinds of transistors. Bipolar junction
transistors, junction field effect transistors, et cetera, et cetera. This is called a MOSFET,
a metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistor, MOSFET. The name sounds complicated, but this
is one of the simplest transistors to understand, which is why I'm using it here. And the MOSFET
consists of a block of P type material with two little intrusions of N type material. We'll
see in the next lecture how you'd actually make this thing. It could equally well be
N type material with two intrusions of P. That's a nice thing about semiconductors. There's
always this complementarity and that sometimes serves us well. But I'll just discuss this
particular MOSFET. So there it is. And now I'm going to connect it to the outside world
by hooking up a battery. Well, that was kind of a stupid thing to do because no matter how
I connect this battery, one of those junctions is forward biased and one is reverse biased.
Remember, if we connect the negative to the N, we've got a forward bias junction. If we
connect the positive to the N, we've got a reverse bias junction. There are two junctions
in this transistor. Each of those little blocks of N type material is connected to this P
type material and there are junctions in between them. And consequently, no current will flow
in this device. Got a forward junction on the left, a forward bias junction, a reverse
bias junction on the right. It would make no difference if I change the battery around.
All that would happen is now I'd have a reverse bias junction on the left, a forward bias
junction on the right, and still the thing would conduct no electric current. That's
a pretty dumb device. But that's not all there is to a MOSFET transistor or any transistor
because unlike a diode, a transistor has not just two places you connect electricity to
it, electric currents, electric voltages, but three. It's got a control electrode and
the key to a transistor, this is what makes a transistor so valuable is it allows one
electric circuit to control another. That's the key element in computing. It's the key
element in stereo amplifiers. It's the key element in almost every application, electronic
application, is to have a device in which one circuit controls another. So how do we
make that happen in the transistor? Well, we add a thin layer of oxide. A wonderful
thing about silicon, if that P type material is silicon, if you simply expose it to oxygen
and let it oxidize, it makes silicon dioxide, sand, glass, quartz, which is an excellent
insulator. And so you can build insulating layers on these materials and we'll talk more
about how you do that in the next lecture. But here we have this thin insulating layer
and then we coat a thin layer of metal on top of that. And now, let's see what happens.
If I take that thin layer of metal and I connect it, call that metal the gate and the
thin layer is the insulating layer. If I take that gate, and it's a gate because it's a
control element, it decides whether electrons are going to get through this thing or not.
What happens if I take that gate and I connect it, say, to the positive terminal of the battery?
Now I'd probably do more complicated things. It might be resistors. It might go to a slightly
different voltage, but the basic idea is this. What if I connect that gate to the positive
terminal of the battery? Now the gate gets positive charge on itself. So I've drawn some
little pluses on the gate. Now, the nice thing about the MOSFET is no electric current flows
through the gate. So power, product of voltage and current, as we saw with the demonstration
some lectures ago, there's no power, at least being drawn by the gate circuit, takes no
power, almost no power, because almost no current flows through that insulating layer
of what is essentially glass or silicon dioxide. But the electrical attraction of the positive
charge in that metal gate for any negative charges that are sitting around in that p-type
material, now we've got to remember something. The p-type material is p-type because the
majority charge carriers are holes, but there still are some minority electrons, and they're
there because of that random thermal excitation which produces electron hole pairs. They're
not a lot of them. They're spread throughout the whole p-type material. They're very diffused.
They play very little role normally in the electrical conductivity of this material.
But now, and again this picture is not really to very good prospect, very good scale, now
I've got this thin metal layer. It's positively charged. Those positive charges attract electrons
in the p-type material, again those few minority carrier electrons, and it tracks them into
the region right under the gate. And a semiconductor with lots of electrons in it is n-type material.
And if this device is engineered right and you put enough voltage on that gate, you will
pull enough electrons into that, quote, channel between the two little permanent intrusions
that you make the whole channel n. And consequently, we have just a block of n-type semiconductor.
We don't have any junctions anymore that can block the flow of current, and current can
flow through this device. And that's how the transistor fundamentally works. You apply
a voltage to the gate, you put positive charge on the gate, and you therefore make the channel
conducting and there you have a transistor which has been turned on.
Now how well the transistor conducts depends on how much voltage you put on the gate. Put
a little bit and you'll only attract a few electrons and you won't get much conduction.
Put a higher voltage and you'll get lots of electrons. And there are two basic modes
to operate this transistor or any other electronic control device. In the so-called analog mode,
which is what's going on in your stereo amplifier, for example, you use a variation in the voltage
at the gate to control a great big current that may be flowing through that channel.
Put a little bit of voltage, a little current flows. Put a big voltage, a big current flows.
Put an audio signal with varying voltages like we saw in the oscilloscope when we had
our musicians playing instruments and a varying current flows that follows that. And that current
could be strong enough to drive a loudspeaker. That's the essence of amplification. In amplification,
you vary the gate voltage continuously to vary the current in that channel continuously.
In digital electronics, on the other hand, we want that dramatic difference between one
and zero, yes and no, on and off. And so we use the gate as a switch. If you put zero
volts on the gate, no current flows and the thing is off. If you put a certain substantial
voltage on the gate, the transistor turns what we say fully on and it conducts. And
so you have just two states for the transistor. It becomes basically an on-off switch. That's
how we're going to be using transistors in digital electronics. It's possible, by the
way, to build, as I said, a complementary transistor. And in many cases, putting complementary
transistors together gives you a much more efficient semiconductor logic circuit or a
much more efficient amplifier. Chances are the output, the final stages of your stereo
amplifier has complementary transistors driving the speaker in each direction. So transistors
are remarkable electronic control devices. And let me end just by showing you a couple
of transistors and then going to our required summary slide. Here are some transistors.
Little one with, again, three leads. Medium one, this one can handle a water-so of power.
And here's a big power transistor such as might swing a few tens of watts in the output
of a power amplifier. It's mounted on a big heat sink because it will get quite hot as
it's operating. So those are some individual transistors. And let's move now from atom
to transistor. There's where we were at the end of the last lecture. We'd got from atoms
to PN junctions, to PNN materials. In this lecture, we built PN junctions. We discovered
that they work as one-way valves. And from that, we were able to build the MOSFET transistor.
