Lecture 25, Keeping Warm.
This is the first lecture in Module 5 whose title is Fire and Ice, and is the title of
Module 5, Fire and Ice, and the title of this lecture, Keeping Warm, both imply this
module is about heat and related phenomena.
Let's take a look, as we have with the other modules, at a quick outline of what we're
going to be doing in the six lectures that comprise this module.
The first lecture is called Keeping Warm.
I'll say a little bit more about what it's going to do in just a minute.
Lecture 26 is Life in the Greenhouse.
That's going to talk particularly about Earth's climate, how Earth's climate is established,
and how we human beings may be changing Earth's climate.
Lecture 27, the tip of the iceberg, talks about changes in state between liquids, solids,
gases, and how they affect different substances.
We'll answer the question, which I hinted at before in my lecture on taking flight of
all things, why it is that the iceberg floats with most of its mass submerged, in fact,
why the iceberg floats at all, which is a remarkable question.
So we'll look at changes of state of materials with changes in temperature and generally
thermal conditions.
Physics in the Kitchen.
I love to cook.
The kitchen is full of examples of physics.
Heat transfer occurs.
We cook things with microwave ovens.
We need to know how to get an egg just right.
We need to explore different cooking techniques, how is baking different from broiling, different
from boiling, different from steaming.
I love double boilers because they cook egg custards, particularly tapioca, to perfection.
How does that work?
We'll look at physics in the kitchen.
Lecture 29 is Like a Work of Shakespeare.
Am I going to talk about the thermodynamics of sonnets?
Am I going to talk about Hamlet's temperature?
What am I going to talk about there?
Like a Work of Shakespeare is a quote from the British writer, C.P. Snow, and I'll leave
it at that until we get to lecture 29.
And finally, lecture 30, Energy in Your Life.
We'll talk about ourselves as creatures in 21st century industrialized society and the
amount of energy that it takes to supply us with our energy needs.
We got a hint of that several lectures ago when we had somebody cranking, it was Jamie,
cranking away on that hand crank generator.
We'll bring that out once again and we'll talk about how much energy is actually used
in your name and where that energy comes from.
As that last lecture's title hints, energy and thermal phenomena, temperature and heat,
are closely related.
Well this is lecture 25, Keeping Warm.
And as the title suggests, we're going to be talking about how it is that systems keep
at the particular temperatures they're at.
We human beings, in particular, are able to exist in only a relatively narrow range
of temperatures.
We can survive only over a few tens of degrees Fahrenheit and we're comfortable only over
a very narrow range of a few degrees to ten degrees or so Fahrenheit.
We're very restricted as to our comfortable temperature ranges.
How do we manage to keep warm?
How do we keep our buildings warm?
How does our planet keep warm?
How does a greenhouse keep warm?
How do natural systems keep warm?
What determines the temperature of the sun?
What determines the temperature at the filament of a light bulb?
How do things keep warm?
Those are the kinds of questions we're answering in this lecture.
Let me begin with some definitions.
We sort of talk loosely about heat.
I want to be a little more precise with the definition of heat than you probably are in
your everyday life.
We sort of think of heat, and I've suggested this before, as referring to kind of random
motions of the molecules that make up a substance.
And I argued before that, for example, when I do something like step on the brakes in
my car, provided it's not a hybrid car that's regeneratively braking using the law of induction
and putting that energy back into the battery.
But if it's an ordinary car with friction brakes, what we're doing is turning the directed
forward motion of the car into this random motion of the molecules that we call loosely
heat.
And I've always used that word loosely because that is not quite the definition of heat.
Strictly speaking, that energy associated with the random motion of molecules should
be called internal energy.
It's energy that's internal to a system.
It isn't associated with the bulk motion of a system.
It's internal to the system in the sense that it belongs to the individual particles, the
individual atoms and molecules that make up that system.
So what we tend to think of as heat, I say here's a bathtub full of hot water, it's got
a lot of heat in it.
I really shouldn't say that.
It's got a lot of thermal energy.
What's heat then?
Heat has a very specific meaning in physics.
It means energy that's in transition, going from one place to another, and not just any
energy that's in transition.
For example, the energy that is flowing down an electrical wire to bring power to my laptop
computer right now, that's not heat.
Heat is energy that's flowing because there's a temperature difference between two things
or two places.
And when there's a temperature difference between two things and two places or two places,
energy tends to flow from one to the other, and the energy flowing as a result of the
temperature difference is called heat.
Once the energy gets into the other substance, it stands strictly speaking internal energy.
And you may say, why am I quibbling with words like this?
And the answer is an important one.
If I have a bathtub full of cold water and I make it hot, one way to make it hot would
be to put it in contact with a hot object.
I could dump a hot block of stone into it.
I heat up a stone and a fire and dump it in the bathtub.
And the bathtub would warm up because the stone is hotter than the bath water and energy
would flow as a result of that temperature difference.
But I could equally take that bath and put my hand in it and agitate it vigorously, supplying
energy and turning that energy by friction into the internal energy.
My hand is not significantly hotter than the bathtub.
Maybe it's even cooler.
It's not transferring energy by virtue of a temperature difference by another means.
But the end result is the same.
The bathtub is at a higher temperature and it has more internal energy.
It refers to energy that is in transition specifically because of a temperature difference.
Now I've talked about temperature differences.
What on earth is temperature?
Well temperature is actually a fairly simple thing in the easiest physics definition.
It gets pretty complicated in more complicated definitions.
But in the simplest definition, temperature is simply basically a measure of the average
energy, the average internal energy that individual molecules have.
Now you have to be a little bit careful with that definition.
It's most accurate for gases, simple dilute gases like the atmosphere around me.
But it basically applies.
What temperature is basically measuring is how much of that internal jiggling energy
there is on average.
You increase that energy, you've increased the temperature.
Now there's a whole range of internal energies, of internal speeds of the particles that are
say whizzing around in this room at speeds on the order of 300 meters a second.
But some of them are going 1000 meters a second and some of them are going 10 meters a second.
But the average speed is around 300.
That's also close to the speed you're most likely to find.
So temperature is a measure of the energy, ultimately the kinetic energy of the molecules
as they whizz around.
So we have heat which describes how much total energy, internal energy, energy associated
with these random emotions there is in something, I'm sorry not heat, it's the energy flowing.
Internal energy is that total amount of energy in the substance.
Heat is energy that flows from one thing to another as a result of a temperature difference.
And temperature is a measure of the average amount of energy in the molecules of a substance
and the average amount of internal energy, the internal energy per molecule.
So they're all measuring slightly different things.
How do we measure temperature?
Well temperature unfortunately like the meter kilogram system of units that we invented
to do electricity and magnetism is really, the temperature scales we have really aren't
quite as natural as they might be.
Because temperature is a measure of energy and because systems have a minimum amount
of energy they can possibly have, you might think that minimum is zero because of quantum
physics isn't quite zero, but it's tiny.
There is actually a minimum temperature that a system can have and that temperature is
called absolute zero.
So if we had been smart and physicists who work with thermal effects particularly are
smart enough to use this system of temperature, we would use a temperature system basically
based on absolute zero.
But that's not the temperature system we use.
We tend to use in the United States the Fahrenheit scale for temperature and I have here a picture
that shows as horizontal lines the temperatures representing the temperatures at which various
phenomena occur.
At the very bottom is absolute zero.
You cannot go lower than that.
It's like the bottom of a swimming pool.
You can't have any less water than taking it all out.
There's a temperature fairly close to absolute zero at which nitrogen boils.
After lectures in this module I'm going to be working with liquid nitrogen and it's going
to be at about that temperature.
Much higher than that is the temperature at which ice melts and higher still is the temperature
at which water boils.
On our Fahrenheit scale, 212 is the boiling point of water, 32 is the freezing point of
water, the melting point of ice.
On that scale nitrogen happens to boil at about minus 321 degrees Fahrenheit and absolute
zero occurs at about minus 460 Fahrenheit.
Most other countries in the United States and most scientists who don't have to use
the absolute zero scale, for instance a biologist talking about what's the best temperature
to incubate these cells, will typically use the Celsius scale and the Celsius scale is
quite similar to the Fahrenheit scale in that it doesn't have it zero at absolute zero.
On either of these scales zero degrees doesn't really mean there's zero of something.
It's just an arbitrary point on the scale and my home in Vermont last winter it got
to 20 below zero many times.
There's nothing magic about that negative temperature.
We're still way above the true absolute zero.
That's just an arbitrary point on an arbitrary scale.
The Celsius scale is a little bit more rational in that the melting point of ice, the freezing
point of water, is zero degrees Celsius.
The boiling point is 100 degrees higher at 100 degrees Celsius.
Nitrogen happens to boil or liquefy depending on which way you're going at almost minus
200 Celsius and absolute zero is minus 273.
Neither of these scales is the best to use.
The actual official system international system of units temperature scale is the Kelvin scale.
On the Kelvin scale absolute zero is zero Kelvin's.
By the way if you want to sound very sophisticated you say degrees Celsius, degrees Fahrenheit
but Kelvin's are an official international system unit and you just say Kelvin's.
So if you hear a physicist saying, oh the sun's at 6000 degrees Kelvin, you can say
ah you're not quite using the right terminology.
The sun is at 6000 Kelvin's and water boils at 273 Kelvin's and water vaporizes, I'm sorry
did I say boils, water melts, ice melts at 273 Kelvin's, water boils at 373 Kelvin's,
100 degrees higher, 100 Kelvin's higher or 100 degrees Celsius higher.
Nitrogen boils or liquefies at 77 Kelvin's and absolute zero is as it should be zero
Kelvin's.
Notice that there are 100 degrees between the boiling point of water down to the melting
point of ice in the Celsius scale and there are 100 Kelvin's from the boiling point of
water down to the melting point of ice.
That same 100 difference means that a degree Celsius change is the same as a Kelvin change.
A Kelvin and a degree Celsius have the same size.
The only difference between those two scales is the zero point.
There's a Fahrenheit scale is quite different.
The degree size is different and the zero point is also different.
There's one fourth scale I'll just mention unless you're an engineer you've probably
never heard of this scale and have no reason to.
But engineers who deal with things like power plants need to work in absolute temperatures
and so engineers in the United States at least use the ranking scale in which a degree ranking
is the same as a degree Fahrenheit in size but the zero point has been correctly put
at absolute zero and on that scale ice melts at 492 degrees ranking and water boils at
672 degrees ranking and we'll see in subsequent lectures pretty much that one about Shakespeare
just why it is that we need these temperature scales that begin at zero particularly when
we're talking about things like power plants and engines and things like that.
Now I should mention that we are rarely interested in the absolute amount of energy in some warm
substance for instance again go back to my bathtub of warm water I don't really care
how much total energy is in there.
The Shakespeare lecture is going to give us a better reason why that is but one reason
is it turns out to be impossible to get all that energy out even if you would like to.
What we're usually more concerned with is how much energy does it take to change the
temperature of a substance or an object by a given amount and that number is called the
object's heat capacity.
The bigger the heat capacity the more energy the object can absorb without changing its
temperature very much.
Water happens to be a substance with an enormous heat capacity compared to most other substances
or very large anyway and that's why it takes water a very long time to boil when you put
it on the stove it takes quite a bit of energy to raise the temperature of water from tap
water temperature up to that boiling point of 212 Fahrenheit or 100 Celsius takes a long
time to do that because it takes a lot of energy coming in from your stove to do that.
It's also why large lakes like the Great Lakes exert moderating effects or the ocean exert
moderating effects on the climate around them because it takes a long time for those temperatures
to change and so they act like temperatures stabilizing regions and regions near large
bodies of water tend to experience less extreme temperature changes at least as long as those
bodies of water are unfrozen.
Now I've indicated the heat is the flow of energy resulting from a temperature difference.
So when an object's temperature differs from its surroundings heat will flow either into
the object if it's cooler than its surroundings or away from the object if it's warmer from
its surroundings and that is properly called heat.
And there are three mechanisms whereby energy is transferred by heat or to put it more succinctly
three different heat transfer mechanisms that are important to understand if we're going
to answer the question that's implied in the title of this lecture namely how do we keep
things warm.
The commonest mechanism is conduction.
It occurs when you simply place two objects in direct contact with each other and what
happens is in the hotter object particles are moving a little faster.
They collide with slower moving particles in the attached cooler object and they transfer
their energy.
Think back to the last lecture in the module on motion in module two.
I showed you some collisions of two carts and I put different masses on them and when
one object was moving faster and hitting a slower moving object energy got transferred
to it.
I similarly bounced a couple ball the tennis ball off of a kickball.
That kind of collision occurs at the microscopic level and for the objects that are moving
faster the molecules in the hotter substance energy gets transferred to the cooler substance
and that's the mechanism of heat transfer.
And different substances again are better conductors of heat better at causing this
heat conduction to take place.
Metals happen to be very good conductors of heat and it's for the same reason basically
that they're good conductors of electricity.
They have a lot of free electrons those free electrons are lightweight they easily respond
to collisions with a or a warmer region of a piece of metal and they quickly move and
they transfer that energy to other parts of the substance.
So a metal if you heat up one part of it quickly becomes hot all over if you stick a hot poker
in the fire and leave it there very long you can't even touch the metal parts of it they're
far out of the fire because metals are very good heat conductors for the same reason they're
good electrical conductors.
Fire is a moderately good conductor air with its widely separated molecules tends to be
a relatively poor conductor of heat and materials like styrofoam or fiberglass insulation managed
to trap heat.
I have a piece of styrofoam over here that's been cut open you can see the little bubble
like structure in it they happen to trap heat because they stop heat flow because they have
little trapped air bubbles and air is a relatively good insulator and so basically heat doesn't
move easily through styrofoam because of those little bubbles of air which are very
poor conductors of heat.
Now I usually like to avoid the non-metric units you notice I've been trying to talk
about meters here and I would tend to talk about Celsius degrees and things like that
because those are the unit scientists use but I do want to say something about one unit
that's worth knowing about and that's the so-called R factor used in measuring insulation effectiveness.
Over here I have a piece of styrofoam blue board this is commonly used to insulate basements
for example it's applied to the outside of basement walls before a new home is back filled.
Styrofoam has the property that has an R value which I've designated by this script R here
of 6 per inch.
Now that R value has meaning this is 1.5 inch 6 styrofoam so it's got an R value of 7.5 total.
That R value has meaning or rather the inverse of that R value one over that R value has
a specific meaning in terms of English units and here's what it means 1 over 7.5 if you
do the math arithmetic is about 0.13 a little more than a tenth.
The units of that which we rarely give you go to your construction yard and buy some
insulation say what's the R value now this is 6 inch fiberglass R 19 ask them what the
units are they won't be able to tell you probably but it does have units and the units are British
thermal units that's a unit of energy it's the amount of energy it takes to raise the
temperature of a pound of water by one degree Fahrenheit it's analogous to the calorie which
is the amount it takes to raise a gram of water one degree Celsius British thermal unit
used in the United States not in Britain per hour per degree temperature difference between
the two sides of the styrofoam per square foot so what that means is if I have one square
foot of the styrofoam insulation and the temperature difference between the inside and the outside
is one degree Fahrenheit then every hour this will lose 0.13 BTUs of energy if I have
many many square feet in my walls I multiply by how many square feet I have if it's 68
degrees Fahrenheit inside my house and it's 0 degrees Fahrenheit outside in the winter
then I multiply by 68 degrees for that difference and that number is what allows say the the
plumber or heating specialist who's sizing a new furnace for your new house to calculate
how much heat output that furnace has to be capable of because they can calculate from
the value our values of your insulation what the energy loss rate is so that's what that
our value in insulation is all about and in fact our value simply adds so they're very
useful numbers to deal with by the way people are often asking me should I turn down my
my thermostat at night does it make sense to do that or doesn't it just take more energy
to heat up in the morning and the answer is obvious if you think about it so think about
it okay why is the answer obvious because the rate of heat loss depends on the temperature
difference so if my house cools down at night the heat loss rate is going to be lower and
I'm not going to have to overcompensate for that to bring the heat up in the morning so
that's conduction and that's important one of the important things in determining energy
loss from our houses another heat loss mechanism is convection convection is the transfer of
energy by the bulk motion of a fluid and it's responsible for a number of common energy
energy transfer mechanisms for example heat flow by convection here's a symbolic picture
of a pot of water on the stove the stove burner is red hot there's heat transfer by conduction
into the water but then the warmed water becomes less dense and it rises in the middle and
it sinks in the edges and it sets up these patterns of circulation convection cells
they're called that are what are ultimately transferring energy from the bottom of the
water to the top of the water that's a very common convection convective heat flow convective
heat flows and if you have a radiator in your house that heats the air and that sets
up a convective air circulation transferring heat around the room for example and convection
is also important in a number of natural systems here's a picture on the left of looking down
on convection cells in a laboratory and they form these very remarkable distinct hexagonal
patterns the middle of these cells is where the warm fluid is rising those boundaries
those hexagonal boundaries is where the cool fluid is falling having transferred its energy
to whatever is at the top of this picture here's a picture of the sun taken through
a special telescope the sun has convection going on to transfer energy from its interior
to its surface and this is actually a movie and if I get the movie started you can see
those convection cells is actually the boiling motion churning on the surface of the sun
let's run that again there's the surface of the sun the churning convective motions as
the convection occurs inside the sun and brings that boiling fluid to the top it's not boiling
but it's moving in these convective motions it's not a liquid it's a gas in the case of
the sun a much slower version of natural convection occurs inside the earth below the crust of
the earth is the semi plasticish mantle you can think about it as a very very thick viscous
fluid there's heat rising from the interior of the earth from the primordial heat from
when earth was formed and also from radioactive decay that's up sets up convection currents
in the mantle they run very slowly on time scales of hundreds of millions of years tens
of millions of millions of years and that's what drives continental drift for instance
the North Atlantic Ocean is opening fundamentally due to convection patterns like this that are
carrying Europe and America apart at about the rate that your fingernail grows not immeasurable
we can actually measure it with among other things the global positioning system that
I will talk about in a later lecture by the way I mentioned that air is a poor conductor
of heat and therefore a good insulator but it isn't good enough just to make say a double
tane window with a wide gap between them because if you have air air readily sets up convection
currents and those convection currents can carry heat even if air isn't a very good conductor
that's again why we use insulation like fiberglass and styrofoam because those little bubbles
inhibit the convective motions of the air and then we get the true insulating value of the
air because we've suppressed the convection finally let me mention energy loss mechanism
that here on earth tends to be important only at very high temperatures it's the way hot
wood stove sends much of its energy into the room for example or a light bulb filament
and that's radiation that's the transfer of energy by electromagnetic waves because all
objects involve vibrating molecules and atoms and they have electric charges they represent
accelerated electric charges and we saw in the last lecture of module 3 accelerated charges
are what produce electromagnetic radiation so something like a hot stove burner emits
electromagnetic radiation that becomes visible for you to see shiny objects reflect radiation
so shiny objects can block the flow of radiation here's a thermos bottle if you look inside
the thermos bottle vacuum bottle you see it's shiny on the inside that's to suppress any
energy loss from radiation in addition there's a vacuum between the inner and outer walls
of these containers and conduction and convection can't occur in a vacuum because there's no
materials to handle the conduction or convection so the thermos bottle effectively suppresses
virtually all energy loss from what you put in it that's why it's so smart that if you
put cold stuff in it stays cold and hot stuff in and it stays hot that's also why some very
high quality windows you might buy for a new house are called low e windows they actually
block the flow of infrared radiation that your house would tend to emit the hotter an
object gets the more electromagnetic radiation it emits and something else happens too and
that's something else is that the color of the radiation changes here I have an example
of that here I have a light bulb the bare filament you can see it it's not a frosted
light bulb like most of the light bulbs you use and I have it connected to this device
which is actually a variable auto transformer which uses again Faraday's law of induction
to provide a variable voltage to this light bulb and as I turn the light bulb up first
not much happens but there is electric current flowing through it but you just don't see
anything happening but as I turn it up more it begins to glow first a dull red it's not
emitting much radiation and the radiation it's emitting is primarily not that red color
but actually infrared that I can't see but as I turn it up more two things happen it
emits more radiation and by the way the amount of radiation emits goes up very rapidly as
the fourth power of the absolute temperature so if I double the temperature in kelvin's
or ranking not from 10 to 20 Fahrenheit but from 100 to 200 or 200 to 400 kelvin's I will
multiply the amount of radiation by 2 to the 4th or 16 fold so it goes up very rapidly
with increasing temperature and furthermore you'll see the light is getting yellower and
yellower and yellower and yellower more and more it is coming out now as visible light
more and more and more visible light more light more light and it's getting whiter and whiter
and whiter and whiter I'm actually exceeding the design voltage of this lamp so it may not
last long and there it is white hot light the temperature of that filament is reflected
in the color of the light it emits the sun for example is white hot it's at 6000 degrees
celsius about the same as 6000 kelvin's because there's only a few hundred degrees difference
in the zero point the filament of a typical light bulb not many had that all cranked up
is about 3000 kelvin's about 3000 degrees celsius I had that cranked all the way up
it was almost the same temperature as the surface of the sun probably and I can tell
that because it was glowing with about the same white kind of temperature now I want
to end with an important concept which we'll use more of in the next chapter if I have
a hot object and I have no additional energy to it for instance this light bulb and I turn
off the power so there's no energy source it quickly cools down why because it loses
energy to its surroundings and if I don't want it to lose energy I have to keep supplying
it at a steady rate with new energy if I don't want its temperature to change it will always
lose energy but I'm replacing that lost energy and maintaining a constant temperature and
that's the key to maintaining constant temperature that's the key to keeping warm you want to
balance the energy loss that naturally occurs with any energy supplied to the system in
things like buildings we have thermostats that turn the furnace on and off to achieve
that balance in our brains we have a hypothalamus that senses our body temperature and it does
things like causing us to sweat more or in certain animals it raises the fur or shuts
down the fur or ruffles the feathers or whatever in such a way that that affects the energy
loss rate and tries to or it increases our metabolic rate to change the energy input
to keep us at the same temperature even without some active mechanism like that though objects
naturally seek a certain temperature and an example I want to give you to end with here
is the example of a solar heated greenhouse before I do let me just give you the general
conceptual framework for this idea of energy balance heat flow depends on temperature differences
if you're too hot the heat flow increases well then there's more cooling if you're too
cool the heat flow decreases resulting in a warming so an object ultimately will come
into balance at a constant temperature if the energy input to that object or system
remains constant what that balance what that temperature is depends on how rapidly the
object can exchange heat with its surroundings and as an example here's a greenhouse okay
and this greenhouse is going to be in balance it's cold outside but the greenhouse can still
be warm inside why because energy is coming into the greenhouse from the sun and energy
is going out of the greenhouse at an equal rate and that rate is determined by the material
of which the walls are made how well the glass is double layered to be insulated and so on
exactly what that warmer temperature will be is determined by the properties of the greenhouse
how it's been designed but the point is in balance the rate at which energy is coming
into that greenhouse in this case sunlight is exactly balanced by the rate at which the
energy is going out to the cooler environment and you might say wow there must be some very
complicated computerized heating system to get that balance just right nonsense there's
nothing like that this happens completely automatically what if it were too cool in
the greenhouse what if you opened the door for a while and left it open and then you
say oh the door is open and you closed it well now the greenhouse is cool what does that
mean because it's cool it's not at a very big temperature difference from its surroundings
so the rate at which energy flows out is relatively small but the rate at which energy is coming
in from the sun is still large and that means there's a net input of energy to the system
its internal energy is going up and its temperature is a measure of that internal energy and therefore
the temperature goes up on the other hand if it's too hot in the greenhouse say a hundred
people go in there and do aerobics for a while and their body heat and so on make it too hot
in the greenhouse well then the greenhouse is much warmer than its surroundings and the
rate of heat flow depends on the temperature difference just as it did for my styrofoam
slab there and therefore the energy flowing out flows out at a greater rate than its coming
in from the sun and that results in a loss of energy and the greenhouse cools down and
eventually it finds itself at an equilibrium temperature which is determined by the rate
at which energy is coming in and by the rate at which it's losing energy through its walls
that's what determines the equilibrium temperature same as true of the filament of this light
bulb this light bulb is surrounded by the room and right now I'm dumping into it it's
a 200 watt light bulb I'm putting into it 200 watts of electrical energy and it quickly
reaches the right temperature so that it is hot enough compared to its surroundings that
it is radiating energy also at the rate of 200 watts and then it achieves its equilibrium
temperature if it's too cool it's getting more energy in than going out it warms up
if it's too hot it's radiating more energy than is coming in and it cools down and it
achieves a balance the sun is at 6000 kelvins because the energy input to the surface of
the sun from the nuclear reaction to its core is exactly balanced by the energy radiated
away from the sun into space and again there's not some complicated mechanism that achieves
that it simply happens naturally the system comes into energy balance because the energy
loss rate the rate of heat flow depends on that temperature difference and that kind
of energy balance is the ultimate determinant of earth's climate and that will be the topic
of the next lecture.
