Lecture 28. Physics in the Kitchen.
I guess this lecture is about the closest you're going to get with the teaching company to a cooking show.
And before I start, let me say that in deference to my colleagues in other sciences,
there is certainly also a lot of chemistry and biochemistry in the kitchen.
It isn't just physics, but I'm going to emphasize the physical science aspect of it being a physicist.
Ironically, we tend in the kitchen to want to do one of two things to foods.
We either want to cool them or we want to heat them.
Rarely do we want to leave them at room temperature.
And so I want to explore in this lecture our means of first cooling foods and why we do that,
and then look at our various means of cooking them ending with one of the most modern, the microwave oven.
Most foods keep better in the refrigerator, not all, but most. Why is that?
Well, there are two things going on in foods.
There are enzymes that are involved in ultimately spoiling the food,
causing the food to over-ripen, if you will, in causing lettuce to get wilted and spoiled,
and things like that happen to the food.
And those enzymatic chemical processes are slowed down by being in the refrigerator.
More importantly, there are bacteria, some of which cause food spoilage
and make the food look dreadful and taste dreadful,
and some of which may not leave an obvious trace, but may be pathogenic,
and they may grow and multiply in the food and cause human disease.
So we like to keep most of our food cool.
You might think that a few degrees, and it really is a few degrees, a few tens of degrees,
you might think that wouldn't make such a big difference, but it does.
And you might especially think it doesn't make a big difference
after hearing me go on and on at the start of this module on heat and thermodynamics,
about the fact that if we really think naturally about temperature,
we ought to be using the absolute temperature scales.
And on the absolute temperature scale, in which room temperature is about 300 kelvins,
or 450 Fahrenheit, the difference between the temperature in the refrigerator
and the temperature outside in the room seems pretty negligible.
So why is it that we cool foods?
What's the physics of food spoilage?
Well, let's take a look at the graph I have on the screen here,
another slight veering into quantitative, but not too quantitative.
And what I want to graph here is, for a typical substance at a typical temperature,
I want to ask the question, how fast are the various molecules moving around in that substance?
Now, I've emphasized that the internal energy that we loosely call heat,
but really is better called internal energy,
which is ultimately a measure of the temperature, the internal energy per molecule,
is what temperature is really measuring.
That that energy is not the same for all molecules, there's a spread in energies.
There's some average energy, and that's what the temperature is measuring,
but in a system at some temperature there's a widespread of molecular energies,
and therefore molecular speeds.
And so this particular graph shows on its horizontal axis at the bottom
the speed of molecules, and these are actual speeds you might typically have
for molecules at these temperatures.
And on the vertical axis, I'm going to plot the number of molecules
that have a particular speed, or maybe a particular,
or in a particular small range of speeds.
So here's what the graph would look like, this blue curve,
for a substance at the temperature of the refrigerator.
There's a peak somewhere, that's the most likely temperature,
the most likely speed you're to find, it's around 400 meters a second in this particular case,
that's pretty fast, but that's typical of thermal speeds in substances.
The average speed, by the way, is not quite equal to that most probable speed
because this graph isn't symmetric, so if you average it,
you get a slightly different speed, probably a little bit to the right.
But the point is, there's a peak, there's kind of a typical speed,
or an average speed, or a speed you're most likely to get the molecules at,
and they're a little bit different, but they're near that peak.
But there is a possibility that some molecules will have very low speeds,
even down towards zero, not much possibility to allow zero.
There aren't many at zero, or a little close to zero,
but as you rise toward that typical speed, there are more and more molecules.
Then as you go above that typical speed, the number of molecules falls off again,
and there's a kind of tail, a very high energy, high speed tail of molecules with very high speeds.
There aren't very many of them, but they're important.
And the reason they're important is that chemical reactions occur more rapidly at higher temperatures
because of the higher energy of the molecules.
Well, there's a single fairly low temperature, in this case it's refrigerator temperature,
characterizing these molecules, but the ones at the tail of that distribution
are more likely to participate in chemical reactions,
are more likely to cause chemical reactions to occur because they have higher energy.
So if they bang into some other molecule, it's more likely to be some interesting action.
Molecule breaks apart, atoms form in a new way, chemistry occurs.
So although molecules have this typical distribution of speeds,
the highest speed molecules, although they're in a minority,
and there aren't very many of them, play a major role in mitigating the chemical reactions
that occur with the substance.
So that's the curve of number of molecules versus speed for refrigerator temperature.
Now I've argued that room temperature isn't much different, and it isn't.
If I plotted the same curve, and these are actual plots from the actual equation
that you would use to describe this, for room temperature, it looks almost the same.
It's almost indistinguishable.
The peak has moved a little bit to the right because at room temperature
the average speed of the molecules and the most probable speed of the molecules
are just a little bit higher.
The curve has also dropped down.
The height of the peak is a little bit lower.
That's because the entire curve has broadened out a bit.
The whole breadth of speeds over which you're likely to find molecules
at the higher temperature is broader.
And so the molecules are spread over a broader range of speeds,
and that's why you see the peak having less height.
So that's another secondary effect.
Not only does the plot shift to the right, but the distribution spreads out a little bit.
So it doesn't look significantly different,
consistent with my argument that room temperature and refrigerator temperature
aren't much different.
But let's now look at this high energy tail.
Now let's blow that up just a little bit.
In fact, a lot.
If I blow up those two curves at the high energy tail,
I see a remarkable difference between the blue curve, refrigerator temperature,
and the red curve, room temperature.
There are far more molecules.
Oh, in this case, depending on the exact value you pick along there,
but in the typical range of the left end,
there are maybe four or five times as many molecules in the red curve
at that speed as there are in the blue curve.
Even though there was only a slight shift in temperature
and it changed the overall curve slightly,
it changed the high energy tail dramatically.
And so a change of only a few degrees,
a warming of only a few degrees,
changes the number of molecules in that high energy tail substantially.
And it's those molecules that are participating in chemical reactions,
including spoilage, including the reactions that go on inside bacteria
and allow them to multiply.
And that's why the difference between room temperature
and the temperature in the refrigerator is substantial.
You put fresh milk in the refrigerator and it'll keep there for two weeks.
You put the same fresh milk out on the counter on a warm day
and it will keep only a few hours.
And the difference is much more dramatic
than the difference between, say, 275 kelvins and 300 kelvins
between the refrigerator and the room temperature countertop would suggest.
And it's because of this greatly increased number of molecules
in the high energy tail of this distribution.
So we need to cool our food.
How do we do that?
We do it with refrigerators.
In the old days, a refrigerator was an insulated box
and in the winter, people went out and they cut ice off lakes
and they stored the ice in buildings, ice houses,
refrigerated with sawdust and you went and got ice
and kept it in your refrigerator and that kept your food cold.
But refrigerators invented in the early 20th century,
electrically operated or gas operated refrigerators,
made keeping foods cool a much easier thing to do.
What a refrigerator does is work on the principle fundamentally of state changes.
I argued in the last lecture that when you change the state of a substance,
particularly when you change a liquid to a gas, it takes energy to do that.
And I showed you one example of refrigeration.
I poured some water on my hand and blew on it
and that evaporation cooled my hand
and that's the principle ultimately of the refrigerator.
The refrigerator contains a fluid called a working fluid
whose job is to change state and absorb energy from the contents of the refrigerator.
In the 1930s, the working fluid was ammonia,
a rather hazardous substance which when it leaked out
caused all kinds of toxicity problems.
In later times, a synthetic chemical called freon was invented.
Freon is a seemingly inert chemical that is just untoxic,
seems to be harmless to anything.
And freon was used for many, many years in refrigerators
until it was discovered in the 1970s
that freon causes chemical reactions in the upper atmosphere
that destroy ozone and let additional ultraviolet down to the surface of the earth.
And the Montreal Protocol of 1987 was an international agreement
that basically phased out freon and related compounds
in favor of materials that are less harmful to the environment.
Although they still act as greenhouse gases,
they don't have this ozone destroying effect.
By the way, that discovery in the 1970s led to a Nobel Prize in Chemistry
which was the first Nobel Prize awarded for basically environmental research.
So how does the refrigerator work?
So let's look inside a refrigerator.
Here's a picture of what's going on in the refrigerator
and I'm basically showing you some tubing, metal tubing,
aluminum tubing, some kind of metal tubing
and a couple of devices, a compressor and an expansion valve.
Let's just see how this thing works.
So the working fluid is sometimes a gas
and I've designated that by red and sometimes a liquid
and I've designated that by blue.
So what happens?
Well, there's a compressor.
The compressor is a pump that pressurizes the working fluid
and pumps it around in this loop.
And so when the compressor gets a hold of the working fluid,
it compresses it and it becomes a high-pressure gas.
And then that fluid moves through some coils,
sometimes in the bottom of the refrigerator,
which is actually a rather poor place for energy efficiency-wise,
better places on top and you may have seen ancient refrigerators
that actually have a little round thing on top
and that was a better place to put these coils,
sometimes in the back, sometimes in the bottom.
But the purpose of those coils is to take that high-pressure gas
and let it get rid of some of its energy
in the process condensing to a liquid.
So as it goes through those coils,
it gets rid of some of its energy.
It rejects that energy to the outside environment,
the room the refrigerator is in.
Translation, if you touch the coils of the refrigerator,
either underneath or in back, they're warm.
They're giving heat out to the room that the refrigerator is in.
A refrigerator, ironically, gives off heat.
Well, not so ironically.
We'll see why in a minute.
OK, so now we have the working fluid in liquid form,
but it's still at high pressure.
It's rejected this heat to the surrounding environment.
Then it moves through the expansion valve
and the high-pressure liquid going through this valve,
which is basically just a tiny hole.
It's a tiny little orifice where the gas is forced to go through
and as it goes through, it expands and cools
and becomes a low-pressure liquid.
So now we have low-pressure liquid
and the low-pressure liquid is then circulated
through a series of coils that are insulated
from the outside environment,
in contact with the innards of the refrigerator.
And heat flows, again, that's the right term
because heat is energy flowing because of a temperature difference,
heat flows into these cool coils
and it evaporates the liquid
and it takes energy to evaporate the liquid
and that energy is ultimately extracted
from the materials inside the refrigerator.
It goes into the working fluid.
It's pumped around.
The heat has been extracted from the contents of the refrigerator
and now the working fluid is a gas
because it's evaporated at the expense of the energy
of the things inside the refrigerator
and it goes back to the compressor
and the cycle starts over again.
The net effect of the refrigerator
is simply to pump heat from inside the refrigerator
from the contents to the outside.
So that heat you feel coming out of the refrigerator,
some of it at least, not all of it unfortunately,
but some of it is coming from the contents of the refrigerator.
You put in some milk that you accidentally got warm
in the car bringing it home
down to refrigerator temperature
and the energy it extracts from the milk
ultimately comes out through this rather complex cycle
I've just described, comes out through those coils
and is rejected basically to the environment
as waste heat.
By the way, this is sort of how heat pumps work
that heat houses except they cool the outside environment
and pump the heat into the house.
So that seems all well and good.
However, there's something I've left out of this picture.
The refrigerator doesn't work unless you plug it in
and that's a profound statement.
This process of heat transferring from the cool stuff
in the refrigerator to the warm outside environment
does not happen spontaneously.
It requires a source of energy.
So you can't get this process to happen for nothing
even though energetically it might seem possible.
It isn't and that's the entire subject of the next lecture
called Like a Work of Shakespeare
and we'll go there and understand
why this is such a profound statement in the next lecture.
So refrigerators are complicated things
and they're tied into some complicated
and actually philosophically pretty profound statements
about the way the universe works
and that's tied up in the fact that you have to plug your refrigerator in.
Cooking appliances, on the other hand,
are dramatically more simple than refrigerators.
The difference between cooking appliances
and refrigerators is night and day.
Refrigerators are in some sense quite profound.
Cooking appliances are quite simple.
Conventional cooking systems, not microwaves,
we'll get to them later.
Conventional cooking systems use either the fact,
the sort of brute fact that if you pass electric current
through a substance that has electrical resistance,
the substance heats up.
And we know why it heats up.
From the module on electricity we learned
that the process of electrical conduction
involves electrons moving through a material
banging into the ions of the material,
giving up their energy,
and the whole material ends up in vibrational motion
which is essentially heat.
So resistance basically converts nice ordered electrical energy
into random heat.
For reasons I'll show you in the next lecture,
it's a lousy way to heat things in some ways.
But that's how electric stoves work.
That's how little immersion electric heaters work.
That's how electric broilers work.
That's how electric grills work.
If you have a gas range, well, that's just combustion of the gas.
Again, I'll show you in the next lecture
why that's actually a more efficient way to go.
Although you do tend to fill your house
with the products of gas combustion
which are water and carbon dioxide mostly,
but maybe some other things.
Natural gas propane, it doesn't matter.
You're basically producing heat
from the chemical reactions involved
in the combustion of the gas.
And either way, the purpose of the cooking
is to alter the food's characteristics,
one, in ways that make it taste better
and be more palatable,
and two, to kill harmful bacteria.
So both those goals are goals
of the heating process that cooking entails.
And in cooking, there are actually a number
of complex chemical and physical changes.
If you have meat, eggs, dairy,
other animal products,
they have proteins that tend to coagulate
when they're heated.
So they make the food stiffer.
So a well-done steak is stiffer
than a rare steak, for example.
If you push that process too far,
the meat or other animal product
becomes tough as those proteins coagulate.
There are sugars and amino acids in foods,
and reactions among those sugars
and amino acids occur in different ways
at different temperatures,
and result in hundreds of different substances
unified by literally kitchen scientists
as flavor-enhancing substances.
So you want to develop those substances
when you cook.
If you heat in the presence of water,
particularly, you tend to break down
complex sugars into simpler substances,
and in particular, you may bring on
the sugars, you may bring on the process
of caramelization, where sugars turn
that beautiful gold and brown
before they burn up completely.
So an important goal of cooking
and a goal of the chef,
who he or she understands all this physics
and chemistry, is to
make these process work
to get the desired result,
and a gourmet chef somehow has an instinctive feel
without having necessarily understanding
all this physics and chemistry
for how to bring out the right flavors
for just what temperatures to apply
for what lengths of time and so on.
That's what makes a gourmet cook.
But somehow you have to get energy into the food,
and you do that by one of any of the three
basic heat conduction mechanisms
in many mechanisms.
Baking,
simmering,
boiling, deep fat
frying, what you're
ultimately doing is surrounding
the food by a fluid
into which heat is being
transferred from some other source,
like the stove burner or the surrounding oven
or whatever, and then the energy
is transferred to the food ultimately by
convection.
The energy in this case reaches the surface
of the food, and then it travels by conduction
into the interior of the food.
In fact, all conventional cooking methods
deliver energy
only to the surface of the food.
I'll say more about microwaves later, they're a little bit different.
But conventional cooking methods deliver the energy
to the surface of the food, and from there
it's conducted inward. It travels inward
by conduction, unless the food is a liquid,
and there may also be convection in it.
In baking, what you do is heat the oven.
You have electric heating elements or flames.
The entire oven walls become warm
or hot, and the air inside the oven
achieves the temperature you've got the oven
set at, and
that air is in contact with your roast
or your hunk of food or whatever it is
in there, and that warmed air
transfers food into the
it transfers energy into the food.
The problem with that is air has a relatively
low heat capacity, unlike, say, water.
And so the air that's in contact
with the food kind of cools down rapidly,
and it takes a while for more
energy to conduct through the air
and for the convection currents that are set up
in the oven to bring warmer air there,
and so baking tends to be a long,
slow process.
If you have a convection oven,
there's that word convection, the convection oven
uses instead of natural convective motions,
forced convection, it has a fan,
and the fan basically pushes
the warm air in the oven into contact
with the food and doesn't let it linger
in contact with the food long enough to cool down,
which is why convection ovens, although they're still
using the process of baking, do so
faster.
On the other hand, if you have boiling
or simmering going on, you've got
the food immersed, or partly immersed
at least, in water,
and the water is at typically
near or at the boiling point,
and since water has
a much higher heat capacity, it's much harder
for the cool food to cool down the water,
furthermore, water is a much better conductor
of heat, and so the processes of boiling
and simmering take place much
more rapidly. Convection
carries the energy from, say,
the bottom of a pan to the food,
and there again, it conducts into the interior
of the food. If you're boiling in
an uncovered container,
you're guaranteed that the temperature of the water
will not exceed 212 degrees
Fahrenheit or 100 degrees Celsius. That's because,
again, as I showed in the previous lecture,
once the phase change starts,
the material has to stay at the same
temperature until it's all gone. Woe to you
if you boil all the water away. As long as there's water there,
it's at 212, as long as
it's at atmospheric pressure. Now,
I showed you in the last lecture how I could boil coffee
at a temperature less than
212 if I was at
less than atmospheric pressure. Similarly,
if I put more pressure on,
the water will rise to a higher temperature
as a liquid before it boils, and that's what goes on
if you like to use a pressure cooker. A great thing
for cooking beets, which can be really tough
and you've got to get a lot of energy into them
to soften them up, or potatoes sometimes.
A pressure cooker is just a big pressure vessel.
It's a lid that's tight-fitting.
If you put the lid on, there's a little regulator
thing that sits on top that regulates the pressure
at typically twice-atmospheric pressure,
and at that temperature, water boils at about
250 degrees Fahrenheit, and so food cooks
that much faster because the water is much hotter.
So that's how a pressure cooker works.
By the way, a pressure cooker is also equipped
with an expansion safety valve. It's that little rubber thing
with a metal piece in it, and if it gets too hot,
that thing melts, and the steam escapes
rather than blowing up the pressure cooker,
which happened with earlier pressure cookers.
If you like to steam food,
the food is immersed in water vapor
over boiling water.
The water vapor has a lower heat capacity.
It acts a little bit more like baking
in the sense that it's a slower, more gentle process,
but nevertheless, the food is surrounded
by the steam at 212 degrees,
and again, it's always at that transition point.
The steam eventually rises, hits the top of the pan,
condenses, flows back down,
and you have a continuous cycle going on.
The steam, the water vapor
is ultimately transferring the heat
to the whatever's being cooked.
One of my favorite cooking tools,
and one that's getting harder to find
because I think it's not used as much,
is the double boiler. Here's a pan
in which you put maybe an inch of water.
Here's a pan in which you put something
like an egg custard, or one of my favorite
desserts, tapioca pudding,
and the egg custard,
or whatever it is, is cooking
due to the heat that's being transferred
from the water boiling below,
making water vapor. The water vapor
condenses on the bottom of the pan.
It carries the energy in the form of that latent heat.
It gives up the energy gently
at the bottom of the pan. The bottom of the pan
is again kept at that transition temperature,
212 degrees, but there is no
violent agitation of the custard
as there would be with boiling.
So it's a very nice, gentle, even method
of cooking. You can't possibly burn the stuff,
and you don't subject it
to that kind of vigorous motion
that might toughen things up.
So I really like a double boiler,
and that is a method that is similar to the way
a hurricane works. I argued that a hurricane
worked by a latent heat
of water evaporated from the ocean
released in the air to drive the hurricane.
Similarly, in the double boiler,
that latent heat released from the water
that's boiling because of the, it's being on
a hot stove burner, is then released
in contact with the bottom of the upper pan,
and that's what causes the food to cook.
So that's a double boiler. If you deep
fat fry, well that's, I wouldn't recommend
that method for health reasons,
but if you do,
the oil boils at a higher temperature than water,
and so you can heat the surrounding liquid
to a higher temperature, and deep fat frying
is a very quick method of cooking.
If you grill or boil, the heat is transferred
directly to the food, stir-frying
or pan-frying, or what's sometimes called
pan-broiling, where you throw a slab of meat
on a hot pan or something, that's
direct conduction from the pan surface
to the food. If you use a charcoal
grill or you broil in the oven,
the dominant method of heat transfer,
in those cases, is radiation
from the red hot surface
onto the surface of the food. That's why
it's pretty easy to burn food with those methods.
So all those methods of cooking,
those conventional methods of cooking, ultimately
deposit energy at the surface of the food,
and then it works its way in by
the process of conduction.
Microwaving is entirely different.
Strictly speaking, microwaving
is not a process involving heat.
Think about that a minute.
Remember what heat is.
Heat is energy that's flowing as a result
of a temperature difference.
Well, in microwave cooking, there's no such thing
as a temperature difference. There's that
magnetron tube that is spinning electrons
around and generating these microwaves
at 2.45 gigahertz frequency.
Describe that more in lecture 18.
But the magnetron is not hot
compared with the food. The energy
is not flowing because
of a temperature difference. It's flowing because
we generated microwaves in a magnetron
and beamed them into the food. Microwaving
is a non-thermal way of cooking.
Microwaves, quote,
heat the food without any heat.
There's energy transfer, but it's not
strictly heat because it's not flowing
because of a temperature difference.
And as I pointed out in previous lectures,
the microwaves cook ultimately because
the water molecule in particular
has a big separation of electric charge,
positive and negative, and the oscillating
electric field of the microwave,
which you saw in that little movie I showed
you of how an electromagnetic wave
consists of oscillating electric and
electric field going back and forth
2.45 billion times a second, grabs
the water molecules and jiggles them all up
and makes that random motion that we call
loosely heat, but we really should call
thermal energy. So the microwave
deposits its energy in the food and
that energy becomes thermal, what we call
thermal energy or internal energy
in the food.
And let me just show you an example.
Here's some water. It's at room temperature here.
It's actually a little below room temperature, about
55 degrees
Fahrenheit, I put it in the microwave oven.
Turn on the microwave oven, give it
a couple minutes and
that water will reach the boiling point quickly.
No heat is being transferred.
Energy is being pumped into the water,
but not heat.
Now the microwaves in an oven, as I mentioned,
have a specific frequency. It's about
2.4 billion cycles per second, about
2.4 gigahertz, and that corresponds
to a wavelength of about 5 inches,
12 centimeters, and that results
as I argued way in module 1
when I was talking about wave interference
in the possibility that as the waves
bounce around the microwave oven,
and even though you see a plastic interior
to the oven, right behind that is metal
and the microwaves are bouncing around,
there was a little water spilled and a bubble of it
just boiled, which is what that, I guess
you didn't hear that noise, but I did.
Popping noise was caused by.
So as the microwaves bounce around,
there are regions where they interfere constructively
and regions where they interfere destructively,
and that picture is kind of a symbolic
look at what the microwave
intensity in the oven might look like.
There are hot spots and cold spots.
Again, if the microwaves
had a wavelength like that of visible light,
very, very tiny, this wouldn't matter
because you couldn't be able to tell
the difference between a hot spot and a cold
that would be so close together.
But because the microwave wavelength
is about this long, and that's because
the frequency that's best for jiggling
these water molecules is associated
with these hot spots and cold spots
in the microwave oven.
So what do we do?
Well, inside this particular oven,
the food is going around.
I can open the oven, by the way,
that's a sign that it's not a thermal heating mechanism,
there's no heat to come out,
except the fact that the water is now a little hotter.
There's a rotating plate
in the bottom here,
and that rotating plate,
which you can see here,
carries the food around and it goes
where the food, where the cold spots
and hot spots are.
In some microwaves ovens,
as I've said before, I believe,
there is...
Let's just go again a little bit more.
In some microwaves ovens,
there is a rotating plate
that spreads the microwaves out
instead of doing this.
So that's microwave cooking,
and the microwaves
are safely kept in the food.
The microwaves aren't coming out
and filling the whole room with microwaves.
Well, let's stop it again.
I think we've got enough that we can see
that this water is hot.
Ooh, that water is very hot.
I stick the thermometer in
and it goes shooting right up.
I don't know if you can see that,
but there it goes, that red is rising rapidly
because that water has been heated,
but by a non-thermal means.
If you look in the front of the microwave,
there's a glass door so I can see into it,
and those holes, although they're big enough
for us to see through,
are small enough
that they block microwaves.
Remember, in a very early lecture,
I talked about what it meant for a surface
to be rough or smooth, and it meant
rough or smooth compared to the wavelength
of the waves involved.
Well, these holes are enormous
compared to the wavelength of visible light,
so light goes right through them,
but they're small compared to the wavelength
of microwaves, which is about that big,
and it's a good idea to stand
right in front of it all the time,
but that basically blocks
the microwaves from coming out of the oven.
By the way,
some foods
you need to
you want to cook at a lower power level
in the microwave, and when you set a lower power level,
you'll hear your microwave turning on and off
rapidly
to lower the effect of power level.
That gives the heat time to spread
throughout the food and cooks more gently.
In other cooking methods, the microwaves
actually penetrate about half an inch
into typical food,
so there's heating of the outer half inch
roughly, and from there, the food
conducts inward as it would in a normal cooking process.
Microwaving, by the way, is not particularly effective
on ice, for the reason I showed in the last lecture.
The ice, the water molecules in ice
are locked into a crystal structure.
They aren't free to undergo this jiggling,
and so when you thaw food in a microwave,
you're actually grabbing other molecules,
warming them up, and then that energy
that's part of the reason why you don't
blast full power when you're thawing,
but you have a thaw setting that uses much lower power.
Microwaving is very efficient.
All the microwave energy ends up in the food,
and that has two implications.
One is efficiency, although
it takes a lot more electricity to make,
say, 900 watts of microwaves
than 900 watts, so the oven itself
isn't all that efficient, but the cooking process is.
It also means if you double the amount of food
in the oven, it will take exactly twice as long
to cook it. If you have a package of food
in six minutes, and you put two of them in,
you put them in for 12 minutes, because all the energy
goes in, unlike the other processes
in which most of the energy is wasted.
Microwave cooking entails some dangers.
The electric fields cause currents to flow.
They can heat up metal.
At sharp corners of metal, you accumulate
electric charge, and sparks can fly.
Here's this teaching company, Mug.
It's got some gold leaf on it.
I wouldn't want to put this in a microwave oven
because I'd get lightning strikes, literally,
on that gold leaf.
If it heats the water from the outside
instead of boiling it from below, it's possible
that water can heat above the boiling point
and not boil.
And then if you pull that cup out, jostle
a little or drop a tea bag in, it may boil
explosively and splatter hot water on you.
So there's some dangers with microwave ovens.
Well, I want to end on a totally different topic,
just out of a little bit of humor.
How do you cook an egg?
Well, just to show you that this is
a scientific proposition, here's
Professor William's famous egg formula,
and I give you, at the bottom, a website
where you can go look up Professor
William's treatises on eggs.
He's from England. And here is the cooking time
for an egg. And D is the egg diameter
in millimeters. Notice the cooking scale
is the square of the egg diameter.
T is the hot water temperature.
T naught is the initial egg temperature.
And T yolk is the desired yolk temperature.
What do you want? Soft and runny?
150. Soft gel?
165. Hard boiled?
170. You're going to get it turning green
at 175 and dry and crumbly
at 195. There really is
a lot of physics in your kitchen.
