Welcome to lecture 29. Let me just check my notes. Ah, yes. This is like a work of Shakespeare.
I've been talking about this lecture for some time, and by the end of it, we'll understand
why it has that literary title. I'm trying a new system of notes here. Let me begin with
a demonstration. Here is, oh, we're not quite done with physics in the kitchen, I guess.
Here's a glass bowl, here's an egg. There's the egg. In the glass bowl, white and yolk.
I'm going to beat the egg. Scrambled egg. Now, what I would like to do next is to take
this beater and very carefully repeat exactly the motions I performed in beating this egg.
Turn the other way, exactly the same speed, exactly the same place, waiting for that yolk
to re-emerge. Not yet. Doing it just right, repeating exactly those motions. It doesn't
happen. Why don't you try this at home? Maybe you'll have better luck than I do. Take an
egg, beat the egg with an egg beater or an electric beater or a whisk like I'm doing,
and then carefully repeat the motions just in reverse until the white and the yolk separate
and that nice plump yolk reassembles itself out of that mixture of scrambled eggs. Well,
good luck. The chances of that happening in the lifetime of the universe are minuscule.
If you beat an egg every minute from now until the time the universe is already in existence,
14 billion years, the chances are negligible that that would happen. Why is that? It's
because of all the possible combinations of the molecules that make up an egg. The combination
that has all the yellow yolk molecules and all the albumin white molecules separated,
there are many such combinations, but the number of those combinations is far, far,
far tinier than the number of completely random combinations in which egg, yolk and egg white
are intermixed. This concept I'm introducing here with the
beating egg is a probabilistic concept. It's unlikely other laws of physics. There's nothing
in Newton's laws that say if I turn the egg beater backwards at just the right way, the
egg won't go back together. That doesn't violate any laws of physics, but it is highly improbable
that I will ever get the egg back into that ordered state. That is a concept I want to
get across now and let me just check my notes to see what other example. I dropped my notes.
What are the chances that when I scoop those notes up, I'm going to be able to give you
a coherent lecture? Those notes were nicely in order. They told me exactly what concepts
I was going to talk about next. What are we going to say next? Oh dear, they're gone.
If I just go scoop those notes up, I will get some random arrangement of those note cards.
Now there may possibly be other configurations than the one I had them in that made some
coherent sense. Maybe there's only that one. Maybe even that one wasn't coherent, but
let's suppose it was. The chances of picking up all those notes that fell at random and
getting them into that coherent pattern are absolutely negligible. I could do it a million
times and the chances of them coming out in exactly the right arrangement are negligible.
What am I talking about? I'm talking about a tendency in nature for systems to go from
ordered states to disordered states, from your house to get neat after you've cleaned
it up for it to get messy. For you to drop your kid off at college and come back a few
weeks later and their dorm room looks like a pig's die. And we sort of think, ah, nature
naturally tends to this and we make some big high-fluding law about it, which I will do
shortly. But the real reason that happens is because of all the possible states that
the world can get itself into, that the books in your house can arrange themselves into,
that my note cards can be in, that the molecules of the egg can be in, the states in which
there is clear order, yolk separated from white, note cards in the order that gives
a coherent lecture, all the books on the shelves in nice alphabetical order, those states
are far fewer than the more random chaotic states. And so left to its own devices, if
change occurs at all, it will generally just out of this probability because there are
more random unorganized states, things will evolve toward this more unorganized state.
It is conceivable to imagine that they would go the other way, but it just doesn't happen
and the reason it doesn't happen is because there are so many more chaotic states, so
many more disorganized states than there are organized states. Let me give you one other
example of that. Here I have one of these blocks that I used to demonstrate friction
a long time ago in module 2. Friction, remember, is a non-conservative force, mechanical energy,
the bulk energy of motion is not conserved in friction, so something is conserved, we'll
get to that soon. Let me just give this block a shove, a shove it along the table and it
quickly comes to a stop. Now where did its energy go? Its bulk mechanical energy is gone,
but energy is conserved and we know where that energy is gone. The table surface and
the block have become a little bit warmer. That bulk translational motion of the entire
block moving has been converted into that random motion of the molecules that we call
loosely heat or that we should more correctly call internal energy. In fact, if I had stuck
this thermometer into the block as I did this experiment, this wouldn't really happen
because the energy involved in relation to the energy needed to raise the temperature
of this block significantly is small, but in principle if I shoved this block along,
I would see the thermometer go up. Because that's not something we can actually do,
I've made here a little movie of that. So here I have the block with the thermometer
stuck in it and the block is going to start out moving rapidly and it's going to decelerate
because the force of friction is acting on it and it's going to give up its mechanical
energy and that energy is going to reappear as the internal energy, the random thermal
energy of its molecules and as a result it's going to get hotter. So here's what the movie
looks like. The block is moving along fast at first, it's slowing down, you see the temperature
going up and up and up and the block is moving more and more slowly because it's decelerating
and eventually it comes to a stop. There it's slowing and slowing and eventually comes to
a stop at a much higher temperature or somewhat higher temperature. That is a reasonable movie.
That's something you're entirely likely to see in the real world. You might not be able
to actually stick the thermometer in, but a block moving along coming to a stop is not
the least bit surprising. Here's what's very surprising. That block is sitting there and
it has all that random thermal energy in it. What if all those molecules decided all it
wants to be moving in the same direction so that the block suddenly took off and started
heading in that direction all by itself? You might say that's impossible. It's not impossible
because the energy isn't there, the energy is there. The energy is there in the random
thermal motions in all directions and it could happen that they just conspired instantaneously
to all go in the right direction and then the block started moving. That would not violate
the conservation of energy, but it would be enormously improbable. So here's another movie.
Here's the block where we left it. Now the block starts out slowly at first and gradually
it gains speed moving to the left and as it does so, the temperature drops and it goes
faster and faster to the left. There is nothing in that movie that violates conservation of
energy and yet you would say something's wrong with that movie. I'm playing the movie
backwards. We're running it through the projector the wrong way or something. It doesn't happen.
Why doesn't it happen? Because of all the possible distributions of motions the particles
in that block could have, the one in which they're all moving in the same direction is
very, very unusual. If I ever am in that situation, as I am when I give the block a big push,
the chances are as that system evolves to some other configuration, it will evolve to
one of those much more likely configurations in which the motions of the molecules are
not all directed the same way but are random. In all these examples, the beating egg, the
dropping of the lecture notes or the wooden block, the reason we tend toward a system
of more disorganization is because those states of motion are more probable. Let me give you
one other example more closely related to the topic of this module, namely heat and
thermal things. So I'm going to move over to this microwave oven where I have a glass
of cold water sitting on top and a glass of hot water that has been warmed in the oven
and I take them and I put them side by side and I'm just going to let them sit there a
while and we both know what's going to happen. I'm going to come back and I'm going to have
two glasses of lukewarm water. The cool water is going to have warmed up to room temperature,
the warm water is going to have cooled down. By the way, even if I had put them in a completely
insulated container, a great big styrofoam cooler chest or something, they would exchange
energy with each other, heat would flow from the hotter glass to the cooler glass and I
would come back and I would find them lukewarm. And I could wait from now until forever and
it would be very unlikely that the energy would flow back from one lukewarm glass to
the other one raising the temperature of one and cooling the other, although total energy
would still stay the same. So we're talking here in this lecture about
something that's a little bit different from energy and its conservation. We're talking
about a new law of physics which is different from the laws of Newton which are absolutely
strict and must be true. It's a probabilistic law. It says things are unlikely to go spontaneously
into more organized states simply because there are more disorganized states available
to them. And all these four examples I've given you now, the egg, the lecture notes,
the block and the water, all illustrate that law which is called the second law of thermodynamics.
The second law simply says that given their own devices, systems move naturally towards
states of less organization, more chaos. To be a little more strict, the second law of
thermodynamics says the best you can possibly do is stay in a particular ordered state.
You can't get more organized spontaneously. And I'm going to spend the rest of this lecture
elaborating that concept, the second law of thermodynamics and the related concept which
you've probably heard, and sort of know the meaning of the concept of entropy.
Entropy is a quantitative measure. We can actually calculate a numerical value for entropy
that describes how ordered or disordered a state is. So the entropy of this scrambled
egg here, not cooked yet but scrambled, that entropy is greater than the entropy of the
egg when I first broke it and had separate white and yolk. Entropy is a measure of disorder.
So the second law of thermodynamics basically says that entropy tends to increase or more
specifically it says the entropy of a closed system. I'm going to talk more about closed
systems in a minute. But what I mean by a closed system is a system that doesn't have
any communication with the rest of the world, the rest of the universe. It's completely
closed in particular. It can't exchange energy with the outside world or anything else for
that matter. And the second law of thermodynamics says if you have a closed system, the best
you can do with that system is to keep its entropy constant, to keep its state of organization
unchanged, but more generally what's most likely to happen is it's likely to become
more disorganized, its entropy is likely to increase. So the second law put more succinctly
says the entropy of a closed system cannot decrease. It might just barely might be able
to stay the same, more likely to increase, but it cannot decrease. If you want a simple
English translation of the second law, the English translation is crudely that states
evolve naturally toward more chaotic situations, toward more chaotic organizations. Systems
evolve toward states that are more chaotic, less organized, more entropy. Or if you want
to be really precise, they either stay as they are or they evolve toward more disorder,
but they don't evolve spontaneously naturally toward states that have more order. Now, what's
a system? Well, that's your choice. The room I'm in right now could be a system. My body
could be a system. Planet Earth could be a system. You choose the system. And the second
law applies to closed systems, systems that cannot communicate with the rest of the world.
Well, all those systems I just mentioned do. I'm certainly interacting with the rest
of the world. This room that I'm in is interacting with the rest of the building, although because
this room is air conditioned because of the bright studio lights, they've taken precautions
to minimize that interaction so they can keep this room cooler and its surroundings, for
example. So we can achieve with insulation and things like that some degree of isolation
from the rest of the world, but we can't really get completely there. So we might expand our
definition of systems till we get to the entire universe, because that's all there is. And
so there's no question of the universe being isolated from everything else. Well, we don't
want to go there, but there are multiple universe theories and things like that that we can
get to in exotic theoretical physics courses, but not in here. Let's stop at the universe.
The second law simply then says the entropy of the universe cannot decrease, period. And
the implication of that statement is it can increase. And although the statement doesn't
imply it, it is in fact likely to increase. And once it does increase, it can't go back.
So entropy at best stays the same and more likely increases. And that is the statement
of the second law. And most of the processes that we tend to undergo, processes that involve
non-conservative forces like friction, processes like the beating of the egg, processes like
putting the two glasses of water that were once hot and cold, a kind of organization
there together and have them come lukewarm, those are imperfect processes in the sense
that they are processes that result in an increase of entropy and a loss of order. Now,
I could do something interesting here. I could walk over to these glasses which are now the
same temperature, and I could put one of them in the refrigerator, and I could put the other
one against those coils that I talked about in the last lecture where the refrigerator
rejects its waste heat, and I could run the refrigerator a while, and the one lukewarm
glass would get cooler, and the other lukewarm glass would get warmer, and I would in fact
have transferred energy from the cooler glass to the warmer one, and when it was all over,
I could put the glasses back together and I would have that nice, wonderful organizational
state I started with. That would be akin to reversing the egg-beating process and separating
the white and yolk. So why doesn't that work? Why can't I do that? Well, I can do that.
I can do the experiment I just described. I can put those glasses in the refrigerator,
one in the refrigerator, one outside, and do that experiment, and here is a conceptual
picture of what that experiment looks like. So here I have one glass in the refrigerator,
the other glass outside the refrigerator, near those coils where the refrigerator rejects
its waste heat. They're both at the same temperature as indicated by the thermometer, and after
I run the refrigerator for a while, energy is transferred through that process by which
the refrigerator works, from the glass inside the refrigerator to the glass of water outside
the refrigerator, the water in the refrigerator becomes cooler, the water outside becomes
warmer, and we have that organized state again. Okay? So there has been an entropy decrease.
There has been an increase in organization. We've moved from a chaotic state, more randomness,
to a state where there's this clear organization. Glass A is warm, glass B is cool. If I draw
a box around the refrigerator and the glass that's outside it, I have a system, and that's
a system whose entropy is decreased. Does that violate the second law of thermodynamics?
No, it doesn't, because that is not a closed system. There's something else involved here.
There is a wire connecting the refrigerator to a power plant somewhere. So the refrigerator
is not a closed system. Maybe or maybe not, but if I draw a box around the whole system
of power plant and refrigerator, what the power plant is doing is burning fuels and
all kinds of processes are going on in the power plant, which ultimately increase the
energy. The chemical composition of a fuel is more organization than the chemical composition
of the products of combustion, for example. So the process at the power plant is to increase
entropy. The process at the refrigerator is to decrease entropy, but the refrigerator
cannot be a closed system. This is why it has to be plugged in. The second law says
so. That's why it's a profoundly different kind of device, as I suggested last time,
than a simple stove or heating device. It has to be plugged into the power plant, and
if I look at the entropy of this entire system, the entropy increase at the power plant, the
entropy decrease at the refrigerator, there's an overall entropy increase. So the refrigerator
has not solved the problem or not violated the entropy law, the second law of thermodynamics.
Now let me give you some other examples. Life appeared on Earth. We had the planet initially
in a state of kind of chaos, and life has evolved on Earth. And we humans have evolved,
and we have done things like put symbols on printed pages, or in the case of the course
you're watching probably, little pits in a very carefully organized pattern on a little
plastic disc, a DVD. Or if you're old fashioned watching on VHS tape, we've imposed a definite
information containing organized magnetization pattern on a strip of VHS tape where before
all was random. Organization has appeared out of chaos on planet Earth. All those processes
reduce entropy. Evolution, the evolution of life and of intelligence and of human society,
these are entropy decreasing processes. How is that possible? It's only possible because
Earth is a, is not a closed system. Earth is just like the refrigerator. It's connected
to something. In the case of the refrigerator, there was a wire connecting the refrigerator
to a power plant. In the case of the Earth, there is a steady stream of electromagnetic
radiation coming from the sun. There are entropy increasing processes occurring in the nuclear
fusion reactions that occur in the sun's core. And the combined system of Earth and
sun is a system in which entropy is increasing. Entropy is decreasing on Earth as we organize
things. And entropy is increasing on the sun due to the nuclear reactions at its core.
And the overall system is showing an entropy increase. So there's nothing wrong with making
organization happen. You're allowed to clean up your kid's dorm room or your room or vacuum
your house or whatever. And it will go to a more organized state. But I guarantee energy
will be used in the process and the processes that produce that energy will themselves generate
more entropy and the overall effect will be to increase the entropy of the universe.
You gain organization, but at the expense of disorganization, possibly somewhere else.
Now let me give you another and more specific and sort of more engineering oriented statement
of the second law of thermodynamics, which will play a major role in the next lecture
when we talk about us as high energy users, something I hit it at a long time ago when
I had Jamie up here cranking that generator. One statement of the second law is that it's
impossible to build a perfect heat engine. What is a perfect heat engine? Well, my example
of the block that started up and somehow converted all that random thermal energy into directed
motion, that's sort of a heat engine. And here's a conceptual diagram of what a perfect
heat engine would be. This isn't a real engine. An engine is a device that produces mechanical
energy out of something typically by burning a fuel. And we'll conceive of somehow we've
gotten some stuff hot, water, I don't care what, burning a fuel, making a nuclear reaction,
using sunlight, I don't care. But we've got some hot reservoirs, a bunch of stuff at a
high temperature. And conceptually what a heat engine would be, it would be a device
that would somehow tap the internal energy of this heat reservoir and produce useful
energy, mechanical or electrical energy coming out. And we would extract all that random
thermal energy as heat, as useful work. That's what the second law says is impossible. The
second law says if we want to build a heat engine, we have to do something like this
and I will describe an implementation of this engine in the next lecture. We have to have
a cold reservoir also, cooler than the hot one. And the cold reservoir could just be
the ambient environment around us and it usually is in the case of the engines we build. And
what the second law says is if you try to extract heat from that reservoir, what you
will do is you will extract energy and some of it will turn into useful work, but you
can't turn all of it into useful work. Some of it, in fact, much of it, in the case of
many of the engines we build, two thirds of it, in the case of electric power plants
typically, gets rejected to the environment as waste heat. And there is no way around
that. That's a fundamental limitation posed by the second law of thermodynamics. So one
consequence of the second law of thermodynamics is that it's impossible to build a perfect
heat engine. You can try to extract energy from thermal sources and turn it into useful
mechanical work and maybe run an electric generator or drive the wheels of a car. But
in the process, the second law guarantees that you're going to throw a lot of energy
away as waste heat. Now, why do I call it waste heat? It is useful. In fact, you could
use it to heat your house. In fact, there are cities in Europe, particularly, where
houses are in fact heated by that waste heat from power plants. And there are increasingly
industries in the United States, more about this in the next lecture, that need hot stuff,
hot water, steam, and they also need electricity, and they generate them in the same system,
and they use the waste heat as the usable heat that they need. So it's not totally wasted.
What we're talking about here really is energy quality. What the second law is about is telling
us not about amounts of energy. Remember, there was nothing wrong with that movie run
in reverse energetically. Nothing wrong with any of these things I said can't happen energetically.
It's just they're improbable. What the second law is about is energy quality. And here's
a diagram that tells you a little bit about the quality of energy. The best kind of energy
you can have, the highest quality energy is mechanical or electrical energy. You can do
anything that you might want to do with energy, with either mechanical energy, the energy of
directed bulk motion of an object, the rotational motion of the shaft of a machine, the motion
of a car, the motion of an airplane through the air. These are highest quality energy or
electrical energy. Mechanical electrical energy are the highest quality, the lowest entropy. Heat
at very high temperatures because we're in an environment at low temperature represents
a great deal of organization and therefore high quality and low entropy. And the lowest
temperature represents the lowest quality. So on this scale, energy quality goes from
low to high on the left there, and entropy goes from low to high downward. There are
different values of energy quality. And you can convert the highest quality energy to
the lowest quality with 100% efficiency. It's a dumb thing to do because you're wasting
its good quality. That's why electric water heaters, for example, or electric heating
in general is not a great idea because it just takes low quality energy to heat your
house. And if you've got high quality energy, why not do something really useful with it
rather than turn it into low quality heat? But you can do that and you can do it with
100% efficiency. But if you have low quality energy, you can't turn it back to high quality.
With 100% efficiency. That's why this block, it's full of low quality energy enough to
make the block be moving like this. It won't happen. I could build a machine that would
get the block moving, but most of the energy it extracted from the block would end up as
waste heat rather than as motion of the block. That's the second law of thermodynamics talking
about energy quality. There's another equivalent statement. And the equivalent statement says
it is impossible to build a perfect refrigerator. That's another statement. And you can prove
and you would do this if you took a standard introductory physics course. You would prove
that those two statements of the second law are logically equivalent. If one of them is
true, the other one has to be true. What's a perfect refrigerator? Well, here's a perfect
refrigerator conceptually. What a perfect refrigerator does is say, OK, I want to extract
energy from some cold stuff and I want to put it out in some hot stuff and I want to
take as much energy as I can out of the cold stuff and have all that energy flow into the
hot stuff. And I don't want to do anything else. That would be the spontaneous flow of
energy from a cool thing to a hot thing. That would be my two glasses of lukewarm water,
one of them getting cooler and the other getting hotter spontaneously, energy flowing from the
one that was cooling to the one that was heating. The creation of order out of what had been
a more chaotic, a more disorganized state. The second law says you can't do that. How
do you build a refrigerator? Well, I showed you, unlike with an engine, I showed you the
actual mechanics of how you would build a refrigerator. It doesn't look like this picture
on your screen, but it's conceptually like that except it's missing the part that makes
it a real refrigerator. Think about what that part was. It was the part where I plugged the
refrigerator into the wall, ultimately into some power plant, which has some kind of nuclear
or chemical or whatever it is, reactions going on, increasing entropy at the power plant.
The real refrigerator looks like this. It's the opposite of the engine. An engine is a
device that takes heat from a hot reservoir, produces useful mechanical energy, high quality
energy, mechanical energy, or electrical energy, and rejects some waste heat to the environment.
A perfect refrigerator goes the other way, or a real refrigerator goes the other way.
It extracts energy from a cool reservoir, dumps it into a hot reservoir, but it can't
do that spontaneously completely. It requires an input of useful energy, of high quality
energy, mechanical energy, or electrical energy. That's why you've got to plug your refrigerator
in. By the way, that also makes heat pumps for heating houses, not perfect devices, but
they're a lot better than heating your houses with, say, electrical resistance, and they
may be even better than burning a fuel. Because what a heat pump does is uses some useful
energy, some high quality energy like electricity, to run basically a refrigerator that refrigerates
the ground, or if you're in a Southern states, the outside air, cools that down a bit and
dumps that heat into your house. And if the heat pump is well designed and the temperature
differences are right, it may take, say, one unit of mechanical energy or electrical
energy to move three or four units of heat, in which case you've got a lot more energy
into your house than you brought in in the form of electrical energy. So those devices
can be quite helpful and quite efficient. This, by the way, brings back the point I
made in the previous lecture. Again, I said refrigerators and stoves were very, very different
kinds of devices. Refrigerators are devices that involve the second law of thermodynamics
and there's this fundamental limitation. Because they have to have high quality energy
coming in. But when you just want to heat water, you can get away with the lowest quality
energy and you're fine. Well, that brings me to the end of this lecture almost, but
I wanted to give you a reason, a justification for the title that I've been talking about
since the beginning of this course, like a work of Shakespeare. There was a British
writer and scientist and also was a government official named C.P. Snow and he wrote a book
called The Two Cultures and he decried the fact that the sciences and the humanities
could never talk to each other. And there is a famous quote from C.P. Snow and in that
longer quote is the title of this lecture and I want to share that with you. This is
why the title is like a work of Shakespeare and C.P. Snow says, a good many times I've
been present at gatherings of people who by the standards of the traditional culture are
thought highly educated and who have with considerable gusto been expressing their
incredulity at the illiteracy of scientists. Once or twice I have been provoked and I have
asked the company how many of them could describe the second law of thermodynamics. And let
me pern thighs here for a moment. From what I've said in this lecture, I think you can
see that the second law of thermodynamics is pretty basic and pretty important, particularly
to us energy consuming denizens of planet earth and if that's not obvious now it will
become much more obvious in the next lecture. C.P. Snow goes on. The response was cold,
it was also negative, yet I was asking something which is about the scientific equivalent of
have you read a work of Shakespeare's? That's why my title is like a work of Shakespeare.
The second law of thermodynamics is like a work of Shakespeare. It's something that
ought to be in the repertoire of every intelligent educated person. Like a work of Shakespeare,
like the second law of thermodynamics. Now before I end, there's something about the
second law of thermodynamics that implies maybe there's a first law of thermodynamics.
Well there is a first law of thermodynamics and the first law of thermodynamics is basically
a broadening of the concept of energy conservation. I already talked about the conservation of
energy, how we could swing from potential energy to kinetic energy and back and forth
or bounce on a spring and store energy in the spring and so on. But then we worried
about non-conservative processes like friction and where do they fit in? Well the first law
talks to them. It says basically energy is conserved except that that includes now internal
energy. It says you can do useful work on something and you can erase its internal energy or you
can transfer internal energy by heat, but however you do it, energy is ultimately conserved,
however it can be transferred among forms including these lower quality forms like
internal energy. So the first law is about the conservation of energy as a quantity whereas
the second law speaks to something entirely new and different, namely energy's quality.
