Lecture 30, energy in your life.
If you think back on the other lectures you've had already in this course, many, many of them
deal with the theme of energy.
We ended the previous lecture on the subject of the first law of thermodynamics, an extension
of the idea of energy conservation from mechanical energy, potential, and kinetic, to the more
general sense of energy, including this internal energy we associate loosely with the word
heat, energy that can't be easily extracted and turned into mechanical energy or electricity.
We talked about the energy of orbiting satellites.
We talked about kinetic energy of motion in the module on going places.
Energy's been a major theme in this course.
And in this lecture, I want to focus on energy in your life, particularly the energy you
use in particularly the, particularly the energy you use as a citizen of industrialized
society in the 21st century.
So that's the theme of this particular lecture.
The fact is that we modern humans use energy at a far greater rate than our own bodies
can supply.
And that's the big idea and the big theme here.
And I want to give you a couple examples that demonstrate that.
Some lectures ago when we were talking about electromagnetic induction, I had Jamie from
the teaching company up here and I was kind of tormenting her with this device, which
is an electric generator, hand cranked electric generator.
We read the voltage and the current on these meters.
And if we multiply them together, we get the electric power we're producing.
I illustrated the generator then largely to show you how electromagnetic induction was
used to produce electricity.
Now I'm using the generator as symbolic of the energy that my body can produce.
And I want to get you a real gut feel for that energy.
I've tried to do this before, but I'm going to emphasize it now more in the context of
how much energy do you use as a citizen of industrial society versus how much your own
body can produce?
Your body is a source of energy.
You eat food.
You metabolize the food.
You can move.
You can lift things.
You can run.
You can swim.
You can jump.
You can dance.
You can do all kinds of things that involve turning that food energy into mechanical
energy, basically.
You also think in your blood courses through your veins, all kinds of things happen.
How much energy is your body capable of producing versus the amount of energy you use as a resident
of industrial society?
I think I won't torment any more teaching company employees.
I'll just crank away on this thing myself.
And again, it's very easy to crank it, provided there's no demand for electrical energy.
I'm not producing any energy, except a little bit to overcome the friction in the shafts
of this device.
But when I turn on this hundred, I can barely turn it.
Well, it's all I can do to make that hundred light bulb light.
If I'm succeeding, it's pretty much at full brightness.
We got about 12 volts, and somewhere between half and one ampere, I'm succeeding right
now in producing energy at the rate of 100 watts.
Now, I probably don't want to do this all the time.
On the other hand, it's not something I can only do for a second or two.
I can probably comfortably produce energy at this rate for a while, depends on how buff
you are, whether you could do this longer or you could light a bigger light bulb.
But that light bulb at 100 watts is pretty typical of the human body.
The power output of the typical human body is, in fact, about 100 watts.
Although I might not want to do that day in and day out, there are other processes going
on in my body.
For example, the keeping of my body at 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit, there's an inevitable
heat loss to the cooler environment, and consequently, my body is always producing energy.
And in fact, that figure of 100 watts, although it looks like that takes a lot of work, is
in fact roughly what my body is producing all the time.
If you don't have access to a hand crank generator, if you do, try it out.
Really it's good to feel what 100 watts means.
I don't want you just to have some complicated mathematical formula for power.
That's what 100 watts means.
If you haven't got that kind of thing, do some deep knee bends at maybe the rate of
about one a second, going down and up and down and up and down and up at the rate of
about once a second.
Now it depends on your mass, how big you are, and how far down you're going, and how fast
you're doing them.
But if you're a sort of normal sized person, chances are that the power involved in doing
that, and you could calculate this using principles of first year physics, is about 100 watts.
So the point is, a human being is roughly equivalent to a 100 watt source of energy.
Give or take a little, but roughly 100 watts.
Now at this point, I want to take a minute and be sure to make a distinction I've made
a couple times before, but we really have to get it down solid here.
That's the distinction between energy and power.
Energy is a kind of stuff, as I've argued, one of the basic substances of the universe.
What makes everything happen?
Kinetic energy, potential energy, internal energy, heat, energy flowing because of a temperature
difference.
It's stuff.
Power is a measure of rate.
In the same way that miles an hour, miles per hour, or a measure of the rate at which
your car covers ground, or eats up miles, if you want to put it that way, or produces
distance.
Similarly, power, measured in watts, is a measure of the rate at which a system produces, or
consumes, or transfers, or whatever, energy.
Some common units for energy that you may be familiar with.
I've been talking about joules.
A joule is the unit of energy in the official international system of units.
A joule is the energy you would produce if you exerted a force of 1 Newton for a distance
of 1 meter.
That's the definition of a joule.
A calorie is an amount of energy.
It used to be thought a unit of heat, but when it was discovered that heat, or thermal
energy, and mechanical energy were basically the same kind of thing, the mechanical equivalent
of heat, an experiment that joule did to prove that.
That's why he is honored with that name.
Calorie is the amount of energy that it takes to raise the temperature of 1 gram of water,
1 degree Celsius.
A British thermal unit used in the United States, and we tend to think of these as measures
of heat energy, but I could talk about the amount of British thermal units I supply to
a bowling ball by lifting it up or something.
A British thermal unit, the amount of energy it takes to raise 1 pound of water, 1 degree
Fahrenheit, English units.
Another unit of energy, this is the one you see on your electric bill, is the kilowatt
hour.
A kilowatt hour is the amount of energy you use if you ran a 1,000 watt light bulb.
Well, that's a pretty hard light bulb to get a hold of, but a 1,000 watt hair dryer
for one hour, that would use a kilowatt hour.
Or if you ran a 100 watt light bulb for a 10th of an hour, I mean for it for 10 hours,
that would be also a kilowatt hour.
By the way, you probably pay about 10 cents a kilowatt hour.
That means if you were paying me to produce that kilowatt hour for you turning this crank
and you were doing so at rates competitive with your electric company charges, there's
why I slipped and said a 10th, you would pay me a 10th of a cent an hour.
Electricity is truly cheap.
We had to produce our electricity with human energy servants, more on that in a minute,
turning cranks.
We would be paying them well below minimum wage, way under a penny an hour.
So notice kilowatt hours, that's kind of a funny energy unit.
That's because the watt or the kilowatt is a rate of power, a rate at which you're using
energy and so when you multiply by time, you get a unit of energy.
So in the case of watts, unlike miles per hour, the watt sort of has the per time built
in.
A watt is a joule per second.
A kilowatt is 1,000 watts, 1,000 joules per second.
And we know in our guts, not mathematically, but in our guts from this demonstration, what
a watt is.
There's 100 watts.
It's that as I'm turning that crank or the as you're doing those deep knee bends.
That's what 100 watts means.
Energy and power often get confused.
You'll read in the newspaper that a new power plant is going to produce a 1,000 megawatts
every hour.
Well, that's nonsense.
Watts already has the time built into it.
It produces 1,000 megawatts or a gigawatt.
That's the rate at which it produces electrical energy.
And to say the average power of the human body is 100 watts is to say that's the rate
at which the human body can transform food energy into other forms of energy, produce
useful energy.
The total amount, if you ask how much energy does my body produce, that's a very different
question.
That depends on how long I choose to crank that crank or how long I live or whatever.
The power is the rate at which I can produce energy.
It doesn't tell you anything about how much energy I produce unless you know also how
long I'm putting out that power or how long this light bulb is using that power or whatever.
Now here's the question I want to ask.
How much energy, or that's the wrong question, at what rate do we citizens of 21st century
United States, 21st century industrialized society, use energy?
Round the clock, on average, in our names, at what rate is energy being used in our
names?
Before we answer that question, think a minute about it.
Well, there are lights.
The lights are burning to make it bright for you after the natural daylight is gone.
The air conditioner is running to keep you cool, or the heat is running to keep you warm,
burning fuels and running that electric blower that blows the warm air around your house.
That refrigerator is running, and as we know from the previous lecture, it requires electricity
and you wash your clothes with a washing machine that has a big motor and uses hot water that
was heated with some energy source and you dry your clothes in a clothes dryer.
You don't have to, you can hang them in the clothesline, but you do dry them in a clothes
dryer probably, and you drive a car, and maybe it's a big SUV that consumes an enormous
amount of energy, and maybe it's a small car, but it still consumes a lot more energy than
your body could produce unless you ride a bicycle or walk, that's the case.
You fly around in airplanes, you ride in trains, you go to the supermarket and there
are banks and banks and banks of frozen foods, and so you don't have to be inconvenienced
by opening a door to get to those.
Some supermarkets are still having those open banks and there's an enormous amount of energy
going into cooling that food because it's exposed to the warmed air of the supermarket.
What a colossal waste.
There is a large amount of energy being used in your name.
How much?
Well, I'm going to give you the answer, although if you thought about it a while, you might
be able to come up with the answer.
The answer is this, for Americans, and I'm speaking now particularly to Americans, citizens
of the United States particularly, Canadians are nearly the same, actually they're a little
higher on this number.
Americans of the late 20th and early 21st century consume energy at the average rate
of a little over 10 kilowatts, 10,000 watts.
That's the rate at which energy is being consumed in your name by all the industrial processes,
all the transportation use, all the heating you use and so on, about 10,000 watts, 10 kilowatts.
Your own body produces only about 100 watts, a tenth of a kilowatt.
I'm going to use that round number of 10 kilowatts, even though the number is actually
almost closer to 12 kilowatts these days.
About 10 kilowatts, 10,000 watts, you only can produce about a tenth of a thousand watts,
a tenth of a kilowatt, 100 watts, and therefore that 10,000 watts is 10 times would get you
a kilowatt, so 100 times gets you 10 kilowatts.
The amount of energy used in your name is 100 times what your body can produce.
What that means is that if you had servants turning cranks, there would be 100 servants
working round the clock at devices like this, 100 human servants to produce the energy that
you, one individual human being, in 21st century America uses.
Now, you might say, oh, but I drive a hybrid car and I live in a solar heated house, etc.
Your number may be lower.
For residents of my state, Vermont, surprisingly, because we're in such a cold state, the number's
more like 60 energy servants, but the average for the United States, just averaged over
all of us who are here, nearly 300 million of us in the total energy our country consumes,
comes out to about 10 kilowatts, about 100 energy servants worth.
Let's take a look at some of them.
So here you are, and here are some things that happen in your name.
Some energy uses.
You drive a car, maybe it's a big SUV like that.
You run light bulbs.
You run a refrigerator, which we know requires energy.
You run stoves.
You cook.
You have probably a big screen television.
You fly around in airplanes.
There are factories working to produce goods for you.
There are power plants generating the electricity you use.
Even agriculture is not simple gardening, but a mechanized process that uses a large amount
of energy.
Far more energy goes into growing the crops than the food energy you and your body get
out of them.
Those are your energy uses, and symbolically, that's the number of energy servants.
There's the hundred energy servants it would take turning those cranks or doing deep need
bends and somehow converting that to useful work for you to keep you going in a early
21st century industrialized society in the United States.
What do these servants do for us?
What do they get us?
Well, they do a number of things, and I'm going to break this down very crudely.
These are statistics on what the energy servants do, how the energy is used.
About 21 percent of our energy use is in the residential sector.
Heating our houses and cooling is the biggest single use.
The next biggest single use is hot water heating, and it goes on from there.
Refrigerators are a major user, although they're getting more efficient.
Laundry machines, light bulbs, computers that we now have on all the time, televisions,
that kind of thing.
21 percent are residential.
By the way, since there are just about 100 energy servants, 21 percent means 21 of those
servants are in your house working for you.
So go home to your house, and it's just a few people in your family, but there's really,
for every one of you in your family, if you've got four people in your family, there are
21 times four, which is 84 servants around there.
You better make room for them.
And maybe you really need three times as many, because they only work eight hour shifts.
So maybe you've got three and a 20, you've got about 250 people in your house, and you
got to feed and clothe them and house them.
They better not use any energy, or you're going to need even more.
About 21 of those servants are residential.
About 18 of them are commercial.
They're running the lights in the department stores, the refrigerators in the grocery stores,
the checkout counter, lasers in the laser scanners.
They're running everything in the commercial sector.
The industrial sector uses about 33 of those servants.
You say, well, I don't work in energy, I'm a teacher.
But the industrial society is working for you, producing the goods that you use.
And so you're responsible for 33 servants working in industry.
And about 28 of them in the United States are involved in transportation.
Most of them cars, some of them trucks, a smaller number of trains, and some airplanes.
But most of that is cars and trucks.
That's what the servants are doing for us.
What kind of servants are they?
Well, I drew them as little human beings, but of course they aren't little human beings,
or we would be using the rest of the human race to satisfy our energy needs.
So where do they come from?
What kind of servants are they?
What are the sources of our energy?
About 23 of those servants are coal servants.
About 40 of them are oil servants.
About 24% are gas servants.
Add those up.
You've got 24 and 23.
Let's see, that's 47 and 40, that's 87% are fossil fuels.
These are the fossil fuels.
These are the substances that are buried deep in the ground that consist of carbon fuels
that was fixed by sunlight in ancient plants, and that we are now digging out of the ground
and consuming at a far greater rate than they were produced, and dumping the waste product,
the primary one of which is carbon dioxide, into the atmosphere.
And that's causing some of the problems I alluded to in the second lecture in this
module in the greenhouse.
Where do the rest of the servants come from?
In the United States, and this varies from country to country, and it varies dramatically
from region to region, 8% of them are nuclear, where I come from Vermont, we're the most
nuclear dependent state in the country, and all of New England is very heavily nuclear
oriented.
We don't have many fossil fuel power plants, particularly Northern New England, but we
do have a lot of nuclear power.
Go to the Pacific Northwest, where there's a lot of hydroelectric power, that supplies
only 3% of our energy nationwide, but it supplies a substantial amount in that area.
And the rest, a remarkable amount, and this is the only number that's really changed significantly
in the past few decades, is that wood and waste are now contributing about 4% of our
energy, garbage to energy plants.
And other, and if you're a fan of solar energy, wind energy, geothermal energy, all those
good things, you've got to look realistically here, they supply less than a percent, about
half a percent of our total energy.
By the way, nearly all of that is geothermal in a few plants in California, and that has
its own problems.
And I'm not going to get into those in this lecture.
But the fact is, the vast majority of our energy comes from fossil fuels.
And that's true worldwide, something between 80 and 90% of the world's total energy comes
from fossil fuels.
And as the developing world industrializes, more and more fossil fuels are going to be
burned.
How do we get useful energy out of these fuels?
Well, what we do with fuels is burn them.
Well, I should back up, I showed you a fuel cell early on.
Fuel cells aren't in use yet in widespread use, but if we had fuel cells going, that's
a way to extract energy from fuels without actually burning them.
But today we burn them, we produce heat, and we use heat engines.
And I described in the last lecture conceptually what a heat engine did.
Now I'm going to describe a little bit more practically how a heat engine works.
So here's an example of a sort of typical heat engine.
This is a particular kind of heat engine called the Carnot cycle engine.
There are relatively few, there are no real engines that work exactly like this, but they
work on the same general principle.
And what we have here is a cylinder, and the gray thing is a movable piston, and the yellow
thing is a fluid that can expand or contract, and in some systems maybe change state in
this one, and change state, but in this one it's just going to expand or contract.
And what we do is take the cylinder, the piston, and the gas, and we connect this to
some kind of mechanical load.
So we connect the piston by means of some kind of shaft to a wheel we want to turn.
It might be connected to an electric generator, or that might be the wheel of a train or a
car or something.
In fact, this looks a lot like a steam engine on an old steam train.
So how do we extract energy?
Well, we put the gas in contact with a hot substance, which we've heated up by burning
one of these fuels, or fissioning uranium, or shining sunlight on it, or whatever.
Or it's, yeah, whatever.
You could even think of a wind turbine as an example of this, but then the heating is being
done in the natural air circulation system.
So the gas expands as it does, so it pushes against the piston, and the piston turns the
wheel and does useful mechanical work.
Then we take the heat source away, but the wheel's got some inertia, so it continues
to turn, and the gas expands a little bit more.
At this point, the wheel is still turning.
It's got some inertia.
It's going to turn just past that extreme motion of the piston.
It's going to start to move the piston back, and at that point we put the cylinder in contact
with a cool reservoir, because we've got to cool that gas down.
If we just let the piston turn, the gas will get compressed, it will get hot.
So we've got to cool it back down in order to let it expand again.
So we put it in contact with a cool reservoir, and the gas compresses, and that pulls the
piston back.
But as the gas compresses, and it's in contact with the cool reservoir, we dump some heat
into that cool reservoir.
That's the waste heat I talked about in the context of heat engines going to the environment.
And then we start the cycle over again.
And that engine has extracted energy from the hot reservoir.
It's turned it into useful mechanical work, some of it, but in the process of getting
it back to its cyclic place, so it can continue the action, it has had to dump some energy
to the environment.
By the way, the second law, it doesn't read exactly what I said in the previous lecture.
It really says it is impossible to construct an engine operating in a cycle, so it returns
to the same state every so often, which is what all real engines have to do.
It's impossible to build one of those with 100% efficiency.
You can work out, and an introductory physics student would do this, the efficiency of this
engine, the useful energy you get out divided by the total amount of energy you get from
the heat source.
So if half of the energy you extract from the heat source, from the burning coal, the
burning oil, the burning gasoline, the fissioning uranium, if half that energy goes into useful
mechanical work or electricity, and the other half gets dumped to the environment as waste
heat, you've got a 50% efficient engine.
And it turns out the engine's efficiency depends on the difference between the hottest temperature
you have in the system, T-hot, and the coldest temperature you have, divided by T-hot.
Now that sounds a little bit quantitative, but it's not bad, and what it basically says
is the hotter you can make the high temperature reservoir, the more efficient your engine is.
You can't very much change the low temperature reservoir, because here on Earth we're stuck
with the ambient temperature, which is about 300 Kelvin.
By the way, that formula works only for temperatures in Kelvin's.
So that is the efficiency of this engine called a Carnot cycle, and it's approximately the
efficiency or the maximum efficiency of other real engines.
The hottest temperature, unfortunately, is determined partly by engineering.
You can't build a nuclear reactor without having to build a great big huge steel vessel
to contain the reaction.
The thickness of the steel we can easily work with determines how much pressure we can build
up, and how hot we can make that.
So practical engineering terms dictate how hot we can make that hottest temperature,
and they set the limits on the efficiencies of engines.
All real engines dump waste heat to the environment, and here's a picture showing two examples.
On the left, there's a car radiator.
You might think the radiator's job is just to keep the engine cool, because the engine
happens to get hot.
Well, the engine doesn't just happen to get hot.
The second law says it has to get hot, and waste heat has to dump to the environment,
and the radiator is one of the places it goes.
It also goes out the exhaust pipe.
On the right, you see these typical cooling towers associated with power plants.
Most people think they're just for nuclear power plants.
That's nonsense.
Any kind of big power plant has to have cooling towers like this.
These cooling towers dump some of the waste heat to the atmosphere, avoiding dumping
it to the rivers, and therefore avoiding what's called thermal pollution.
Now you might say, well, couldn't some clever engineer design a better engine, one that's
more efficient?
And the answer is no.
And that was proved in 1824 by a young French physicist named Sadie Carnot, and he proved
that his engine, the Carnot engine that I just described, has the maximum possible efficiency,
and that no engine you can build could have more efficiency than that, and you might build
an engine with less efficiency.
So that Carnot engine with that efficiency depends on the maximum temperature and the
minimum temperature.
That's the maximum possible temperature you can get.
And as a result, our typical power plants, for example, range from somewhere from about
25% efficient to roughly 50% efficient for the most advanced cycle power plants we have
today.
More than half the energy we make in all our power plants is dumped as waste heat.
By the way, most of the flow of fresh water that lands as rain on the United States and
flows through the rivers, most of it sooner or later finds its way through the cooling
systems of power plants, of electric power plants.
It's that big a deal.
And we sometimes cool ahead of time with these cooling towers and other means to keep that
waste heat out of the environment where it would be thermal pollution.
Well, couldn't we do something with that waste heat?
The answer is we could.
And again, from the previous lecture, I mentioned that the second law is really about energy
quality rather than energy quantity.
Some of our energy uses require relatively low quality energy, heating water on the stove,
heating water to take showers.
Other forms of energy like transportation, electric motors to run our disk drives in
our computers and our CD drives and our electric clocks and our washing machines.
Those require the highest quality of energy.
The second law of thermodynamics says we can't make that high quality energy from thermal
sources from burning fuels with 100% efficiency.
But here's the deal.
In the United States, we tend to use energy roughly a third of it as this high quality
energy motion electricity.
We have to have that.
About a third of it is heat, high quality, high temperature heat for industrial processes,
steam usually, at greater than 100 degrees Celsius.
About a third of it is heat for more mundane purposes like cooking, heating houses and
so on, heating buildings at less than 100 degrees Celsius.
The energy we produce, on the other hand, with our power plants particularly and our
cars is typically high quality energy and less of it is heat.
So there's a kind of mismatch there.
We're producing more high quality energy than we need.
And sometimes we do things that are really not very energy efficient.
For example, let's look at the process of heating hot water.
Here's an electric hot water heater.
Now we're going to add one energy unit to this hot water heater, whatever it is, a
joule, a kilowatt hour, whatever.
Some unit of energy we're going to add to this hot water heater.
Now electrical energy is very efficient in the sense that if I stick an electrical resistance
heater in a water heater, virtually all the energy I send into that electrical resistance
as electricity comes out as heat in the water.
It's almost 100 percent.
So if I supply one unit of electrical energy to that water heater, I get one unit of heat.
Sounds great.
However, at the power plant, which is typically on the order of 33 percent efficient, a little
more for advanced power plants, a little less for some of the older ones, nuclear plants
are hair less efficient, not because they're nuclear per se, but because it's again harder
to achieve the very high temperatures when you try to contain the nuclear reaction.
So typically something like three units of fuel energy, coal, nuclear, fission, uranium,
whatever, would be used to produce that one unit of electricity.
So this water heater, although it looks great, is really only 33 percent efficient.
It takes three units of fuel to produce one unit of heat.
On the other hand, here's a gas water heater.
There's a flame right in the gas water heater.
The gas water heater is very efficient.
A modern gas water heater is 80, 90 percent or more efficient.
What that means is it takes maybe 1.05 energy units of gas, stored energy in the gas fuel,
to produce the one unit of hot water.
That is a much more efficient use of our energy.
We should try to match the end uses of our energy to the quality of the energy generation
source.
If we did just that, we'd have all the energy we still use.
We wouldn't reduce that at all, but we would use that energy in more efficient ways.
By the way, some industries in the United States are increasingly doing this.
They're developing what's called cogeneration.
I hinted at this briefly in the previous lecture.
Instead of buying electrical energy from the power company and then having a boiler to
make the steam you need for your industrial processes, you take the boiler and you make
the steam and then you use the steam to turn your own electric generator, extracting some
of the energy as the electricity you use that for your high quality needs and what would
have been the waste heat from the electric power generation becomes the lower quality
energy you need for your steam or heating your building or whatever.
So more and more people are cogenerating.
Currently Europe, which is the world leader, is approaching 30% electricity by cogeneration,
so they're much more efficient in matching their end uses to the energy quality.
Another method of using energy more efficiently that I mentioned briefly in the previous lecture
is to use heat pumps.
A heat pump is basically a refrigerator in reverse.
We might extract say five units of heat from the ground, dump that out of the heat pump
into the house.
When we bring in one unit of electrical energy to do it, all that ends up as heat.
So one unit of electrical energy has helped move another five units of heat from the ground
giving us six units of heat in the house.
So that's a heat pump, which is another way of handling energy efficiently.
So applied to these heat pumps, the second law basically says, yeah, you've got to supply
some extra energy, some useful mechanical work, but you can do so in a way that transfers
much more energy than the energy you're bringing in as electricity.
Well, let me end by saying that the examples in this lecture so far represent ways to use
the energy we use more efficiently to get those 100 energy servants from less fuel.
But do we really need all those 100 energy servants?
Do we really need to drive cars that go 10 miles on a gallon of gas because they feel
big and militaristic to us?
Do we really need to take our clothes out of the washing machine and throw them in the
dryer when just a step outside hanging them in the breeze would dry them with no use of
energy?
And by the way, I've calculated in a little book I wrote on nuclear issues that if all
of us used, suppose every household is using a clothes dryer one hour a day, if we decided
to hang our clothes up instead, we would produce 200 nuclear bombs less worth of plutonium
in the nuclear power plants of this country every year just by that step.
The ways we choose to use energy have consequences.
And I think personally that we could not only use our energy more efficiently, but we could
reduce the number of these energy servants we need.
And here's my picture again of you surrounded by some of the energy users you use and those
100 energy servants that are cranking away for you to produce that energy.
What could you do?
Well, you could replace that SUV with a hybrid car.
You could replace some of that electrical energy generation by wind.
You might replace your big screen television set.
I guess I didn't do that here with a LCD screen that uses less energy.
You might ride the train instead of an airplane.
Trains are much more efficient.
This factory has fewer smokestacks.
It's running more efficient processes, polluting less in the process.
You've got an energy efficient light bulb.
You're going out and growing some of your own vegetables with your gardening tools.
And if you did all those things, we don't all have to go back to the land and become
hippies and grow organic foods.
But if we did just some of these things, like buying different cars or buying green
energy when it's available to us, if our electric company says, gee, if you pay 20% more, we'll
guarantee your energy is coming from renewable sources.
Would you do that?
It would sure help.
And if you did that, I think you could get rid of, let go at least half of those hundred
energy servants.
That's energy in your life.
