Welcome to lecture 32, Dance and Spin.
Alternative title might be everything you ever wanted to know about rotational motion.
So this lecture is an outgrowth of module 2 dealing which dealt with going places motion,
and this deals with a very specific type of motion, rotational motion about an axis.
Now in principle we could describe this kind of motion using Newton's laws,
but the problem is when we have a rotating object like planet Earth, like a bicycle wheel,
like a spinning star, like a dancer doing a pirouette, like a proton spinning
in the magnetic resonance imaging machine that's imaging your insides.
All these are examples of rotational motion.
The problem is different parts of the object are moving in different ways.
They have different velocities, they have different directions of motion,
they have different speeds, and it would be very complicated to describe rotational motion
using Newton's laws as we understood them.
That doesn't mean rotational motion isn't governed by Newton's laws,
but what it does mean is that it's easier to come up with another language,
an analogous language to describe rotational motion.
Ultimately it's grounded in the physics of Newton's laws of motion,
but this alternative language will make it much easier to talk about rotational motion.
And I want to spend part of this lecture introducing that language,
getting you to have faith that it is really exactly analogous to Newton's laws,
and therefore from what you already know of Newton's laws,
being able to understand some phenomena of rotational motion which are extraordinarily counterintuitive.
So let's get started.
We would like to define analogs for the quantities we know about that define linear motion,
straight line motion or motion in a circular path, something like that,
but we want to define them for objects that are rotating.
So the first thing we need is an analog of velocity,
and that analog is angular velocity.
When I talk about angular velocity, here's a little globe.
I'm going to get it spinning. That's what the Earth actually does.
It has angular velocity.
That part of the globe was moving that way.
A part of the globe on the other side that you can't see was moving that way.
Different parts are moving in different directions, parts down inside are moving with different speeds.
We want to describe that with a single quantity.
Well, I can talk about how many revolutions per minute it's making,
or how many revolutions per second, or how many degrees per second,
or more sophisticated, how many radians per second,
or how many revolutions per hour,
or in the case of the Earth, it undergoes that motion at one revolution per day.
And that's talking about something all parts of that globe are doing.
But remember velocity has direction,
and changes in direction count as much as do changes in speed.
And the same is true for rotational motion.
And again, that's a fact that's often overlooked.
People who don't quite understand motion are forgetting that change in direction is a change in motion.
Similarly, a change in the direction of angular velocity is also a change in its angular motion, its rotational motion.
How do we describe that motion in direction?
Well, I'm going to be using my right hand a lot in this course, even though I'm left-handed.
And here is the way we do it.
You might say, well, what direction is this thing rotating?
Well, I could kind of talk about clockwise or counterclockwise,
or I could sort of say toward the east.
But those are all with reference to the Earth itself.
Here's the way to describe it in good, solid, absolute terms.
What I do is I observe the object undergoing rotational motion,
in this case the Earth spinning toward the east,
and I curl the fingers of my right hand in the direction of that motion this way.
And my right thumb points in the direction,
which I'm going to define to be the direction of the rotation.
Now, nothing is really happening in this direction.
It's going around like this.
But this direction, perpendicular to the plane in which the thing rotates,
turns out to be the best way mathematically to describe the direction of that rotational motion.
So I'm going to use this right-hand rule.
If, like me, you're left-handed, don't be hill-snubbed,
we could have defined everything the other way.
We would have had to draw all our coordinate systems differently.
The relation of magnetic and electric fields in a way
would have looked different slightly.
But it all would have been describing the same physical world.
But we've chosen to use this right-hand rule.
So there we have an analogy with regular ordinary straight line velocity.
We have angular velocity.
Now we need an analogy with mass.
Mass, remember, is a measure of how heavy something is
or, more importantly, how much resistance it presents to acceleration to changes in motion.
Here's a very heavy thing.
To get it accelerated takes a big force.
Mass is a measure of inertia, resistance to change in motion.
Well, in the case of rotation, the same thing is true.
We have something which is analogous to mass called rotational inertia,
and it's a measure of how hard it is to change an object's rotational motion.
And I have a picture here of three objects.
They all have the same mass, the same resistance to changes in linear motion,
straight line motion, but they have very different resistance to changes in rotational motion.
The one at the left is like a bicycle wheel.
Upper left, it's mostly hollow.
Most of its mass is concentrated in its rim.
The one on the upper right is pretty much uniformly distributed mass
except for a little axle at the center.
And the one at the bottom has more of its mass at the center,
which would be easiest to get rotating.
Think about that a minute.
Well, the answer is the one with most of the mass at the center
because you don't have to get that mass up to very high speeds
if it's close to the center, close to the rotation axis.
The bicycle wheel here has the greatest rotational inertia.
And just to give you a sense of how rotational inertia works,
I have here two objects.
They have identical radii, or equal radius, equal diameter.
They also have equal mass.
I'm not going to weigh them.
You'll have to take my word for that.
But they have very different rotational inertias
because the distribution of mass in both of them is different.
This ring has all its mass at the outside, far from its rotation axis,
and this disc has its mass distributed uniformly.
And I'm going to roll these two down the plane of this inclined plane.
And you will see quite clearly the fact that the rotational inertia
of the brass ring is bigger than the rotational inertia of the wooden disc.
It doesn't respond.
It doesn't change its rotational motion as rapidly as the wooden disc does.
So here they go.
Let me do that again.
Here they go.
And the wooden disc got to the bottom first
because its rotational inertia is less.
It was easier to get it into rotational motion.
Let me put these things away
because I'll need this table for other things.
So now we have a rotational analog also of mass.
That's rotational inertia.
Now, in talking about linear motion, I define momentum, quantity of motion,
the product of an object's velocity with its mass.
Well, we can define the analytics quantity for rotational motion,
the product of an object's mass analog, rotational inertia,
with its velocity analog, rotational velocity,
and that's called angular momentum.
And just as the momentum of an object stays the same
unless it's subject to forces,
that's basically a statement of Newton's Law,
a statement of the analog of Newton's Law
is that unless something is happening to an object
and we'll talk about that something in just a minute,
its angular momentum tends to stay the same.
And that property is exploited, for example, in gyroscopes.
And over here I have a big model gyroscope.
It consists of a big, massive disc mounted on a shaft.
The whole thing is balanced very carefully.
I've adjusted these weights to balance it.
And I'm going to set the whole thing into rotational motion,
or set the disc into rotational motion.
There it goes. It's rotating.
And if I let go, it basically stays exactly where it is.
In fact, it's difficult for me to change the orientation of its rotation axis.
It's hard for me to do that
because it wants to stay rotating in exactly the same direction.
If I point it in some direction,
then the axis stays in that direction
because the direction of the angular momentum,
in this case the wheel, is rotating that way.
So if I curl my right fingers again in that direction,
that direction along this shaft
is the direction of this object's angular momentum.
If I represented that by an arrow,
it would look something like this.
The direction of the angular momentum of that rotating wheel
is along this axis this way.
If it were rotating the other way, it would have been down that way.
That's angular momentum.
And angular momentum tends to stay the same
unless something, which I'll describe in just a moment,
acts on the object.
This principle, by the way, the gyroscopic principle,
is what is used to, for instance, point spacecraft in space.
It's used to stabilize ships.
It's the principle of the so-called gyro compass
because if I set a gyroscope in nice frictionless bearings spinning,
and keep it spinning, maybe by means of a motor
that's mounted in the frictionless bearings also,
that gyroscope will always point in the same direction,
even if the object around it, a ship or a spacecraft
or an airplane or whatever,
changes the direction of its motion.
The gyroscope will always point in the same direction.
Why? Because its angular momentum doesn't easily change.
And the bigger its rotational inertia,
the harder it is for that angular momentum to change.
By the way, I talked about GPS in the previous lecture.
Some GPS receivers are coming out with tiny miniature,
rapidly spinning gyroscopes in them.
And their purpose is to keep track of the GPS receiver's location
in a brief interval when it might lose contact with satellites,
as in going through a tunnel
or being hidden by the shadow of a mountain or something like that.
So gyroscopes are used in navigation,
in determining where things are,
in determining changes in motion,
because a gyroscope, just an object with a big rotational inertia
and therefore a big angular momentum, if it's rotating fast,
tends to keep its direction in space
because angular momentum doesn't easily change,
just like regular linear momentum doesn't easily change.
Unless you exert big forces.
Now, there's an interesting difference between rotational inertia and mass.
I can't very easily change the mass of my body
while I can change it gradually with my eating habits
or my natural growth.
But I can't easily reconfigure my body to have a different mass,
but I can easily reconfigure it to have a different rotational inertia.
Remember why the brass ring had a bigger rotational inertia
than the wooden disc?
It's because its mass was distributed differently.
They had the same mass,
but here the mass was further from the rotation axis.
And I am capable of rearranging my body
in ways that alter my angular momentum.
Or not my angular momentum, I'm sorry,
that alter my rotational inertia.
And if I've got a certain amount of angular momentum,
that angular momentum still can't change.
And so it has to stay the same.
And the angular momentum is the product of my rotational inertia
and my angular velocity.
If my angular, if my rotational inertia goes down,
my angular velocity has to go up to keep my angular momentum the same.
Let me give you a quick demonstration of that
and to make it a little more dramatic,
I'm going to hold these big weights out in my hand.
So I'm going to step on this turntable,
which is fairly frictionless.
It's not perfectly frictionless, but it's pretty good.
And I'm going to get myself rotating with these weights out
and I'm going to bring the weights in and I rotate faster.
There I go, round and round.
I put the weights out and I rotate much more slowly.
What I'm doing is making my rotational inertia bigger.
I bring them in and I rotate faster.
Let me give myself a little more angular velocity there.
Okay, bring them in.
Woo!
Put them out.
In.
I'm changing my rotational inertia.
I'm therefore changing my angular velocity,
but my angular momentum, the product of those two, stays exactly the same.
Now that principle, angular momentum staying the same
as rotational inertia changes, is widely used in both nature
and in technology and in the arts, for example, and in athletics.
And let me give you here a few examples.
Here's a skater.
Ice skater.
It's Fumi Sugari from Japan.
She's going to be performing on ice
and see her rearranging her body in ways that have, at first,
her body parts extended out from the axis about which she's rotating,
and then gradually she's going to bring them in.
And as she does so, she is changing her rotational inertia
and therefore she is changing the rate at which her body rotates.
She's changing her rotational velocity,
but she's not changing her angular momentum.
So there she goes.
Watch her go around.
And as she spins, there she goes.
She stands taller and taller and she still has her leg out, her arms out.
Her rotational inertia is large.
She's spinning rather slowly.
Now she's going to pull in her leg, pull in her arms.
Faster and faster she goes as her rotational inertia goes down.
Her angular velocity goes up to keep her angular momentum the same.
She's essentially spinning on frictionless ice.
Like I was standing on a frictionless platform there.
And there she goes.
By altering the configuration of her body,
she's able to alter the rotational inertia,
the resistance of changes in rotational motion,
but she can't change her angular momentum
and therefore she has to go with a faster angular speed.
Now there are many applications of this.
There's a cosmic application.
When massive stars explode,
the remnant of the massive star often collapses down to an object
that's roughly a few miles across.
And a star might be spinning at a stately speed
of like the Sun's revolution once a month, roughly.
But if that same object with all that mass
collapses down to a few miles across,
this principle of angular momentum staying the same,
even as rotational inertia shrinks,
means those objects have to be going very, very, very fast.
Those objects are called pulsars.
And we first discovered pulsars by the rapid click, click, click radio noise
they made in our radio telescopes as these objects were spinning,
sometimes tens or hundreds of times a second.
The picture you see here are two pictures of the same object.
It's the famous crab nebula, the result of a supernova explosion
that took place, well, I shouldn't say took place a thousand years ago,
but was first seen on Earth roughly a thousand years ago.
The picture on the left is taken with an optical telescope.
The picture on the right is taken with an x-ray telescope.
And you almost see something that looks like a rotating disk.
And at the center of it is this pulsar.
And you can see two kinds of jets of material coming out either end.
And as this thing rotates, different hotspots on it and beamed signals,
beams of particles coming out give rise to radio signals
that get brighter and dimmer and brighter and dimmer or louder and softer
as the pulsar goes around.
And I have here some audio clips of this pulsar, the crab pulsar,
which rotates at about 30 times a second,
and another pulsar that rotates a little slower.
Here's the crab pulsar making that noise in a radio telescope.
And here's another pulsar called the velopulsar,
which is pulsing about 11 times a second.
So those are the actual sounds of these rapidly spinning pulsars.
Now, we can change a system by changing its rotational inertia.
We can also change a system that has several different parts
by changing the angular momentum of different parts of that system.
Let me give you an example of that.
Here I have this bicycle wheel I've talked about several times before.
And I'm going to stand on this platform.
Now, right now, neither I nor the bicycle wheel is rotating very much anyway.
And so we have no angular momentum whatsoever.
The system has no angular momentum, zero.
But I'm going to get the bicycle wheel rotating.
Well, the system still has no angular momentum.
But the bicycle wheel was rotating in one particular direction.
Remember, angular momentum has direction.
In fact, I said it rotating that way, so its angular momentum was up.
And in order to conserve angular momentum, to keep it the same, still zero,
I had to rotate the other way, angular momentum down,
to keep the net angular momentum zero.
And I want to emphasize that important point.
Angular momentum has direction.
And a change in direction is as much a change in angular momentum
as is a change in speed.
That was the key to understanding a lot of things like satellite orbits
and so on in the Newtonian case in linear motion.
It's going to be the key to understanding some really weird phenomena
and also some common ones like riding a bicycle in the rotational case.
Let me do another example.
Now I'm going to give the bicycle wheel some angular momentum
and I'm going to step onto the wheel.
And now the system has angular momentum
and I'm going to turn the bicycle wheel upside down,
which dramatically changes its angular momentum
because it changed the direction of that angular momentum.
The whole system still has the same angular momentum it did before.
But now the two parts of the system have different angular momentum
that conspire, angular momentum that conspire to give
what was the initial angular momentum of that system.
That principle, by the way, is put to very good use in spacecraft,
particularly the Hubble Space Telescope.
Many spacecraft are actually steered, pointed at the objects
they're looking at if they're astronomical spacecraft,
by means of angular momentum.
We could do it with a little rocket jet,
but sooner or later we'd run out of fuel.
And in the case of Hubble, we'd have all kinds of rocket exhaust
around blurring the images.
So what we have instead in a spacecraft like Hubble
are four so-called reaction wheels that are like my bicycle wheel
and they can be spun up or down by me.
They're mounted at right angles to each other
and there's a fourth one at an angle for redundancy
and one fails, would take three at right angles
to do everything we need to do.
And they're spun by motors which are powered by the solar panels
on the spacecraft and so they can't run out of fuel.
And when we want to spin the spacecraft in one direction,
we rotate one of these wheels in the opposite direction.
And by having wheels in three different directions,
we can do this in any direction.
So that's a real practical use of this phenomenon.
Well, we now have the rotational analogies
of a great many quantities,
but we haven't yet got the rotational analog of force.
And I want to give you a sense of what that is.
So here's the bicycle wheel.
If I want to change its rotational motion,
I have to apply a force.
And that force is more effective if I apply it there
than it is if I apply it there.
When you try to open a door, you make the door rotate.
You don't push on it near the hinges.
You push on it at the far side.
That's where we put the handle.
Why? Because it's more effective in changing rotational motion.
The quantity that changes rotational motion is called torque.
Torque is a combination of force,
and the distance the force is from where the rotation is occurring.
For example, here's a bolt stuck into a great hunk of metal.
And I want to turn that bolt.
I can't do it. I can't do it with this little tiny wrench.
But if I put on this much bigger wrench,
where I can apply a force farther away from the rotation axis,
then I can easily tighten the bolt.
That quantity torque, the analog of force, depends on the force
and how far you are from the axis of rotation.
Here's a picture of a wrench.
I want to rotate it in what in this picture is a clockwise direction.
I could apply a force some little distance from the rotation axis.
I wouldn't get much torque. It wouldn't be very effective.
I could apply a force like that,
but because it's pulling away partly,
that wouldn't be very effective either.
I get the most effect, the biggest torque,
if I apply it at right angles like that
and at a long distance from the rotation axis.
So now we know the rotational analog also of force, torque.
And what's the direction of that torque?
Same thing, right hand rule, twist in the direction the bolt would turn.
It's into your screen in this particular case.
There it is.
Okay, so here are our analogies.
Velocity V, angular velocity, it's given the symbol omega,
but we won't worry about that.
Mass M, rotational inertia.
Momentum MV, rotational inertia,
angular momentum product of rotational inertia
and angular velocity, force, torque.
And on the basis of those analogies,
we're going to understand some pretty strange things
that happen with rotational motion.
Let's look at some simpler things first.
First, we have to understand the analogy with Newton's second law,
and that's another complete analogy once we have this picture.
Newton's second law says force is rate of change of momentum.
The rotational analog of Newton's second law says
torque is the rate of change of angular momentum.
That's all we need to know.
Okay, let's just look at a few examples from dancing, for example.
Here's a dancer balancing.
Her center of gravity is right over the point of contact with the floor,
her foot, and there are no torques exerted on her.
If she leans over a little bit, the force of gravity is straight down.
If she leans over a little bit,
the force of gravity is still straight down.
But now there's an angle between her foot and that center of gravity,
center of mass, and she's going to topple over.
There's going to be a torque on her.
The torque is going to be, again, applying the right-hand rule.
In this case, she's going to tend to topple to what is the right on this screen.
That's going to be an angular momentum into your screen.
Well, it is going to give her an angular momentum into your screen.
It's going to be a torque into your screen.
Here's a dancer trying to pirouette.
It's a very difficult thing to do, especially if the dancer is on her toes.
If you look closely at her foot, there's only a tiny little bit of foot
in contact with the floor.
How does she apply torque to keep herself going?
Well, if you look carefully at her, she drops down onto her flat foot,
and she's able to apply between the heel and the toe,
or the heel and the ball of the foot, forces in slightly different directions,
and they result in that torque that actually spins her around.
We have Candace Olbrook, whom we saw way back in Module 2
from the Loudoun Ballet Company,
and what she's going to do for us is a fouette turn,
and watch her carefully.
You'll see her spinning around.
Very difficult to get any torque when she's on her toes,
but then when she goes down onto her flat foot,
you'll see her exerting the forces on the floor
that result in the torque that gets her spinning.
So there she goes doing that turn.
Notice also her leg going in and out.
She's changing her rotational inertia as she does this.
There's the toe. Very difficult with the toe,
but when her foot goes down, that's the time she gets the torque.
So there she is spinning for us. Thank you.
Finally, there's a very strange phenomenon
that occurs with rotational motion, which you may find baffling,
and I want to show you how that works.
And if you understand that torque causes changes in angular momentum,
you will understand this.
First, consider an object like this meter stick that is not rotating.
Suppose it starts to fall over.
Well, like that dancer, there's a torque on it, and there it goes.
It has started rotating in that direction.
It's gained an angular momentum, which is that way,
the way my thumb is pointing.
And there is a torque on it in that direction,
and everybody's completely consistent.
If I had a gyroscope, a little thing that spins,
that was not rotating, and I had it unbalanced like this,
sitting on a little pedestal, there's its pivot point,
there's the force of gravity on it,
there is a torque on it, and again, right-hand rule,
there's the direction of the torque into your screen,
what's the direction of the change in angular momentum?
Well, change in angular momentum, torque.
What's the same?
What's the direction of the force?
Same as the direction of the change in an object's motion.
What's the change in direction of an object's angular motion?
Same as the direction of the torque into the screen.
There's no rotation.
So the angular momentum, which was zero, has to increase
increase and the gyroscope falls over and direction is that way into the into the screen
and clockwise rotation. The gyroscope falls over. But what happens if the gyroscope is
already rotating? If it's already rotating, then well, it's still got a torque on it.
The direction of the torque is still the same. It's into your screen. By the way, if this
is getting complicated, played over a few times, it's into your screen. But now the
rotating gyroscope already has angular momentum along that axis if it's rotating in the direction
I've shown. So what has to happen? Well, what's the direction of the change in angular momentum?
Again, it's the same as the direction of the torque and that's again into your screen.
But because the gyroscope is already rotating, just like the satellite is already moving,
it doesn't fall to earth, it falls around earth, the gyroscope undergoes this processional
motion in which it rotates around like that. And let me give you an example of that with
the gyroscope I have over here. So here's the gyroscope. It's perfectly balanced right
now. I'm going to wind this cord up on it so I can get it rotating again. Just like
you would do with a little toy gyroscope. I'm not there, but worry about that. Okay,
there it goes. It's rotating happily. It's angular momentum is staying constant. It's
balanced. Now I'm going to imbalance it, and that's going to put a torque on it. And
now it's angular momentum changes in the direction of that torque. And there it goes happily
around in the direction of the torque. The angular momentum is changing in this direction
and that's the direction of the torque. Let me give you another example of that. Here's
my big gyroscopic bicycle wheel. This is not actually a bicycle wheel. It's a bicycle wheel
that has had a much more massive rim. Instead of an air filled tire, there's a lid filled
rim here covered by rubber, lid or some heavy thing. And this particular bicycle wheel has
a very large rotational inertia, much larger than you'd want to have on your bicycle. So
I'm going to take this bicycle wheel. I'm going to put a rope on it. Now if I simply
dangle it from this rope, it will, of course, fall over. No question. But what if I get
it rotating? Well, now it's already got angular momentum. And I hold it unbalanced and there
it goes, precessing our ground. Again, the torque on it, which would make it fall over
if we're rotating, is doing the same thing, changing its angular momentum at the rate
given by the torque. So that strange phenomenon of precession is really just a consequence
of Newton's second law applied to rotational motion. And there are some practical examples
of that. Earth, for example, is itself a big gyroscope. It's a big spinning thing. Because
of its rotation, it's not exactly a sphere. In fact, it's wider at the equator. So it
looks something like this in exaggeration. It's spinning around. Right now, its polar
axis points to the star Polaris. There is a force of the sun's gravity on one side of
the earth and there's a weaker force of the sun's gravity on the other side of the earth
because gravity falls off with distance. And together, they conspire to make a torque
on the earth. And that torque makes the earth precess just like a giant top. And as a result,
13,000 years from now, the star that is Polaris will not be the North Star. In fact, the star
Vega will be approximately the North Star. That precession occurs on earth with a period
of about 26,000 years. So 26,000 years from now, Polaris will again be the North Star.
By the way, I mentioned in the discussion of climate that there were subtle changes
in Earth's orbit that affected climate. This is an example of one of those kinds of subtle
changes that can affect Earth's climate. Precession also occurs on the subatomic scale.
Here's a proton. Protons have a little intrinsic angular momentum called spin. This proton
is spinning around. It's also got a North and South magnetic pole. It's magnetic because
it's charged. Charge is moving. That makes magnetism. And if I put the proton in a magnetic
field, there will be a torque on it. And the direction of the torque, in this case, given
the direction I've drawn that spin, spinning that way, there's going to be a force tending
to bring it toward to alignment with that magnetic field. So it's going to tend to rotate
that way. That's going to make a torque out of the screen. And consequently, it's going
to process in this direction. The pole is going to move first out of your screen and
then back around and into your screen. That is not an unimportant phenomenon. That phenomenon
is the basis of magnetic resonance imaging, which I'll talk about more in a few lectures
in the lecture on physics in your body. Finally, let me use these ideas to explain a much more
common everyday experience, which it really wasn't until about the 1970s that we really
began to understand fairly well. And that's how a bicycle works. What keeps a bicycle from
falling over? Why is a bicycle so easy to ride? Well, I've got a bicycle here. Now, here's
the bicycle. And if it's standing still and it starts to fall over this way to the left,
it will simply fall over. Well, if it's like this, there will be a force on it downward.
That will result in a torque. Take my right hand, go in the direction it's going to rotate
backwards. So if the bicycle tips to the left, there is a torque toward the back. That means
its angular momentum has to change in the direction toward the back. Now, if the wheels
aren't rotating, it has no angular momentum. So it's got to gain angular momentum. It's
got to go from zero angular momentum to an angular momentum that points toward the back.
And that can happen if the whole bicycle rotates tipping over like that, because that gives
an angular momentum to the back. But what if the wheel is already rotating like that
in the forward direction? Well, then the bike has angular momentum that way, right
out of the axle. And I'm going to stick a little arrow on here to remind you about that
angular momentum. So there's the direction of the angular momentum of the bicycle when
that bicycle wheel is rotating and the bicycle is going forward. Well, if the bicycle starts
to tip over, all the arguments I just made about the torque are still there. There's
now a torque on the bicycle. The direction of that torque is the direction in which this
rotation wants to occur if the bicycle weren't rotating, namely still toward the back. None
of that argument changes. But now, what does that mean? It means the angular momentum has
to change. It has to go more toward the back. But the angular momentum is already in that
direction, essentially horizontal. So how does that direction change toward the back?
Well, easily. Just turn the wheels a little bit. And then Newton's second law, the analogy
for rotational motion, is completely satisfied. And the way you ride a bicycle and the reason
it's so easy to ride a bicycle and keep balanced is, this is at least part of the reason. There
are some other things that work here, too, is that the angular momentum change that's
necessary in response to that torque that tends to pull you over is simply a slight
turn of the wheel. And as a result, bicycling becomes very simple.
