Welcome to lecture 35, Physics in Your Body.
The title of this whole course is Physics in Your Life, so by now you recognize that
physics intrudes upon or plays a role in your life in a great many ways, but this lecture
is going to get a little more invasive.
We're going to take physics right inside your body.
Before we do that, I should point out that physics is ultimately the fundamental science,
and in principle most scientists would argue you could describe the workings of anything
in the universe in terms of basic physics principles.
That's not a very useful or insightful or convenient thing to do, and in fact it's something
we can't do in general for entities much more complicated than the simplest molecules,
for example.
So, I have to point out that a full description of the body these days at least requires the
fields of physiology, molecular biology, cell biology, biochemistry, chemistry, and
so on.
Nevertheless, physics plays a significant role in the body in a number of ways.
I'm just going to describe a few of them here today in this lecture.
First of all, the body is after all a mechanical system.
We move around, we produce energy, we raise our arms and change their potential energy,
and so on and so forth, particularly forces act on our body, and I want to talk a little
bit about that at first.
Second, our body is partly solid, our bones, partly sort of semi-fluid like stuff, and
partly real fluids flowing like our blood, and that plays a role, that branch of physics
fluid flow plays a significant role.
Perhaps less obvious than mechanics, but equally significant, our bodies are very much electrical
entities, particularly our hearts and our nervous system, and I'll talk a little bit
about that.
But more significantly, I think, in today's technological world, the way physics gets
into our body is through medical techniques, particularly techniques that allow us to image
the interiors of our bodies in more or less non-invasive ways, and I will describe a number
of the methods currently in use, starting with simple x-rays and moving on to much more
sophisticated methods like magnetic resonance imaging and PET scans, and describe how those
work.
And finally, physics plays a role in the treatment of disease, and I'll end with a description
of those phenomena, how those technologies work.
Let me begin with simple Newtonian mechanics.
The motions of the body are controlled, essentially, by the laws of Newtonian mechanics.
We don't move at speeds near the speed of light or aren't relative to anything in our
nearby environment.
Relativity doesn't play a role.
The laws of Newtonian mechanics fit very nicely in describing our body, and I want to make
only one significant point here in describing the physiology of the body.
There's a lot more I could go on with sports physiology, the physiology of respiration,
all these things, but I just want to talk about forces acting on the body, because our
bodies are subject to forces that are far larger than you might imagine, and I want
to give you two examples that show how that comes about.
So here's a bowling ball, which I've been using throughout this course for a variety
of purposes.
Now I'm simply going to take the bowling ball, and I'm going to hold it like that in my arm.
And I would assert that the forces that are involved in my doing that are far larger than
you might imagine.
This bowling ball weighs about 15 pounds.
Pounds are the English unit of force, and so you might say, well, the forces involved
are 15 pounds, but they're not.
They're much, much bigger, and I'm going to give you a sense of that.
So let's look at the picture here, which says weightlifting.
First we'll look at the physiology of how I might, well, I'm not so much lifting the
weight as simply holding the weight.
So the picture here shows an arm making a right angle bend, as I did when I was holding
the bowling ball.
We see the upper arm and the lower arm, and if we want to get into the physiology, first
of all, we notice that the lower arm is holding on its end this massive object, in my case,
the bowling ball.
So that's not part of the physiology, but that's there.
Then there is a structure of bones within the arm, the humerus, the upper arm bone,
the radius and the ulna, the two lower arm bones.
That's part of the physiology, the skeletal structure, but that's not enough to hold this
bowling ball up.
There is also a biceps muscle and a tendon, which attaches the biceps muscle to the bones
of the forearm.
So that's the physiology behind the very simple demonstration I just did, simply holding a
bowling ball.
Now let's turn from the physiology to the physics.
So as far as the physics is concerned, what we have is a system here of basically two
rod-like objects.
They're held at right angles to each other, and at the elbow, there is a pivot joint,
which is free to allow my lower arm to rotate about that joint, rotational motion.
That was the subject of Lecture 32.
So we're going to start applying some concepts from Lecture 32 here.
First of all, the weight of that bowling ball is a downward force.
It's the force of gravity on the bowling ball.
There's also a downward force from the weight of the arm itself, but that's pretty insignificant,
in this case, compared to the weight of the bowling ball.
Now that weight is a long distance from the pivot point, and remember from my demonstration
in Lecture 32 with wrenches and so on, that the torque, the twisting force, the force
that tends to cause rotational motion to change, the torque, depends on the magnitude of the
force and also how far that force is applied from the pivot point.
It was more effective with a wrench that was longer than with a wrench that was shorter.
Well that weight is a pretty big distance from my elbow, and consequently, it produces
a pretty large torque, and there I've shown you the distance from the elbow pivot to the
weight.
That's the distance involved in calculating the torque.
You multiply that distance by the weight to get the torque.
Now my arm, when I was holding the bowling ball, was in fact not rotating.
It was in a static situation.
It was not undergoing rotational accelerations.
Rotational motion, which was to be at rest, was not changing.
So there must not have been any net torque on it.
That's the rotational analog of Newton's law.
Torque causes change in rotational motion.
There was no change in rotational motion.
So there must be a torque in the other direction.
This particular torque from the weight is tending to rotate my arm in this picture clockwise,
or if I did the little right hand rule thing, into the screen.
So must be a torque tending to rotate the arm counterclockwise, and that torque is provided
by the only thing here in the picture that can provide the torque.
That is the biceps muscle and the tendon that connects it to the forearm bones.
But that connection point is only a tiny distance from the elbow pivot.
And that means that the force in the muscle must be much, much, much larger than the weight.
How much larger?
Well, that depends on how big that weight is.
That weight was about 15 pounds.
That difference was about a factor of 10 in those two distances.
And consequently, maybe I had a force in my biceps muscle of 150 pounds.
It's a pretty big force.
Not as big as some forces that develop in one's body, though.
So the forces involved in doing simple things like holding objects in our arms because of
those principles of rotational motion and torque tend to be larger than you might expect.
Here's another example.
I'm going to jump off this stool.
Now our bodies fortunately know instinctively what to do to avoid breaking our bones when
we do simple acts like jump.
If I were to jump perfectly stiff-legged, and if the teaching company's studio floor
weren't padded with carpeting and weren't kind of made of pretty springy plywood, and
I jump stiff-legged, say, onto a concrete floor, I would guarantee I could shatter my
bones.
I instinctively, as I jump, avoid that problem.
Let's take a look.
And you see me bending my knees and coming down.
What's going on there?
Let me do it once more.
Jumping off the stool and landing.
And I want to ask, what kind of forces are involved on my feet and the bones in my legs
and so on as a result of this simple act?
Well, let's take a look at that.
So here I've got a picture called hard landing.
Here I am standing on something, and here I am jumping off and landing on the ground.
How far did I jump?
Well, I don't know.
Maybe 15, 18 inches.
Let's say it was 18 inches, for example.
So I fell 18 inches.
How long did it take me to stop?
Well, that depends on things like how springy the floor is, and how soft the carpet is,
and how springy the soles of my shoes are, and things like that.
Let's suppose, as an example, the stopping distance was an inch.
It wasn't in the case of my jump, and I'll show you that jump in a minute, pictorially.
But suppose I had jumped stiff-legged and had a stopping distance of one inch.
Now what had to happen?
I jumped off the stool.
I gained energy from the gravitational force acting on me over that distance of 18 inches.
The energy I gained, the kinetic energy I gained, turns out to be simply given by the
force acting my weight times the distance, times the 18 inches.
Then the floor had to exert a force upward on me that took away that kinetic energy.
So the product of that upward force and the distance over which I stopped had to be equal
to the product of the gravitational force and the distance I fell.
So to put it slightly mathematically, the weight times the fall distance has to equal
the stopping force times the stopping distance.
Well, the weight is my weight.
The fall distance is 18 inches.
The stopping distance is only one inch, and therefore the stopping force is about 18 times
my weight.
And for me, or a typical sized person, that could amount to about 1.5 tons.
So it's as if I were, say, lying on my back with my feet up in the air, and someone dropped
a 1.5 ton weight on my feet.
There are very large forces involved in some of the commonplace things we do, or there
could be if we didn't do them carefully and instinctively act to prevent danger to ourselves.
Once in my early years as a physicist, I don't do this anymore, but I served as an expert
witness in a medical malpractice suit that I won't go into, but it involved forces on
leg muscles and bones due to an accident that occurred in a hospital.
And I spent an entire day on the witness stand with the lawyers for the other side trying
to prevent me from stating the number, the number being the actual force that was exerted.
Because the number was so big, the jury would be aghast.
Well, actually, although the number was big, and it was enough to cause damage, there are
in general very large forces exerted on our bodies in the regular everyday acts of walking,
jumping, and so on.
They aren't as large typically as this 1.5 ton force, because what we do, as I did when
I jump off the stool, is protect ourselves.
We undergo soft landing.
So here I jump again.
But just as I hit the ground, just as my feet touch the ground, I bend my knees.
And the effect of that is to make the stopping distance for all of my body but my foot.
And it's a pretty low mass thing, so it's not a big deal there.
Stopping distance is much smaller.
Maybe it's 9 inches or something, depending on how much I bend my feet.
Well, it's still the case that the weight times the fall distance equals the stopping
distance, the stopping force times the stopping distance.
If the stopping distance is 9 inches and the fall was 18 inches, that means the force
on my feet was double my weight, about 300 pounds, and that's certainly entirely tolerable.
So we do things instinctively, like bending our knees to make this soft landing.
By the way, if you want to look in detail at what is happening to a foot on a landing,
here's a very high-speed photograph, or high-speed movie, just showing a foot landing on the floor.
You can see that rippling wave-like motion going through the foot as those forces are
taken up by the soft tissue and transmitted into the bone and so on.
There are remarkable short-term stresses on our feet as we do things like that.
By the way, there's a whole physics of automobile safety.
Airbags in cars are doing exactly the same thing my bending my knees are doing when I
jump off the stool.
They're changing the stopping distance, making the stopping distance longer so the stopping
force is less dramatic.
So that's an example of Newtonian mechanics in our bodies.
What about electricity?
Well our nervous system is a good example of an electrical system.
We have nerve cells called neurons, and they actually have extensions.
We think of cells as little microscopic things, but neurons have extensions that are up to
several feet long, and electrochemical signals travel down those neurons.
They travel relatively slowly, not anything like the near-speed of light signal of electrical
signals and wires, and that's why our response time is measured in, say, tenths of seconds
rather than microseconds or something like that.
And these neurons act very much like electrical cables, and some of the earliest understanding
of neurons, when we really began to understand how the system worked, came from treating
them as electrical cables and borrowing terminology from electrical engineers to try to understand
how these work.
Simple circuit analogies apply to a lot of cases in the nervous system and in other cases
inside the body.
We gave you an example way back in module 3, where we looked at the tiny currents flowing
through the ion channels, bringing materials into the cell.
So the body has many, many electrical systems.
One of the most obviously electrical and most important is the human heart.
So the heart is really very much an electrical system, and I want to give you a quick sense
of how that works.
I have a picture here showing a heart muscle cell.
Heart muscle cells are elongated structures, and in their normal resting condition they
have positive charge on the outside of that cell membrane and negative charge on the inside
of the cell membrane, and the charge is distributed all around.
The cell is electrically neutral, and not only is it electrically neutral, it doesn't
have any of this asymmetric distribution of charge, like for example, I've argued the
water molecule does.
But during the beating of the heart, these cells temporarily depolarize.
They lose some of this polarization across themselves, and here's how it looks.
The polarized cell, because of the symmetry, has no significant electrical effects.
But the heart muscle cell, when it's partly depolarized, not when it's fully depolarized,
but partly depolarized, this cell has lost the charge on the inside and outside at the
left, it now looks like a system in which positive charge is slightly displaced to the
right of negative charge.
That's how I described the water molecule before.
Water had oxygen negative to hydrogen's positive.
It had a displacement of positive charge relative to negative charge, and even though it was
electrically neutral, it still had electrical effects because of that.
In the case of water, that's what made it a good solvent.
That's also what allowed a microwave oven to grab a water molecule and vibrate it around.
Well, that's not what's happening to the heart muscle, but now the heart muscle does have
electrical properties.
They're the properties of a so-called electric dipole, a system in which charge is displaced
slightly, but the whole system is neutral.
And we represent the electric dipole-ness with an arrow that points in the direction
from the negativeness of the charge distribution to the positiveness.
So an individual heart cell becomes basically an electric dipole during the process of depolarization.
So now let's look at the whole heart.
This is a pretty silly picture of a heart, sort of heart-shaped, and it sort of tilted
the way it would be in the body.
And it's full of these cells.
And initially, the cells are all basically polarized.
But what happens is the heart beats as a wave of depolarization sweeps downward through
the heart.
So the first layer of cells basically depolarizes.
Now things are more complicated in this simple picture, but this is a quick way of looking
at the electrical effect of the heart.
Later the second group of cells is depolarized and so on.
That wave of depolarization sweeps through the heart in a direction like that.
And because all those cells have the same electric dipole-ness, the heart acquires basically
what a physicist would call an electric dipole moment and what a cardiologist would call
the heart vector.
And it's a vector that points basically in this direction from negative toward positive
in the heart.
And during the time this is happening, the electric fields associated with these dipoles,
these separated charges, set up a field which is sort of the electrical analog of the field
of a bar magnet.
And if I plot what that field looks like, this is an actual data on a human torso here.
And those contours are contours not of electric field, but of equal values of electrical potential
of basically voltage due to these dipoles in the human heart.
And when you get an electrocardiogram, electrodes are placed around your body and basically they're
measuring these electric potentials.
And when that happens, you get a signal that looks something like this, begins with this
slight rise, that's the P wave, that's when the atria are depolarizing, then there's
a big peak in the middle called the QRS complex, this is a normal looking heart cardiogram,
that's when the ventricles are depolarizing, and then in order to start the process all
over again, the system has to repolarize.
What makes all this happen?
Well there are specialized cells called the pacemakers that initiate the electrical signals
that get this going.
When those go awry and the heart starts fibrillating, for example, a fatal condition, you can stimulate
it back into beating with the application of an electric current.
Well that's electricity.
What about fluid flow?
I showed you a demonstration some lectures ago in which I held basically a blower hose
and I supported a ball on that airstream, even if it was tilted.
And I argued that was Bernoulli's principle, which says when you have a low flow speed
you have high pressure and a high flow speed you have low pressure.
So here's an unobstructed artery, uniform flow throughout, uniform speed and pressure.
What if the artery builds up a little plaque and gets obstructed?
Well then the blood flowing through has to speed up at the site of that plaque in order
to keep the same amount of blood flowing by.
Higher speed, lower pressure.
There is external pressure from your body and the artery can actually collapse, a very
dangerous position, a very dangerous situation due to that lower pressure inside the artery
due to the higher speed caused by that collapse.
Well those are some examples of physics in the operation of your body and in this last
case in a possible problem your body could have.
One of the major things we do with physics is to diagnose problems with your body.
X-rays, we've all had x-rays for our teeth and our bones and so on.
X-rays were discovered by the German physicist Wilhelm Röntgen in 1895 in November.
He quickly took an x-ray of his wife's bones, showed it to a medical society and two months
later in January x-rays were already being hailed as a medical miracle.
And modern x-rays can be as simple as what Röntgen did which is put a body part between
a source of x-rays and bones and a film and I showed you how we made x-rays in a previous
lecture.
But much more sophisticated techniques include devices like CAT scans in which x-rays are
taken from a wide variety of angles and here on the left you see a patient going into a
CAT scanner and x-ray source moves around, the x-rays that go through are imaged and
a computer reconstructs a two or three dimensional picture of what's going on and on the right
you see a picture of a CAT scan of the brain and these are good at revealing basically
slices, two dimensional slices through the whole three dimensions of the brain.
More sophisticated technique even than CAT scans in some ways is magnetic resonance
imaging and that goes right into basic physics.
It's based on a process called nuclear magnetic resonance and here I show a proton.
A proton is a little magnetic, little magnet because it's spinning.
If I put the proton in a magnetic field it will do what we discovered spinning things
do back in lecture 32, it will precess and it can precess with its spin approximately
aligned with the magnetic field or aligned the opposite way.
Those are both possibilities and takes a little more energy to align at the opposite
way to push it against the field.
So here's a proton spinning with its spin aligned with the field, if a radio wave of
just the right frequency comes along that radio wave can flip the spin downward and
then when the proton flips back up it emits a radio wave of the same frequency, a little
radio wave photon.
That's basically how nuclear magnetic resonance works.
How do we turn that into magnetic resonance imaging by the way the physicians, the medical
community is studiously avoiding the word nuclear here, there's nothing really nuclear
going on, otherwise you're working with atomic nuclei in magnetic resonance imaging.
We deal with the protons mostly in water and fat.
They are in a magnetic field and in an MRI machine the magnetic field is non-uniform
which I've indicated here by the field being stronger on the right more of those arrows.
And so only one of those protons is in the right place to respond to radio waves coming
along.
Radio wave comes along in the machine it misses that first proton because it's not the right
frequency to make it flip.
The second one flips, flips back and gives us out the signal and that's the MRI signal
and because we know how the magnetic field varies with position we know where that signal
is coming from in the body.
And so we can reconstruct a picture and the picture gives us a sense of what the density
of the protons are in the body and that ultimately allows us to image structures.
So here's a picture of a patient being sent into that long cylindrical magnet.
It's usually a superconducting magnet that constitutes the core of the MRI machine and
on the right you see a very detailed image of the brain, the spinal column, features
in the face and so on.
MRI imaging is very good at finding the subtle differences in the density of protons and
therefore different tissue structures within the body.
Remarkable imaging technique.
Another way we image interior of the body is by injecting or placing radioactive materials
inside the body.
An example for instance is radioactive phosphate which gets absorbed by bones.
Give the patient some radioactive phosphate then look at them with radiation detectors
from outside.
Here's a bone scan.
You see the spinal column again showing up very nicely in this radioactive bone scan.
Number of different isotopes are used.
Radioactive iodine settles in the thyroid gland so you can use it for thyroid studies.
The thallium is good for looking at blood flow through the brain and so on.
A particularly interesting radioisotope method of looking at imaging inside of the body is
PET scans, positron emission tomography.
My first job out of college I was actually working on the process of PET before it had
become an active medical procedure.
And here I show a nucleus of oxygen 15 which is a radioactive version of oxygen with only
7 neutrons instead of 8.
Normal oxygen is 8 and 8, oxygen 16.
This is oxygen 15.
You have to make it in the hospital in a cyclotron because it's got only a 2-minute half-life.
And it decays by emitting a positron which is an antimatter particle, the antimatter
particle of the electron, an anti-electron.
If you want to know more about antimatter, look at my course on modern physics.
So out comes this antimatter positron.
It's in a universe in which there are lots of electrons, not anti-electrons.
And pretty soon it encounters an electron.
The two get together, they annihilate in a burst of energy, a conversion, 100% conversion
of matter to energy.
And out come two gamma ray photons.
They come in exactly opposite directions.
And by E equals MC squared, each one has the energy of one electron's mass or one positron's
mass because they're the same.
And so we can detect these gamma rays coming out and we can look at where they've come
from with arrays of detectors.
And so we can pin down exactly where this annihilation occurred.
So you can have somebody breathe oxygen containing this radioactive oxygen 15, and you can actually
watch as the oxygen goes into their lungs and then is taken up by the blood.
Pet scanning is very good for processes where you want to observe things that are actually
happening inside the body, procedures that are happening in real time.
Pet scanning is very good for that.
So example of pet scan, here's a patient about to be put into, the head is about to be put
into a pet scanner, and at the right you see a pet scan of the brain.
So physics has given us a number of quite dramatic techniques for imaging the interior
of the body noninvasively.
And I didn't even mention one I had talked about way back in lecture six, which is ultrasound,
which again uses that partial reflection that occurs at a boundary of two different media,
reflecting off internal boundaries between say organs, between the bladder and the surrounding
tissue, between the intestine and the surrounding tissue and so on, to image with sound waves
going in and bouncing off.
So many, many ways to get inside our body essentially noninvasively, sometimes we put
in dyes or radioactive materials, but a lot of the time these techniques are almost completely
noninvasive.
All we do in MRI is get those protons spinning in a magnetic field, for example, and we get
beautiful detailed images of what's going on inside you.
Well physics also plays a role as I indicated in curing disease.
How does that work?
I've talked about lasers.
Lasers have in many instances replaced scalpels as basically precision knives for a variety
of surgery.
Way back in module one I talked a little bit about how laser eye surgery is used to reshape
the cornea and correct your vision.
But laser surgery is used in a variety of other applications.
In the eye, for example, it's used to weld a detached retina back to the back of the
eye.
A detached retina is a dangerous condition when your retina detaches from the back of
the eye and begins to flip around in there and you can lose your vision that way.
Well, you'd like to just tack that retina back down and a little blast with a laser
right through the eye can do that.
So laser eye surgery is basically to weld the retina back to the back of the eye.
Another advantage of laser surgery as opposed to real knives is it leaves a lot less bleeding
as a laser knife goes through the proteins in the material in the body tissues coagulate
immediately and reduce bleeding.
A process called laser angioplasty.
Angioplasty is a process of sort of reaming out your arteries.
In laser angioplasty, a catheter is threaded into your arteries so it's a little bit invasive.
At the end of the catheter is a miniature high-powered ultraviolet laser and when one
gets to where there is a buildup of fatty plaque on the artery wall, something that
could break loose and cause a heart attack or a stroke, that's blasted with the ultraviolet
laser and it's actually vaporized.
So laser angioplasty is a way of vaporizing the plaque that builds up in people's arteries.
If you've got kidney stones, it turns out one way of dealing with kidney stones is to
use shock waves, a concept I introduced in lecture six when I talked about the shock
waves produced as sonic booms by supersonic aircraft for example, but a shock wave is
really any extremely high intensity sound wave that has with it an abrupt pressure change
and that abrupt pressure change exerts enormous forces on objects it hits and so by sending
very high energy sound waves either from something that's been threaded into the body or sometimes
from a device that's simply placed on the outside of the body and focusing those sound
waves down, one can blast kidney stones and break them up to the point where they can
be passed through the urinary system for example.
You got a broken bone?
Well it turns out electric fields just associated with steady currents can help make bones grow
so can ultrasound so those techniques are used in cases where healing is difficult or taking
a long time.
But perhaps the most significant example of physics in medicine in curing disease is the
use of radiation to cure disease particularly cancer and there are medical physicists whose
entire job is to figure out just what dose of radiation one needs to do that.
And here's basically why radiation works.
Radiation is particularly effective against cells that divide rapidly which characterizes
cancer cells.
That's also by the way why children whose cells are dividing more rapidly than adults
are particularly susceptible to radiation dangers.
Cancer cells are also less organized and most cells have repair mechanisms that actually
let them repair the damage caused by minor radiation doses.
Well the less organized cancer cells aren't as good at that so they're more susceptible
to radiation.
So here's a graph which is showing the percent of cells killed on the vertical axis as a function
of the radiation dose I give and for healthy cells that might look like that give a little
bit of radiation not much happens because the cells can repair themselves as after
a while you reach a point where if the radiation dose increases a little bit the mortality
of those cells goes up significantly and finally at a big enough radiation dose most
of the cells are killed.
That's for normal cells.
Cancer cells because again they're dividing rapidly and because they're less organized
and don't have effective repair mechanisms they the high mortality kicks in earlier.
So the name of the game in radiation therapy is to look at these two curves figure out
what kind of cancer cells you've got and so on and find a dose that maximizes the survival
rate of the patient.
For example if the patient has a cancer that is definitely going to be fatal giving them
no radiation they're going to die and if you give anybody healthy person or cancer patient
enough radiation it takes a big amount by the way to be fatal but it has happened.
We know the amounts roughly from studies of the Japanese nuclear bomb survivors and cases
of the fairly rare cases of nuclear accidents if you give a big enough radiation dose the
patient is going to die period.
So somewhere in between and it's somewhere at the point where healthy cells are beginning
to be killed but not in great big numbers and cancer cells are being killed in pretty
big numbers there's an optimum point and if you can achieve that dose of radiation you
can enhance the survival rate of the patient to the maximum not to 100% unfortunately but
to a maximum.
Many radiation therapy used gamma rays actually emitted by radioactive material radioactive
cobalt in particular but that was difficult to control difficult to control the penetration
depth and so on most modern radiation therapy uses miniature accelerators sort of like
miniature atom smashers that accelerate either electrons or protons high energy beams of
particles and the intensity of those beams can be controlled.
Protons although they've only come into use largely in recent years are good because they
deliver their energy more at the site of the tumor that you're trying to get rid of
than throughout the body and of course you want to minimize damage to healthy cells that's
one effect of this physics of collisions that I talked about back in module 2.
So in radiation therapy we basically put a patient under a machine basically in the beam
of a high energy particle accelerator and we bombard them with these particles sometimes
we do so with beams coming from a lot of different direction which maximizes the exposure
of the tumor and minimizes the exposure of other tissues.
Well physics is a very big part of our lives and of our bodies and particularly it can
cure us of some diseases.
