Welcome to lecture 36, the final lecture, your place in the universe.
In the previous lectures, I've tried to give you a sense, sometimes more theoretically,
sometimes more practically, of the many, many roles physics plays in your life.
But there's a very deep fundamental role physics plays in your life, and that is because you
yourself, the materials of which your body is made, the evolutionary sequence that has led
to the intelligent being that you are, those are all the products of a remarkable cosmic
evolution that's been going on for something like 14 billion years, and you would not be here
if it weren't for a lot of detailed physics that went into that evolution. And I want to take a
brief time in this final lecture to map out that cosmic evolution ending up with you as an
intelligent being. This is really the stuff of some other courses, particularly Professor
Filipenko's course, Professor Tyson's course, and to some extent Professor Pollock's course,
the first two on cosmology and astronomy, the last one on particle physics. They have a lot
more to say about these matters than I'm going to say here. What is your place in the universe?
Well, in terms of place, literally interpreted, your place is on a relatively cold chunk of rock
we call planet Earth. It's much cooler than most of the visible material we see in the universe,
the stars. On the other hand, it's much warmer than the average temperature of the universe,
which is only 2.7 kelvins. What about your place in time, which also means part of your
place in the universe? Well, your place in time is roughly 14 billion years or so after what we
think was the beginning of the universe. And the universe has had a beginning and it's had an
evolutionary sequence that began with the simplest forms and whose main theme is the idea that as
the universe gets bigger and cools down, it becomes more complex and more and more complex
structures can form. And I won't say it's the final endpoint, but where we are today here on
Earth, what we know of as the human brain is probably the most complex and remarkable structure
that has evolved in that evolutionary sequence. So the dominant theme, expansion and cooling,
ever more complex structures coalescing out of what had been the primordial soup. Now,
we haven't always had that vision. In the early 20th century, people assumed the universe was
completely static. It always looked pretty much as it has, as it does. It always had,
it always will. It had been there forever. In fact, so prominent was that view that Einstein,
when his general theory of relativity came out in 1916, was embarrassed to find that his general
theory predicted that the universe should be either expanding or contracting. And he knew it
wasn't because that was a prevailing view. And so he introduced a fudge factor into his equations
to make it not expand. He later called that his biggest blunder. Although in 1998, we became
a little less clear whether he was wrong. I'll get to that later. But in the 1920s, after the
construction of the 100 inch Mount Wilson telescope, the biggest telescope of its time, faint fuzzy
patches that had been a matter of debate, were they within our own stellar system or were they
some distant, quote, island universes? It became clear that they were, in fact, distant
universes in the right word. They were distant islands of stars, maybe hundreds of billions
of stars like our own Milky Way. The galaxies have been discovered. And in a series of observations
in the 1920s, Edwin Hubble observed distant galaxies with the Mount Wilson telescope. And he
discovered a remarkable relationship. He noticed that galaxies that were far away from us seemed
to be reddened. Their light was reddened. And the further away they were, the redder the light
was. Now, redder light means longer wavelength, as we know. And the best interpretation of that,
the simplest interpretation of that, the interpretation we believe correct, is that the
reddening is due to the Doppler effect. Remember, longer wavelengths, waves get Doppler shifted
to longer wavelengths if the source of the waves is moving away from you. So with the
exception of the very nearest neighborhood galaxies that are moving sort of at random
with respect to our galaxy, all the galaxies out in the universe are moving away from us
with speeds that depend on their distance. And that's called the Hubble relation. And
here's a simple graph of it. On the left at the horizontal axis is nearby galaxies. On
the right or far away galaxies. On the vertical axis, it's the speed at which they're receding
from us. So if you measure some different galaxies, you get a little bit of scatter
in how these points lie, but they basically describe a straight line. And that straight
line is the Hubble relationship. It's a relationship that says, OK, the further away you are, the
faster you're going. What is the interpretation of that? Well, one interpretation is to think
of the current picture of the universe as kind of a movie that we might run backwards,
a frame in a movie that we might run backwards. Why are the farthest galaxies farthest away
from us? Because they're moving fastest. At some point, all these galaxies were in one
place, and we can extrapolate backwards in time and ask when that point was. And the
answer comes out depending on exactly what the value of the Hubble constant is, the
slope of this line, somewhere between typically 10 and 20 billion years ago. We've now pinned
down that number with considerably more accuracy to 14 something and change billion years ago.
But that's the origin of the idea that the universe began in a big bang event. It sounds
awfully like we're at the center of the universe, but we're not. And I'm going to give you a
simple example. Here's an example involving raisin bread. Imagine a big blob of raisin
bread. This is a picture of the blob of raisin bread, and each of the black dots is a raisin,
and the thing is expanding. By the way, in my lecture on lasers, lecture 33, I sent some
signals over a laser beam, and those signals were in fact some verbiage from my course
on modern physics, and I was talking about exactly this example about the raisin bread
analogy for the expanding universe, and possibly thinking about an infinite loaf of raisin
bread. But if it's a finite loaf, here's a picture of it. And here are a couple of galaxies
that are some distance apart. And later, after the universe has expanded, they're a bigger
distance apart. Here are a couple other galaxies. They're some distance apart. Later, after
the universe has expanded, they're a bigger distance apart. So those first two, the first
pair of galaxies, they were some distance apart, then they were a bigger distance apart.
The distance grew by a certain amount. In the same time, those galaxies that started
out more distant grew by a bigger amount. And that's an explanation of the fact that
as the universe expands, the galaxies that are further apart end up moving, are they're
moving faster. They have to be to cover the same overall expansion in a given time. And
you might still say, well, that means we're at the center, but we're not, because if you're
in this loaf of raisin bread, every raisin sees the same thing. If you're at that one
raisin that doesn't have an arrow on it, you see all the other raisins moving away from
you and they're moving away at speeds that depend on their distance. If you go to another
raisin, it sees exactly the same thing. And the only problem with this analogy is that
the raisin bread is finite. So you have to think about an infinite loaf of raisin bread
and that's a little bit mind boggling. Another way to think of it is to imagine something
like the surface of this balloon. I've got a simple balloon here. I've marked on it red
dots that represent galaxies. And I'm going to blow it up. And what's going to happen
is every galaxy is going to move apart from every other galaxy as the universe, in this
case the two-dimensional surface of this balloon expands, and yet no galaxies at the center.
The down inside middle of the balloon, that isn't part of the universe. This is a two-dimensional
analogy of what's going on in our three or four-dimensional universe, the four dimensions
of space and time. It's expanding and every galaxy is moving apart from every other one,
but nobody's at the center. So here goes a balloon analogy for the expanding universe.
So as the universe expands, each galaxy moves away from other galaxies, and the speed of
that motion depends on how far apart those galaxies are. Those two galaxies didn't have
to move very fast to get far apart in that time. Two galaxies further apart, those two,
had to move faster. The galaxies move apart with recession speeds that depend on their
distances from each other. So that's the expanding universe. Now, until the mid-twentieth century,
this idea of an expanding universe was controversial. Of an expanding universe with a beginning,
the idea of the Big Bang, was controversial. There was a competing theory called the steady
state theory. And the steady state theory said, yep, the universe is expanding, but
as it expands, matter is created out of nothing to keep the overall density of the universe
the same. It sounds odd, but it was needed to avoid the problems associated with saying
the universe has a beginning. But then in 1965, there was a very important discovery
made. It was made by a couple of scientists at Bell Laboratories, Arno Penzius and Robert
Wilson. They were cleaning out a radio telescope which had some static in it, some noise, and
they were trying to figure out what the source of that noise was. There were some pigeons
nesting in the telescope. Maybe it was a pigeon dung, so they shoveled that out and
cleaned out and couldn't get rid of the noise. It seemed to be coming from all directions.
And this was Bell Labs in New Jersey, and coincidentally, theoreticians at Princeton
University were studying what the effect of a universe with a Big Bang would be. And
they argued that there ought to be now a sea, if you will, of microwave radiation pervading
the entire universe, characteristic of an object at a temperature of a little below
three kelvins. And those two groups of scientists heard about each other, and the link was made
and it was recognized that the Bell Labs scientists had studied this cosmic microwave background
radiation, as it's called, which is sort of a fossil remnant of a time much earlier in
the universe. And I talked about this briefly in a couple of earlier lectures. And today,
this cosmic microwave background provides some of the most detailed knowledge we have
about the history of the early universe. I'll get back to that a little bit later.
And then in the 1970s and 80s, just after this discovery, particle physicists, working
with the structure of high-energy particles in their particle accelerator laboratories,
were beginning to understand the interactions of elementary particles under the kind of
conditions that would have existed early in a universe that began with a Big Bang. And
you can find out much more about that again in Professor Pollock's course, Particle Physics
for Non-Physicists. So these new understandings from the microscopic realm of particle physics
and from the realm of the cosmic microwave background radiation were put together to
give a picture of what the early universe might have looked like based on what we know
theoretically. And today, we start the cosmic timeline at about 10 to the minus 43 seconds.
That's a 1 over 1 with 43 zeros after it. We can't go back further than that. And the
reason is, at that point, the universe was so hot and dense that it's so compactly crammed
into one place. Well, maybe it's still infinitely big if it's infinite. We can argue about that.
That's still not clear, although it begins to look like it's infinite. But conditions
were such that you needed both general relativity and quantum physics to explain what was going
on. And we simply have not, as I said in the first lecture, yet figured out how to join
those two theories. So we have to start at this point at about 10 to the minus 43 seconds.
We just can't go back any further because the physics we have doesn't allow us to. And
we know at that point the universe was basically a sort of undifferentiated soup of matter and
energy. And processes were occurring, namely the creation of particles out of pure energy
and the annihilation of particles back into pure energy, the process that was involved
in positron emission tomography that I discussed in the previous lecture. That's a rare process
now. But that was going on in the universe. The number of particles was not fixed. Things
were going back and forth all the time because there was so much thermal energy in this hot,
dense stuff that was the early universe. The basic particles, if they bang into each other,
the energy was too high for them ever to stick together and form anything more complex.
And you might say, well, how do we possibly know about this? Well, we were a pretty good
theoretical footing in this explanation of the early universe for some time. But in around
the year 2000, experiments at Brookhaven National Laboratory began to actually recreate conditions
that existed in the first millionth of a second or less of the universe. And bear out that
our understanding of the particle physics at that time is probably correct. The picture
I'm showing now is a picture of a spew of particles coming out in the collision of two
nuclei of gold that in this Brookhaven machine, the relativistic heavy ion collider, so called
because these gold nuclei and golds of pretty heavy nucleus are accelerated to almost the
speed of light. Two gold nuclei are banged into each other head on an outcome, a spew
of elementary particles. And from that, we can understand momentarily what conditions
were like in the early universe. So this is well before a millionth of a second. At about
a millionth of a second, the temperature had dropped to the point where quarks, they're
quarks and electrons basically, those were the really fundamental particles that existed
where quarks could begin to stick together to form the familiar protons and neutrons.
The protons and neutrons couldn't stick together yet, but the quarks could stick together to
join individual protons and neutrons. But as the universe expanded and cooled, and here's
this big theme, expand, cool, more complex structures for them. Now we have nucleons,
protons and neutrons, before a millionth of a second we couldn't have those. At about
three minutes, the temperature dropped to the point where those protons and neutrons
could finally begin to stick together. And for the next 30 minutes, what an important
half hour in the history of the universe. You've been through 36 half hour lectures,
but that half hour capped them all. That half hour was the half hour in which protons and
neutrons could join. And some of them joined proton to neutron to make deuterium, that second
isotope of hydrogen, heavy hydrogen. And some of those deuterium was joined to make two
protons and two neutrons helium. And there was a smattering, just a smattering of a few
other things, a little bit of lithium was formed, for example, some deuterium as I mentioned.
But mostly what happened is for half an hour, these nucleons joined and they made helium.
And at the end of that half an hour, things got so undense that that process was unlikely
to occur anymore. And consequently, at that point, we had a universe that theoreticians
predict should have been about 75% protons hydrogen and about 25% helium and a tiny,
tiny trace amount of just one or two other elements, deuterium, a version of hydrogen
and lithium, for example. Almost nothing else. We look out in the overall universe,
not at planet Earth, not at our Sun even, but at the wherever we can see what we think
is of primordial stuff, or we sort of average over everything we see in the universe. And
in fact, the universe we observe consists of about 75% hydrogen and 25% helium, a nice
confirmation of the predictions of this big bang theory.
Now at some time, which I've described earlier in this course as roughly about half a million
years out, 500,000 years out, and probably more accurately about 300,000 years out, we
still have just these atomic nuclei, protons and helium nuclei and electrons whizzing all
around. But the electrons, again, there's still too much thermal energy for the electrons
to join to make atoms. But at about 300,000 years out, it gets cool enough the electrons
when they join with protons can make hydrogen atoms or helium atoms when they join with
helium nuclei. Before that, the universe was opaque to electromagnetic waves, to light
another electromagnetic radiation, because again, those particles were individual charged
particles, and they interact strongly with the electric field of electromagnetic waves.
But after they formed atoms, which are neutral, there's much less interaction, there's still
some, but much less interaction with electromagnetic waves, and at that moment the universe became
transparent. And the radiation that was emitted as the electrons fell into those orbits and
made the atoms, then suddenly saw a transparent universe, and that radiation could travel
throughout the universe, basically forever, with relatively little chance that it would
ever bump into anything. That's the cosmic microwave background radiation. At the time
it was formed, it was visible, ultraviolet and higher energy radiation, but as the universe
expanded, the expansion of the universe dragged out the wavelength of those waves, till today
they're characteristic of the distribution of wavelengths in a object that's only about
2.7 Kelvin's above absolute zero. So that's the number we describe as the temperature
of the universe, and we study that cosmic microwave background today with satellites,
and a first glimpse shows that it looks remarkably uniform. This is a picture of the sky, a sort
of map of the sky, as observed from a satellite, and this is the intensity of the cosmic microwave
background, and it looks almost uniform. It has variations though, to one part in about
100,000, which give us details about the lumpiness of the universe at that time 300,000 years
out, and in fact, some of this information takes us back to before a second, if we interpret
this correctly, because we actually see sound waves, the residues of sound waves that were
bouncing around in the early universe. This is a picture from the Wilkinson Microwave
Anisotropy probe, a spacecraft by the way, which is parked at the L2 Lagrangian point.
I describe for you the L1 point, 1.5 million kilometers, a million miles, sunward of earth,
there's another point, a million miles, the other side of earth, and it's a nice place
to put a spacecraft looking out into deep space, because the earth, and the moon, and
the sun don't get in the way. By the way, if you would like to observe the cosmic microwave
background, you can do so. Just turn on your TV and tune it to a place between channels.
Much more interesting than what you see on most of TV, and look at what you see, and
you see that snow bouncing around. That snow is random noise due to light switches going
on and off, random microwave interference, microwave ovens, all kinds of stuff like that,
but about 1% of it is in fact the cosmic microwave background radiation. So you yourself can
observe the cosmic microwave background on your TV. Now, I showed you these pictures
that suggested that there was a little bit of lumpiness in the universe even 300,000 years out.
That lumpiness as the universe expanded led to gravitational agglomerations of material,
which ultimately led to the formation of galaxies, and recent observations by Hubble
suggest that galaxies actually began forming. Within a few hundred million years of the Big Bang,
by 400 million years, there were probably galaxies. And today we have detailed studies
going on of the distribution of galaxies at the farthest reaches of space that we can see.
Here, for example, is a picture of what's called the Hubble Ultra Deep Field, a very long time
exposure with the Hubble Space Telescope designed to bring out galaxies at the farthest reaches
of our vision, which is almost to the edge of the, well, is the edge of the observable universe,
we think, almost. And you see galaxies of all sorts, of all distances, of all colors, of all
shapes strewn about here. Each of these galaxies has about a hundred billion stars. When you look
in the depths of space, don't look in a densely star-populated region of the Milky Way, but out
into the depths of intergalactic space, there are galaxies everywhere. There are huge, there are
great huge numbers of galaxies, enormous numbers. And in fact, here's a survey, this is from the
Sloan Digital Sky Survey that shows on the right a small picture of a slice of space. Some of the
nearby objects are stars, but most of the objects are galaxies. And by studying those slices of the
sky, a three-dimensional map is constructed of the distribution of galaxies. And this particular
study looked at some 200,000 galaxies. And in the picture on the left, you see the distribution
of those galaxies in space. That's the distribution of only the 67,000 nearest galaxies.
So this expansion continues. And for about the first nine billion years, the universe continues
to expand, but the expansion slows. And the reason it slows, we believe, is because all that matter,
which is rushing apart from each other, is after all, exerting gravitational force on itself, on
each other, and slowing the expansion. Just like when I throw a ball up, it slows down. And the
question has long been, would the universe ever slow down and come back? We think we've answered
that question now. And the answer became very surprising. In 1998, studies of distant supernovas,
now corroborated by other astronomical observations, suggested that about five
billion years ago, coincidentally, about the time the solar system and the Earth and the Sun were
formed, but that's a pure coincidence, the slowdown stopped and the expansion began to accelerate.
And that's evidence for some kind of new, unknown energy or force. It's called dark energy.
It's kind of an anti-gravity that is acting to push these things apart, and we don't understand
what that is. And as I was going over my notes for this lecture this morning, an email beeped on my
screen from the American Astronomical Society, and it contains some news of interest to the
astronomical community, as they send out every so often. And one of the news items was a decision by
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, NASA, and the U.S. Department of Energy,
to make the investigation of dark matter a very high scientific priority in the coming decade.
So this is something we need to understand. This is part of that 95% of the universe
that we do not know what it's about. Well, that's the big picture, but now let me zoom in,
because I want to get in the last few minutes of this course, to the physics of the universe in
your life. In the early 2000s, new observations showed that stars were beginning to form as early
as 100 million or so years, a few hundred million years after the Big Bang event. And what stars
do is basically build new material and recycle material. Stars form out of agglomerations of
gas and dust. I have a picture here from the Hubble Space Telescope, a gorgeous picture of a big
cloud of interstellar dust, and you can see kind of glows coming around it. That's from
new stars embedded in that cloud that have just been forming new young stars that are glowing
very brightly. Stars are continually forming in the universe in our own galaxy, and astronomers
are actively studying those star formation regions. And as more and more matter accumulates in a new
star, the density grows, the pressure due to gravity grows, and eventually the star becomes
hot enough in the center for those nuclear fusion reactions I discussed in lecture 34
to start taking place. And at that point, the star is sustained against further collapse by
the nuclear fusion reactions, and the star settles into a period of steady so-called nuclear burning.
How long does it burn? Well, that depends on the mass of the star, a star like our son,
which is a fairly puny, everyday star, will live about 10 billion years, and it's about halfway
through its lifetime. It's a middle-aged star. But a star that's much more massive, like a star 30
times the mass of the sun, will live only 10 million years. The rate at which those nuclear
reactions go grows very rapidly with the mass of the star, and it's those stars that are particularly
interesting in this story. What happens in the star? In a star like the sun, hydrogen fuses
into helium, and a star makes helium. Good. In more massive stars, well, actually in the sun to
some extent, but more importantly in more massive stars, there are reactions that then take helium
and fuse it into other things. And here's a remarkable coincidence. If three heliums get
together, helium is two neutrons and two protons, three get together, they make six neutrons and
six protons, and that's carbon, the element essential for life. Well, it's very unusual that
three particles would collide all at once. Very rare event. What if two heliums collide? Well,
they form an isotope of beryllium, which is very unstable. It lasts just barely long enough
that there's a reasonable chance that a third helium will come along and collide with it and
make carbon. If the lifetime of that beryllium were only a little bit shorter, the universe
would never have gotten beyond helium. And we would live in a universe of hydrogen helium,
but we wouldn't live there because the complexity of intelligence would not have been able to form.
What a wonderful fluke. Now, in one of these massive stars, as the star exhausts first its
hydrogen and then its helium and so on, it then begins fusion of more and more heavy elements.
And by the processes of nuclear physics, we build up preferentially iron at the center, silicon,
oxygen, carbon, helium, hydrogen. And these are related somewhat to that curve of binding energy
I showed in lecture 34. Eventually, the massive star exhausts its fuel, a sudden collapse that
occurs on a very short time scale happens, and the star rebounds from that collapse and explodes.
And that's called a supernova. Sometimes there's a black hole or a neutron star left after it.
That's interesting for astrophysics. But for us, the important point is what the star has done is
it's taken all these elements, the heavy elements, the carbon, the oxygen, the stuff we're made of,
and it's recycled it out into the interplanetary or interstellar medium, where hundreds of millions,
billions of years later, it finds itself in these interstellar clouds that are the stellar
nurseries, and that stuff begins to content. So with each, as time goes on, the stars,
each star generation cooking up more and more of these heavier elements,
enriches the universe in these heavier elements which are needed for things like life.
So the stars are what have made ultimately the material of which we're made, and that's our most
intimate connection to this whole process. Now when new stars condense, we now know and have known
since 1995 a process that happened around our star, namely the formation of smaller, cooler
bodies that don't ignite nuclear fusion and aren't stars, but our planets happens. And in 1995,
the first extrasolar planet was discovered, and now we know dozens and dozens of planetary
systems. And remarkably, they don't look very much like ours, although that's partly a bias because
we tend only to be able to see large planets at this point, or see large planets, Jupiter-sized
planets easily. But we're getting into some surprises there. If you think about stars like
the Sun, or any star that isn't giving off lots of x-rays or other harmful radiation,
there is some kind of zone called the habitable zone, some distance from the star,
where conditions for life, at least as we know it, and I have to say that because we may not
know enough about all the ways the universe can make life, where life can exist. In our own solar
system, Venus, Earth, and Mars are all within the habitable zone, but Venus, because of its
runaway greenhouse effect that I discussed in an earlier lecture, can't support life. And Mars,
at present, is probably too dry and cold to support life, although, as our ongoing research
is suggesting, it might have once done so. Now sometime, let's focus now on Earth, sometime
around the first billion years life arose, pretty soon we had blue-green algae, and they made the
oxygen atmosphere. By a billion years, we had multicellular organisms. 400 million years ago,
life colonized land. 65 million years ago, the dinosaurs were wiped out in an impact of an
asteroid with the Earth. And about 4 million years ago, the first human beings evolved
and developed consciousness. So we are at the end, not the end forever, but the end right now,
of a cosmic timeline that looks something like this. Early, we knew nothing. There was a period
of cosmic inflation, rapid expansion of the universe. We had protons and neutrons forming,
helium nuclei form. About half a million years out, or a little less, is the origin of the
cosmic microwave background. We get galaxies forming, a hundred or so million years out.
The Earth forms, and the expansion happens to accelerate about nine billion years out. And
here we are, intelligence evolves, at least on this planet. And who knows how many other places
in the universe? What about the future? Well, a physicist named Freeman Dyson has written
an optimistic paper called Time Without End, Physics and Biology in an Expanding Universe.
And Dyson argues that once intelligence gets established, the organization that is intelligence
will persist to the infinite future, a kind of optimistic assessment.
The recent discoveries, particularly the accelerated expansion, kind of temper Dyson's
optimism, but there's still a grand vision of our place as intelligent beings in an ongoing universe.
Well, this course has been about physics, and how physics is in your life. And this most dramatic
way physics is in your life is in making the conditions that made your intelligence, your
consciousness, and your ability to contemplate the universe possible. And I want to end by bringing
in literature, because all of what we do as human beings is linked. We don't just do science. And I
think our appreciation of the universe is enhanced by our knowledge of our connection to it scientifically.
So I want to end with a favorite poem of mine. Just read a sampling from this poem.
It's called The Origin of Order by the poet Patti Ann Rogers. It's from a wonderful book
called Verse and Universe, which is a whole book of poems about science and mathematics.
And I recommend a number of the poems in there. But this one I love because it evokes this whole
sense of cosmic evolution that I've described in this lecture. It evokes our being, literally,
children of the stars, our being made of stardust, and everything around us on planet earth here,
and in much of the rest of the visible universe also being made of stardust. So I'll end with
this poem. And I hope you've enjoyed this look at physics in your life. Stellar dust has settled.
It is green underwater now in the leaves of the yellow crowfoot. Its potentialities are
gathered together under pine litter as emerging flower of the pink Arbutus. It has gained the power
to make itself again in the bone-filled egg of osprey and teal. At this moment, there are dead
stars seeing themselves as marsh and forest in the eyes of muskrat and shrew, disintegrated
suns making songs all night long in the throats of crawfish frogs. Child of the sky, ancestor of the
sky, the mind has been obligated from the beginning to create an ordered universe as the only possible
proof of its own inheritance. Thank you, and I hope you enjoyed physics in your life.
