Tessellations of the plane offer an interesting approach to create visually appealing structures
from simple geometric shapes.
One way to create such a tessellation is by repeatedly rotating and translating a single
polygon, resulting in a space-filling tiling.
Such structures are widely used as purely visual patterns in ornamentation, but what
happens if we fabricate structural elements from these tilings?
By using the shape boundaries as the template for a structure, we create networks of rods
with intriguing mechanical properties.
How these structures stretch and bend is highly dependent on their geometry, creating a synergy
of appearance and function.
However, the mechanical properties of these structures are hard to predict.
We present a method to characterize the mechanical behavior of structured sheet materials, allowing
us to capture the macroscopic deformation behavior under stretching and bending.
With our approach, users can explore structures and find or create materials with desired
macromechanical properties.
To characterize the mechanical behavior of the tiling on the macroscopic level, we start
by considering a small periodic patch of the tiling.
On this native resolution, we compute a series of test deformations that fully describe the
behavior of the material.
Based on this data, we then fit a thin plate model that averages away the small-scale deformation
behavior while keeping the large-scale behavior of the structure.
We can then use this model to show the mechanical properties of the material, the Young's modulus,
Poisson's ratio, and Bendig stiffness.
The direction-dependent nature of these properties is captured by radial plots, making it possible
to visualize anisotropic materials.
Our method allows us to efficiently characterize a large number of structures.
To demonstrate this, we applied our characterization to a collection of isohedral tilings, periodic
tilings built from a single polygonal shape.
We can then explore the space of mechanical properties that these structures cover, look
at the Young's modulus, Poisson's ratio, and Bendig behavior of individual structures,
and investigate the material properties of different structure families.
Ultimately, it allows us to find and fabricate structures with desired material properties.
We can also apply our characterization method in an inverse design approach, directly looking
for a structure that fits the target behavior.
In this example, we start from an initial structure and use a simple gradient descent
approach to find a nearby structure that has isotropic material behavior.
Similarly, we can use optimization to search for specific anisotropic material properties.
By using multiple starting points, we find materials with different structures but a
similar mechanical behavior.
Thank you for your attention.
