Dear Fellow Scholars, this is Two Minute Papers with Károly Zsolnai-Fehér.
I get a lot of messages from you Fellow Scholars that you would like to get started in machine
learning and are looking for materials.
Words fail to describe how great the feeling is that this series inspires many of you to
start your career in research.
At this point, we are not only explaining the work of research scientists, but creating
new research scientists.
Machine learning is an amazing field of research that provides us with incredible tools that
help us solve problems that were previously impossible to solve.
Neural networks can paint in the style of famous artists or recognize images and are
capable of so many other things that it simply blows my mind.
However, bear in mind that machine learning is not an easy field.
This field fuses together the beauty, rigor and preciseness of mathematics with the useful
applications of engineering.
It is also a fast-moving field on almost any given day 10 new scientific papers pop
up in the repositories.
For everything that I mentioned in this video, there is a link in the description box and
more, so make sure to dive in and check them out.
If you have other materials that helped you understand some of the more difficult concepts,
please let me know in the comments section and I'll include them in the text below.
First, some non-scientific texts to get you in the mood, I recommend reading The Road
to Superintelligence on a fantastic blog by the name Wait But Why.
This is a frighteningly long article for many, but I guarantee that you won't be able
to stop reading it.
Beware.
Nick Pastram's Superintelligence is also a fantastic read, after which you'll probably
be convinced that it doesn't make sense to work on anything else but machine learning.
There is a previous two-minute papers episode on artificial superintelligence if you're
looking for a teaser for this book.
Now let's get a bit more technical with some of the better video series and courses out
there.
Welch Labs is an amazing YouTube channel with a very intuitive introduction to the concept
of neural networks.
Andrew Ink is a chief scientist at Baidu Research in Deep Learning.
His wonderful course is widely regarded as the pinnacle of all machine learning courses
and is therefore highly recommended.
Nando de Freitas is a professor at the University of Oxford and has also worked with DeepMind.
His course that he held at the University of British Columbia covers many of the more
advanced concepts in machine learning.
Regarding books, I recommend reading my favorite holy tome of machine learning that goes by
the name of Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning by Christopher Bishop.
A sample chapter is available from the book if you wish to take a look.
It has beautiful typesetting, lots of intuition and crystal clear presentation, definitely
worth every penny of the price.
I'd like to note that I am not paid for any of the book endorsements in the series.
When I recommend the book, I genuinely think that it provides great value to you fellow
scholars.
About software libraries, usually in most fields the main problem is that the implementation
of many state-of-the-art techniques are severely lacking.
Luckily in the machine learning community we have them in abundance.
I've linked a great talk on what libraries are available and the strengths and weaknesses
for each of them.
At this point you'll probably have an idea of which direction you're most excited about.
Start searching for keywords, make sure to read the living hell out of the machine learning
ready to stay up to date, and the best part is yet to come, starting to explore on your
own.
Thanks for watching and for your generous support, and I'll see you next time.
