We have assumed in science for hundreds of years that spacetime is fundamental reality.
In the last 10 years, for the first time, scientists have taken off the spacetime headset.
What are we going to find?
So I should be very, very clear on this point.
Now, I'm a cognitive neuroscientist.
And when I say that spacetime isn't fundamental, objects and spacetime are fundamental,
that means neurons don't exist when they're not perceived.
What I'm saying is very, very uncomfortable that we don't see reality as it is.
This theory of conscious agents is really the first layer of software
outside of our spacetime headset.
Once you know the software, you can change the game pretty much any way you want to.
So you believe we're living in a simulation of sorts?
I think that we just have to bite the bullet and say,
no matter how smart and mathematically precise you are,
it's going to be trivial compared to the reality beyond.
I think as a scientist, it's critical for me to actually spend time in utter silence.
That's where the true new creativity comes from.
What we know is one perspective out of an infinite number of perspectives.
But that's who you are.
What you are transcends any description.
And that's how the infinite comes to know itself.
Don, so good to have you back.
Thank you, Andre. Thanks for having me back.
I thought we could start with giving maybe a 10-minute overview,
kind of a high-level view of both your work,
our conversation last time, which I absolutely loved and our audience loved.
And then we can dive deeper into some new terrain here on this conversation today,
which I'm very much looking forward to.
So starting with how fitness beats truth and how the chance that evolution has shaped
sensory systems to see objective reality is precisely zero in the work that you share.
Could you elaborate on that a little bit in terms of how evolution shapes our
sensory systems to be able to navigate it effectively for survival purposes,
but not to see reality as it is objectively?
Right. So Darwin's theory is very clear that evolution shapes sensory systems to guide
adaptive behavior. And that's true. According to Darwin's theory, that is in fact true.
Most of us think intuitively that to do that, evolution must shape us to see the truth because
clearly if you see the truth, that will be much more adaptive than if you don't see the truth.
So to guide adaptive behavior, evolution must also shape us to see the truth.
And it turns out that that extra assumption, which isn't in Darwin's theory,
shouldn't be in Darwin's theory. Now, the mathematics of it is very, very simple.
The payoff functions that guide evolution. Like if you play a game, you have payoffs. If you
make certain moves on the board game or in a video game, you get a certain number of points.
And if you get enough points, you can get to the next level of the game. If you don't get enough
points in time, you die and so forth. Same thing like an evolution. There's the evolutionary game
theory. You have payoffs that guide adaptive evolution. And what happens with those payoffs,
they're basically not telling you whether you go to the next level of the game, but whether
your genes, your offspring go to the next level of the game. So when you analyze those fitness
payoffs and ask, do those fitness payoffs contain information about the true structure of objective
reality? If they're going to shape you, if the payoff functions that guide evolution
are going to shape your sensory systems for you to see the truth, then they have to know a little
bit about the truth themselves or they can't shape you. And what we've proven, and this is,
again, work with not just me, but Chetan Prakash and Manish Singh, Robert Prentner and Brian
Marion and Justin Marks, a number of other people, not just me. But what we've shown is in a number
of ways that the payoff functions basically don't have the information, almost surely don't
have the information about the structure of the world. So you can actually prove the probability
is precisely zero that any payoff function has that information and therefore is precisely
zero probability that we've been shaped to see reality as it is. Now, I should mention
just two quick objections that people have about this. One is, I've shot myself on the foot,
logically. I've used evolutionary game theory, which is supposed to capture Darwin's theory of
evolution. It's the mathematics of Darwin's theory. And I've used it to actually show that certain
basic concepts in Darwin's theory like real physical animals competing for real physical
resources in a real space and time. I'm saying that all of that is, you know, space and time
aren't fundamental. We're not seeing reality as it is. Objects and space, time are just an illusion
or a headset. So the argument from philosophers, some philosophers have been, well, Hoffman,
unfortunately, shot himself on the foot, logically. He's used evolutionary game theory
mathematics to show that the very concepts that were gave rise to evolutionary game theory
aren't true. So either the math faithfully represents Darwin's ideas and captures it
and is a good representation of those ideas, or it's not. If it's not,
Hoffman couldn't use it for what he's using it for. And if it does, if it is a good faithful
representation of Darwin's central ideas, then it couldn't possibly contradict them.
So in either way, Hoffman is messed up and his team. And the answer is this,
fundamentally misunderstands the nature of scientific theories. Every theory makes assumptions.
They're the miracles of the theory. And then it says, if you grant me those assumptions,
I'll show, I'll then prove all this or explain all this other wonderful stuff.
But it never explains its assumptions. And you can get a new theory, a deeper theory,
that explains those assumptions, but it'll have its own new assumptions add infinitum.
So every theory has, if it's good enough, has a scope. But every theory,
no matter how good it is, has its limits. If none else, its assumptions are showing you
what its limits are. So the only question is, when you have a mathematical representation
of the theory, is the mathematics, if it's a good theory, the mathematics will help you explore
the scope. That's new. And, but if it's a great theory, the mathematics will actually show you
precisely what the limits are. And in case of Einstein's theory of spacetime, for example,
his mathematics is of course fantastic and GPS and everything else is based on Einstein's math.
So wonderful scope. But his theory also, the same mathematics that captures his theory and shows
its scope also tells us its limits. And the limits are, in Einstein's case, 10 to the minus 33
centimeters. Space time ceases to have any operational meaning, 10 to the minus 33 centimeters,
10 to the minus 43 seconds. And so here we have the case where the mathematics that Einstein came
up with is the very mathematics that comes back and says your fundamental concept of space and time
fail at 10 to the minus 33 centimeters and 10 to the minus 43 seconds. So that's how science,
good science, really works. The mathematics that's intended to capture the fundamental concepts of
your theory. If it's great mathematics and a great theory, we'll come back and show you
exactly what the limits are of those fundamental concepts. So that's not self-refutation.
In fact, that's why science is so powerful when we just use informal discussion and, you know,
talking about ideas over beer and so forth. That's one thing.
But you can never find out the limit of your ideas and the limits of your theories
when you have just an informal theory. And as a result, it's easy to become dogmatic and to
think that you're getting close to the theory of everything that I know the truth and you don't and
so forth. What science does is it puts a big dose of humility on there. Even a big theory
like Einstein's theory of space time, it tells you that theory is great and it stops at 10 to the
minus 33 centimeters game over. So you need a new concept. So that's, so it's an anti-dogmatic kind
of thing. So that's sort of just a little kind of pushback I've gotten on this and you can see why
would be some strong pushback because what I'm saying is very, very uncomfortable that we don't see
reality as it is. Yeah. And we'll circle back to the value of discovering the limits of different
theories because I'm excited to dive into that to continue to, you know, put a bow on the high
level overview of this work. That understanding that you just shared in conjunction with local
realism being proof false leads us to explore the headset analogy. And so, you know, the Nobel
Prize for local realism being proved false explains how objects in space time cease to exist when
they're not perceived. Like they get rendered on the fly when they're perceived. Why does that become
an important reflection when we start to dismantle this notion that reality is as it seems?
Well, again, I should say that your local realism is false. The Nobel Prize was a
granted for it for that experimental verification. There are some who still want to maintain some
kind of realism through multiverse kinds of explanations and so forth. I think that we just
have to bite the bullet and say space and time aren't fundamental. And the properties of objects
in space and time aren't fundamental. So that's the direction I'm going by. I just want to
point out that there are very, very bright physicists who would disagree. Now, the theory of
evolution of natural selection and my work on that is in some sense, it suggests that space
time is an interface, right? So it does, it strongly suggests that what evolution gave us was not
a window on the truth, but a headset that lets us play the game of life. And so that's why I think
it does fit in with the modern results in physics. I think it's a very reasonable interpretation
of modern quantum theory. And it's actually part of, for example, a big interpretation,
the so-called cubism interpretation of quantum theory that Chris Fuchs and others are espousing,
that the quantum state is just the observer's statement of the degrees of belief of what
they will experience if they make certain kinds of observations. And it's not, you know, quantum
states are not descriptions of objective reality. They're descriptions of your degrees of subjective
belief. So I think that that fits very, very well with the work I'm saying. So here's a case where
physics, this interpretation of physics, the Cubist interpretation of physics, the non-local realist
interpretation of quantum physics works very, very well with what evolution is suggesting,
that we evolve not to see the truth, but to have a headset. So yeah, I think the two actually
dovetail quite well. The truth to be hidden, but allowing us to control it in a way that we need.
That's exactly right. And I should mention that since the last time we talked,
there's been a big push by the European Research Council, the ERC. They have a 10 million euro
new initiative for finding that there are these new structures outside of spacetime.
Like the Amplituhedron?
Like the Amplituhedron, right. Yeah, that's right. So they're called positive geometries,
but and so they, it's just started. Is it a cosmological polytope? Is that correct?
That's right. That's right, an associahedron and so forth. So there are these positive
geometries and they could have billions of dimensions. Spacetime has four, maybe 11 in
string theory or something like that, but they could have billions of dimensions. In other words,
our headset is pretty cheap. It's a really, really low dimensional, we got the cheap model.
The high energy theoretical physicists are now looking at structures like the Amplituhedron,
in which one of the parameters is the dimension of your spacetime. So in our case, M equals four.
M is the parameter, and ours is four, but they could have a billion. M could be any number,
M is one of the, four is one of the smaller numbers you could have. So that's already a
parameter in the positive geometries that your headset, your spacetime could be
as many dimensions as you want. And we have about as cheap of one as you could get away with.
So instead of us having a theory of everything, we have a theory just of a trivial headset.
So just refining again, the understanding that objects cease to exist in the form we think they
do when they're not perceived. This goes for the chair that you're sitting on, the moon, any object
that the quantum theories works at all scales, then this would apply to that at all scales.
Can you just share a little bit more about the headset analogy and how that helps us kind of
wrap our head around things exist in objective reality in a way that is analogous like we
explored to last time, like a computer where there's gates of electricity moving, but the display
of the screen is set to hide the truth of reality so we can control it in a way that is useful,
because otherwise if we didn't have the display of a computer screen, like how would we actually
effectively navigate it? So could you elaborate on that a little bit more so we can wrap our
head around that? That's right. So an obvious question is if we don't see the truth, then
what has evolution done? How does it allow us to survive when we're ignorant of what reality is?
But if you think about it, it actually makes a lot of sense. If you have someone,
say Grand Theft Auto, and it is a virtual reality version of Grand Theft Auto in multiplayer,
and there's some supercomputer somewhere that's running it, but you don't see that
supercomputer, you don't need them about the software and so forth. All I know is I've got a
steering wheel in front of me, I've got a dashboard, I've got a gas pedal and so forth,
and I can see over to my right, I can see a green Ferrari or something like that that I'm racing
against. Well, of course, if you looked inside the supercomputer, there's no green Ferrari anywhere
inside the supercomputer, and there's no steering wheel and none of that. The reality that I'm
interacting with and what I'm really doing in this metaphor in that reality is toggling millions of
voltages in a precise order. It has to be, you get one toggle wrong and the thing can crash.
So you have to get this precise toggling of millions of voltages. That's what you're really
doing in the reality. But if you had to do that to play the game, if you actually had to go in
there and know what sequence of voltages to put in at what time, good luck. I'm going to win the
game if I'm just turning my steering wheel and slamming on the brakes and the gas and what,
I'm going to win the game. So here's the case where it's very, very clear that knowing the
reality and having to interface directly with the reality to play the game is going to make you lose
as opposed to just having a dumb, dumb down user interface that hides the truth but gives you just
the controls you need. So that's sort of the point of view of evolution. From the evolutionary
point of view, Darwin's idea then is basically that evolution shaped us with sensory systems that
hide all the truth that we don't need and all the gory details. Just give us the levers that we need
to control reality without actually knowing what those levers do. Because if you had all the stuff
that you know, you're going to have to pay for more energy for all the neurons you're going to need
to store that information to understand that stuff, it's just too expensive. So that's sort of
an intuition where it starts to make it seem not so much crazy, but of course,
of course you don't want to see the truth. It's just too complicated.
Yeah. So this starts to, I think, be a little destabilizing for some people when you say,
we're living in a matrix simulation. Reality isn't real. And so this understanding that
this headset, our sensory system allows us to navigate the game of life, like the game in
GTA 6 or whatever that comes out. If we have a VR headset like the Apple headset, it will allow us
to navigate and play in there, for example. And that space time is a very limited scope of reality.
And within that limited scope of reality, we are perceiving less than 0.1% of the electromagnetic
spectrum that we can see with visible light. The sensory experience of life is
extremely limited to the vastness of what existence actually is.
That's right. And even the very notion of the electromagnetic spectrum itself
is an artifact of the headset. It's not a deep insight into the reality. So when we talk about
that, we're using headset language is not the truth. But even in the headset, we have hints
inside the headset, even the part that we see inside the headset is trivial compared to what's
out there. So you believe we're living in a simulation of sorts. Is that right?
Yeah, I would say that this is, that space time is not fundamental objective reality.
Therefore, something else is. And so I should be careful though, and say when most people talk
about simulation theory, like Nick Bostrom and people in that camp, their point of view is very,
very different from mine. And I should be very, very clear about the difference and also the
similarities. So the similarities are that what you see around you is not the truth. It's in some
sense, a simulation or a headset. But what Nick and Bostrom and others think is that
space time and physicalist ideas are still fundamental. And they think that computer
programs properly programmed can actually create consciousness. So the idea is that
there's some computer programmer in a different world that has created this simulation and the
simulation is sophisticated enough that the algorithms are actually creating creatures
like us with consciousness. But it's consciousness that's emerging from the computational prowess
of the programmer and the power of the computer. Of course, then the possibility is that that
programmer in their computer is in fact just a simulation from a deeper programmer and so forth
many, many levels of that. But at the bottom, the bottom level is presumably again a physicalist
space time programmer in a world that's physical and space time. And so the idea is, so they're
making two assumptions that space time, physics is fundamental. And second, that properly programmed
computers can create consciousness. And I'm disagreeing with both points. So the two critical
points of their simulation hypothesis, I think are false. I think there's no evidence
in any theory of how computer programs could create consciousness. I'll put it this way.
There's not a single theory out there right now. And there have been lots of attempts that says
that consciousness is created by some kind of algorithm, some kind of computational process,
some kind of neural network that can, that none of those theories can explain even one specific
conscious experience. When you look at all the theories that are out there and they've been
at this for decades, and many of these people are my friends and they're brilliant people.
But what I always ask them when I speak at conferences is to say, okay, we can experience
roughly a trillion specific conscious experiences. Taste of garlic, smell of chocolate, the sound of
a trumpet. There's about a trillion things that we experienced should be shooting fish and a barrel
to pick one and give us a theory and say how this computational process must be the taste of mint.
So how many of you guys got? How many have you done? Zero. And that's the way it's been,
and that's the way it's going to be. So, so there's a lot of talk about these computational approaches
and or neuro biological approaches for, for coming with conscious experiences. And there's
not a single specific conscious experience that they can explain. Zero. And I predict that that's
going to continue because it's not possible in principle to do that. So, so I disagree with
the simulation theorists that are saying that your consciousness is due to some program or writing
up a program that created your conscience. Show me the beef. There's nothing there. There's all
sorts of ideas and hand waves, but I have not seen anybody plop down and say, here is, for example,
an integrated information theory. Here is the causal matrix and by end matrix and must be 5000.
And these are the 5000 by 5000. These are the exact numbers that must be in the matrix for this to
be the taste of mint. Nothing. Right. And if you think about it, how in the world could a 5000 by
5000 matrix of numbers be the taste of mint? You've got some explaining to do. So, so, so that's where
I disagree on two things, right? The idea that spacetime is fundamental and that computational
processes or neural processes could create conscious experiences. And I'll just mention
when you, when I give up local realism, and when I say that spacetime isn't fundamental,
objects and spacetime are fundamental, that means neurons don't exist when they're not perceived.
That means none of my behavior is caused by neural activity. Now, I'm a cognitive neuroscientist
and I think we need more money for, for neuroscience, not less. So I'm, so let me be very, very clear.
I am not denigrating neuroscience research. I'm a cognitive neuroscientist. I love that
research and we, but it's going to be much harder than we thought. The 86 billion neurons of the
brain and roughly the same number of glial cells are complicated, but they're trivial. They're just
a headset projection of the real thing that's behind them outside of spacetime. And so neuroscience
is going to have to reverse engineer the 86 billion neurons and, and look at the much more
complicated reality behind that. So, so I, that's why I say we need more money for neuroscience,
not less. And we're going to have to up our game because we haven't actually started the hard work
yet in neuroscience. So let's just lay the, the foundation too for, for people that start to explore
the hard problem of consciousness of why any collection of matter from the materials view
would have an experience of itself is very baffling. And so when you look at consciousness in the
many different theories of how it could come to be, there is a materialist view, which is like
you just explained, which is along, you know, analogous the understanding that spacetime is real
and after a certain amount of unconscious complexity and your neuronal structure,
consciousness starts to appear as you turn that dial forward. Now we're exploring a little bit more
of a originally thought of as panpsychist view, which is the understanding that consciousness is
actually fundamental. Could you explain the difference between consciousness being fundamental
or panpsychism versus idealism? Sure. That's right. So I'm good friends with Philip Goff,
who's one of the principal proponents of the modern panpsychist kind of theory. And
so there, I'll talk about one specific version of it. I think that, that Philip may have thought
about it that way, but I think he's not necessarily committed to this. So what I'm saying right now,
sure. I'm not pinning Philip with this. Okay. But one kind of panpsychism
takes spacetime as fundamental. And it says that in addition to these elementary particles,
the leptons, bosons and quarks of the standard model of physics. So we have these fundamental
particles and their physical properties. In addition, let's just posit that these
bosons, leptons and quarks also have in addition a fundamental unit of consciousness. So that they,
and in some sense, the consciousness is what is the reality behind the mathematics.
And that certainly is interesting, but there's a couple problems with it. First is,
why should we assume that the laws of consciousness are tied to the laws of our particular headset?
This is just the M equals 4 version of a projection of something that's much more complicated.
It fails to understand how trivial spacetime is. Spacetime is just a trivial headset. And so if
we're going to pin our theory of consciousness such that the equations of that little headset are,
in some sense, dictating how these consciousnesses interact, that's just way too limiting.
We have to think outside of that box. And second, it actually does no work.
As a scientist, I would like, I mean, philosophy is important and so I'm not
denigrating philosophy, but as a scientist, I would like my theory of consciousness to actually
do some work for me. Not just to say, the laws of physics, you can leave them alone,
nothing to see here, but we can tag on consciousness. I'm very, very unhappy with that.
I would like a theory of consciousness that shows me where the laws of physics come out
as a special case of the more general laws of consciousness. So I would like to show that the
headset is a trivial headset and consciousness is the more fundamental. So you can see it's a very,
very different spirit. Now, having said that, there are many different versions of panpsychism.
So I could easily imagine, and I may have already influenced Philip in this direction,
we'll see. Panpsychism, that's not tied to space time. In that case, as a scientist,
I still want, then, fundamental mathematical principles. I want this partly because as a
scientist, here's the attitude that I think hard-nosed physicalists should have toward this.
They can say, look, in our assumption that space and time are fundamental and doing the
mathematics of physics is fundamental, we can explain all this stuff. Your GPS is due to us.
The science and technology that's allowing us to do this podcast is all due to this physical
science. What kind of scientific equipment has come out of your theory of consciousness?
Oh, none? Oh, well, I think that that sort of tells us how important your ideas are vis-a-vis
our physical. And what can I say? They've got me. And they've got anybody who says consciousness
is fundamental, and they say, well, what kind of technology can you give us? None. Well, then
either that whole approach is not strong enough, or you haven't done your work. And I think it
is, we haven't done our work. I think the approach is strong enough. But we now,
those of us who take consciousness as fundamental, need to have fundamentally new mathematical
theories of consciousness, qua consciousness, with rigorous mathematics that shows how precisely
space-time comes out as a projection of this, where we actually get the standard model of
particle physics and the generalization of it, so that we can actually predict new technologies.
So that's where I'm headed. So the panpsychist approach
has not at all been taken into direction by philosophers that could ever lead to brand
new mathematics that would lead to new technology. So that's one problem I've got with it.
The approach that I'm taking is, I call it conscious realism, but you mentioned idealism.
Strictly speaking, what I'm doing is philosophically idealism. It's probably the closest would be
Bernardo Castro's analytical idealism. So yes, it is. What I'm doing is idealism.
Which just so I can understand, panpsychist view would be that consciousness is fundamental.
So essentially consciousness is a fundamental constituent, and idealism would be perceiving
consciousness as all there is, but projecting down essentially as like reality is a shadow of
innocence. Yeah, the idea that's what we call physical spacetime is just ideas in the mind.
It's just a headset. Ideas in the mind of God. Ideas in the mind of consciousness. Absolutely.
So and the idea would be then that this is what quantum mechanics is telling us. The
fact that local realism is false means that the moon or whatever you observe has a value of position,
momentum, and spend, and so forth. When you observe and when you don't observe, you can't assert
those things, because in fact, they're not true. And this is quite nice. This is
non-contextual realism. And there's some wonderful work on this, the Coak and Specker
theorems and so forth. There are cases where you can actually set up these quantum measurements,
where you can show a sequence of measurements, where you can predict with probability one.
What the outcome of an experiment will be, what one of the measurements will be.
Probability one. And you can prove that the mathematics of quantum mechanics entails
that there could not possibly have been a value until you made the measurement. So these are like
knock down, drag out kinds of arguments that non-contextual realism is false. So all measurements
are contextual. And to put that in normal language, that means that in some sense,
the consciousness of the observer. Although, I shouldn't put that on Chris Fuchs. So I think
that he's going to be agnostic about consciousness and all this stuff. He's just saying whatever
quantum mechanics is, it's just describing the degrees of belief of the agent that's making
the measurements. So when I talk about consciousness, I'm not putting that on Chris. That's me.
So now as we start to explore a little bit more beyond the headset,
what role do you feel like evolution could be playing as a projection down from consciousness?
That's a great question. And it does raise the issue that I'm going to be talking about
consciousness beyond space. And strictly speaking, that's an independent hypothesis
from the whole business about evolution leading us to have evolved a headset. So we have to be
very careful about how the science goes here. In the first step, I'm just taking Darwin's theory
and the mathematics of it and saying, let me just take that as my game. Darwin's theory and the
mathematics of it. What does it tell us about our perceptions? Oh, it's just a headset is not the
truth. That's what Darwin's theory entails. Now it's a separate step. Okay, now that Darwin has
told us that we need to look outside of space time. But Darwin doesn't tell us what's outside of
space time, right? So it's brilliant. So when I do the next step and say, okay, I'm going to propose
that there's this social network of conscious agents, I'm leaping way, way beyond Darwin. And
there's nothing in Darwin that says that's the leap you have to take. So I should be very, very
clear. Nothing in my work in evolutionary theory is saying you must go to conscious agents. However,
I have to go the other way. If I'm going to propose conscious agents, the social network,
the Twitterverse of conscious agents as the fundamental reality, then it's my responsibility
to show that I can first project it back into something that I would call space time, create a
space time. And that when I do that projection, in that space time, I would see what looks like
nature, red, and tooth and claw as Darwin predicts. So it's not that Darwin predicts
conscious agents, it's rather that Darwin says there's something beyond space time.
And then I go, okay, well, what is it? Darwin can't tell me, I need to make my own leap. So
I'm going to propose conscious agents, because at least that way I might be able to understand
consciousness. Then okay, then as a scientist, no BS, give me back space time, give me back the
standard model of particle physics, every bit of it with new predictions, and give me back
evolution of a natural selection. Otherwise, my theory of conscious agents, you shouldn't pay
attention to it at all. So unless I can do that, bye bye. So that's the hard nose attitude that we
have to have for these an idealist theory of conscious beyond space time. For as a scientist,
again, I'm not putting down philosophy. Philosophy is wonderful. And I learned a lot from philosophers.
But I'm talking about science here. Scientists who are idealists have to do this hard work
and give us back a theory of space time that that that gives us new technologies and new insights.
So that's what what what I'm up to right now is working with my my colleagues. It's a mathematically
precise theory of consciousness. It's think of it as again, like a social network like the
Twitterverse. There's an infinite number of these conscious agents. And we have a mathematics
with a Markovian so called a Markovian dynamical system. It's trivial to show that it's
computationally universal. So our network of conscious agents can do anything that a neural
network could do. Chat GPT, Gemini, Bard, all these, these all these AI programs that are
based on neural nets, conscious agent networks can do all of that. So our conscious agent nets
only assume that there are agents that have a range of experiences, like the taste of chocolate,
the smell of garlic. So that's one of our miracles. Every scientific theory has a miracle.
Here's my miracles. There are conscious experiences. And second miracle is that there are probabilistic
relationships among conscious experiences. That first one, though, doesn't necessarily
require an assumption, right? So how could you say it's a miracle? Well, most because our conscious
experience is probably the one thing that I sell evident, right? You? Well, I would agree that
space and time, what we call physics is an extrapolation from our experiences.
My experiences are all I know directly. So I would agree with you on that.
But when I say it's a miracle for my theory, what I'm saying is my theory will not try to explain
the origin of conscious experiences. So it's not sense. It's a miracle. So it's going and some
people might say, well, that's why I like physicalism, because I'm just going to start off with
the standard model of particle physics. And I don't need to assume the taste of mint and all
these experiences, just the particle particles of in their properties. And I'm going to show you
where those conscious experiences come from. And then I went and and I would say if they could do
that. But as I said, that would be very, very impressive if they could do that. Right now,
they're batting zero. And I predict that they're going to bat zero. But they would have their
own miracle, which is the laws of the standard model of particle physics and the and then the
quarks and gluons and bosons and and leptons that they that they're. So it's not like they don't
have any miracles. They have their own miracles. It's just not my miracles. So every every theory
is going to have its miracles. Now, one thing about taking consciousness as fundamental is
there's a wide variety of conscious experiences, right? I said there's a trillion specific ones
that we have. So that's in some sense, it's assuming a lot, right? But it's one category
of of assumption that's a category of conscious experiences. And the reason why right now,
I think it's a good step as a scientist to move in that direction is when you look at
my my good friends and colleagues who are doing the physicalist theories,
they're having to assume all of space time physics, the standard model and so forth.
And then when they get to the step of explaining conscious experiences, they can't. And so what
they're effectively having to do is also they have to stipulate the conscious experiences. They
stipulate the physics and they stipulate the conscious experiences. And that's actually the
word that Stephen Pinker used as he describes, you know, like the global workspace global neuronal
workspace theory is saying it. Yeah, it stipulates all the physics, but then it also has to stipulate
the conscious experiences. And so my attitude is, well, if the physicalist theories are stipulating
the conscious experiences as well as the physics, and I'm only stipulating the conscious experiences,
and I'm going to show where the physics comes out, I'm going to explain the physics, I'm not
going to stipulate the physics, I'm going to explain it and hopefully get a deeper model with
new technologies that you couldn't get with space time. Then you win that that approach will win
because I've stipulated less than the physicalist theories. So that's why I think I want to go
ahead with this, even though it's a big give to take all these conscious experiences as fundamental.
But what I'm not taking is other things like learning, memory, problem solving, intelligence,
the self, there's all these other things that we would expect to have from a theory of consciousness.
And I'm not assuming those that I'm going to explain the only thing I'm assuming are the raw
conscious experiences themselves and probabilistic relationships among them. That's all. That's all
I'm giving myself. So it's very, very spare starting point, as spare as I could make it. It was
literally the minimal thing that I thought I could get away with. And then there's no notion of self,
learning, memory, intelligence, all that other stuff, we have to build that. But the fact that it's
computationally universal means, it doesn't mean it's easy, but it means, yeah, we can do it.
So we mentioned a little bit earlier the amplitude hydrant, which is this
joule-shaped geometric structure that challenges our notion of space and time.
How would you explain what that is to somebody that is not a physicist or mathematician? Like
in simplistic terms, what does that represent for the possibility in challenging notions of space and
time? Yeah, it's an interesting short story. I'll tell this short story. When you try to understand
how particles interact in space-time, you might smash two gluons into each other and four gluons
go spraying out. And you want to look at the probabilities of various kinds of interactions
that particles can have. They're called them scattering amplitudes, but probabilities of
interactions. When you do the mathematics in space-time using quantum field theory,
the math is very difficult. That little two in, four gluons out, hundreds of pages of algebra,
hundreds of pages of algebra for one interaction, millions of terms. And that makes it really hard
when you have to look at millions or even billions of these interactions per second
to try to figure out what's the new stuff. So there was some serious pressure to try to make
the mathematics easier. The experimentals were saying, come on, guys, you've got to give us
something a little bit easier to work with here on the mathematics. And so some mathematicians
in the 80s discovered they could get it down to 13 pages instead of several hundred pages that
were like, oh, thank you. Holy smoke down to like 13 or something. And then they guessed a single formula,
like just a few terms. You could write it down by hand. And it was right for that one particular
interact. And it was like, there's something going on here. There's like some magic going on here.
Maybe it's a one-off. But then they found other examples. And then in 2005, 2006, Ed Whitton in
his postdocs discovered something called, it's now called the BCFW recursion relation
that allowed them, for many, many kinds of interactions, technically it's called n equals
four super Yang-Mills. But anyway, a particular class, they could compute them with this very,
very simple recursive formula that collapsed all this stuff. And some guy named Hodges, then
brilliant physicist in England, said, in one case, a few cases, it looks like this formula is
putting together pieces of a volume of some object. Maybe there's some general thing here.
And then Nima and his team said, oh, that's an interesting idea. So they went after that.
And in 2014, 2013, they published the archive, but 2014, the actual publication came out. So just
10 years ago, the official publication came out of the amplitude hedron, which confirmed what Hodges
had proposed. But there was some geometric object that BCFW recursion relations were gluing pieces
together to make this object. And that object was encoding in its volumes, the scattering
probabilities. And the structure, it turned out, of this object. The structure was encoding the
probabilities. The volumes are encoding the probabilities. But the structure, like the edges,
the all the edges and so forth, were encoding properties of locality and uniterity,
effectively, space-time properties, quantum uniterity and space-time locality,
relativistic locality. And so, but this was not an object inside space-time. And it was actually
entirely beyond space-time and also beyond quantum theory. So some people said, well,
yeah, space-time isn't fundamental, but we'll use entanglement, for example, of quantum theory,
to boot up space-time. And they're saying, no, no, no, no. Space-time and quantum theory
are emerging together from something far deeper, such as the amplitohedron.
And then more generally, these positive geometries. So the amplitohedron is sort of like the first,
but positive geometries more generally. So the idea is there's,
we have assumed in science for hundreds of years that space-time is fundamental reality.
In the last 10 years, for the first time, scientists have taken off the space-time
headset. And we've said, we can look outside space-time. What are we going to find? We're
looking outside of space-time. The first paper, in some sense, that was going outside of space-time is,
say, in the last 10 years, give or take. So we've been looking outside of space-time for 10 years,
and what do we find? What do you take off the headset? Obelisks.
Geometric structures, not a dynamic, just sitting there. Here I am. Big geometric. Could be millions
of dimensions. It could be hundreds of dimensions, trillions of dimensions, just sitting there.
And so here, it was very much like 2001 Space Odyssey, where the obelisk is there.
And all the apes are pounding and hooting, and they know it's important. It's clearly,
and they have no clue, right? And that's where we are. We've taken off the headset,
there's these obelisks sitting there, smiling at us. It's quiet. They're not moving.
They're telling us something really, really important. But it's so tantalizing that, as I
mentioned, the European Research Council just put out a $10 million initiative. It's called
the Universe Plus initiative. February, they brought together like 100 mathematicians and
high-energy theoretical physicists to launch this whole thing, and we're off to the races.
We've taken off the headset. We found these obelisks. We want to find out who put those
obelisks there and why. What is this telling us? Right. So the race is on, and what I'm proposing
is we need a dynamics. Physics always wants something dynamical. We need a dynamics
that will give rise to these obelisks, the positive geometries. And so that's what I'm working on with
this theory of consciousness. What the paper I'm working on right now, and the paper I published
last year, is we're taking the theory of consciousness in this dynamical system, and we're
showing how to get the new objects that the physicists have found outside of spacetime from
them. So I didn't mention, in addition to the positive geometries, there are combinatorial objects,
in particular something called decorated permutations that classify these structures,
classify the objects. And we've done that. We've actually mapped our consciousness dynamics onto
the decorated permutations. That's then giving us, that helped us grok how to then mesh our theory
of conscious agent dynamics, the markup dynamics, with these positive geometries. And the paper we're
working on right now, we're planning to actually take, in a simple case, n equals four super young
males to go all the way from consciousness all the way into spacetime and predict a scattering
amplitude. So the idea, that was just the first baby step, but the idea is, we start with the
theory of consciousness mathematically precise outside of spacetime, and show precisely where
are these decorated permutations, and the positive geometries come from, and then show how spacetime
and its properties emerge as a trivial projection of this social dynamics of conscious agents.
So that's sort of the big picture where we're headed.
Okay, there's like four tangents that just spurred off that I want to explore.
There is this Sufi master, actually, that I believe has a quote roughly saying,
this whole universe was made so that God may know himself, the seed wished to know what it was,
and what is in it, and so it became a tree. And it seems like structures, like these geometric
structures that exist out of spacetime that we're discovering point to projecting down into
this reality to create almost analogous to like, we discover certain crystals or rocks that earth,
for whatever reason, the dynamics create these mathematically precise structures that are extremely
beautiful, that we're looking down projecting down into there are these higher dimensional
structures that are projecting down. And so I'm just curious, what implications do you feel like
is, comes about as we start discovering these hired, like obelisks that for some reason are there,
we don't know why. But that, yeah, that again, like we mentioned, challenges or notions of spacetime,
but then also begs the question of what are they doing? How are they there?
Right, right. And first, I should clarify one thing, I mean, I probably sound very excited
about these ideas about conscious agents outside of spacetime. And I'm playing it up.
Because that's the current research I'm doing, it's a lot of fun. But frankly, it's just a baby
step, right? It's not the truth. There is no such thing as a theory of everything. And that includes
Hoffman's theory. So I'm not claiming I've got the final word. I'm just saying that here's a very
interesting, for those of us who think something like consciousness is fundamental, here is a first
scientific theory outside of spacetime. But it's not the final theory of everything. And I'll be
very, very happy when someone comes and overthrows my theory and get something deeper. But my guess
is that the deeper thing will be a much deeper understanding of consciousness than one that
my theory is proposing. So Humble Pis is required, right? This isn't, I'm not the theory of everything.
It's okay to be excited and be fine, but don't mistake that for me thinking it's the truth.
It's not the truth. It's just an interesting baby step. In terms of
for example, what you were saying about what the Sufi master said.
I think something like that is really right. Again, it's a good pointer. Again, not when I say
right, not the truth, but again, a pointer in an interesting direction. I think that
so I should be very, very clear on this point. This is really critical.
I talked earlier about scientific theories always making assumptions. And therefore,
there could never be a scientific theory of everything.
That means there's an infinite number of scientific theories that we could create
because there's an infinite number of deeper and deeper assumptions we could make.
And reality, whatever it is, is transcends even that infinite sequence of scientific theories.
And that's really an important point and it's coming from a very
simple fact about scientific theories. Every scientific theory must make assumptions.
And it doesn't explain its assumptions. Those are miracles for the scientific theory.
There's no way around it. You cannot give me a scientific theory that doesn't have miracles
at the starting point. We call them assumptions. That's a very sobering fact about science and one
that we should really look at closely. It means infinite job security for science,
which is good. But that's also very, very humbling. It means that even if we gave infinite effort,
had a billion Einstein's working for a billion years,
we wouldn't scratch the surface of whatever objective reality is.
So when spiritual traditions, many spiritual traditions have made it very,
very clear, like the Tao De Ching says, the Tao that can be spoken of is not the true Tao.
They're saying something that's truly, truly important. And that is all of our concepts
fail ultimately. They're pointers to the reality, but they're not the reality.
In the following, in a very, very simple sense, the word mint versus the experience of mint.
Of course, the word mint is nothing like the experience of mint.
And the word mint doesn't explain the experience of mint. And it's not a theory of the experience of
mint. If you want to know mint, the experience of mint, you have to taste it yourself. You have
to know it firsthand. And then someone else can say, that is what I mean by the word mint.
So you have to have the experience yourself. And then the words can point to it.
This is not BS. This is the way, and this is all of our concepts, the color red,
the smell of garlic, the sound of a trumpet. You have to have the, if you don't have the
experience yourself, good luck me giving it to you by talking. So my words aren't going to do it.
And so that's, so what the spiritual traditions have been saying is extremely important here.
It's not just schmistical nonsense. I'm saying that scientists have to really understand
that our scientific, I'm a scientist. I love scientific theories. They beat hand waves by a
long shot. So I'm sort of impatient with hand waves. Scientific theories are wonderful because
they're precise and they tell you their limits. And so they tell you when that theory is done.
That's beautiful. But many scientists still have the hope that they're going to get a theory of
everything. No chance. There is no theory of everything. So the spiritual traditions are
telling us the right thing when they say any word is a pointer. The same thing is true of
scientific theories. They're all at best pointers, but our pointers in science tell us their limits.
The space time pointer stops at 10 to the minus 33 centimeters. Thank you.
After that, space time is not worthwhile. It doesn't work and 10 to the minus 43 seconds.
That's the anti dogmatic cure that we get from science. That's really, really powerful. So,
I'm all on board with the spiritual traditions saying in some sense that
whatever reality is, you can only make pointers to it. And even our scientific theories will only
be pointers to it. And they're only pointers to a perspective on it. So the idea that the
infinite one that you were saying from the Sufi master, that the infinite needs to look at itself
from different perspectives, I agree. And maybe what science does is it gives us rigorous, the
most rigorous descriptions we can give pointers from a perspective. And the fact that we can do
technology doesn't mean that we know the truth. It means that we have a good description of this
perspective. And so the match of the scientific description to a perspective, not the ultimate
truth transcends, but the perspective description getting that right does allow technology. And
so that's where we can see most of our theories are not even right about our perspective, right?
We're just so wrong that we don't even get our perspective correct. So that's how humbling
this is. Yeah. And words are frustratingly inadequate for describing these things. And
much like what you were saying, it's so puzzling because our words are meant to communicate our
inner experience. And yet our inner experience inherently transcends linguistics. That's right.
And I'm excited to dive also into Kurt Gdel's incompleteness theorem, because this points
that there are truths that can't be proven. And so we'll dive into that in a moment. But
just any further thoughts on how the limits of language is a very real thing. And it's a thing
on this podcast that we can talk about many different things forever. And yet you won't have
the experience of meant until you taste it. Until you taste it. That's right. And in spiritual,
the big one in spirituality is that the ultimate unconditioned consciousness
transcends any description. You can only know it by letting go of thought. And actually being
face to face, no thought with that unconditional infinite intelligence that you are. Now, for many
scientists, that sounds very mystical. It sounds very, very... This is so unscientific. It's so...
We want rigorous terms that we can verify and experiments. And my point earlier was,
no, this is not different than what's going on in science at all. All of the basic
concepts that we have, how do we know the taste of meant? If you've never tasted it,
I can't... The word is only a pointer. Spacetime. If you've never experienced spacetime,
the mathematics is only a pointer. So this is not something, some deficit of spiritual traditions
that they say, well, we're pointing to this, this mystical thing that's infinite intelligence that
you are. But, you know, no words. And most of my colleagues in science would go,
that's kind of nonsense. We don't need to deal with here in science. And I'm saying, no, no,
that's the kind of nonsense you deal with all the time. Almost every term that you use is only
known by what we call ostensive definition. Ostensive definition means someone has to point
and then give you the word. Like when you have a baby, 18 months, and it's time for them to learn
some words. And mom and dad, there's a rabbit on the carpet. And at the right age, you can just point
and say, rabbit. And, you know, Chris gets it. Maybe Chris gets that. Now, when you think about it,
that's a miracle. There's an infinite number of hypotheses that Chris could entertain. It could
be the fur, the texture of the fur, the color. It could be the ear and the left foot. It could be
the tail and the chair behind the rabbit. There's an infinite number. So how is it that all mom and
dad have to do at the right age is to point and say to Chris, rabbit. And Chris gets it.
Often in one or just one or two trials. That's ostensive definition. And that means that Chris
already has to have that experience. And mom and dad don't teach them the experience. They assume
the experience and they give a pointer, which is trivial compared to the experience of the rabbit.
Rabbit is nothing. The word rabbit is just a trivial pointer. And this is how we know
basically everything, every visual experience that you have, every smell experience you have,
every tactile experience you have, the fact that you get the name. People just tell you
the experience that you're having that I'm assuming that you're having. We call that, you know, hot.
We call that cold. We call that rough. We call that smooth. We call that satin. Whatever.
You have to have the experience. And that's almost any sensory experience is all by
ostensive definition. We don't teach people anything. If they don't have the experience,
you can't teach them. So this kind of thing, it's easy for scientists to dismiss the claim
that language fails to capture this deep consciousness that's unconditioned, that's
infinite, and that ultimately is the core of who you are. That sounds so schmistical to them.
And I'm saying, no, no, no, this is ubiquitous. And all the terms that we know basically are
by ostensive definition from things that transcend the words and can't be reduced
to the words. And I should just, it's humorous, but when you're pointing to the rabbit and saying
rabbit at the right age with Chris, what you don't do is point and say quadruped.
You'd be messing up your kid. If you said quadruped or, you know, mammal, something like that.
It's just the wrong thing to do. So we actually have rules that are wired into us. We know
intuitively, you don't have to go to class. You just know that when you're going to say rabbit,
you're not going to say quadruped or mammal or anything like that.
It's reducing it down to its function or parts instead of what its essence is.
That's right. And the kid is also pre-programmed to know that mom and dad know this intuitively.
So they're going to give me what we call the basic level object category name first,
and then they'll maybe give me some superordinate or subordinate
pointers later on. But right now, I'm going to just get the basic level. And so we're actually wired
up with the right way of pointing out. So the pointing that you get in the spiritual traditions,
and these are just pointers. I'm just pointing out that that's how we learn everything.
It's pointing out all the time. This is not just some mystical weird stuff that these people,
it's all over the place, and it's essential in science.
And I think that the pointing out of things doesn't absolve us of the mystery of what it is,
because oftentimes you give a bird a name, or you discover a new species or whatever,
and you name it. And it's like, okay, now we know what that is. There is a level of grandiosity,
just labeling something as in that's a rabbit. And okay, yeah, there's just not,
there's not, I just know that rabbits look like that, or a tree is just a tree. And you don't get
to, I guess, be surprised by the mystery of what the essence of that thing is, which is
like the one in the many different ancient wisdom traditions that have talked about this
immaterial realm that pre-exists space, time, and the quantum foam from
Kabbalistic origins talking about Ain Sof, which is literally without end, or Buddhism talking
about emptiness, or Advaita Vedanta talking about this non-dual reality, that the consciousness
extremely vast and differentiating itself into all of these different experiences,
which I find so fascinating. I've heard you talk to how, as humans, we have three channels of color
with red, green, and blue. The Mantis Shrimp has 10, 11, or more channels of color. What is that
experience like? Exactly. No, I agree with all the points that you're making here. And it's really
critical, as you were talking about the spiritual traditions, do tell us that the word is just the
word, and the reality transcends the word. The word is just a pointer. And so they often will
recommend that you spend time letting go of the words. So that's meditation. So if you want to
not be trapped in the trivial world of concepts, which is trivial compared to reality, then spend
time in meditation where you literally let your mind not dwell on the concepts. You just have no,
you let go of any concept. And when you actually look at the, when you walk around in the world,
look at trees, look at the ocean, where you just literally say, I'm, my mind can be quiet for a
while. Just no thoughts. I'm just going to be here in thoughtless pure awareness. Then the world
comes alive. And you begin to realize most of the time, you've killed the world. It's deadened. You
see the dead world of your concepts, and you don't see the living world that's around you. And I can
put this, so that's what spiritual tradition, I'll put this in scientific language, base inference.
We talk about our prior understandings, our prior probabilities as you know, in Bayesian
priors. So you have this prior probability of, for example, maybe belief in the standard model
of particle physics and the particular laws in that and those problems. That's my, my, my prior.
Before that, maybe with Newton, we had Newton's theory of physics and so forth. That would be our
prayer. And once you have a prior, once you have the prior probability, any new data that you get
will be interpreted in terms of your prior understanding. And there's this whole Bayesian
inference kind of thing. And you get a posterior distribution, which is so given that you have
this prior belief, and you get this new data coming in, then you compute what your posterior
distribution will be. Walking around without concepts, letting go of thought is saying,
I need to let go of my prior. If I don't let go of my prior, I'm condemned to only see my posterior
in, in both funny senses that, right? You can only see your posterior, both in the technical sense
and in, in this more metaphorical sense. If you don't let go of your priors, you will only see
your posterior. And, and so if you don't want to just be seeing your own posterior, you want to be
open up to novelty, then you actually have to spend time. I think as a scientist, it's critical for
me to actually spend time in, of course, thought and mathematics and hard notes of no substitute.
Do your hard work. And then let go of it completely. Sit there in utter silence. That's where the
true new creativity comes from. And then go back and try to translate it, if you can,
into the, the math and symbols that, that you have. And that way you're not stuck
with your priors. You, if you want creativity, you actually have to get outside your priors
all together. So I, so I would suggest that again, there's not some kind of schmystical, nasty,
terrible, silly stuff that's going on, you know, in spiritual traditions that, that's
anathema to science. I think there's a way to understand what the spiritual traditions are
telling us that makes sense from a Bayesian inference point of view from the science, from
the scientists. If you don't let go of your priors, you're condemned to only see your posterior.
So let go of your priors. What does that mean? Of course, do your homework,
but then at some point step back and let go of all your concepts for a while and see what comes out.
Yeah, it really seems like the parable of the blind men and the elephant, where blind men come
and, you know, touch the tail of the elephant, think it's a whips and other touches the leg,
thinks it's a tree trunk. Another touches the trunk of the elephant and thinks it's, you know,
a snake and another touches the belly, thinks it's a wall. And they're all experiencing parts
of something and not understanding the whole of what it is. And I just find it very interesting
to explore the overlap and conciliance of what the cutting edge science saying with the ancient
wisdom traditions and philosophy and metaphysics. And if we can touch all the different parts of
that metaphorical elephant to see and talk to each other about what our experience is of that thing
that it points us closer to the direction of the experience of what it actually, you know,
what it actually is and what reality actually is. Yes, I think that the idea of the elephant being
looked at from different various perspectives is apt here. And the science gives us rigorous tools
to do that palpating of different parts of the elephant with more precision than we might otherwise
palpate it. And when I say that there's infinite job security and science, I mean,
that's really, truly humbling. It means that we, with all the palpation we've done,
we have 0% of the elephant underneath us, 0%. And that's, I honestly believe that.
I think that we've palpated 0% of it. What we know is one perspective out of an infinite
number of perspectives. Not like there's five perspectives and we got one of them.
No, there's an infinite number of different perspectives and whatever it is, but that's
who you are. What you are transcends any description, an infinite number of descriptions.
And so it's truly, truly a remarkable claim that spiritual traditions are making and that
you and I are just avatars. Andre and Don are avatars being used by an infinite consciousness
that transcends an infinite number of different descriptions and would transcend an infinite
study by science. And it's talking to itself through two different avatars and looking at
itself right now through a particular humble perspective, only a four-dimensional space
time headset perspective on itself. And it's doing that and who knows how many,
there's an infinite number of these other things going on all the time. But what's interesting
about it as well from a social perspective is, once I understand that Andre and Don are just
really the same consciousness talking to itself through two different avatars,
that's the real foundation for social interaction and social justice. Love your neighbor as yourself
is true and right because your neighbor is yourself. It's interesting that the infinite
consciousness that we are has chosen to forget itself, to plunge itself into a perspective
so thoroughly that it's lost in the perspective and it actually views its other avatars as enemies
in some cases and slowly wakes up. So somehow it's really important when you look at yourself
from a perspective that you really look at yourself from that perspective, you take it really,
really seriously and you get lost in it and then very, very painfully wake up and then you realize,
oh, as interesting and complicated and wonderful as that perspective was, I infinitely transcend that
and that's how the infinite comes to know itself. It's beautiful and it's why I love talking to
you so much too because you're able to navigate both terrains of the scientific understanding which
is rigorous and the philosophical and inner experience side of things. If consciousness
really is this unifying field, then us as individuals in parentheses having this individual
experience are much like waves of an ocean. We're not actually separate, but we have the
experience in a certain amount of time, in a certain amount of space that Andre and Don exist,
just like a wave exists in an ocean for a certain amount of time and for a certain amount of space
and it has its own experience that is unique and unlike any other wave that has probably ever
come before and after that time and space it inhabited is over, then it joins back the ocean,
but the kicker is that it was never separate from the ocean. In the first place. In the first place,
but there is value in the ocean having the wave in us as individuals that are connected to source
or the one kind of losing ourselves, discovering ourselves, waking up because that somehow provides
a unique nuanced experience and perspective of the one that otherwise wouldn't have been previously
available. I completely agree. I think that's right and the one thing that we're trying to do
with mathematics that we're working on right now is to actually take that idea and make it mathematical.
Again, the mathematics will always just be a baby step, but still to take those ideas that
what you were saying is I think been part of the wisdom traditions for millennia,
that kind of idea, to turn it into mathematically precise things. So what we're doing right now,
for example, we have with the Markovian dynamics of conscious agents and the way the wisdom ideas
get cashed out is that the model, again, it's just a model, but here's what the model says.
We can write down dynamics of this infinite conscious agent.
That's so-called stationary dynamics. There is no entropic arrow of time.
So it's a dynamical system, but the entropy is not increasing.
Well, if it is, then also, since your P is increased air is moving in the other direction,
what do you say? For stationary dynamics, that's the technical thing I'd have to ask about.
I'll have to look. Sidebar. That's right. But the entropy is constant in the stationary dynamics,
but it's a theorem that if I take this dynamics in which there's no entropic arrow of time and I
look at it from any perspective, by conditional probability, for example, then the dynamics that
I'll see will be a projected dynamics, and that projected dynamics will have an arrow of time.
The entropy will be increasing. So here we are with an entropic arrow of time.
The model I'm working on is there's a consciousness has no entropic arrow of time.
It's timeless, and it's also spaceless. But when I look at it from this perspective,
so we're talking about perspectives, but now we can deal with mathematical precision. We can say,
when we take this perspective, then by the mathematics tells us we're going to get an
arrow of time. So we will get a big bang. And by the way, it's all one. The consciousness is all
one. But when you get inside of the projection, now all of a sudden there are these artificial
boundaries. So you get what we call predictive processing and Markov blankets and active inference
and so forth. All of this stuff, which is sort of modern state-of-the-art neuroscience kinds of
things that we're looking to and other computer science looking at ways of, you know, modeling
thing, all of that breaking into units with Markov blankets, separating things and so forth,
active inference mean predictive processing to maintain our boundaries. All of that is not
an insight into the deep nature of reality. All of that is an artifact of loss of information
in the projection, as is Darwin's theory of natural selection. Nature, red and tooth and
claw. What is the fundamental limited resource in evolution? Time. If I don't eat in time,
I die. If I don't mate in time, I don't reproduce. If I don't breathe in time, I die. Time is the
fundamental limited resource. So I love Darwin's theory. Inside space-time, talking about biology
inside of our space-time, there's no better theory than Darwin's. Having said that wonderful
thing about Darwin, every aspect of his theory is an artifact of the projection from space-time.
None of it translates to anything about the reality beyond. None of it. So that's a real
warning sign to us to be very, very humble about our theories. Darwin's theory is a beautiful
theory inside space-time. It has no traction outside whatsoever. It's all of it as an artifact.
So we're not moving towards the theory of everything. We should be very, very humble.
I'm curious. Do you think that there are levels of fundamental reality that are simply inconceivable
to the human mind and understanding? Like, we wouldn't expect a monkey to understand quantum
mechanics or entanglement or have even the baseline ingredients to be able to have any
semblance of anything regarding quantum mechanics. Are there things that you think that are simply
beyond the capacity of the human mind to understand and deeper levels of reality?
That's, I do. I think that the human mind has great capacities and fundamental limitations.
And when spiritual traditions tell us to set aside the human mind now and then,
spend time on meditation and put the human mind apart, of course, then when you try to
reconceptualize what you experienced, you can only reconceptualize it inside the human mind.
That's the tool you've got. But in fact, you infinitely transcend the human mind. So you
aren't the human mind. When you talk to me through these avatars, we're having to use the human mind
and therefore, all of a sudden, the bandwidth goes down to a straw, a little tiny straw of
information that goes back and forth. But you and I are, in fact, the infinite intelligence
looking at itself through this particular little straw. So yeah, the human mind has this incredibly-
Write that down.
But you are not the human mind. You transcend infinitely the human mind. But
as long as you're in this avatar, you can only have a human mind appreciation of that transcendence.
I love that. So, I mean, right now, we're exploring the boundaries or limitations of
our possible understanding. And I know that you've talked to the value of discovering the
limitations of our mathematical theorems and because they show us what's possible and how we
can invent GPS and so much of things that we use and take for granted in our convenient modern society.
And it also shows us where it fails, right? And so, what is the value of discovering the
limitations? Do you feel like, and how it redirects us in our energy and their search?
Well, I think it's valuable for a couple of reasons. One reason is simply that it's true
that the mathematics, as powerful as mathematics is, and I love mathematics,
all the theorems that you can prove are a trivial subset of the theorems that are out there.
And all the theorems that are entailed by any set of axioms you write down
are trivial subset of all the theorems that are true. So, it's really important to know that.
Once again, I think one way to think about it is that it's the infinite intelligence giving
itself a wake-up call, giving its avatars, its projections a wake-up call. It's plunging itself
in all the way with both feet, it's losing itself in there, but it's giving itself a little hint
from the mathematics that says, no matter how smart and mathematically precise you are,
it's going to be trivial compared to the reality beyond. Wake-up call, wake-up call,
you aren't your projection, you aren't the avatar. Reality transcends, infinitely transcends anything
that you can do in your science and your mathematics, which is not to say, don't do your
science, do your, I'm a scientist, I'm not a mathematician, I wish, I wish I were, I work
with mathematicians, but I am a scientist. And so, I'm all for the science and the mathematics,
but it's wonderful to get a better appreciation of this projection of these avatars.
But ultimately, that's a big hint to ourself from Gertl's Incompleteness theorem, for example,
that there's infinite exploration beyond what you could even do with your science and your
mathematics. So, that's a very important wake-up call. So, let's explore that Incompleteness
theorem. I've been geeking out, diving deeper into Kierkegaard's Incompleteness theorem, also
his life and who he was as an individual, very, very interesting, regarded as one of the most
brilliant logicians to possibly have ever lived. And I recall Einstein referring to him as kind of
like the smart one, like he would like love to come back and go on long walks with him.
And a very interesting individual also had these metaphysical practices of laying down
and intuiting mathematical objects and different things like that, which I want to talk to you
about in a little bit. But for people that don't know what the Incompleteness theorem is,
how would you break it down in describing truths that are truths but can't be proven?
Well, what Gertl showed was that if I write down a certain set of axioms, like for arithmetic,
every number has a successor and things like that. If my axioms are enough rigorous and enough
complicated, so substantial enough to actually be able to formulate all of arithmetic,
then Gertl showed that he could write down a sentence that was true and could not be proven
from your axioms. And that's pretty stunning, right? So that was the brilliance was to actually
use the language of mathematics to write down a sentence that says, I'm true, but can't be proven.
And so he did that. And which you can say, well, okay, well, no problem, I'll just take that and
add that to my axioms. So now I'm good. So this statement wasn't provable, so I won't,
I'll just throw it in as an axiom. But then Gertl's thing is recursive. He can then show you another
one. And this goes on ad infinitum. What this means is Gertl showed that basically,
you can't just write down a finite set of axioms and then a set of rules and grind out all the
truths. Truth transcends proof. There's a bottom in three words. That's what that's Gertl in three
words. Truth transcends proof. And that's along the lines of what I was saying earlier that truth
transcends any scientific theory. Because every scientific theory is going to have
a mathematical set of assumptions, the axioms, and it will have mathematical derivation rules that
are, of course, usually at least is good enough for doing arithmetic. So every scientific theory
is subject to Gertl's incompleteness theorem, which means that as many truths as you can crank
out with your scientific theory, I'm sorry, as many proofs about realities, you can crank out
the truth infinitely transcends it. So this is another bit of humble pie. And again,
my take home message is not don't do science. Absolutely do science. Because science does
crank out a lot of interesting proofs that seem to be useful. But it also, to its credit, tells you
that it can't give you the whole truth. That's wonderful.
So he ascribed binary, I believe, different numbers to certain equations and theorems to be able to
prove this. A random example that's just coming to mind right now. I don't even know if it's accurate,
but I'd love to hear is if I say this statement, all men are liars. And I'm a man. If I am lying,
then that kind of eats itself because is that statement true or false? If I'm lying that
all men are liars, but that that entails that I'm telling the truth about all men are liars,
but I am also so it's like it kind of eats itself in a really confusing way.
That's right. The liars paradox is an important point.
I even know it's like a thing. It's a very, very big thing in mathematics.
And there's also the barber of Seville, which is a similar, the barber of Seville
shaves all and only those who don't shave themselves.
Who shaves the barber of Seville? Right. You get yourself into, so that's where this turns out
to be non-trivial in mathematics because you get things that Bertrand Russell discovered this issue
of in the set theory. So a lot of mathematics is set on set theory, the set of all integers,
for example, or the set of all prime numbers. We have all the sets are very, very important.
But Bertrand Russell pointed out that what about the set of all sets that don't contain themselves?
Does that set contain itself or not? And you get this liars paradox kind of thing coming out.
What they have often done is reduce set theory to what they call a class theory to try to avoid
these kinds of paradoxes. But my take is that this is really not really resolved. There is
this liar paradox kind of thing that goes on in mathematics. And so yeah, it's pretty deep.
But I would say that the big one though is that truth transcends proof.
And that you kind of in a way have to be, you have to go outside of a system to like fully
understand it. And that consciousness is not amorphous, but structured. And that structuredness,
I guess, goes to infinity. I would agree up to a point. I would say that when you say
consciousness is structured, I would say as a scientist, I'm limited to describing consciousness
as structured and having that structure go into infinity. That's what I'm doing. So what you're
describing is what I'm trying to do. But I actually think that consciousness transcends
structure, infinitely transcends structure. But it can be structured. Just like projection.
Sure. Like we're structures of consciousness in a way. That's right. But what you are literally
does transcend any words or any mathematics period. But there's an infinite number of
perspectives that we could take on the true consciousness. And in many of those perspectives,
then you could have infinite mathematical description that I'm working on. The paper I'm
working on right now is one. So I'm working on a paper right now where you want to share a little
bit about just to just to touch. I love I love to hear. Yeah. So it's, we have this Markovian
dynamics. So Markov chains describing a big social network of interacting conscious agents,
an infinite number of them in principle.
So it's just like, like you were talking about, I mean, infinite structure description of, of the
one consciousness. And I'm doing that because that's the best I can do as a scientist. But I,
as I said earlier, I think that consciousness transcends that completely. So, so, so I'm
putting the humble pie right up front on this. But now with the humble pie there,
fun part of this, this, this perspective, it turns out that we discovered just in this year a,
a new order on Markov chains that no one had ever discovered before. And it's a way of saying when
one Markov chain in some sense is less than another or entails another. For those who know
Markov theory, I'll just say it real briefly. If you can take a Markov kernel, and if you take a
trace of it of that Markov chain on a subset of its states, like the first three states or
something like that, you'll get a new Markovian kernel called the trace chain. So you can take
a big Markovian kernel, trace it on a subset of its states, and you get a new Markovian kernel
that's called the trace chain of it. And now I can go into an intuition on that if you want to,
I can say a little bit more intuitively about what that means. But what this logic is, is we
discovered that if you say one Markovian kernel entails another or observes another,
if and only if it's a trace of the other. So it's a trace chain of the other.
Then you get a complete logic. All consciousnesses are now tied together in this one big logic.
You could talk about when they can actually, it tells you how to combine consciousnesses,
when they can combine into new higher consciousnesses, and when they can't. It's a
non-bullying logic, and it shows that consciousness can go infinitely far in complexity, in infinitely
many directions. There's no one top consciousness in this model. So even this mathematics is already
complex enough to say whatever consciousness is, there's not just a single little guy at the top.
There's an infinite number of directions. You can go infinitely far. And so we'll be publishing
it this year, this paper. So there's this whole logic of all the little consciousnesses and bigger
and bigger consciousnesses, how they combine to ultimately point to the one consciousness
which transcends our logic. But with this logic, this is going to be part of the key for us making
the map into space-time and the physics, and giving a theory of observation. Because we now have
a theory, what does it mean for one consciousness to observe another? It's if it's a trace of the
other. And that's going to be, we're thinking it's going to be a big, big help in physics because
in quantum theory, they don't have a theory of observation. They don't have a theory of the
observer. So when you don't observe something, there's a unitary linear evolution of the system.
But when you observe, whatever processes, whatever system is doing the observation is nonlinear,
it's nonunitary. And so for quantum theory has been out for almost 100 years, in 1926 to now,
so 98 years. And no theory of observation, because you can't reduce a nonunitary process
to a unitary one, you just can't do it. So we're proposing a theory of observation for physics.
With what you just described, is it possible that it could be linked to what someone,
some would regard as a kind of contentious exploration with James Lovelock's Gaia hypothesis
that the Earth is itself a living organism? And I'm curious if this, because it sounds like
you're exploring the inter, how consciousness is kind of like linked together. Do you feel
like conscious agents such as Don, Andre, everybody that lives on Earth and the organisms that live
here, like conscious agents could kind of stack to create a bigger one? For example, Gaia, do you
see that as a possibility? Well, yes, but it's a completely different framework from the Gaia
kind of hypothesis. So let me sort of explain the difference in perspective.
From the theory of conscious agents, it's saying that consciousness is fundamental,
and spacetime and its objects are just a headset. So to make it really radical, how radical it is,
most of us think of ourselves as little 100 to 200 pound tiny objects inside of an infinite
spacetime with trillions of galaxies and so forth. So I'm this tiny little 200 pound object
in this massive universe that's been there for almost 14 billion years and so forth.
And what I'm saying is that's completely wrong. Whatever you are, spacetime is a trivial data
structure inside you. So you're not this trivial 200 pound object inside this vast spacetime.
That vast spacetime is a trivial data structure inside you. So that's how radical what I'm saying
is much more radical than the Gaia hypothesis. So if you're looking for who is the bigger
or not, right? But then the idea is that what we view, we look around us, we see what we think
is a distinction between animate and inanimate objects. I mean, I'm not worried about hitting
this, whereas I'd be worried about hitting you. If I hit the microphone, it might mess up the
audio a little bit, but I'm not worried about causing any pain on anybody. Whereas if I hit you,
I'd be causing pain. So we have this distinction between animate and inanimate objects. And
the Gaia hypothesis is starting to sort of play with that saying, well, maybe the difference between
living and non-living isn't as tight as we thought. Well, I think that that's right in the following
sense. The distinction we make between animate and inanimate objects, I claim, is completely
unprincipled. There's no principle distinction between animate and inanimate at all.
No. In this point of view, the only reality is consciousness. That is the reality. So I'm always
interacting with my headset, space-time headset. I'm always interacting with consciousness.
But my consciousness, my headset is dumbing things down, right? And that's what headsets do. They're
simplifying things. Right now, so I have some insight into your conscious experiences through
my headset. But when I look at a mouse, I'll get much less insight, but some. When I look at an amoeba,
much less, virus, much less. And then when I look at protons, neutrons, none, rocks, none.
But think about it this way. Suppose I'm talking with you on a Zoom screen,
and there's a bunch of pixels on my screen. Some of the pixels are pixels of your face.
And those pixels provide me with a portal into you, into what you're thinking. I mean,
like, if you smile, I can, you know, he must be happier or frown, he doesn't like what I just said.
So I get some insight from those pixels about your conscious experiences. But the pixels of the
wall behind you. No, no insight into consciousness whatsoever. Now, I wouldn't want to say, ah,
so there is a distinction between animate and inanimate pixels. Those are the living pixels,
and those are the none. That's dumb. Pixels are pixels. They're part of an interface,
a headset, or a desktop. And some of them, some pixels provide a portal into the
consciousness, you know, and others don't. And so this is the way I think about why there's no
distinction between animate and inanimate objects. Space time is just a headset. The headset
sometimes gives me insight into consciousness. Sometimes it doesn't. That's what headsets do.
They dumb things down. That's a limit of the headset, not an insight into reality. So when I
look at a rock, I am interacting with consciousness. But my interface is so impoverished that all I get
is a rock. Yeah. Now, I hope that the back and forth goes both ways, that just as the
consciousness on the other side can't really affect me too much directly, I can't affect the
consciousness too much through the rock. If I smash the rock, as I might have to do if I'm
building a house or something like that, I would hate to think that I was causing pain
on the other side. But I don't know. There's no portal into the conscious experience of a rock.
That's right. But I mean, we could assume that objects with no central nervous system would not
be able to feel pain in that way. But I'm curious. So you think, do you believe that all inanimate
objects have a degree of sentience, like having a sliver, a type, a scale somewhere
of a conscious experience? I don't. And I don't think the human body has any sentience either.
Because body is just an interface description. It has nothing. Your body, the body that I see,
that I call Andre, only exists when I perceive. That body is now gone. It only exists in the
instant. So rocks don't have this liver of consciousness because rocks don't even exist
when they're not perceived. And the human body, the human brain doesn't exist when it's not
perceived. I have no neurons right now. Yeah. So this is when we say local realism is false.
We have to be completely thorough. Local realism is absolutely false. And that means the human body
only exists when it's perceived and it doesn't contain consciousness.
However, when I see a human body, I know my interface is telling me, don't do certain things
because my interface has given me a way that could affect consciousness.
So I just want to clarify here. Are you saying that when you look away from me,
I cease to be rendered in your experience. So in a way, I cease to exist.
But the fundamental constituents of my consciousness, although not rendered in real
space time, still do exist, but completely detached from the way our sensory system would
perceive it. That's right. You're not in space time. Yeah. Space time is in you.
Completely. Yeah. So you're entirely outside of space time. And your body
is literally just a pixel description. When I take my camera and point it,
the pixels for Andre will light up and I now have Andre pixels. As soon as I
turn the camera, those pixels are gone. There is no, and your body is just as ephemeral as that.
Even to myself, right? Right now, I have no brain. There are literally no neurons.
There's no neuron. Now, if you did a scan, you would find neurons, but that's because
you're intervening and looking. So you get a picture. Now you've got your pixels that you've
sort of said, now I've got my pixels making neurons. Okay, fine. But neurons only exist
in the act of observation. You don't have neurons when they're not perceived,
but you do have what neurons are connected to. Would you say that?
Nothing in space time exists when it's not perceived. Nothing. Space time itself doesn't
exist when it's not perceived. So this goes way beyond the Gale hypothesis, right?
I know, I know. But the objects in space time, they are connected to the structure of reality.
Just like the pixels on the desktop are a portal to back and forth that when we're talking to each
other. Right. So they're- So yeah, like a folder on your desktop screen doesn't exist when it's
not perceived, but the electrical gates and things that are happening within the computer system,
those do exist. In that metaphor, they do. But when I let go of, when I then step back and
apply that metaphor to all the space time, then they don't exist anymore.
So I use that metaphor just to get people to understand the ideas. So for sake of argument,
let's assume the computer's real. Yeah. The circumstances are real.
People will grant me that. Once they understand, okay, oh yeah, no, there's no blue rectangular icon
inside the computer. You won't find that. So my file on the desktop is not, there's nothing on the
computer. It looks like once you get that, then you have to kick that ladder away. That includes
kicking away the computer itself. It doesn't exist when it's not perceived.
All right. So yeah, I mean, it's, I feel like no matter how many conversations I have
with you, there's still some more head wrapping. I have to, like I need to wrap my head around
this even further. And I feel like our audience does too. It takes many times of talking about
this and exposure to it to like. The rabbit hole goes deeper. It does. It keeps going. It just
seems to keep going. I'm as uncomfortable as you are, by the way. I mean, I have gone through
this kicking and screaming myself. Just grasping onto space time as a rug fully gets pulled
underneath you. And emotionally, I don't believe it one bit. I can see why I do meditation and so
forth. I realized the amount that this has penetrated into my emotional belief in is 1%.
Yeah. But the logic, I mean, I just can't argue with the logic and who knows when my emotions
will come along for the ride. There seems to be various enlightened beings, masters of meditation
that have emotionally embraced it. What they would say is close to 100%. Yes. Where they have
literally no fear of the body because they clearly have the perception that it is not thumb. Right.
Where if somebody comes up to you, God forbid on the street and puts a gun to your head.
I'd be scared. Scared to death. Right. It seems like in the metaphysical practices
and the contemplative sciences, you can arrive at the place experientially, emotionally,
where you truly perceive the source of that which you are. And therefore,
that which you are not does not have to grip over you. Which is interesting because it requires both
the rigorous science and logic to be able to explore these things and explain it with the
limited capacity we have for language with language. And then the contemplative practices
that allow us to arrive there experientially to become closer and intimate and become one with
that which we truthfully are. I completely agree. And I think that there are spiritual
masters who are there. Eckhart Tolle, for example, I suspect truly doesn't fear death.
And so, and I intellectually think that, well, this is interesting to think about this way.
Think about a video game in which you jump into the video game
and you could be in the game identified with the avatar. That's me. So if it's a shoot-em-up game
and you think you are your avatar, you're going to be scared to death and you're going to be
really alert and suppose that, I mean, I'm maybe sealed or something. I'm trying to get you ready.
So I'm putting you in this game. So I want to somehow drug you so that when you get in the
simulation, you think it's real because I want you to be scared to death and I want you to learn how
to fight in that thing. So I'm going to make you identified. So here's a drug that makes you identified
with your avatar in this VR game. And boy, you really, you, and then it will slowly
let you disidentify from that avatar. And that's what I think is going on here is we're in this
emotionally. I'm still identified with the avatar, but part of me is recognized. Oh,
Don, that's just an avatar. It's not you, but the emotional part of me is still
plugged into you are an avatar. The meditation process is slowly
waking me up to the truth that an avatar is just an avatar. Relax. Just relax. It's just your avatar.
You are the infinite intelligence of which this whole simulation is a trivial little game that you
is. It's no effort for you, whatever. It's literally nothing. And all the wealth and all the possessions
you could possibly have, you could be the richest man on earth. It's nothing. It's absolutely nothing.
It's just a little game in you and you could make a billion other much better games than that.
So that's, but see, mostly I'm still, it's very, very interesting to know that I am the infinite
intelligence. I've woken up a little bit, but not completely. So I'm still halfway between
identifying with the avatar and halfway of disidentifying with the avatar. And I agree
that there are spiritual masters who have completely disidentified and I would love to
disidentify because it's no fun to be afraid. Yeah. I find it so interesting how I think largely
like around the time of the Vienna circle and the like 19th, 20th century, there was kind of
this big divorce between the simultaneous contemplative practices and metaphysical practices
alongside the scientific explorations. And like most people don't understand to the degree in
which Newton himself had just as much exploration into alchemy than the sciences. And it makes
sense that they're kind of, they're one and the same in the source. And then there's the
experiential side and then there's the logical side. There's the particle. There's the wave.
There's two ways to come at something from the top down, from the bottom up,
you know, and the way that it's processed. I'm curious because I know you meditate for
like roughly like two hours a day, at least you sit in silence. And Kurt Godel was somebody who
very, very viscerally felt that you could lay down and he would say he would lay down for
hours and get rid of all of his senses. So hearing, tasting, touching, smelling,
he would feel that you could intuit directly mathematical objects that since we're connected
to it, there shouldn't be any reason that by abiding in the place in which we are connected
to it, that you shouldn't be able to have intuitions around it that then come into your
mind or your thought that you could then channel into his work. And he said that he did that very,
you know, and he's one of the most brilliant logicians to ever exist. And he was doing that.
So I would just be so curious to see what would happen if the most brilliant minds in today's
age had those practices to support them on the practices as well. So how do you feel like your
practice has personally benefited you on that journey? Well, I think that it's absolutely
essential. I didn't start meditating for that reason. I started meditating for the very pedestrian
reason that I was having hard time sleeping and I didn't want to take drugs. And so I said,
well, they'll meditate. But then I realized later on, well, there's a lot more to this
meditation just helping me with my sleep. This is pretty profound transformation that's going on
here. So I can't take credit or anything like that. I just was doing it for my own little silly
reasons. But then I stumbled onto this is pretty important. And now I use it explicitly as a tool.
I need new ideas. Go into silence. I mean, when you realize that you are that infinite intelligence,
that's what you are. But if you don't let go of your Bayesian priors,
you'll only see your posterior. So I have to, how do you let go of your Bayesian priors? There's
only one way to do it. That's literally to let go. No thoughts. How can you get into the unknown
if you don't leave the known? That's exactly right. So I think this is absolutely essential
for scientists. And I think that the very best creative ones, whether or not they're,
they know it, they go into a moment of silence when the real deep intuitions come. Of course,
you have to do your homework. You've studied your math. You see, there's no, there's no
substitute for doing the hard work. It's just like a powerful, brilliant musician without
understanding and practicing their skills. Then they can throw it out the window and it's a part
of their unconscious competence. And then they sit down, listen, and something beautiful, the next
masterpiece comes through. That's right. You had to do your homework. But then, then is when you
sort of let go of what you know, that the new originality comes through. And Einstein did talk
about that. He said that his big ideas came to him in vague images and so forth. And for me, too,
I'm no Einstein by a long shot. But my ideas, when they do come, come from moments of silence,
where I've done my homework, I have a problem I'm trying to solve. And then all of a sudden,
follow myself just going deep silence. And then all of a sudden, I see something coming.
So I think for scientists to actually take advantage of it, to realize you are that infinite
intelligence, let go of your, of course, build your priors. That's what science is. Build these
really good prior. But then let go of them. If you need to transcend Newton, you have to let go of
Newton for a while before you can go to quantum and general relativity and so forth. You have to
let go of Newtonian ideas. And so going into the silence beyond any concept is really critical.
So it's again, an interesting back and forth and we're getting a little picture perhaps of what
the one is doing all the time in is that back and forth between I've got this perspective on myself,
I got the Newtonian perspective, that was fun. Let me go deeper. Oh, now I got relativity. Oh,
now I've got quantum mechanics. And that's still trivial compared to what I am. But that was an
interesting new perspective. And so even these perspectives as fun as they are are trivial
compared to what you are. What do you say to people that would comment on this podcast? Like
somebody did the last time saying, what difference does it make if reality is an illusion? The pain
I feel is real to me. The joy I feel is real to me. We are having an experience that is obviously
incredibly valuable. And it feels real to us. So I guess, how would you respond to somebody that
says, why does it matter if reality is an illusion? Which it might seem like a trite kind of after
our whole conversation, it seems silly to ask that question, because it has very real implications.
But how would you respond to that? Well, I'd say a couple of things. I think
all of us are inquisitive. Who am I? Why am I here? What is this all about? I mean, maybe
some people are not. But I think most of us are. And then most of us, when we start hearing
the various stories that people tell, find them, man, it's probably not good enough. That story
is probably not good enough. And so I think it's really important because we are inquisitive. And
that may be what we're here for, in fact, is why does the one plunge itself into avatars is
because it's answering the question, who am I? And it's taking an infinite number of different
perspectives and looking and saying, oh, from this perspective, I could talk about myself
this way. And so to find out that this is just a perspective is important,
that this is an illusion, this is just a perspective. So I'm using those two things
together here. It's a perspective. Therefore, it's not the truth. Therefore, it's in that sense,
illusory, is perhaps as best language can be used to describe it. What we're here for in the first
place, we're here to learn that this is an illusion, but it was an interesting illusion.
And look how complicated we are from this point of view, and yet we transcend all of that. So that
would be, I mean, one answer. On the other hand, I think if someone persisted in saying that, I
would say, well, that would be another perspective that the one takes on itself from your avatar.
And maybe that's what the one needed to see from that perspective as well, that relax.
And in some sense, yeah, relax. There's nothing that needs to be completed about you. You are
already the infinite. So maybe this is just really about enjoying all the perspectives,
including the perspective. Who gives it? Yeah.
Yeah, no, I love that. I'm curious what you think as we've been exploring like alternative
views from the conventional notion of our understanding of reality, what do you think
starts to open into otherwise contentious fields of understanding of out-of-body experiences,
precognition, remote viewing, near-death experiences, with this understanding that we've
been exploring with consciousness, what implications do you feel like it has in those realms?
Well, if you're a physicalist, these things can't happen. If, like me, you're a conscious realist,
I can't rule them out. Now, as a hard-nosed scientist, I'm not happy just to say I can't
rule them out. Therefore, I'm going to say that these things are all real. Absolutely not.
I'm going to be hard-nosed still about it. What I'm not going to do is rule them out a priori.
But I'm more than 100% sure that most of these are probably confabulations,
right? Probably most things are confabulations. But there is, for example, the near-death experiences
that there seem to be, there's some systematic experiences of the tunnel, the light, the life
review, maybe a decision to come back. That seems pretty consistent. So, I wouldn't rule that out
at all. But here's where I get hard-nosed about it.
As a scientist, I'm on a theory, right? So, and I'm working on it. So, we'll see. But if
space-time is just a headset, then what does, in some sense, my experience of me is just an avatar
in that. And now we have these experiences of an avatar going through a tunnel and seeing a white
light and review. I want my theory of conscious agents to be able to show how we make a headset
and then show me precisely when that headset is coming to an end for a particular avatar.
Why or how I could get this tunnel with a light experience. In other words, until I have a
scientifically precise theory of this and then can make predictions that are testable.
All we have are informal accounts, hints, in other words, a pre-scientific kind of approach.
And what we've found throughout human history is, of course, you can do great things without science
and you get geniuses who just have good intuitions and do things. But when you actually get the
systematic science stuff, you find out that most of what you believed was nonsense. Most of
things that people did were just plain nonsense. Not all. Sometimes, you know, indigenous people
have some really deep insights that you can't explain how they got that. But most of the time,
there's just plenty of nonsense. So, my guess is, if I were a physicalist, I'd say all nonsense.
No, nothing to be saved here. This is all just illusions caused by the brain activity and so
forth. So, I'm not saying that whatsoever. So, I'm not saying it's all nonsense. I'm saying
at least in principle, it's not all nonsense. I'm saying in practice, probably most of it,
99% of the reports are probably just not accurate. But that doesn't mean that there's something deeper
that isn't true. I think that life does not end with the death of the body. It's just taking off
the avatar. So, I think that maybe Hoffman, as Hoffman doesn't exist anymore, but the consciousness
that was the true thing behind Hoffman will continue to exist because it's the infinite
consciousness. So, I may lose everything that I'm attached to in terms of the Hoffman ego.
All that has to go and spiritual teachers tell us to die before you die. And that's, I think,
that's right. In some sense, if I can die to everything about Hoffman and don't care about
Hoffman, because Hoffman is just an avatar, then when there's time for the avatar to go
goodbye, it'll be just like in the VR game. Once I've not identified with the avatar, when this
game over, I don't care. That was just my avatar that died. It's not me. It's my avatar that died
and then shut down the game. So, I guess I'll summarize what I'm saying.
I cannot dismiss any of these, the near-death experiences or any of these kinds of things.
I can't dismiss them out of hand. But I think that those who take consciousness as fundamental
owe it to everybody to give absolutely rigorous scientific accounts of these things and to hold
the highest standards in terms of the data that we try to collect and so forth.
So, this is not, you know, saying consciousness fundamental is not an invitation to just accept
any hypothesis and say, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. It means I'm open to them, but I'm going to be
hard-nosed about them. And that's what we should do, because if there is something real there,
then we want to understand really what it is. Yeah. I'm curious what, if you had to give your
best guess, if when we die, consciousness still exists, in regards to reincarnation,
which there's been some interesting studies about kids that come in and have actual memories that
you can verify in the real world of people who have lived that they claim as dumb, from where
they lived to people that were, they were in relationship to, to favorite objects that they
had. If it is in the case that somehow this consciousness leaves and then does take another
form, how could it possibly be done where, I guess, memory is stored in consciousness and
could take on another avatar? Right. Well, this is quite interesting because I was approached by
a team of brilliant researchers. One, one of the, the head of the team is a research
scientist at Caltech, and most of them are Indian, so they're, I think, more Hindu and possibly,
and they're very interested in reincarnation. And, and I actually gave a talk in their workshop
at the Science of Consciousness Conference in Tucson back in April. And they found out about this
trace logic that I've mentioned via trace chains of Markov chain. And they realized that that might
actually give them the tools they need for understanding reincarnation. So, so I've been
collaborating with them, and they're going to actually be implementing that logic and trying
to start to make predictions from it of reincarnation. Now, I'm, I'm just giving them help to
understand the basic logic. I'm not actually part of their, their, their research team,
but I will, I'll, I'll help them. So I'll, you know, I have no axe to grind on this. I mean,
I know very little about the theory of reincarnation and so forth. But, but they do, I mean, they're,
they're quite immersed in it. So I'll be very interested to see, but, but this seemed to be,
this trace logic of conscious agents seemed to be the first mathematical framework they'd ever seen
that had the potential to begin to address these, these kinds of questions rigorously,
mathematical rigor. So, so they'll be doing some big simulations, big, big matrices with
millions of entries and so forth to, to, to try to, to get at this. And the kind of question you
asked is going to be the kind of question we'll try to answer. How could the memories of one life,
one avatar sort of be stored in the network and then downloaded into another headset and so forth?
Right. Yeah, be very interesting. Yeah. But so finally we have a mathematical framework that's
rigorous enough and, and can be implemented in, in computers to test it, which is fun. I mean,
at least with science, you can actually test things and go, oh, most of the time you realize your
ideas are just wrong. That's just wrong. Whereas if you don't have the mathematics, you can,
you can believe for many, many years that you're on the right track when you're deeply wrong.
Yeah. You mentioned how our understanding of spacetime and Newtonian physics has
buried many fruits and technologies that we use in every day, in the everyday world. What do you
think could be some possible practical applications of this new understanding of consciousness and
how it would change how we live in the practical world tactically?
I think that you can't think big enough on what it's going to do. Quantum mechanics opened up
incredible technologies that are mind blowing. What are some fields perhaps that you think would be
like revolutionized? Well, transportation for example. So right now,
there are billions or maybe even trillions, but at least billions of galaxies that would be fun
to explore. The nearest one is more than 2 million light years away. That's the nearest one. Well,
even if we're traveling through space near the speed of light, that's a long, long time. I mean,
if you put some humans on the spaceship, the great, great, great, great, great, great grandkids
wouldn't be alive. So you can see that's our nearest galaxy. So going through spacetime
and seeing any of the real estate is just not possible with our current way of thinking. But
what if you realize that spacetime is just a headset and you know the code? So in some sense,
so think about someone who's, again, a real wizard at Grand Theft Auto. They know how to drive their
car faster than anybody else and they know all the, they know the terrain and they can beat
everybody. That's great. But if you're the software engineer who wrote the code, well, you can do
things that are magic to the wizard. You can give them a flat tire anytime you want to. You can
take the gas out of this tank. You can change the geometry of the roads. You can take his car and move
it from one side of the game to the other instantly just like that by changing a pointer. Well,
when we're, this theory of conscious agents is really the first layer of software outside of
our spacetime headset. We're starting to learn how the game is rigged. How do we play, how,
what is a software that's playing the spacetime game? Once we understand that, I don't think we'll
have to go through spacetime to the Andromeda Galaxy. We can go around spacetime. We can just
be there. So we're going to, so, and that's just one. I think you just can't think big enough.
Once you, once you know the software, you can change the game pretty much any way you want to.
It feels like there's not an area of life that it wouldn't revolutionize. Think about like healing
if you understand the deeper dynamics of how the projection of like all of ourselves work together.
What we maybe would have spent decades trying to heal physiologically or travel to
within the limits of the speed of light, all of a sudden like miraculously cease to exist because
you're working with dynamics outside of the headset. That's right. So I think, you know,
in medicine, probably there'll be all sorts of remarkable things. So as I mentioned earlier,
the 86 billion neurons and roughly the same number of glial cells make the brain is really
complicated. But we're going to be going to the more complex software outside of it. We'll actually
be able to understand and maybe rewire the brain outside of space time. And then also understand
systems in the body at a much deeper level and then rewire them. So yeah, I think that
the revolution in medicine will be remarkable. What do you think it will take for the brilliant
physicists that are currently out there to pivot their intelligence to exploring realities beyond
space time, beyond the headset? Well, the Universe Plus project that the European
Research Council has funded already has over 100 scientists doing that. So they're funding
the look for these new positive and understanding these positive geometries
beyond space time. That's very different than saying that they're after consciousness,
but they're not. I mean, maybe individuals are, but that's not what the ERC is up to.
My hope, I'm actually trying to get one of these... Trying to recruit one of them.
Trying to recruit. I've got money for it. So I've got money for a postdoc, for two postdocs. So
if someone's got, what I need is someone with a recent PhD in algebraic geometry,
specific branch of mathematics, algebraic geometry, which is really critical to these positive
geometries, or a real understanding of high energy theoretical physics and in particular the
amplitude and so forth. Because in the current paper, we're going to make a projection to a
special case of the amplitude, but we would like to have someone who can actually help us do the
real whole deal. So we want to do proof of concept in this paper and show that we can actually start
with conscious agents and predict scattering of gluons in space time so that we now can go all
the way. So we've got the little bridge across. Now we need someone to help us build the whole
thing, right? A big, big road across. So we're looking for relative new PhDs in
high energy theoretical physics or algebraic geometry can help us with this. But ultimately,
once we do that, if we can actually make a prediction, a new prediction inside space time,
from a dynamical system of conscious agents, we can show that these positive geometries
arise from it. We can actually make new predictions that are testable and then come out to be true
inside space time. We won't have any trouble at that point getting people. Now we may have trouble
having them take it seriously as consciousness. They might say, consciousness, munchiness. Who
cares about that? But you've got a Markovian dynamics outside of space time. I'm good with
that. So let's just, let's go with that. And so it's not going to be a proof of consciousness
being fundamental, but it'll be perhaps an indication that a Markovian dynamical system
outside of space time is an important next step in science. And that would be fine with me. If
they dismiss the conscious stuff, that's perfectly fine. I completely respect that.
But I would be loving to give me, these guys are brilliant, guys in the generic sense. These people
are brilliant and much more smart in this stuff than I am. And so I'll just be able to then kick
back and try to read their papers. That's what I want. Yeah. I'm so curious to see what evolves
in that space and then also globally. I mean, as these new innovations and discoveries come on
board, I'm curious to see what happens with religious fundamentalists, with people's understanding
of perceptions on God too. Would you say that, I don't love the term or using it because it's
so tainted, but the closest thing approximating the term of God would be the collective consciousness
of all that is? Well, I would say that the word God and then the word collective unconsciousness
or collective conscience are pointers and that the thing itself completely transcended. It is
not even a thing, right? Going back to the mint. Yeah. Even to say the thing itself is already
a mistake, right? So all these things are pointers to something that transcends. And again,
I said something. So as soon as I start using language everywhere, as soon as I say something,
I realize, wrong again, wrong again, wrong again. Maybe for the next podcast, you should just sit
here in silence for a few hours. Well, that's right. And bore people to death and enlighten them.
Yeah. So I think the deepest, rigorous thing I've seen so far is this
trace logic on the space of conscious, of Mark Covington. But that's what, having said that,
I then will immediately say it's a baby step and compared to the reality, zero, right? So I think
that we can go infinitely beyond what I've done, what my team has done with this Markov,
trace chain thing. And even if we go infinitely beyond it, and we do that for a trillion years,
we'll be 0% of the way toward understanding what you already are completely.
Because it's infinite. It's completely infinite. No matter how big the number gets, it's still
nothing in comparison. And that puts the light of dogmatism, right? It's really,
dogmatism is really missing the point. Dogmatism is missing the point that
what you can say about it is never it, never it. There's no right formulation of words.
And killing people, because their formulation of words is different from yours, is really to miss
the point that, I don't know what the word is for meant in Spanish, but
saying meant in Spanish versus saying in English is nothing to kill over. Hey,
we're pointing to the same thing. You're just saying it in Spanish, I'm saying it in English.
Let's not kill each other over it. We're pointing to the same thing, which is what you are,
and what everybody else is. They are that, and they are that completely already.
And what is interesting that the one consciousness chooses to put itself into avatars and let itself
get so wrapped up that it forgets itself and it kills, it has some avatars kill others.
Ultimately,
when you realize it's just an avatar, in some sense, nothing was really ever lost.
When you, with your friends, and you shoot up your friend's avatar, and then afterwards you
take off your headsets, laugh, have a beer together, and it's just your avatar.
It's just like the, I don't know if you've seen the film Ruddy Player One, but I love it,
and it gives a perfect description of what could be very real in the next 20 to 30 years,
if not less, where you have a setup that you plug into with a headset and biofeedback technology
that plugs you into another reality that is extremely real. And if the rise of technology
is at all moving forward, given enough time, well, we will come to the place where
our games are, we can plug into another virtual reality that seems extremely real. And you take
like GTA or Sims just further down the line as AI and technology advances. It's not far off from
the future reality that we could create what is like a simulation and what seems to be conscious
beings having an experience, whether or not they are, is up for debate. But then we get lost in
the sauce, so to speak. We think that we are the character, and yeah, you've given a lot of
important pointers to waking up beyond who we are in this headset.
Yeah, I think that you're right that there's going to be an infinite
number of directions we can explore with different kinds of simulations and so forth and
exploring different physics, right? We can change the laws of physics in these new worlds and see
how we adapt to them. Why not have instead of three dimensions of space, one of four dimensions
of space. Actually, a friend of mine, Mike Desmura, a professor at UCI, probably 20 years ago,
was already doing that with his graduate students. They were making four-dimensional worlds and having
people learn to play in these four-dimensional worlds, and one of the graduate students
claimed in their thesis that people were learning to actually experience, you know,
to actually see in four dimensions. And I didn't buy, I let him get his PhD, but I didn't buy that.
But I think if you trained infants, but I don't think you can do this for ethical reasons,
but if you trained infants, possibly, possibly, they might be able to develop a four-dimensional,
a real four-dimensional space-time experience. So, yeah, I think that we can certainly push
the parameters and our imagination is the only limit. I'm very interested to see what happens
as we can, also within the headset, explore the boundaries of what our senses are capable of.
Forgot the scientist or researcher that was Anika Harris, who we just had on was referring to, but
they're actually training, like, for example, the sense of the magnetic field of the Earth,
and you could develop that sense to know where, like, North is based off of wearing this device,
and you can, like, it's a new sense that you could develop and have the capacity for.
There is, I believe it's the Kogi tribe in South America, where within the first seven years,
the Chosen Shaman children largely live in darkness, which you could say is unethical,
we could say many different things, but they are developing a completely unique relationship
to their internal reality than people in the Western world, just like the opposite end of the
spectrum, and what that unlocks for their capacity to navigate those realms, you know,
in their own consciousness. It's very interesting. It really is, and also David Eagleman has been
doing this kind of research, right, where he's been sort of augmenting our senses in various
interesting ways. You could even have people that could sort of have the stock market information
being played onto their body, and they could sort of feel when this time does buy and when
this time does sell, and so forth. They can build these intuitions. So, yeah, there's a lot of
untapped potential that we could use, but I think it's really fascinating. Right now, we're doing
this using just what we know about the neuroscience inside the headset. Once we actually have stepped
outside the headset, and we know the software behind the neuroscience, then those kind of
technologies I think are going to be even more powerful. Yeah. Do you think we will create
conscious AIs? So, that's a good question. Most people, when they answer that question,
or even ask it, what they're thinking about is this framework, that building a conscious
AI means we're starting with these unconscious circuits and software, physical stuff in space
and time. That's the fundamental reality. But if we get the right kind of complexity in the
circuits and the software, then the unconscious circuits and software will give rise somehow
to the conscious experience. So, that's the way most people take your question, and you try to
answer them. They'll say, oh, yeah, sure. Of course, we know that physical systems can create
consciousness. Your brain is a physical system, and it creates consciousness. Neurons, neural
circuits create consciousness. So, yeah. So, most people, that's the kind of answer they're going
to give. My answer is very, very different. I say that neurons don't even exist when they're not
perceived. Circuits and software don't exist, except as ideas in my mind. So, I've got to rethink
the question entirely. So, here's how I rethink the question.
Inside my headset, there are certain portals to consciousness. One is what I call the Andre
body. That's a portal into a consciousness. And we have one technology
that we know of that works for creating new portals into consciousness. And that technology is
having kids. So, it's low tech, but it works. So, we actually, we have a technology that opens up
new portals into consciousness. So, from this point of view in which consciousness is fundamental,
if we can actually reverse engineer with maybe the concentration theory as the first baby step,
understand that technology. What are we doing when we have kids?
From the point of view of consciousness, how is a new headset being created?
Once we've reverse engineered that, then we can ask ourselves, can we do it ourselves?
Can we just take that and do it abstractly? Instead of doing it through human mating,
can we actually do it in some sense technologically? And I think ultimately,
the answer is probably yes, we'll be able to open new portals. And when we do it,
it may be that certain of the technologies we use will look in our headset like artificial
intelligences on computers, circuits. But now notice that the answer is completely different.
I'm not saying that the circuits and software are creating the consciousness. I'm saying that
consciousness is fundamental. What looks like technology is an interface representation that
only exists when you happen to see it. So, the software and hardware aren't even there
when you don't look. The only thing is there are the conscious agents. But through your headset,
it looks like a conscious robot that you're interacting with. So, you can see why I had
to give a long answer. If I just said yes, the answer is yes, I think we could do it.
But you can see that that would have given you entirely the wrong perspective on what I'm saying.
Yeah. The first example you gave is if you've seen Ex Machina, the movie, where they
essentially develop this through the wetware and the hardware, this sentient AI humanoid robots,
that would be creating it, essentially creating consciousness through
figuring it out throughout the Newtonian world, essentially.
If you assume that physical is framework, you're not going to understand really what you're doing.
Now, it may be that ultimately, we'll find with this theory of consciousness fundamental,
we'll figure out what we have to do inside of our headset and maybe it'll look like the Ex Machina
kind of thing. But what we'll realize is that what we're really doing is rearranging this neural,
this network of conscious agents. It looks like neurons or circuits in software inside space time,
but what we're really doing is this new programming of conscious agents or whatever
transcend conscious agents. So it still may work out that way, but the real scientific
theory will be much deeper than space time. And by the way, that's not just a cognitive
scientist saying that this is now the European Research Council putting 10 million euros on the
line saying these positive geometries outside of space time are the real deal. This is the way
forward. Let's do this. Incredible. Man, I love, thank you so much for your time today. I'm just so
it brings me joy. Like I just feel like a giddy kid who discovered a new toy every time I get to
dive deep into this discussion that just like lights me up so much because starting to slowly chip
away at a model of understanding the world, which has so many implications of how we navigate
within it. And diving deeper into the truth as like, you know, that's the goal with here in the
no less self podcast to discover the true nature of ourselves and the world around us. And I just
putting it out there in the field, I have the vision of producing these high quality round table
discussions around specific areas of life, one being music as medicine, another being around
consciousness theories. And so I'm excited to hopefully in the next 12 months, I'm just going to
find the location and find, you know, the way we want to do it because it's a full thing to like
have six state individuals fun to start to create these conversations that can be shared
in in all of its nuance and all of its many different perspectives to start to like refine
each other's perspective in a way that can be perceived for the masses and for people online
to be able to watch and intrigue interest for people that may want to go down this path and
find the way that the one uniquely wants to express itself through them. And so be on the
lookout for that. I'm excited to have something like that in the future as well. I think that's
an excellent idea. I think that actually something new could come out of it when you bring people
together that are thinking roughly the same, but but not exactly the same. And they've done a lot
of work. They're thinking about it really, really deeply. Then you get some new sparks that they
could really light something up. Yeah. Yeah. And I know researchers obviously do that in their own
accord behind closed doors. And we're not, but it's interesting when you put it in the media,
you know, and for people to view. And it's like the parable of the blind man and the elephant,
you know, let's sit down at a round table, put this elephant on the table and talking about it.
Absolutely. Absolutely. Sweet. So amazing. Now, is there is there anything else you want to share
with their audience? Having understood, you know, the context of the conversation we just have that
you would like to wrap up on or share before we close? I would just say one thing. This is the
Know Thyself podcast. It's about Know Thyself. And I would just say that what I've learned is that
whatever you are transcends any description.
I've said, amazing. Thank you. Thank you so much. Everybody that's been tuning into this episode,
if you made it through nearly two and a half hours, you're my kind of people.
I just love to share this, this joy and this conversation and dialogue. So thanks for coming
on this journey. As always, let us know in which ways this has uniquely impacted you.
And until next time, be well. Thank you, Don.
