An old biblical idea that was picked up recently to great effect,
and by recently now I mean say within the past 100 or 200 years,
is letters equal numbers. In the Bible and amongst Jewish scholars,
this is called the gametria, where each letter is considered the same as a number.
And then all kinds of arcane analyses can be applied,
because once letters become numbers, all of mathematics is able to do with them.
It sounds silly to multiply two letters, or to add two letters together,
but numbers, it's the most obvious thing to do. You give me two numbers, I think.
I'm going to add them. I'm going to multiply them. I'm going to do something with those numbers.
I'm going to do something mathematical. With letters, I look at them and I think,
okay, I've got words here. Words make sentences. I've got some ideas going.
Gametria was the ancient practice of transposing letters to numbers,
the first Hebrew letter, which is alf becomes one, and the second becomes two,
and so on and so forth. Then all sorts of interesting, mystical, and to me,
not necessarily in accordance with the true properties of the universe,
kinds of mathematics is done on the numbers to come up with some kind of extra kind of meaning.
In particular, biblical scholars have applied it to the book of Revelation.
Now we've jumped from the Old Testament to the New Testament.
There's all kinds of poetic and terrifying images in the book of Revelation,
but one in particular that's captured many people's imagination is the phrase,
the number of the beast, also the number of the man, you can calculate it, 666.
The number of the beast is 666. Now, it makes its way in all kinds of horror movies and
terrifying tales of devils and demons and, you know, what does the apartment building 666
Park Avenue mean? You know, what would it mean to have a room 666? I don't think most people
would want to go to a hotel and be given room 666. But what it really means if you use Gametria,
if you take the Hebrew letters that spell out Nero Caesar, who was the Roman emperor at the time,
and you correctly apply the numbers to each letter, and you add them up, what do you get?
The number of the beast, the awful person whose name you can't mention in a bad context,
they add up to 666. The beast is Nero Caesar. And it's not quite the same,
but it will be similar to something that follows later in this lecture. In some sense,
the adding up is a one-way trap door. Yes, if you add up the numbers for Nero Caesar,
you get 666. But at the same time, there's a lot of ways to go backwards that don't get you to Nero
Caesar. There's all different kinds of ways you can add up numbers to get 666. And if you put
corresponding letters to them, you might get words, you might get phrases, you might get gibberish.
In a way, it's a safety hedge for the person who wrote the book of Revelation, that by calling
Nero Caesar 666, knowing that the person who read it and interpreted it to do the gematria
would get Nero Caesar being 666, the author of the book of Revelation could say, no, actually,
I meant it to be something totally different.
