The mono-alphabetic substitution is such an effective way of scrambling letters and encoding things,
encrypting them so that they couldn't be read by someone else, that it lasted for 800 years
as a safe form of communication. Now the at-bash and caesar, the thing that was easy about them is
it was easy to know what the encryption process was and what the decryption process was. For
mono-alphabetic substitution, it's still fairly straightforward but it's going to involve a lot
more scrambling of letters, but I would think with a little bit of practice it could be done
fairly fast by people who were skilled at it. Now I said a moment ago that it lasted 800 years.
That had a certain kind of finality about it and I meant it to have finality about it.
For over a thousand years now, mono-alphabetic substitution is not a safe way to encrypt anything
if you want to keep your secrets safe. What happened? How did it happen?
The idea of gametria, of putting letters to be numbers and so forth, continued to percolate
around the Middle East. Once Muslims had taken control of the area and the Quran, their holy book,
was pondered by Muslim scholars, they too began to perform a kind of gametria. It was a bit different
but at the same time they thought that numbers and letters and how the different kinds of combinations
appeared in the holy book might give extra insight or clue into the nature of God and the universe
and reality. The Quran was scrutinized. People put numbers to letters, people counted things,
people began to wonder about how it was all constructed. Since by doing so they were going
to glean greater insight into the nature of everything. One Muslim, Abu al-Kindi, who was
born in Iraq around 900 A.D., is known as the first Muslim philosopher. He studied so many
different things and applied so much thought and brainpower to so many ideas. He earned the title
but the thing that he did that's of relevance to us is inventing what's called frequency analysis.
He counted the times different letters appeared in the Quran, how often they appeared, how often
they appeared relative to other letters, how often certain words appeared and he built without calling
it this a database of what letters occurred most frequently, which occurred most infrequently
and he had the brilliant insight to realize that this applied to breaking mono-alphabetic
substitution. If I switch all letters the same then whatever letter occurs most frequently in
English say, which is E, if I switch it with Q when it's scrambled then Q will appear most
frequently and so by analyzing the number of times different letters and different pairs of
letters occur I can begin to guess what the words were and how it breaks down and indeed this is a
very effective way of breaking mono-alphabetic substitutions. So even though there's a huge
number of possible ones and a computer could not in a brute force, blind way run through all them
and hope to find it, by cleverly employing ideas from statistics and probability it's possible to
figure out how to solve it. As a side note of interest the phrase for English is Ed oyn sherdlu
E-T-A-O-I-N-S-H-R-D-L-U those are the most frequently occurring letters Ed oyn sherdlu
so if you're trying to crack a mono-alphabetic substitution and you count up all the letters
in it and figure out their relative frequencies you try E for the one that appears most often
and T for the one that's next most often. With some patience and skill and enough time
you'll almost surely be able to solve it. One important historical circumstance where it was
solved to good or bad effect depending on your outlook was Mary Queen of Scots. She used a variation
of a substitution cipher along with a code book to send encrypted messages back and forth to her
supporters while she was in jail. Francis Walsingham who was Queen Elizabeth the first spy master
was sure that she was up to no good and determined to figure out what was going on. Before long he
had intercepted her coded traffic and was able to get hold of everything that she sent and read
everything she sent. Thomas Phillips helped him in this and indeed in 1586 Mary Queen of Scots was
embroiled in plotting the assassination of Elizabeth the first and she was arrested her
conspirators were tortured and killed and because Walsingham was convinced that she was
evil and bad for England she was rapidly beheaded and her body burned and the ashes encased and
led. There was a case where monoalphabetic substitution and the power of breaking it
through frequency analysis and statistical thinking you know resulted in the quashing of
an assassination plot and the death of a conspirator.
