Up till that time in the mid-seventies, all code systems had been symmetric.
Again, if you and I wanted to communicate, we had to have the exact same key.
They wondered, would it be possible for only one person to have the key and still have it work?
In other words, would there be a way for me to say, publicly, here is my method for you to
encrypt things to me, you would use that method, and then I would have a private key that nobody
else had, and I could decrypt your message, but nobody else could. And they came up with this.
Now, one of the interesting things from the broad mathematical perspective on this is,
in the 1930s, the British mathematician, G.H. Hardy, wrote a mathematician's apology.
It was his life story that he tried to do when he was depressed and having a hard time doing math.
And in it, he wrote that the number theory he did was the most useless thing of all,
that's why he gloried in doing it. It had no practical application whatsoever.
A short 40 years later, RSA found a way to use some of his ideas, some of Fermat's ideas,
who we met earlier when we talked about probability, and a host of other intervening
mathematicians' ideas to enact this idea of a asymmetric code. Now, it's really a one-way
trap door, you can think of it. And it's called a trap door because it's very easy to fall down
trap doors, very hard to climb up through them. The RSA hinges on one simple idea, that it's very
easy to multiply two large numbers together. Now, you could do it with paper and pencil,
it might take you a long time, and it might be tremendously boring, but you would be able to
multiply two large numbers together. However, factoring numbers can be very tricky. If you've
multiplied two numbers together that aren't divisible by say 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, and what have you,
then it becomes much harder and harder and more time consuming to try to keep dividing that number
to find how it splits. So the essence of it is multiplying easy, factoring, pulling those numbers
apart, very hard. They found a way to do that so that you could take your message to me,
you could turn it into numbers, and then I could have a public key based on multiplying
two big prime numbers together. You could use that to encrypt your message to me and then send it
to me. Now, because I know the two numbers that multiplied together, I would have the private
key and then I could decrypt your message. Anybody else in the world would know my public key,
they could possibly know what you sent me, but they wouldn't be able to split my number into
its two pieces and therefore could not decrypt it. This might not sound extraordinary, but this was
the most powerful development I want to say in cryptography of all time, and the reason why is
this is what allows the internet today to be what it is. You can use it to exchange keys securely,
you can use it for logging in remotely, and of most importance to us, this is how you can log in
to Amazon or anywhere you like to buy things, and this is how you can do banking, and this is how
you can send your credit card across the internet, this is how you can encrypt messages if you need
to. We both don't have to have a key in advance because there's no way that Amazon could have
all the tens of millions of keys it would need to have with people. What Amazon has and what your
computer has are versions of the RSA public key and using it, information can be transported back
and forth between computers safely and securely. Without that, there would be no internet really,
the internet as it existed before was a bunch of defense computers mainly hooked up between
scientists who wanted to be able to send data to each other, and that's important, I'm sure they
worried about that information being stolen too, but it was much smaller in scope then.
The internet would not have captured the public imagination, would not have turned into an
engine of commerce, would not have transformed our lives if we could not securely log in,
securely send credit card information, and securely transmit keys back and forth by some
clever asymmetric trapdoor way.
