So for both the cake cutting and the estate division, we've seen that psychology can be
tied up in decision making. And I want to talk about a very interesting example that's based
on an old game show that has a current incarnation. The game show is Let's Make a Deal. Let's Make
a Deal was created and hosted by Monty Hall. And the rest of the show doesn't matter as much to us
as the end of the show. At the end of the show, Monty Hall would select a contestant, a curtain
would open, and three doors would be revealed. And behind the three doors were three very different
things. Typically behind one there would be a brand new car. And then behind the other two doors
were what were called zonks by the show. One zonk might be a donkey, for example. Another zonk might
be a hundred pounds of potatoes or some such. There were three doors, one of them held a highly
desirable prize. The other two things you really didn't want in your life unless you eat a lot of
potatoes. The contestant would choose a door. Now if the door was merely opened by Monty Hall at
that point, there'd be no real suspense and nothing much of mathematical interest, although two out
of three times about hilarity would ensue as the person opened the door, their face fell, and they
saw that they had just gotten a donkey or a hundred pounds of potatoes. But the way Monty Hall would
do it and the way the setup for Let's Make a Deal is one door would open. Now it was not the picked
door and it was not the door with the cars, so one of the zonks would be revealed. Using the setup
I've described, I pick one door. Monty Hall has the choice of two zonks to open. He could have
opened the donkey door or the hundred pounds of potato door. There are now two closed doors
and one revealed door. Monty Hall now offers the contestant the chance to switch doors. The
contestant can keep the original pick or switch it to the other door. Now on the TV show and on the set,
the audience would go crazy. People would start shouting out door numbers. People would shout
to switch. Other people would shout to stick to the original door. Chaos, mayhem, and game show fun
would ensue. To make matters even more interesting and to bring in the psychology to the decision
making, Monty Hall would start offering money to either switch or stick or would offer something
like a washing machine just to give up either door. And the contestant would get wound up tighter and
tighter and tighter until a decision had to be made. So the Monty Hall problem is should the person
switch doors or stick? Should the contestant say yes I will switch or yes I will stick? Now
this is a problem that's fooled many people including hundreds of mathematicians who humiliated
themselves publicly because when Marilyn Voss Savant who writes a column in Parade Magazine
built as the world's smartest woman gave the correct answer, which I'll share in a moment,
these mathematicians sent her nasty mail describing how wrong she was and why she was wrong and
unfortunately they were all wrong. She published their responses and it was a black eye for
mathematics in a way but it helped people gain a deeper appreciation of the problem.
Fortunately I was not one of the people who sent one of the nasty letters. But back to the Monty
Hall problem, should the contestant switch doors or stick to the original door they chose?
Here's how it's easy to be fooled. You see now two doors. They're both closed,
behind one door is a car and behind the other door is a zonk. It seems like it's 50-50,
it seems like it doesn't matter at all which door you choose. Stick, switch, doesn't matter,
all the same you'll get the car half the time. It's an attractive view but unfortunately it's
the wrong view. In fact the contestant should always switch doors. If the car is placed randomly
the contestant should always switch doors and I'll try to give you two reasons to see why that's so.
It turns out that always switching means that there's a two-thirds probability of winning the
car, not one-half. Two-thirds is significantly better than a half. I would certainly prefer a
two-thirds probability to that of flipping a coin. So here's the first way of looking at it.
Forget that Monty Hall opens the door, forget that he tries to talk you into or out of a choice.
You had a one out of three chance of choosing the door that the car was behind. Three doors,
one car, you have a one out of three chance of picking it. That means there's a two-thirds chance
you picked the wrong door. So therefore when you switch two-thirds of the time you'll switch to
the right door. Or from the other perspective the only time that switching is bad is if you
picked the right door to begin with. That'll be a third of the time. That means two-thirds of the
time switching will get you the car. It's so counter-intuitive and to me part of the beauty
and attractiveness of math is when something is so unintuitive but produces unassailedly
correct results. Let me give one other way of looking at it. Suppose instead there were 1,000
doors, one of which had a car behind it and the other 999 had lame gag prizes, these lame zonks
like donkeys or potatoes. You guess a door and Monty Hall now opens 998 of the doors revealing 998
gag prizes. So now there's two doors left. One is the door you picked and one is the hidden door
that he's offering you the chance to switch. Should you switch? Of course you should switch.
Monty Hall knows which door the car is behind. It's not very likely it's behind the door that you
picked. There was a one in a thousand chance you picked that correctly. Almost surely the other door
is the one that the car is behind. That is to say 999 out of a thousand times the car will be behind
that other door. Of course you should switch. That setup is exactly the same as the three doors
except the numbers now are by opening only one door it's not as obvious as you should switch.
So now that the probability is understood how does the psychology play into this?
After this became a public question that Marilyn Voss Savant raised and mathematicians humiliated
themselves Monty Hall claimed that by his skilled observations and knowledge of human character
he could get any person to stick or switch if he wanted to. In other words and he could then decide
I want that person to win a car or I want that person to win a donkey or settle for a hundred
dollars or a washing machine or whatever he decided to do. That it was fully within his power
to every time get the person to get the correct answer. So this is part of the way in which math
is powerful and I've touched on this in earlier lectures. Had you deduced the solution to the
Monty Hall problem before it was publicly known and had you been a contestant then you could
have switched and ignored his psychological tactics. That is your belief in the truth of the
math and the probability would allow you to decide to switch and not second guess yourself
no matter what he was saying or offering and two out of three times although you'd unfortunately
have only one chance you would get a car.
