And now on to game theory. Game theory uses mathematics to find optimal results and situations in which players compete or cooperate.
An optimal result in this case means maximizing something good and minimizing something bad.
Now a game, we think of games as mathematicians very broadly, a game can be as trivial as two friends deciding what to do on a given day.
For example, each friend could decide to stay home alone, wouldn't be very much fun from a friend perspective.
One of the friends could decide to go to a movie by him or herself and the other might do something different.
They could decide to go shopping together. They could decide to go to a movie together.
There's a whole list of choices that they could make, either singly or together.
And in some theoretic sense there would be one choice that gave them maximal happiness, say going to the beach together.
How do they find that winning strategy of maximizing their happiness?
A somewhat more complicated version is a zero sum game between two players, chess, checkers, various card games.
One player will win, the other lose. You could even think of warfare perhaps in this context, two different countries battling it out.
One will win, one will lose, although it's really that clear in real life.
Johann von Neumann proved that in such a case there is an optimal solution in the sense that a way for one person to win maximally.
But unfortunately outside of games set up by humans, it seems like life is not a zero sum game in quite the same way.
And perhaps most unfortunately for all of us during the 1950s and 60s and probably into the 70s, this zero sum game between two players was applied or misapplied during the Cold War regarding the arms races involving nuclear weapons.
Spending on nuclear arms proliferated because the USA and the USSR were both thinking in these terms and hoping to out-compete without actually setting off nuclear weapons.
Here's a more complicated example, but in some way much more realistic.
Suppose a company produces a local network system for computers for businesses, but's beta testing a new cloud system that will in fact, where it developed and purchased would be considerably better than the old tried and true system used by their customers.
The producing company would be able to make a lot more money if people began to adopt the new system, but the company would still make a tidy profit if they continued to sell the old system.
So from that company's perspective, it's not clear whether or not they should invest significant time and resources into developing the new cloud system, trying hard to sell it to their current customers in a new client base and phase out the old system.
At the same time, a consumer looking to install a local network would probably be happy with the old system.
They've had lots of great reviews of it, they hear good things about it, maybe they're currently using an older version of it, but they don't understand this or know it yet, they would in fact be much more happy and much more productive with the new cloud system.
A dance begins. Both the company and the consumer would, in this hypothetical case, be better off if they both chose to devote resources to the new cloud system under development, but at the same time both would be fine if they both chose to stick with the old method.
The times that problems ensue in this game, this dance between the producer and the consumer is, what if the producer devotes money to the new system, but the consumer wants the old version?
Sometimes people want the old tried and true version, they don't care that the new one's better, they don't even care that in the long run it will be much better for them, they want what they know or what they understand.
Or vice versa, the consumer is dying to get the new cloud system because they hear things about it, but the producer pulled the plug on that because financing was getting tricky, they couldn't get the next round of funding, and so they're going to sell only their old version because they know that that at least is a steady, well-liked thing.
We now have four situations, one is the best situation if everyone can buy into it and find that strategy. That situation is, the producer makes the new cloud system, the consumer decides to buy the new cloud system, assuming of course the cloud system was good, then that's how they would be maximally happy.
Their second level of happiness is if they both decide to stay with the old system. Fine, the old system might be less profitable, it might work less well, but everybody's happy enough with it, it still is good enough to go on.
That's two out of the four situations. Two of the situations are bad, the company is producing something that consumers don't want, or the consumer wants something that companies are not producing.
