Some serious real life examples that game theorists
help set up to benefit either buyers or sellers
range from offshore oil leases
where it's not clear what's being purchased, right?
It's not clear how much oil will be in the reserve
so bidding for the right to drill the reserve
is going to temper expectations.
Of course, your information might lead you to conclude
that it's a very rich reserve of oil
and therefore you'd be willing to pay a lot
for the lease right.
Another example is radio spectrum rights
and a third is carbon credits
and all these kinds of auctions that corporations,
very large corporations have bid on,
the game theorists setting up the auction
did so very deliberately to try to either get
the highest possible price for the seller or leaser
or the second value, which might be much lower.
On a less serious note, think about bidding on eBay.
Is it fair from the consumer's perspective?
For the consumer, they bid and bid
and they put in a highest possible bid
and if someone bids lower,
then your bid becomes say $1 or $5 lower
than that next person's bid.
In other words, it's an English auction.
Let's take a quick and silly example.
Suppose you collect old lunchboxes
and you track them on eBay very carefully.
You see a Batman lunchbox from the 1960s
that you've been dying to add to your collection
for a long time.
The starting price on it is only $10
but you would be willing to pay $1,000.
If it was a Dutch auction, you might be afraid
that someone was going to beat you to that lunchbox
and you might just do the buy it now price
or as soon as it opened at $1,000, $1,000 done.
At the same time, maybe really nobody else in the world
is fighting for that Batman lunchbox besides you.
After all, it's starting at $10
maybe other collectors who don't quite share your passion
or have your financial resources
would be willing to top out at $75 for it.
The way eBay is set up, you could put in a maximal bid
of $1,000 and if the next highest bid was $75,
your bid would trump it and you would get it
for $76 or $80 or however that particular person set up
your fee over the second highest price.
This is a considerable savings to you
and not good for the person selling it.
However, psychology pays off here too
because the person who was only going to bid $75
as soon as your bid tops out over his or hers
at $76 or $80 might decide to exceed
what their maximal bid was.
Even though that person valued it at a maximum of $75,
now knowing that you're gonna get it for only $76
or $80, they're gonna bid $100
and suddenly the two of you might get involved
in a bidding war.
This benefits the seller.
So does game theory give you a best strategy for eBay?
It absolutely does.
You snipe, you wait till the last minute or last 15 seconds,
you put in your maximal bid at that point
and if you get it, that was your maximal bid.
If you don't get it, then somebody wanted it
way more than you did and you probably would have had
to bid significantly higher to get it.
It avoids the psychological games that can get you
and other bidders into a bidding war.
In other words, eBay does not profit as much as it might.
The seller does not profit as much as he or she may
by you sniping at the last second with your maximal bid.
Now bidders at any auction could collude
to try to keep prices low and that's one reason
why a lot of things being auctioned have a baseline
it has to open here, which would be the minimum valuation
that the person selling would be willing to get for it.
But it would also set up something different,
a prisoner's dilemma, where especially if the bids
were sealed or sniping was a possibility,
if you were colluding with a group of friends
who were all interested in bidding on lunch boxes
or some such, then you could try to artificially
deflate the price just the way team owners in sports
are sometimes thought to collude to keep the salaries
and deals offered to free agents down lower
than they might be.
The problem is this sets up a kind of prisoner's dilemma,
which I'll talk about in a minute,
where one person stands to benefit tremendously then
by betraying the group and offering the free agent
a higher bid or to bid at the last second on the lunchbox
higher than previously agreed upon.
So by colluding, it sets up the possibility,
the very real possibility that a unscrupulous person
is going to maximize their benefit at the cost of you.
The prisoner's dilemma is a fascinating example
of a game, which game theory analysis,
which logic and reasoning, which the power of math
brought to bear upon it does not really come up
with a satisfactory solution.
So let me describe it.
The prisoner's dilemma was invented by Albert Tucker
in 1950.
It's almost, but not quite a paradox.
Logic, reasoning, theory offer no best of course
in action to find a Nash equilibrium for this case.
