Here's the setup. You and I decide to rob a bank. We are captured near the scene of the burglary
and we're given the third degree separately by the police. We each have to choose whether or not
to confess and implicate the other, in other words to confess and betray. I would confess and
betray you or you would confess and betray me or not to. Here's the problem. If neither of us confesses,
so in our separate rooms, soundproof rooms, being worked on by police officers, both of us,
we've previously agreed, we're going to say nothing. We're going to remain quiet. We're going to be
tough. If we both hold true to our word, then both of us will serve one year on a charge of
carrying a concealed weapon. We will go to jail, but it'll be fairly minimal. If both of us, on the
other hand, betray, both of us confess and implicate the other, we both go to prison for 10 years.
That's bad, but of course in that case the police have information and testimony from both of us
about the other. However, if only one of us confesses, that is, betrays and implicates the other,
and the other doesn't confess, then the one who is collaborated with the police will go free,
while the other will go to prison for 20 years on the maximum charge. So let's run through this again.
Let's suppose you and I are both true to our word. We both get a year.
Let's suppose that both of us decide to rat out the other person, then we both get 10 years.
But let's suppose that I'm particularly sleazy and you're true to your word,
then I walk free because I've turned state's evidence and you go to jail for 20 years.
It is now impossible to find a Nash equilibrium. It keeps jumping away. I talked about this when
we talked about paradoxes and logic. This is almost like this sentence is false.
There's probably a way to set it up, in fact, so that it is. Every time I try to make a rational
decision, okay, I'm going to betray you because if I do that, then I will get to walk free and
you'll be in jail for 20 years and I feel bad about that, but not so bad because I'm free
and you're in jail for 20 years. But then I say, wait, I know your strategy. You're thinking the
exact same thing I am. You were offered the exact same deal I will. So you're also going to try to
rat me out and then we're both in jail for 10 years. All right, so I'm not going to rat you out
and you're not going to rat me out. That means we're both in jail only for a year. But then wait,
if you're not going to rat me out, then I should rat you out and so on and so on and so on. It
circles in and in on itself. There's no Nash equilibrium and math has again used itself to
analyze and understand its limits. I'll finish this lecture by talking about voting theory.
And we can almost think of election as a game and wonder about applying game theory. The most
obvious way of doing voting is almost similar to fair division, the majority rules. Now,
that works well enough for many situations, although it does lead to the political phenomenon of the
tyranny of the majority. If it's the case that 55 out of 100 of us always want the same thing,
the other 45 are always going to be very unhappy about it, but majority rules.
