But things can go awry in a mathematical way if there are three or more candidates.
Imagine this situation.
Let's imagine there are three candidates and you prefer and order Alice, Bob, and Carol.
Because you prefer Alice the most, you vote for Alice.
But here's a possibility.
A situation can be created in which Carol wins.
However, if you had voted for Bob, who is not your top choice, Bob would have won.
So you'd have been better off voting for your second preference.
That sounds highly paradoxical and certainly points up a problem with voting theory.
People have created other voting systems to try to eliminate these problems,
but each one was found to have a situation akin to that above,
that by voting against your interests, you'd have ended up happier.
For any way of voting chosen for three or more candidates,
there is something called Arrow's Impossibility Theorem or Arrow's Paradox.
Here's what it says.
Arrow's Impossibility Theorem says that when voters have three or more distinct alternatives,
essentially the only way that all voters can be happy is if there is only one voter.
In other words, a dictator.
It's worth mentioning that this is a mathematically proved thing,
not just something that sounds plausible,
and that Kenneth Arrow, who created this, won the Nobel Prize in Economics.
It's been applied in many different kinds of situations.
It's a remarkable and astonishing result that shows the power of math.
It shows that if you have a three-party system, or more than three parties,
and more than one person is voting or choosing,
then it is always possible to find ways to game the system
or potentially vote against your interests to get what you want second best.
It is the case again of math being used sort of on itself in an analysis
to understand the limits of other theories in the world.
These results seem to suggest that the two-party system in the U.S. of A
is optimal and that a clear winner will be chosen
and switching your vote won't make you happier,
possibly unless you voted for Nader in Florida in 2000.
But your vote is not as powerful as it seems.
The majority vote doesn't always elect the politician.
When you vote for president, you don't actually vote for that president.
You vote for an elector who will go to the Electoral College and cast a vote.
So out of all the many millions of people voting for president,
538 decide who will actually be president.
Now, the electors, it seemed like a good idea for certain respects.
If the vote was very close or torn between different candidates,
now there's a body of, well, today, 538 people making the choice
and deals could be cut, things could be worked out,
and it could be the case that a sticky situation could be resolved in the Electoral College.
The reality is that the partisans who come in, Democrat or Republican,
are so strongly entrenched in their position that the simple majority is going to win once there.
But the Electoral College was set up in the way states are granted electors
and the way the districts choose electors was set up to preserve an elite status
that educated, wealthy landowners would be the ones ultimately deciding
that the popular vote may or may not influence them, probably not,
but that their interests would be preserved.
Using mathematics as a tool to analyze, division of goods, games, voting
has showed us how these things can be stacked against us or stacked in our favor,
but more importantly, knowing the math makes it harder for someone to manipulate us
or more clear should the situation and need arise
how we might try to manipulate decisions to our best advantage.
Math is a powerful decision making tool.
The next lecture tackles a very big problem, that of infinity.
How can we think of infinity in a precise way?
Once that's accomplished, what are the consequences?
Like Buzz Lightyear, can we go to infinity?
And beyond!
This ends lecture six.
