Frequentists believe, as the number of trials increase, the relative frequency will get
closer to the probability of that event.
And it is proved by the law of large numbers.
The law of large numbers tells us, as more trials performed, the frequency will tend
to become closer to the probability.
In another word, the value of frequency will bond.
It is a range around the value of the probability.
This range is known as the margin of error.
Differs from the frequentist interpretation, based on probability, express a degree of
belief in an event, which enables us to compute and update the probabilities after obtaining
new data.
It is based on prior knowledge, and updates when new information emerges.
While you probably feel based on prior knowledge is not that reliable, for prior knowledge
could be very limited and even wrong.
In that case, his frequentist's probability is better than base on probability.
Let's see an example.
The multi-haul problem is based on a TV show Let's Make a Deal and named after its original
host, Monty Hall.
Here is the puzzle for you to solve.
There are three doors in front of you, and there is a price behind one of them.
Once you select a door, the host, who knows what behind the doors, will open one of the
other doors that not have a price behind it.
You will then have the opportunity to switch from the door you originally selected.
The question is, should you switch?
Let's first apply the basis theorem.
Here, PA is the probability of the price is behind the door A, it is one-third, PB is
the host opens the door B. There will be three situations here.
One, if the price behind door A, the probability of the host open door B is 50%.
Two, if the price behind the door B, the probability of the host opens door B is 0%.
Three, if the price behind door C, then the host only tries to open door B, so the probability
is 100%.
Put these three situations together.
PB equals to 50%.
PB given A is if price behind door A, the probability of the host opens door B.
Because the price is behind door A, so the host will choose between door B and C, which
means PB given A is 50%.
Plug all these numbers into the base formula.
We get PA given B is one-third.
This means, if you stay, the chance of win is one-third, and if you switch, the chance
of win is two-thirds.
Now, let's apply the frequent test approach to solve this problem.
How?
Easy.
Let's simulate this game many times, and it will be clear from the simulation result
whether it is to your advantage to switch or not.
I'll write down some code to simulate this game 10,000 times.
Here is the result.
Run the code again.
And again.
And again.
As you see, after repeated the game many times, the result is great well with base approach.
So I hope this can assure you, both approaches can reach the right answer.
The difference between them, base and frequent test reasoning are distinguished by two different
ways of answering the question.
The base approach is subjective and uses a prior belief to define a prior probability
distribution on the possible values of the NO parameters and then update new information.
The frequent test sees probability as something that has to do with a limiting frequency based
on an observed proportion.
The problem must be well-defined, so it can repeat as many times as wanted, then because
of the law of light numbers, we will get closer to the answer.
First, both approaches can take you to the right answer.
Second, they are distinguished by two different ways of answering the question.
I'm always here at your service.
See you in the next one.
