So Calculus has two ideas. Well, that's fortunate, you know, rather than say 100. So it's got
two ideas and we're going to do one of them today and then we'll do one of them in the
next lecture. So it will basically be done and go home. But today we're going to be talking
about the derivative. So the word of the day, derivative. The derivative is a measure of
change. Okay, now change occurs in all sorts of things. The weather changes, temperature
changes, the Dow Jones average changes, we get fatter and thinner changes or age changes,
lots of things change. But the most fundamental idea of change is motion, change in position
with respect to time. Okay, so we are in the role of trying to analyze change. That's one
of the fundamental things that Calculus does. And so the way to analyze any hard thing is
to take the simplest example of that phenomenon and then look at that phenomenon very hard.
And so that's what we're going to do today. Take a very simple example of change, namely
motion, very simple motion and analyze it. Now, remember Zeno. So Zeno was a philosopher
in 450 BC and he proposed several paradoxes about motion. And one of them had to do with
an arrow flying through the air. Okay, so here's an arrow flying through the air. And
what Zeno said was this. He said, how can that arrow be moving? Because if you look
at the arrow at one instant of time, it's only in one place. So how can it move? Where
is the motion when it's in one instant? It's just at one place. So what we're going to
do today is we're going to talk about the derivative and we're going to resolve Zeno's
paradox of motion, that particular paradox. So let's begin then with the simplest idea
of motion that we can think of. And that is when we're driving on a road in a car, in
a car we're going on a straight road, we're driving in a car and we're not slowing down
or speeding up. We're just going straight through. There's a stop sign and we just drive
right on through. We don't even slow down. So this is the scenario that we're going
to start with and it's a very good one for illustrating the idea of motion. So here we
go. Here is a picture of a car moving on a straight road. And you notice that it went
right through the stop sign. So this is the first thing. Well, it turned out that as we
were going to do this, we knew we might commit a slight infraction of the vehicular code and
so we were prepared for it. And we prepared ourselves for it when a few minutes later
the sirens came and we were pulled over and the officer stopped us and there we were in
the car and the officer said, you went right through that stop sign. You're going to get
a ticket. But fortunately we were prepared and we had a camera set up right next to the
stop sign at the very moment when the officer contends that we were going through the stop
sign. And so here is the picture that we show the officer and it's sent to us via over the
radio waves. There's the picture and we show the picture. Did I mention by the way that my name
in this, the person who's driving the car is named Zeno. And so Zeno shows the picture to the
officers. And there it is. You see the picture now. And the argument is very simple. Officer,
how can you possibly tell me that I went through the stop sign when I have evidence right here
that I'm at the stop sign exactly when you said I was moving. And in fact, by the way,
this picture is time-stamped as you see there and it's time-stamped one minute. So think of it
as one minute after the hour. You're looking at your watch and at one minute, exactly one minute,
not one minute in one second, exactly one minute, that's where you were. Now you notice those
little indications in the back behind the car. Well, those things are the mileage markers for
this road. It turns out you're on a road that's very well marked with its mileage marks. Got
mileage markers. In fact, it's got so many mileage markers as you will see. It has mileage markers
at every single distance, which is very useful. You can never be too far lost. You know where
you are. So you see that the tip of the car is right at the one mile marker. So you say,
and the time is one minute. So Zeno says to the officers, can't give me a ticket. Here it is. No
jury is going to convict me of going through the stop sign. Unfortunately, Zeno then looks at the
name tags of the officers. And the name tags, unfortunately for him, are Newton and Leibniz.
This is, he's going to find, this is a drawback for his case, you see. So, okay, because Newton
and Leibniz, being officers of the law, are ready with additional evidence. They also had cameras
on the side of the road. Isn't this amazing? You got these mile markers and you've got cameras. So
on the side of the road, they have cameras. And here it is. At two minutes after the hour,
they show this photograph, not the moving photograph, not the car moving, this photograph. This is a
photograph of the car exactly at the two mile mark. And notice the time stamp there. The time stamp
says two minutes after the hour. Okay. So Newton and Leibniz say, look, you went one mile between
the one mile marker and the two mile marker, and it took you one minute. Therefore, you were going
one mile per minute. Very simple. Simple computation. In fact, they do the computation for you. It's not
very hard computation, but they do it for you. And they tell you that the average speed is
where you were at the two minute time minus where you were at the one minute time. That's how far
you went. You see, you saw where you were at the two minute. You saw where you were at the one minute.
You subtract the two to see how far you went, and it took you one minute to accomplish that.
And so you went two minus one over one, one mile per minute. By the way, we're going to work in
miles per minute instead of miles per hour. And the reason for that is that one mile per minute
is 60 miles per hour, of course, you know that. But the trouble is that 60 is a big number.
One is a smaller number. So let's use the one. Okay. So one mile per minute.
Well, Zeno in the car says, Okay, sure, I averaged one mile per minute during that minute, 60 miles
an hour. That's how fast I went over the course of a minute. But how do you know I wasn't stopped at
the stop sign for, you know, 30 seconds, and then and then went fast enough to make the average one
minute. What does that have to do? Where's the relevance to your assertion that I went through
the stop sign at the one minute mark? Okay. Well, so that's that's Zeno's argument. But
but Newton and Leibniz, unfortunately, can you guess other evidence, other evidence? Okay,
because they have, they say, Okay, well, remember where you were at one minute, you were at the
stop sign. And look what I had, Newton and Leibniz, they had a camera exactly taking a picture at
the 1.1 minute time. And there it is. And notice that you have a mileage marker, as as usual,
the mileage marker at every place. And it shows exactly where the car was at the 1.1 minute mark.
It was at the 1.1 mileage marker. Look at your window. That's where it was. And so Newton and
Leibniz say, Look, in the 10th of a minute, by the way, we're not gonna use seconds.
Seconds, you know, there's 60 seconds in a minute. How are you going to divide by
things like that? I mean, that's way too hard. We're just going to use tenths of a minute and
hundreds of minutes. So it's 1.1 minutes. That's one minute and a tenth of a minute
efforts. And here it is at the 1.1 mileage marker. And Newton and Leibniz then say,
Let's do the math. The math says that during that 10th of a minute, very small amount of time,
six seconds, during that 10th of a minute, your average speed was once again,
one mile per minute, because you went a total of a 10th of a mile in a 10th of a minute average,
one mile per minute. Okay, more evidence. But you still say, Okay, I don't care about that.
What you're trying to tell me is what I was doing at the one minute time. And you haven't even
approached that question yet. All you're telling me is what my average speed was afterwards.
You know, but what does that have to do with one minute? And they say we have more evidence.
Did you think they might? Yeah, here we are. Here we are at the 1.01 minute time.
Tiny interval of time. Fortunately, they had a camera. They had a camera right there.
They had a camera. There was a mileage marker right there. Isn't that unfortunate?
And they do the math. Newton and Leibniz, they say, Okay, where was where were you at time 1.01?
And while you see it on the mileage marker, you were exactly at the 1.01 mileage mark.
So how far did you go in that very tiny interval of time, a hundredth of a minute?
How far did you go? Well, you went exactly a hundredth of a mile, took you a hundredth of a minute.
How fast did you go? Well, during that hundredth of a minute, your speed was
one mile per minute. This is more evidence. But once again, you know, very persistent person.
Is that really the answer? Why are you saying that I went at one minute?
You're still not getting to it. More evidence. How about a thousandth? A thousandth of a minute.
The same thing. We do the same thing. A thousandth of a minute.
You mileage marker, mileage marker, a thousandth. Wow, that's amazing street, isn't it?
Every place has a mileage marker. The camera was ready, took a picture.
Now, now look, let's, let's compile all of this evidence. Oh, by the way,
they even had a picture before the one minute mark with 99.99 minute mark, a little bit before a minute.
Sure enough, same computation. The average speed was one mile per minute.
The evidence is pretty overpowering and it all is aiming in the same direction.
It's saying, as you can see, here we have a table that summarizes it. The average speed
between one and two minutes was one mile per minute. The average speed between one minute
and 1.1 minute was one mile per minute. The average speed to 1.01 minute,
one mile per minute. The evidence is pretty consistent.
It quacks like a duck, walks like a duck. Your speed is one mile per minute.
Now, now, let's, let's, let's step back for a minute and, and think about what we're saying here.
So the, the contention of Newton and Leibniz is that it does make sense to say that at
the one minute mark, at that exact instant, you did have a speed and that speed is one
mile per minute. But the evidence for that is not something that, that where you could just
look at where the car was or what it was doing at that instant. At that instant, it's just in
one place. You know, Zena was right about that. At that instant, it's just in one place.
But the meaning, the meaning of saying what the instantaneous speed is, giving meaning to the
idea that at one instant something can have a speed is an infinite process. It required not
just the five pieces of evidence we had here, but all of the evidence for every time,
around the one minute time, it was all of the evidence gave the same answer, one mile per minute.
And it's that infinite process. The fact that the instantaneous speed is really what it means is
an infinite process that, that resolves the question of instantaneous motion.
So, so let me, let me say it one in another way. We never talked about the, how in an infinitesimal
amount of time, how far the car went. We never did that. What we did say is, in a given amount of
time, we just looked at the position of the car in two places in two moments, subtracted to see
how far they went and then divided by how long it took. It was always the same process over and
over and over again, pretty tedious, over and over, same thing over and over again. But it was,
it never, every individual division did not involve infinity. It's just then we took the
accumulation of all the evidence to give us one answer. And that was, that was our method of
meaning motion at an instant. I thought it would be amusing to read to you what Aristotle had to
say about motion. You see, this was a puzzle. I mean, the Zeno's paradox was something that
Aristotle spoke to. And so this is his, his, he was thinking hard about motion. And here is his
definition. He says, his definition of motion as, quote, the fulfillment of what exists potentially
insofar as it exists potentially. And a further remark, quote, we can define motion as the fulfillment
of the movable qua movable. This is Aristotle. Now, you see, there is, there's an issue about
motion. And when my students write things such as that on papers, I read them and I say,
did that student really think they were saying something? Or was it just, just words? And I,
I don't, I presume Aristotle thought he was, he was shedding light on the idea of motion. But it
was a real puzzle. If you think hard about motion, at first it becomes more puzzling. And it's not
until we have this idea of the infinite process that it becomes clarified. So it's interesting.
So it's interesting. But, but the example that I just gave had a defect. And the defect was that the
car was always going at exactly the same speed the whole time. That we, it gave the answer one,
one, one, one, one. But in real life, that's not what, what actually happens. I mean, in real life,
when you're going up to this stop sign and you're contemplating not, not stopping, probably you're
speeding up. You know, why, why, you know, if you're going to be caught, why not be caught doing
something important? So, so let's look at the same scenario again. But this time, let's think about
a case where the car actually varies its speed as it moves. Okay, so here we go.
Here we have another car and it's going to be moving. But this time it's the same road that has
all these great mileage markers. That's important. And this time you're driving along the road in such
a way that at each moment of time you look at your watch, you say, what, what minute is it?
And then you take that number and you square it, multiply it by itself. And you make sure you
keep moving at such a rate that you're always at the mileage marker that's the square of the time.
Okay, so for example, at, at when your watch says one minute, you're at mileage marker one,
because one times one is one. When your watch says two, you're at two times two is four.
When you're at a half minute, half times a half, you're at the quarter mark.
When it says 1.5, you're at 1.5 times 1.5, which is 2.25 mileage mark. Okay, so is that clear?
So you're moving on as you're moving on, you, you, you keep moving at such a rate that you're
always at the square. Now let me tell you, you're speeding up. You've got to be speeding up in
order to do this because when you're at the one minute mark, you're at the one mile marker.
When you're at the two minute mark, you're at the two times two, four mile marker. When you're at
the three minute mark, you're at the three times three, nine mile marker. So you see you've gone
more miles for each additional minute. Okay, so you're definitely speeding up. So now since your
speed is changing, the question becomes more interesting. What do you mean by instantaneous
speed at one moment? So, so let's do exactly the same scenario as before, but now see if we can
make sense about the instantaneous speed of this car going through the stop sign at exactly the
one minute mark if the car is moving according to that, that formula p of t equals t squared.
Okay, so let's do it. So we go through the thing. At two minutes, we see how fast we're going on
average. We see where we, where we are at the two minute mark, which is four. We see where we were
at the one minute mark, which is one. The difference is three took one minute to accomplish that.
The average speed during that minute between one minute and two minutes is
three miles per minute, which incidents quite fast 180 miles per hour. That's moving. Okay.
But if you want to know how fast a car is going at a particular instant,
the more important information is where you were at times very close to that moment.
Not what happened in a distant times, but what happened very close to the one minute.
That's why we were so fortunate to have these mile markers so nearby. So we look at the,
at the moment, 1.1 minute. So we're going to do the same thing we did before. We look at the
one point one minute time and, and Leibniz and Newton here have this camera. They take a photograph
of where we are. And where are we at the one point one minute marker? We are at the point.
We are at the mile marker, 1.21 mile marker, 1.21. And so the difference between 1.21
and one is 0.21. When we divide by the elapsed time of a 10th of a minute,
a 10th into 0.21 is 2.1 miles per minute. So it's a good thing we had that mileage
marker 1.21 there on the, on the screen. Now, next we're going to do the same thing again,
but look at a smaller interval of time. So we'll, we'll try the same thing again.
This is, so you, I hope you get the idea of the repetitiveness of this. And it's a, it's sort of
an expository challenge, of course. You know, how do you keep something interesting whose
fundamental idea is that you repeat a very simple thing over and over again. In fact,
infinitely many times, but, but that's, that's your challenge too. So we'll just do that together.
So here it is at the time 1.01 minute. Where are you? Well, at 1.01 minute, remember,
you look at your watch and you're always positioned at the place the time times itself.
Well, in this case, the time times itself is 1.0201. And fortunately, there's a mile
marker there that says 1.0201. And that's where the nose of the car is. Now the, the, the total
distance you traveled then during that hundredth of a minute, not long was 0.0201 miles. It took
a hundredth of a minute. You divide by a hundredth of a minute and you see that the average speed
during that hundredth of a minute is 2.01 miles per minute. Once again, just determined by your
location at a particular time and your location at the one minute time. Only those things are
relevant. And then we divide by the lapse time to get the average speed. Same thing. Again,
we'll try it with the one, one thousandth of a minute. We can see that when we do the computation,
we get 2.001 miles per minute. Now notice here, unlike the previous case, we're getting different
answers each time. In the previous case, we always got the answer one mile per minute when we were
just going along the road in a steady speed. But here we don't get the same answer. We get
slightly different answers. But as we take shorter and shorter intervals of time,
those answers are getting closer and closer to the same thing. So let's look at a table that
summarizes the evidence that is going to be presented in court about how fast we were or
were not going at the exact moment, one minute, when we should have been stopped at the stop sign.
So here it is. When we're always at position along the road mileage marker
t times t, we discovered that the average speed from one to two was three miles per minute.
The average from one to one point one was 2.1 miles per minute. During that tenth of a minute,
during the hundredth of a minute, it was 2.01. During the thousandth of a minute,
it was 2.001. During the hundredth of a minute right before one, it was 1.99 miles per minute.
You see, we're getting, we have lots of evidence and we could of course do many more,
even smaller increments of time. And all the evidence is heading in one direction,
two miles per minute. Although there is no actual measurement that we ever do,
that's exactly equal to two. Because at every moment slightly beyond,
our average speed is slightly above two. And for every moment slightly before the one minute mark,
the average speed is slightly below two. But nevertheless, we get a sense that these numbers
are converging, the average speeds are converging toward one number, and that number is two miles per
minute. And indeed, that's what we are going to call the instantaneous speed at the one mile mark.
So what we've described is an infinite process. It's an infinite process, and at every moment,
we could do this infinite process to compute the instantaneous speed. In other words, if you're
driving in a car, and you know exactly where you are at every moment, you know absolutely,
down to the millionth decimal place, exactly where you are at every moment,
you could compute how fast you're going at every moment. You see? It's part of it. You couldn't,
there's no choice about it. And what the process you would do to compute the speed at any individual
instant would be an infinite process, this infinite process, of taking where you are at
the instant that you're concerned with, and then looking at slightly further times and seeing
where you are then, subtracting, dividing, to see your average speed over smaller and
smaller increments of time, and then seeing what that accumulation of evidence gives you,
and it gives you one number, the instantaneous speed. So now that whole process is the word
of the day, the derivative. That whole process is the of taking the average speeds and then
seeing what the accumulated evidence is to get a single number, which is an infinite process,
is the derivative. Now, we can do this process for the particular motion t squared. We did it
already at the time, exactly one minute mark. And we got the answer to that we were going two miles
per minute, which incidentally is 120 miles an hour. We were speeding at that point through
the stop sign. But we can do exactly the same thing at any other instant of time.
So we've done that. Now, I'm not going to go through and write down all of those,
the infinite, tedious differences and subtract, but I'll tell you what the answers are.
And here we have a little table. If you tried it at 0.7, and you could actually do this with a
calculator and just plug in the numbers, 0.7, 0.701, plug it in, see where you were, subtract,
divide. And you did that process over and over again with smaller and smaller numbers.
You would see that the instantaneous speed is 1.4 miles per minute, just as we saw the answer
was two before. We've already done the case at the one minute mark being two miles per minute
was the instantaneous speed at the 1.4 minute mark. I'm just I just picked these numbers incidentally
at random. I could have picked any numbers. I just picked numbers at random just so they
1.4. It looks random, doesn't it? 1.4. It's random. Yeah. And the answer is 2.8 miles per minute.
Okay. Now let's see at two minute marks. If you if you measured, did this whole infinite
process at the two minute mark, you would get the answer four miles per minute.
Okay. If you did it at the three minute mark, you would see that your speed, your instantaneous
speed was six miles per minute. Now look at this chart and look for a pattern.
0.7 at time 0.7, your speed was 1.4. Time one speed was two. Time 1.4 speed was 2.8. Time two speed
was four. Time three speed was six. I bet you can guess what the speed was at 2.5.
Five. And in fact, at every moment, your speed or your velocity is exactly two times the time.
So if you drive along a road and you watch the mileage markers go by and you keep the car always
at the time, the time squared, that's the mileage marker you position yourself at,
you will see that the speedometer automatically is always reading two times the time.
It's a requirement. And we saw it. We saw that. So this is the resolution then of Zeno's Paradox.
That the Zeno's Paradox of motion, the idea that of instantaneous speed and saying,
what does it mean for the arrow to be moving at that instant? The meaning of that is this whole
infinite process of seeing where it was at times immediately before and after and using this
difference quotient and dividing to get an actual one individual answer. The word for the day,
as you recall, is derivative. And now we have an expression that captures what we've done.
The expression is that we looked at the position of a time delta t by tradition means a small unit
of additional time. We look at where we were at time t plus delta t means where we were at that
moment slightly beyond the moment of interest. And then we subtract where we were at time t.
That difference is the distance traveled during that very small interval of time.
We divide by delta t to get the average speed during that tiny interval of time. And then
we do the same thing for smaller and smaller delta t's. When we do it infinitely often,
we get one single answer, and that is the word for the day, derivative.
