In the last lecture, we saw that the first idea of calculus, the derivative, came about
by analyzing a crime, a vehicular crime, going through a stop sign, and trying to analyze
instantaneous speed with which it committed that crime.
Well, today we're going to investigate another car, another crime.
This time, a much more heinous crime of kidnapping.
Okay, so here's the scenario you have to envision yourself in this scenario.
You're standing at the side of a road, and a car comes up and grabs you and pulls you
into the back of the car and drives you off on this straight road.
And there you are.
It's completely covered.
The car is completely covered on the side, so you can't see outside, unlike last lecture
where you had mile markers every single instant.
No mile markers on this road, and you can't see out anyway.
You're just inside the car.
However, fortunately, you brought your video camera.
You were carrying a video camera, and you can't see out, but you can see the speedometer
of the car as you're being hauled off in this kidnapping mode.
Okay?
And that's all you can see.
Take a video picture of the speedometer.
It's not too interesting a video.
I don't think it's going to make the top 10 thriller videos, because all you see is the
needle of the speedometer going back and forth and back and forth, and that's all you can
see.
After an hour, you're dumped out on the side of the road.
And there you are.
You're out in the middle of nowhere, but you do have your cell phone, and you have the
tape of the video camera, tape of the speedometer.
And your question is, and by the way, I forgot to say that the video camera had a time stamp
on it so that at every moment of time, you knew what the speed was.
So then you're dumped out on the side of the road, and you say, how can I call up and tell
people exactly where I am?
Well, you look at the picture of the speedometer, and that should tell you where you are, because
it's telling you how fast you are going at every moment.
And if you go faster, you know you've gone further, and if you go slower, you know you've
gone slower, and less far.
And so you should be able to use the information on that video of the speedometer to figure
out where you are.
It turns out that the second idea of calculus, second of two, is the process by which we're
going to figure out exactly where you are by examining the videotape of the speedometer.
OK?
So that's what we're going to do.
Now in mathematics, if you're faced with a difficult problem or a problem you haven't
done before, it's always a good idea to do a very simple problem first, and then do more
complicated problems, because then you teach yourself how to do the more complicated cases
if you really learn how to do the simple cases, OK?
So let's think about this scenario of the videotape of the car, and think about what
would the simplest possible videotape of the speedometer be, one that's so simple that
it would be completely trivial to figure out how far you went.
Well, I think the simplest case would be if the speedometer just stayed at one speed
the whole time.
So then it's a really boring video, because the picture is just the speedometer at one
speed for the entire hour.
So let's suppose, for example, that the speedometer read 60 miles per hour for the whole hour,
no variation, just at 60 miles per hour, the whole hour, then how far did you go?
Well, it's pretty simple.
You went 60 miles, if you went 60 miles an hour for an hour.
But of course, probably that's not what happened.
Probably the car varied in its speed during that time.
But we've at least learned something.
We can do the case where the speedometer stays steady.
Well, what's the next simplest case we can think of?
Well, the next simplest case I can think of is suppose that the car went at a steady speed
for, say, half an hour, and then instantly jumped to another speed and went at another
steady speed for the second half hour.
Well, we can do that, right?
For example, and let's go back to miles per minute instead of miles per hour, because
that way we can, when we say 30 minutes, if you went one mile per minute for 30 minutes,
you would have gone 30 miles.
So suppose that your speedometer then went at a steady speed of 30 miles, no, it went
at a steady speed of one mile per minute for 30 minutes.
And then it instantly changed speed and went at two miles per minute, which is fast, 120
miles an hour, two miles per minute for the remaining 30 minutes.
So let's see if we can figure out how far we went in that scenario.
Well, let's see.
So you went one mile per minute for 30 minutes.
So during that 30 minutes, you went 30 miles.
Then for the other 30 minutes, how fast were you going?
Two miles per minute.
So you went two miles per minute for 30 minutes.
You multiply the 30 minutes times the two miles per minute to get 60 miles during that
second half.
You add those together, 30 plus 60, you went 90 miles.
So I think we're getting the sense that if the speed, now in that case, the speed just
went changed once.
It went at one speed for the first half hour.
It went at another speed for the next half hour.
But we could do the same thing if it changed speed, say, six times.
So let's do it since it's a little hard to just do verbally.
Let's look at a chart where we have some steady speeds for 10 minute intervals.
So suppose that for the first 10 minutes, you went at one mile per minute.
For the next 10 minutes between the 10 minute mark and the 20 minute mark, you went two
miles per minute.
The third 10 minutes, you went three miles per minute, fourth 10 minutes, four miles
per minute, fifth 10 minutes, five miles per minute, sixth 10 minutes, six miles per
minute.
Of course, this is not really a car anymore, right, six miles per minute.
That's 360 miles an hour, at least it's a very fast car.
But nevertheless, for the purposes of demonstration, it's easy to remember how fast you're going
during these 10 minutes.
So how do we compute how far we travel during that hour?
Well, it's really pretty simple.
We know how far we traveled in the first 10 minutes, how far we traveled in the second
10 minutes, how far we traveled in the third 10 minutes.
Each one is obtained by multiplying the speed.
For example, in this third 10 minutes, the speed is three miles per minute.
We went at that speed for 10 minutes.
And that's how far we went during that 10-minute interval of time.
And then four times 10 is how far we went during the fourth 10-minute interval of time.
We add them together and we get the answer 210 miles.
Well, so this gives a very good method for computing the distance traveled if we are
going at a steady speed the whole time.
But now let's think where that is the steady speed the whole time or in jumps.
Steady speed, steady speed, steady speed, steady speed.
We now know how to do that example.
The question now is how about if we're in a more realistic case where the speed is varying?
That is sometimes you're going slower and sometimes you're going faster.
That's what really happens.
How would you go about finding the distance traveled?
And let's first of all think about a particular case.
Suppose that you were looking at this videotape of the speedometer, but the videotape, instead
of being a videotape that continuously took pictures, suppose that it just took one picture
every minute.
So maybe it wasn't a video camera, maybe it was just a clicking camera and you clicked
it every minute.
How would you estimate how far you went during that hour given the information on those still
photographs of one a minute photographs?
Well, one thing you could do is just say, well, I don't really know how the speed might
have varied during that minute, but I'll just assume that I went at a steady speed during
that first minute.
And then I went at a steady speed in the second minute and the third minute and the fourth
minute, and that would give me an approximation to how far I went during that hour.
Or suppose let's do the same thing again.
You sort of get the idea that in calculus what we do is we do the same thing over and
over again, but with shorter intervals of time, well, we're going to do the same thing
again here.
Suppose you had a camera and you took a photograph every, say, a hundredth of a minute.
And every time you took that photograph, you'd see what the speed was right at that moment.
Well, you'd know how to compute a good approximation to how far you went because you'd know for
every hundredth of a minute increment of time approximately how far you went.
You could take the speed at that moment and just assume you went at the same speed during
that interval of time.
Let's bring this idea home by looking at an example of where the speed actually is varying
continuously.
That is, at every different time we're going at a different speed.
So let's look at a case where at every moment of time on your videotape, you see that the
speedometer is always reading two times the time, miles per minute.
Two times the time, miles per minute.
So that means at the one minute mark, the car is going one mile per minute at the one
minute mark the car is going two times.
One two miles per minute.
At the two minute mark, the car is going two times to four miles per minute.
At the one half minute mark, the car is going one half times two.
One mile per minute.
Now since this car is going so fast, the speeds are getting very fast.
In order to make it realistic, instead of talking about 60 minutes, let's just talk
about three minutes.
So it's a much shorter kidnapping, shorter kidnapping of three minutes kidnapping.
So one way to approximate the distance traveled would be this, that we could say, if the car
were going at zero miles an hour for the first half minute, that would be some approximation
not a very good approximation to how far you actually want, but it would be some approximation.
And then during the next half minute from one half minute to one minute, you could assume
that the car went at the speed where it started that interval of time, namely one half times
two, which is one mile per minute.
And then between the intervals of time, one minute to 1.5 minutes, suppose you took the
slowest speed you ever went there, namely the two miles per minute, the speed you started
at during that time.
That's where your photograph of the speedometer is being recorded.
And we do the same thing from the half minute to the two minute mark, from the two to the
two and a half and from the two and a half to the three minute mark.
When we compute the distance by making this kind of an estimate, we're going to get a
distance that's actually less than the actual distance that the car traveled.
Because we're taking the slowest speed that we ever went during that interval of time.
Now I haven't had two cars here just to demonstrate this.
So here we're traveling along our road and the actual car, which will be here, this red
one, is always increasing in speed.
It's room like that.
The blue car, the blue car on the other hand, let's suppose that it just goes at the fixed
speed that, what the red car is going at the interval of time.
So at the beginning, the blue car just sits there while the red car picks up its speed.
And then the blue car goes at the speed that the red car is traveling at that one half
minute mark, and it goes at a steady speed while the red car goes even faster.
And then the blue car goes faster, but at a steady speed while the red car continues
to gain speed all the time.
So the blue car is going at sort of a jerky speed, first just stop for half a minute,
then it goes at a steady speed for a half a minute, then it goes at a faster speed for
a half a minute, then a faster steady speed for a half a minute, but it never changes
smoothly in speed.
So this approximation will of course leave the blue car well behind the red car, since
at every moment it's going slower, it's well behind.
But you do know that the red car traveled then more than the blue car traveled.
But the blue car's travel is easy to compute because that's the method we already knew,
where it stays steady, steady speed, then a steady speed.
OK, so how far did the blue car travel?
It traveled at this long tedious sum.
OK, well we could do the exact same thing again, which we will just because this is what you
do in math.
You see, you actually carry these things through.
This is a case where during that first minute, during the first half minute, suppose the
blue car is going at the speed that the red car attained only at the end.
In other words, the blue car is always going faster than the red car, and the red car just
goes at the same speed just right at the very end.
So here the blue car starts right in going one mile per minute, 60 miles per hour, while
the red car starts at a stop and gradually increases to one mile per minute after a half
a minute.
So the blue car is going at the steady but very fast speed, the red car is gaining speed,
and at the very end it's going at the same speed.
OK, now this will give us, when we do the same computation, the same tedious computation
of saying suppose that the car just went at a steady speed for half a minute, then another
steady speed for half a minute, another steady speed for half a minute.
When we do that computation, we see that in this case the blue car went 10.5 miles.
And that distance has to be more than the red car actually went.
So we've boxed in the actual distance traveled by the red car by saying getting one number
that's too big and one number that's too small, OK?
Now how can we get two other numbers that are boxing in the correct answer but closer?
Well, you know, you were here for the last lecture, so you know what we're going to do.
We're going to take smaller increments of time.
Instead of half a minute increments, let's take 10th of a minute increments of time.
And what we're doing in these 10th of a minute increments is the same computation as before.
We're saying suppose that we were traveling in a car that went at a steady speed of the
slowest speed that the red car ever traveled in during that interval of time.
And then it jumps up to the slowest speed that the red car travels for the next interval
of time, the next 10th of a minute interval of time.
And we just continue this process all the way down.
Here we go.
You can see this, for example, at the between 0.3 and 0.4 minutes, we're saying suppose
we went at a steady 0.6 miles per minute, whereas actually the red car at the end of
that interval was going 0.8 miles per minute.
And we add these up.
This is a long addition process because you see if we go between 0 minutes and 3 minutes,
look at how many intervals of time we have to have.
We have 30 intervals of time.
And when we add them up, you see this dot, dot, dot?
That means we got bored with this.
And so we didn't want to put all those in there.
But the process is simple.
That for every one of these 10th of an interval of time, we take the speed times the time
plus speed times time plus speed times time.
We add them all together, we get 8.7 miles.
But you can guess what we're going to do next.
But we're going to do it anyway, regardless whether you want to or not.
We're now going to assume that we go at steady speeds, but this time at the fastest speed
that the red car ever attained during that interval.
So it's a little faster than the red car.
But it's not that much faster because it's now a 10th of a minute.
So it's only during a 10th of a minute.
So the red car didn't change speed that much during a 10th of a minute.
And we do the same process again.
And here it is.
And each time, let's look at a typical time here.
This time we're assuming we went at 0.8 miles per minute during the interval 0.3 to 0.4.
Whereas in fact, the red car only went at 0.8 at the very last instant.
So here we go.
We add up these 10 times 3, 30 little increments of time.
We see how far we went.
And we realize that the red car actually traveled less than this computation that we would do
for the car traveling in that jerky motion.
Well now you can see that we're boxing in the actual distance traveled.
We're boxing it in so that the distance that we've now seen in the previous slide, we saw
that the distance traveled was more than 8.7 miles.
And here we see by actually doing this addition that it travels less than 9.3 miles.
Now suppose then we just continue this process.
And we continue the process by dividing the time between the 0 minute mark and the 3 minute
mark into finer and finer intervals of time.
So instead of doing just a tenth of a minute, we could do hundreds of a minute.
This would be amazing.
That's 300 multiplications in additions.
But we could do that.
I mean, it'd be boring.
Right?
It would be boring.
For example, a computer could do.
And we could actually get a number.
And that's what this long expression means.
All it says is that we'd look at the first interval of time.
And this is the speed that we attained at the end of that first interval.
Delta T, remember, it just stands for a little tiny bit of time.
Think of a hundredth of a minute or a thousandth of a minute.
And then you can see that this is just a general formula v of something says the speed
at that time.
So v of 3 delta T just says at the time when you look at your watch and it's like 3,000s,
how fast are you going?
6,000s.
And then you multiply it by this delta T time.
You add them up.
This is what we've been doing before many times.
And you add all these up and you'd get an approximation to the distance traveled.
By taking more and more divisions, that is, smaller and smaller delta T's, you get one
answer.
You never get the right answer.
By doing this computation, you will never get exactly the answer.
But we box it in.
We say it's less than something and bigger than something.
And those numbers are getting closer and closer to each other.
And they're telling us in the aggregate that the exact distance that you traveled, if you
keep the speedometer exactly at v of T equals 2T, if you keep the speed exactly at 2 times
the time, then you will have traveled precisely 9 miles during that 3-minute interval of time.
So this process, the whole thing I've described here is the second idea of calculus, the integral.
Think of the reason for the word integral is that it is integrating a lot of little pieces.
In this case, it's integrating the concept of velocity.
Velocity is the instantaneous speed that you're going at every moment, and somehow you combine
those together to accumulate the total distance traveled.
Leibniz was one of the inventors of calculus, and his original name for this process was
calculus sumatorius sum.
So it was a sum.
So it's always this long addition problem that you think of when you think of the integral.
So this is the integral.
Once again, just as we did with the derivative, remember when we had the derivative, we said,
well, what's the derivative at this moment?
What's the derivative at this moment?
What's the derivative at this moment?
And we saw a general pattern.
Well, here we'll do the same thing again.
Suppose that this car is always traveling at the rate of V of t equals 2t.
We already computed how far it went in three minutes.
It went nine miles.
Well, we could do that same summing process and stop anywhere.
We could stop at two minutes.
We could stop at one minute.
We could stop at 1.5 minutes.
We could stop at 2.3 minutes.
We could stop at any point in time at all.
And we would see how far we would have traveled between time 0 and that time.
And if we do that, we would get the following answers.
And I will not subject you to the infinite long addition process that is the integral.
But here is the answer.
Between 0 and 0.5, if you just accumulated the distance you traveled during that first half
minute, always looking at your speedometer being twice as much,
you will find that you went a quarter of a mile, 0.25 miles.
If you looked at the interval of time between 0 and 1,
you went exactly one mile.
If you look at the interval of time between 0 and 1.5 minutes,
you will have gone precisely 2.25 miles.
Now, I hope that when you're looking at these, you're thinking to yourself,
is there a pattern?
Can I see a pattern in these numbers or are they just random?
Can you see a pattern?
From 0 to 2, it's 4, 4 miles.
To accomplish getting this number 4 from 0 to 2, it was an infinite process,
the process of dividing the interval of time into smaller and smaller pieces
and then adding them up.
From 0 to 3, that's the one we did.
That was 9 miles.
Can we see the pattern here?
The pattern is that the distance traveled
is the square of the time interval that we're taking.
The last time from 0 to that time, it's the square.
From 0.5, it's 0.25.
The square of a half is a quarter.
Square of 1 is 1.
Square of 1.5 is 2.25.
Square of 2 is 4.
Square of 3 is 9.
And so here, we can accumulate the answer into one formula that says that the position
where we will be after t minutes, if we keep this speedometer always at the 2t mark,
will be exactly t squared.
So what we want to remember from this lecture, the word for the day, is integral.
And the method for getting the integral was to divide the time into finer and finer pieces
and then do a process of multiplication, namely the elapsed time times the speed,
plus elapsed time times speed, plus elapsed time times speed.
And we have this very long, tedious addition process.
But then we do the same process again with smaller increments of time to get a finer approximation,
a closer approximation.
And for the accumulated evidence of all of those approximations is a single number, which
is the integral.
These two ideas, as we've seen them presented today and the previous lecture, the thing
to think about from these two ideas is that, first of all, they're related to each other.
Both of them are telling us things about the same situation, namely a car moving on a straight
road.
And indeed, that insight, the fact that they both arise from the same situation, is going
to be the key to the fundamental theorem of calculus, which is the topic of the next lecture.
It's the idea that connects the process of the derivative with the process of the integral.
I wanted to tell one story about how this process of integration comes up in real life.
And that is when I was in college, we once had an event, and they may still have them
today called car rallies.
Do you have car rallies?
And what this was is that you would get in a car, and they would give you a map, and
they would give you instructions.
And they would say, go for 20 minutes at 30 miles per hour eastward.
And then when you get to, you see a barn, then you go for until you see a cow at 30
minutes and so on.
We didn't actually finish this thing, but what it was is that you could actually figure
how far you were going if you used the calculus to compute the rate of change and then the
amount of time passing.
So the idea of integration is one that has great utility in real life.
But the actual value of integration, we will see in many subsequent lectures.
And that is that if you take other objects such as the sphere, and you want to compute
how much volume the sphere has, you can think about dividing it up into little tiny pieces
and adding them together.
So the process by which you computed the distance traveled, which was dividing time
into little pieces and adding them together, how far we went in each little piece.
That same process, abstracted, is exactly the same process that we use to compute things
such as the volume of a sphere or the amount of money that accumulates in an account that's
earning interest.
So when you abstract these ideas, like the derivative and the integral, that's when
they have their real force and their real value.
So next time is the fundamental theorem of calculus and in future times applications
of integral and derivative to many settings.
