During the last two lectures, we were introduced to the two fundamental ideas of calculus.
In lecture two, we talked about the derivative.
And the derivative, remember, was the procedure by which we took a car,
and knowing where the car was at each moment, we deduced how fast the car was going at every instant.
That was the procedure of taking the position at one moment,
and then seeing where it was in a slightly future moment, subtracting the two to see how far we'd gone,
and then dividing by the elapsed time to get the average speed over that short interval of time,
and then taking smaller and smaller intervals of time to converge to one exact speed that we called the instantaneous speed.
So that was the derivative, lecture two.
Lecture three was the integral.
And remember, the procedure for the integral took us from the velocity of the car.
If we knew where our speedometer was at every single instant,
it was a procedure by which we could deduce how far we've traveled.
So the integral involved looking at our speed and making an estimate about how far we went
by saying, suppose we knew our speed, for example, at every second,
and then we'd say, okay, we could assume that our speed was constant over each second,
and then just take that as a sample of our speed times that second, see how far we went during that second,
and then the next second see what our velocity was and assume that we proceeded at that constant velocity for the second,
even though it wasn't quite true.
But that gave us an approximation to how far we went, if we knew how fast we were going at every time,
and taking increasingly finer intervals of time would eventually converge to the exact distance that we traveled.
So that was the integral.
So lecture three was the integral, lecture two was the derivative.
Today, the theme of the lecture is to put these two ideas together.
Now, you notice that the way I have presented these two ideas, it's obvious that they're related to each other,
because they're both referring to the same physical event of a car driving down a road.
It would be possible to present these two ideas, the derivative and the integral, in totally different realms.
And in fact, we will see them interpreted in totally different ways that don't have to do with moving cars at all.
And if you present them in those alternative ways, it's more difficult to see the connection between the two.
So I intentionally presented them both as having to do with a car moving down a road for the purpose of this lecture being hopefully clear and simple.
Because what I'm going to say in this lecture is that those two procedures, the derivative procedure on the one hand,
that takes us from position to speed, and the integral procedure that takes us from speed to position are opposite sides of the same coin.
And what we're going to talk about today is precisely in what sense are they opposites.
So this is the relationship between the derivative and the integral is the most fundamental observation in calculus.
And its name is the fundamental theorem of calculus.
This was the theorem for which both Newton and Leibniz were famous for making this observation, and understanding that is the goal of the day.
So let's begin by thinking about our car moving in the road and taking two viewpoints of that activity, the static view and the dynamic view.
A static view is we see where the car was when we started the trip, we see where the car was at the end of the trip.
If we want to know how far we traveled, we just say where are we at the end, where are we at the beginning, subtract the two, that's how far we went.
Now let's take the same situation, but take the dynamic view.
The dynamic view is saying, well, we got there.
We just didn't end up there.
We actually proceeded to get there by virtue of having traveled at a certain speed during the intervening time.
So if we start here, we drive and maybe we go faster and then slower and faster and slower, and we end up at some other location.
This dynamic view also allows us to figure out how far we went.
That's the integral.
So the integral is the dynamic view saying if you know how fast you're going at every moment, you can add up those little tiny bits of progress you make and get the total distance traveled.
Dynamic view, static view.
If you know where you are at every instant, it's very easy to know where you are, how far you've traveled during an hour, say.
You just say where are you at the end of the hour.
So now we're going to put these two together.
Putting them together says there are two ways to compute the distance that you've gone during this hour.
One way is if you have a function that tells you where you are at each moment, you simply subtract.
Where are you at the 60-minute mark and where were you when you started?
You subtract.
That's how far you went.
The other way is this much more complicated and elaborate method of the integral.
That is, we can break the time into little tiny bits.
We can say how fast we're going at every second.
We can multiply how far we went in each second and add up that whole infinite process and converge and get the answer.
So those two are two different procedures for getting the same answer.
Therefore, they are equal to each other.
So let me say it a different way.
If we have a position function where at every moment of time, as we're traveling along, remember how we did this in lecture two,
we're traveling along and we have this incredibly precise mileage markers on the side of the road where it's down to the millionth of an inch.
At every instant, you know exactly where you are as you're driving down the road.
That gives you a position function for every time you know where you are.
That position function entails a velocity function.
It's implicit.
If you know where you are at every second, you also know how fast you're traveling at every second.
That's the procedure of the derivative.
Because remember, derivative took you from knowing where you are at every instant to being able to compute how fast you're going at every instant.
So there are two ways to compute an integral.
Two ways to compute an integral.
That is to say, suppose that you were given a function that told you how fast you're going at every moment.
And you want to know how far you went in an hour.
There are two ways you can do it.
One way is you could do the integral.
That is divide the interval of time up into small pieces.
See how far you went in each little tiny piece and add them all up.
That's a very laborious process.
And it requires infinitely, to get it exactly right, you'd have to do it infinitely many times with smaller and smaller increments of time.
But the alternative method is, can you find a position function that would generate that precise velocity function that you were given?
You see, every position function generates a velocity function.
Well, suppose we could go backwards.
Suppose we were given a velocity function and we had some clever way of saying, oh, that's the velocity function of a position function of a different sort.
If you could find the position function, it would be very simple to do the process of seeing how far you went.
Because you would just say, where am I at the end?
Where am I at the beginning?
And subtract.
Now, I think that this will all be made clear with an example or two to reinforce it.
So let's start with some examples.
So let's go back to the examples that we had during lecture two and three and see if we can see the relationship.
In lecture two, one of the examples we considered was where the car at every moment was at mileage marker T squared.
So that means you looked at your watch in minutes and at every minute you said, I'm going to take that time multiplied by itself and that's where I'll position the car.
So that was the position function, T squared.
And so at every moment, here's the time in the middle.
You can see that as we complete the chart at time one, the position we were at time one was one times one was one.
And going down the chart, no matter what time, even like the square root of two, we knew exactly where we were.
Square root of two times itself is two.
1.5, square 1.5, you get 2.25, square two, you get four, and so on.
This chart here tells us where we are at every moment of time.
And if you recall in lecture two, we saw that there was a pattern in doing this derivative procedure at every moment.
And the pattern was that at every time when we did this procedure, remember the procedure was that we took the position at a given time.
For example, suppose we're talking about the time 1.5.
What we did is we really said, well, where are we a little beyond 1.5 minute mark?
Suppose we were at 1.51, and we said, where are we precisely at 1.51?
And then we said, well, OK, we're at a certain place, namely the square of 1.51.
And where were we at 1.5?
We were at 2.25, and we subtracted the two to see how far we went.
We divided by a hundredth of a minute, because that's the elapsed time, the 1.51.
It differs from 1.50 by 0.01.
We divided to get the average speed over that incredibly short period of time.
And then we saw that those averages of speed as we picked smaller increments of time all tended toward the number two times the time.
It was always two times the time.
We did it precisely for the time 1, and I just told you that if you did it for the other ones, you'd get the same answer.
You get twice the time.
And you can see we can fill out this chart here using the derivative procedure.
We can fill out this chart over here, where the speed is always just twice the time.
Now, suppose, though, we didn't at first know this.
We didn't have the whole picture of both the position function and the velocity function.
But suppose somebody asked us, how far would I travel if I kept my speedometer always at 2 times t?
Suppose I kept my speedometer always at 2 times t.
As I drove down the road, I went faster and faster and faster, always 2 times the time.
At four minutes, I'm going eight miles per minute really fast.
And then they ask you a question like, well, how far would you have traveled during the first three minutes of travel?
If you know that the position function that generates the speed to t is t squared as it is.
If this is the function which, if you take the derivative to it, you get 2t,
then it's very easy to see how far you went during the first three minutes.
Because you see where you were at three minutes, nine, you're at the nine mile marker.
You see where you were at the zero minute mark, you're at zero.
And so how far did you travel?
Nine minus zero, nine miles.
So the fundamental theorem of calculus is telling us that we can transform one problem into another problem.
That's the insight of the fundamental theorem.
It says that if you're trying to take an integral, which involves dividing up things into little pieces and adding this long process of addition,
another way to do it is to find a function whose derivative is the velocity function you're trying to deal with.
It turns out that taking derivatives is a rather simple and mechanical procedure.
By taking derivatives, I mean if you're given a position function like t squared,
we saw that the velocity function at each moment was 2 times t just by looking at a table.
And we did one after another.
We did a few examples and we sort of saw the pattern.
But in reality, there's a much, much easier way to take that derivative
so that if you have a position function that's given to you by some equation,
it's rather easy to find the equation of where your speedometer is going to be at each moment.
It turns out that procedure, the taking of the derivative, the finding the speed from the position,
turns out to be a rather simple kind of process.
Whereas taking the integral is a rather difficult process.
It involves dividing all these things up and adding them up, even with computers, it would take a long time to do that.
Whereas if you can then look at the function backwards, so you're trying to do this integral,
you're trying to see how far you went if you know how fast you're going.
Instead of starting dividing up time, instead you say to yourself,
ah, can I think of a position function whose derivative is the velocity function
that's the challenge I'm trying to deal with at this moment?
And if you can do that, if you can find this position function,
then it's a very easy matter to find out how far you went.
You just see where you were at one time and you subtract where you were at the other time
to see what the total distances that you traveled.
Okay, so for example, if I wanted to ask you what is the integral from time 1 to time 3 of the function 2t?
In other words, I'm saying to you, suppose you're traveling in a car whose speed is always 2t
and from time 1 to time 3, I want to know how far you've gone.
Well, one thing you could do is you could break up the time intervals in little pieces,
see how fast you went at each moment, multiply how far you went in each tiny interval of time,
add them all together, that's the integral procedure.
You could do that and you'd get an answer.
A quicker way would be to say, ah, I know that a position function whose derivative is 2t is t squared.
And at t squared, I met mileage marker 9 at time 3 and I met mileage marker 1 at time 1.
Therefore, the distance I've traveled between those two times is a subtraction problem,
a very easy problem, 9 minus 1 is 8.
You went exactly 8 miles.
Let me give you one more example of where you might want to find a, how far you've traveled for a particular function.
Let's suppose we consider the function v of t equals 3t squared.
So this is just another example of a velocity function.
Suppose that you looked at your speedometer and you always kept your speed at exactly 3t squared miles per minute.
It's really fast.
Okay, but for hypothetical purposes, fine.
So v of t equals 3t squared.
Now, if I ask you how far have you traveled between the time, say, t equals 1 and t equals 4
in that three minute interval between time t equals 1 and t equals 4.
Two ways to do it.
One is to do this very long and tedious addition problem, breaking up the time interval between one minute and four minute into little pieces.
And here I've just shown you a few of the steps of addition that you might do to approximate that distance traveled.
You can see this long and complicated sum.
However, suppose I tell you that the position function p of t equals t cubed generates the velocity function v of t equals 3t squared, which happens to be the case.
And we will see that it's the case in lecture number seven.
But as soon as you know that, then to figure out how far you went between time t equals 1 and t equals 4 is an absolutely trivial matter because you just say, well, where was I at time t equals 4?
To know that, you simply look at the equation.
P of t equals t cubed means that at time four, you are in position four times four times four, which is 64.
64 miles down the road.
At time one, you are in position one times one times one, just one.
So the total distance you traveled is 64 minus one equals 63 miles.
So what we've done is taken this extremely long and complicated addition problem and reduced it to an almost instant one subtraction.
That's the power of the fundamental theorem of calculus.
Well, I thought that it might be a good break at this point since this theorem is the fundamental insight and connection between the two ideas of calculus, the derivative and the integral.
That it might be a pleasant diversion to talk a little bit about the history of calculus and how it came about.
Calculus was an invention of really many people over centuries.
There were ideas of calculus from ancient Greek times and it proceeded to be developed throughout the centuries up until the time of Newton and Leibniz.
But Sir Isaac Newton was a mathematician and a scientist and he was the first person who is credited with actually developing calculus.
As I say, it really is an incremental development and many other mathematicians had part of the idea.
In fact, Newton's teacher by the name of Barrow actually said the fundamental theorem of calculus in Barrow's writing but somehow didn't realize the significance of it and didn't actually highlight it.
But he was Newton's teacher and presumably Newton learned things from him.
Fermat invented some of the early concepts associated with calculus of finding derivatives and finding maximum and minimum of equations which we will deal with in lecture number nine.
And many mathematicians contributed to both the development of the derivative and the development of the integral.
Well, Newton was apparently sort of pathologically averse to controversy.
He really didn't like to be involved in controversy and because of his aversion to controversy, he was involved in probably, no doubt, the biggest controversy in the history of mathematics about priority of who first made a discovery in mathematics.
So it's ironic that the person who was so averse to it actually ended up being embroiled in the biggest one in history and it was cause and effect.
It wasn't just an accident, it was his aversion that caused the controversy.
The reason that it caused it is that Newton actually developed the concept of calculus during the middle of the 1660s.
In 1664, 65, 66, in that period of time, he asserts that he invented the basic ideas of calculus.
And in fact, in 1669, he wrote a paper on it but wouldn't publish it.
In 1671, he wrote another paper on calculus and didn't publish it and another in 1676 and didn't publish it.
In fact, these papers were actually published.
The one he wrote in 1669 was published in 1711, so that's what, 42 years later.
The one he published, he wrote in 1671 was published in 1736, nine years after he was dead.
And then the paper he wrote in 1676 was published in 1704.
So none of his works on calculus were published until into the 18th century.
But he did circulate them to friends and acquaintances, so it was known that he actually had this.
This wasn't just hearsay and he used the techniques of calculus in his scientific work.
But Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, independently invented calculus and he invented calculus somewhere in the middle of the 1670s.
So he said that he thought of the ideas in about 1674 and then actually published the ideas in 1684, ten years later.
And his paper on calculus was called A New Method for Maxima and Minima, as well as Tangents, which is not obstructed by fractional or irrational quantities.
So this was the title for his work.
It was six pages and was extremely obscure, apparently very difficult to understand this.
And one thing that you have to understand, by the way, is that at that time, what we today think of as absolutely fundamental to even starting to think about calculus,
some of those ideas simply didn't exist at all.
For example, the idea of function.
We've talked about the function, you know, at every time we know where we are, at every time there's a speed.
Those are examples of function.
That concept itself wasn't actually formulated until the 1690s after calculus was invented.
So people were a little vague on these concepts.
And later we will talk in much more detail about the process of actually going to the limit that we've talked about sort of loosely.
In other words, when we've said we take these smaller increments of time and we divide by the lapse time to see the instantaneous speed.
And then we say, well, it's not quite the instantaneous speed, but as you get smaller and smaller delta T's, it gets closer to the instantaneous speed.
And so in the end, that's the instantaneous speed.
We've talked about it in that sort of loose way.
Well, Newton and Leibniz didn't understand it in any more formal way at that time.
This was a big problem for all of the people in that century because they were unclear about such concepts as infinite processes.
That was a huge stumbling block for them.
They were worried about infinitesimal lengths of time.
Both Newton and Leibniz would think about infinitesimal lengths of time.
How far does something go in an infinitesimal length of time?
Well, that kind of thinking leads to all sorts of paradoxes, including Zeno's paradoxes.
Those are involved.
I wanted to read you a couple of quotes about Newton and Leibniz.
One is a very famous couplet from a poem by Alexander Pope.
These are the kinds of things one would like to have written about oneself.
Nature and nature's laws lay hidden night.
God said, let Newton be, and all was light.
So this was Alexander Pope on Newton.
And Leibniz, the controversy between Newton and Leibniz started in the later part of the 1600s.
1699 was a date associated with a start of a tirade, which just went downhill.
It was a tremendous controversy.
But Leibniz had this to say about Newton.
And I've served on many committees reading letters of recommendation for mathematicians for positions.
And I can assure you that there are huge numbers of mathematicians who are the best three mathematicians in the world in any given field.
But if a sentence like Leibniz's sentence on Newton appeared in a letter, one would take notice.
Leibniz said about Newton, taking mathematics from the beginning of the world to the time when Newton lived,
what he has done is much the better part.
And this was Leibniz and talking about Newton.
But when Newton began to realize that Leibniz had the ideas of calculus, which he began to realize, Newton began to realize in the 1770s,
Newton's response to make sure that he got credit for calculus was to write a letter to Leibniz in which he encoded a sentence in a Latin sentence.
And I will, well, I won't attempt the Latin, but I'll attempt just a few words of the Latin.
It starts out, data, equation, quote, cunque, and so on.
It's a short Latin sentence whose translation is having any given equation involving never so many flowing quantities to find the fluctuations and vice versa.
This was a sentence which encapsulated his Newton's thinking about derivatives.
And what he did is he took that sentence and he just took the letters, individual letters, a, c, d, e, and he put them just in order.
He said there are six a's, two c's, one d, 13 e's, two f's.
He put them in order and that was what he included in this letter to Leibniz.
To establish his priority for the calculus.
And I read you the sentence which means very little to anybody.
Even a mathematician wouldn't know from the actual translation of the sentence exactly what it was that he had done.
So he tried to establish his priority in that fashion, but then there was accusations that Leibniz had read some of these manuscripts of Newton's work before he got the ideas.
And there were counter, since Leibniz had published first, people who were citing with Leibniz said that Newton had stolen the ideas from Leibniz.
And it was a huge mess which incidentally led to the British mathematics being very retarded for the next century because they didn't take advantage of the wonderful developments of calculus that were taking place on continental Europe.
So in any case, we've now seen the fundamental theorem of calculus which connects the two basic ideas.
And in the next series of lectures, we will develop the idea of derivative for five of the lectures and really see all its implications.
And then we will, or some of its implications in different settings.
And then we will have the same series of lectures on the integral in the next series of lectures.
So we'll look forward to exploring these wonderful seminal ideas at greater length in the coming days.
