We already met the derivative in lecture 2. Remember, the derivative was telling us about how we could measure instantaneous rate of speed when a car was moving on a straight road.
Well, that is an example of change, of change in position with respect to time.
But there are lots of different changes that we're interested in understanding in real life, such as the change of population over time, or the change in economic conditions over time.
And it turns out that the derivative, using the same methods that we use to discuss the rate at which a car moving on a road changes, we can also use it to measure the change in all these other varying quantities.
And often the way that we can depict a change in quantity and visualize it is through the use of a graph.
And to show some examples of that, let's look at a couple of graphs.
The first graph here is the graph of the population of the world during the last century, from 1900 to the year 2000.
And you can see this upward trend, and in fact, if you extrapolate that upward trend of the graph, you would see that it's a trend that will not continue for too long.
Here's another graph of the Dow Jones average over time.
You can see this sort of jaggedy up and down motion, but that has a global trend as well.
So you're familiar with graphs as representing change and representing how quantity is varying over time.
But what we'd like to do now is to look at it in more specificity and see if we can then see how to use the derivative to explain and understand that concept of change in a more detailed fashion.
So let's return then to the generating concept of derivative that we had before, namely our car moving on a straight road, and look at it from a graphical point of view.
So this next graph here shows an example of what might happen when you are driving on a road.
It shows that the position in miles is indicated on the up and down axis of the graph, and then the horizontal axis is representing time.
So all it's saying is at any time, it indicates where it is that you are at that moment.
So let's look at this graph globally and see what happened.
So here we have a car, and let's just think of it this way as this is the car, and I will follow this graph so that you can see how that graph is representing the motion of the car.
So here we start at the beginning of the road. Let's think of it as starting at home.
So you start at home, and you drive here, you drive forward, drive forward, drive forward, and you drive to work which is three miles away.
You see that at three miles away right here, and it takes you three minutes, you go very fast because you're eager to get to work.
So here you are, and you go three miles, there you are at work, and you decide work isn't so great.
So you turn right around and immediately go backwards, and this now is a case going from here to here, you're heading back toward home.
So you're going backwards, and perhaps you're going to pick up something to eat.
So you come back here, all this is on one straight road by the way.
You're not, even though the graph is moving from side to side, it's just indicating positions on one straight road.
So now here then after six minutes, you've returned to this fast food establishment, you get something to eat, and head back toward work.
So here you're heading back toward work, heading forward, back toward work, but after going about halfway toward work, you decide you've had enough of work, it's time to go home.
So you turn around and return backwards, and after ten minutes, you're back home.
In fact, if we continue down the edge of the graph, you can see you actually overshoot and go back toward somebody else's home.
Okay, so this is an example of how a graph tells you your positions at every time and shows what it records information about a moving object.
But can we look at this graph and be more specific about how we were moving?
What information is in it?
For example, can we see how quickly we were moving at different times?
You see, this is showing us where we are at different times, and the steepness of the graph is saying that we're changing our position at a faster rate than if the graph were less steep.
Let's be more specific and go to another example.
Suppose that we had a different graph of position versus time, but this time we're going at a steady rate.
A steady rate corresponds to a straight line because you increase your position, in this case, one mile for every minute you pass.
So it is a straight line, and the steepness of that line is corresponding to the speed.
In this case, the steepness is one to one, one mile per minute, and your rate of speed would be one mile per minute.
If your position graph were a straight line, but steeper, then this indicates that you're going at the rate of two miles for each minute.
So we have the concept that steepness of the graph corresponds to how fast you're going.
Well, the actual graphs of position versus time weren't just straight lines, they had curves in them.
The reason for the curves is that sometimes your car, instead of just going at a steady speed, sometimes it was speeding up and changing its speed.
So it went slower here and then faster later.
So this is recorded by the idea that at various times the graph changes in its steepness.
But we know how to deal with that.
Remember, when we talked about the derivative, how do we talk about the speed of the car at an instant?
The method was that if we were interested in this particular time, we would say, well, I don't know exactly how fast I'm going at that instant,
but I do know how fast I am going if I just look at a moment a little bit later, which we call delta x, a little bit later,
and then we could compute how fast I went on average between that original moment and the moment a little bit later.
That was the generating fraction for the derivative.
And then I took a time that was even closer to my given moment, and I did the same thing, found an average speed, and I continued on in this way until I found a limiting number,
which was the instantaneous speed at that moment.
Notice that from the point of view of the graph, what we did is we had lines that originally went between two points of the graph,
and then at the end they converged to a line that was just tangent to the graph.
So let's see this on this example.
So here I'm holding a position versus time graph.
And here, let's suppose that at some time here, like right here, I am traveling along, and I say, OK, I want to know how fast I'm going right at this moment.
Right at this moment.
Well, I'd say, OK, I'll pick a time in the future and see the slope of the line between this point and this point,
and then you have to tell me the steepness of this bar tells me how fast I'm going on average between those two moments of time.
And then I pick a point closer, and I get a different steepness, and closer I get a different steepness, and closer and closer and closer.
And pretty soon when I look closer and closer, I'm not changing much, and pretty soon when I look closer, I'm just getting the slope of the tangent line,
the line that just grazes.
So the derivative of the function is telling me how steep the line is that just grazes the curve.
And as you see, if I move to a different point, the grazing point changes, and in fact, if I just sort of roll it along,
you'll see that the slope of the tangent line is changing, and it's always indicating how fast I'm going instantaneously at that point.
So this is the...
So what we're exploring here is the relationship between the derivative of the function and the slope of the tangent line.
So here is another example of showing that when we took the slope here of the line between two points on the graph,
how as we move that point down closer and closer to the point x, we get closer to the slope of this dotted tangent line.
There it is.
Now, an interesting thing about a curve, when you're moving along smoothly, you get a nice smooth curve of your positions.
And this smooth curve, and think of it, you're familiar with smooth curves like a circle, you know, a nice smooth kind of curve.
What happens when you look at these smooth curves really close instead of looking at them from a distance?
If you take a circle and you look at it from a distance close, you see a curving line.
But what happens when you get really close to it?
Well, let's look at this example on this microscopic view of a piece of paper.
So here we have first a picture of just a photograph of a curve on a piece of paper drawn by a pencil.
And then this picture shows the same curve where you've magnified it and you see it at a certain level of magnification.
Now look at it at an even higher level of magnification.
Well, you can see at this level of magnification, it looks silly.
Because what you really are seeing is the paper at that magnification looks like logs of wood on top of each other.
It doesn't look anything like a line.
And you can see that the pencil is now a whole, fills up a whole river of pencil.
Well, so we don't really mean to look at a piece of paper magnified.
What we really mean is the abstraction of looking at the circle magnified.
When we take the circle and we magnify it, what we're really doing is stretching the coordinates and trying to see what it looks like
if we then drew that magnified picture again at the larger level of resolution.
And when we do that, we get these kinds of pictures.
Here we see our curve with the tangent line just grazing it at one point.
And remember the derivative is telling us the slope, the steepness of that line.
The slope of the line is the ratio of how high it goes to how much it rises versus how much over you go.
So if we magnify that picture again, you can see that the tangent line becomes closer.
It still just grazes at one point, but the curve is just barely off that straight line, just barely off.
And then if we magnify it yet again, it's almost exactly on.
And in fact, at this next level of magnification, the two lines simply look the same.
Now, we're familiar with this in real life, by the way.
We're familiar with the idea of looking at a curve up close in a magnified view looks straight.
And that is because we live on a big curve, right?
We live on the Earth.
If you're on the ocean and you're in a calm day in the middle of the ocean on an ocean liner
and you look out at the water around you, you don't have the impression of something that is immediately curved.
If you look at the distant horizon or you see a boat going off the edge,
you do eventually recognize that there's a curve involved.
But if you just looked around you, the immediate area around you on this boat, it looks exactly flat.
It looks exactly straight.
And that's the concept of magnification and why it is that the derivative then is just saying this.
If you have a curved line and you take a point on it and you look very, very, very, very close
and you magnify, magnify, magnify, the curve of the line disappears and it becomes just straight.
And then all the derivative is measuring is the steepness of that straight line, the magnification of the curve line.
So that is the concept of the derivative and its relationship to a smooth curve.
So let's go back then and look at our graph of position versus time and use this relationship of the derivative as it means two things now.
It both means the speed, the instantaneous speed, that's what we talked about in lecture two.
But now we see that it also means something else.
It means the steepness of the tangent line at each point.
Those two things are the same quantity and the same number.
So, for example, here in this curve, if we look at the time one, we see that the tangent line, see, during this period, your travel is almost at a steady speed.
So the tangent line just lies on the curve.
And the slope of that tangent line, the slope meaning how steeply it rises over how much time elapsed, that fraction is just equal to one.
Here at time three, when you arrived at work, okay, you just stay there for a moment.
But at that moment, you were not traveling either forward or backward.
If you magnified that very peak of the curve, you would see just a horizontal flat line because that's a time when you're neither going forward nor backward.
As time passes, here at time four, you're traveling backward.
Incidentally, traveling backward corresponds to the slope of the line going downward as you move as time passes.
And when we measure speed, you actually measure what's called velocity, which is speed with a plus or minus sign because it tells you what direction you're going.
So when you're going backward, then you say that your speed is minus one mile per minute.
And the slope of this line is minus, you see, if we see how much does your position change for a one minute change in time.
Well, this line here, the tangent line that's coming down at this 45-degree angle downward, if I drew this little triangle,
I would see that you lose one mile.
So it's minus one mile for one minute of a lapse time.
So that means that your rate of your velocity at this point is minus one mile per minute.
So here we can go and here at this point, once again, you're stopped.
For that moment, you're stopped, your speed is zero, and we can put all of this information together by recording how fast we're going at every minute.
In other words, at every single moment, we can measure how fast we're going by looking at the graph by saying how steep is the graph.
And that gives us a number. That gives us the instantaneous speed at that moment.
Well, at this moment, our speed is one, so we can just put a dot for our speed at one.
Here, our speed is zero.
So if we record this graph here is going to be recording the speed at which we're traveling at each moment.
At this point, since the tangent line is horizontal, that means we're going at zero speed.
And therefore, we record that data by putting a dot here at zero to indicate that our speed is zero.
So this other graph in the different color is going to be a graph that tells how fast we're going at every instant.
At this point, it's the easiest places to look are the places where we're at a peak or a valley because there our speed is zero.
So at all of the places where the position graph is at a peak or a valley, the speed is zero.
So here the speed is zero. Here.
The tangent line is horizontal, so the speed is exactly zero.
Here, the slope is a negative one.
You see it's going downward at one, so our velocity is recorded that that point has one value.
The instantaneous speed is minus one.
And so we put a dot there to indicate that it's minus one.
For all of the points between here and here, since this is a straight line, for all of those points, your speed is the same.
For all of those points, you're going one mile a minute.
Therefore, the velocity graph, as you see, is just a horizontal line.
It's just a horizontal line because you stay at a steady speed of one mile per minute for that entire time.
And then it descends down. You slow down until you get to zero.
So looking at the graph allows us to interpret what is happening in the car's behavior.
But in fact, we can look at this in even more detail and understand when you're speeding up and when you're slowing down.
Not only how fast you're going at an individual instant.
The speed you're going at an individual instant, remember, corresponds to the slope of the tangent line.
But we can also look at this graph and see when are we speeding up and when are we slowing down.
That's acceleration or deceleration.
So in cases like this, well, we're neither accelerating or decelerating.
We're staying at a constant speed.
But here at the top, we're going at zero miles per hour.
And here we were going at one mile per minute.
So we slow down between here and here.
So this curve of our position curve heading cupped downward indicates that we're slowing down.
Because, remember, slope corresponds to speed.
Steeper corresponds to faster.
So if here we're going very fast and then the tangent line becomes less and less and less, then what's happening?
You're slowing down.
You're slowing down.
So let's look at what kind of a position graph corresponds to speeding up.
Well, suppose here we're going at zero miles per hour at the bottom of this trough.
And then we increase our speed here because the tangent line you see as we roll it along becomes steeper.
That means we're going faster.
So that means a cupping in the upward direction corresponds to acceleration speeding up.
A cupping in the downward direction corresponds to slowing down.
So we can look at the graph and deduce all of this information about what the car actually did by understanding the relationship
between the derivative, which is the slope of the tangent line, and the position graph.
Well, let's think about our whole journey for a moment.
Let's consider the entire journey of what happens over the entire period of a trip.
Suppose this is an example of a position graph, this white graph is a position graph, and you leave the house at one time
and you drive for a while and you arrive at your destination at some later time in the day.
Well, just knowing those two positions and those two times, we can deduce what our average speed was.
But we don't know exactly how fast we were going at the intervening moments.
Indeed, in this particular example, what happened?
First, we started off very slowly.
Why did we start off slowly?
Because the tangent line is almost flat.
And then we speed it up and went quite fast here because look how steep that line is.
That means that the tangent line is rising fast, that corresponds to fast travel.
And then we go up to a place here, well, we sort of stopped for a while.
We overshot our mark.
We went too far.
And then what do we do?
We then slowly came back and eventually arrived at our destination.
So our travel went slowly, then we went fast, and then we slowed and came back and eventually stopped.
Well, our average speed is simply the distance we traveled divided by how long it took us to get there.
Our speed varied during that time, but one of the theorems of calculus called the mean value theorem.
And mean doesn't mean rude and tough.
It means average mean value theorem.
It says that there is some specific moment in time in which your actual instantaneous rate of speed was precisely equal to your average rate of speed over the whole interval.
So let me give you an example of the mean value theorem and how it can be applied in real life.
Suppose you get on the Pennsylvania Turnpike at the beginning of the Pennsylvania Turnpike, and you get a ticket that says, you know, when you get on, you get a piece of paper that says that you got on at a time.
Suppose it's exactly one o'clock that you got in the Pennsylvania Turnpike.
And then you drove to the other end of the Pennsylvania Turnpike, and you slowly pulled up to the toll booth, and you handed in your ticket to that toll booth, and the person looked at the ticket, and here it was two o'clock.
And the toll booth was 220 miles down the road.
So at one o'clock, you arrived at the beginning, and you slowly pulled away from that toll booth, and then you arrived one hour later and 220 miles down the road.
Well, what are they going to do?
First, you pay the toll for the road, and then you pay a traffic ticket.
And the traffic ticket doesn't have to do with the fact you were speeding at the beginning or the end, because you weren't.
You pulled away slowly, and you drove in slowly, but they say, if you averaged 220 miles per hour during that time, then at some time you had to have been traveling 220 miles per hour.
So you were really moving down that toll road.
So this is an example of an application of the mean value theorem in real practical life.
So to summarize, then, when we have a position function, we know that the derivative is equal to the slope of the tangent line.
Previously, we saw that if the position function were t squared, that is, we were always traveling along to see that the position was exactly the square of the time.
We saw that the slope of the tangent line was always two times the time.
Remember that from lecture two?
So the slope here at one is two.
The slope at two is four.
You see, and sure enough, you can see visually that the slopes of these lines, slope at one and a half is three.
And we could actually draw the derivative function, which is 2t, and you can see that it starts here at the origin and goes up, and it tells the slope of the tangent line at each point.
Well, the derivative is of a function, for example, t squared, is telling us the slope of the tangent line at every point, just as it's telling us the speed that we're going at every point, the velocity at every point.
And there's a notation for that.
Originally, if we say p of t is the position function.
For example, p of t equals t squared, Newton, one of the inventors of calculus, had a notation for derivative that's no longer used.
His notation was to simply put a dot on top of the name of the function, like he'd put a dot on the top of the p.
The trouble with that particular notation was that if you had, say, a fly that came and landed on your paper, then it could take a derivative, depending on what it left on the paper.
So this actual notation, although it is still used by some areas of engineering and physics, the more common notation is the notation that was invented by Leibniz.
So Leibniz, the other inventor of calculus, used the notation d over dt of a function equals 2t.
Meaning, and this reminds us, this fractional notation, d over dt, reminds us that the derivative is computed by taking a difference.
Remember, it's a difference where we take where we were at a given time minus where we were at another time, and then we divide by the elapsed time, the difference in the times.
And so this notation actually is a wonderful mnemonic for remembering the definition of the derivative.
There's another definition, another symbol used to denote notation for the derivative, which is simply to put a prime by the letter that's denoting the function.
So if we have a function p of t, position of t equals t squared, then we denote by p prime of t the derivative function 2t, which is telling us the slope of the tangent line at every moment.
So we've seen then the relationship between derivative, which we met before, and graphs of functions. Namely, it's the slope of the tangent line.
