Today, we're going to be talking about taking the concept of derivative and abstracting
it to different dependencies that aren't involving a moving object.
As you recall, the structure of this set of lectures is that we first talked about the
two basic ideas of calculus, the derivative and the integral in lectures two and three,
and then we showed the connection between them in lecture four, and now these sequence
of five lectures that we're involved in now are exploring the derivative and its different
applications.
The last lecture showed that the derivative was related to the slope of the tangent line
of a graph.
But today, we're not going to think about graphs, we're instead going to think about
the fact that derivative is measuring the rate of change.
In this case, we're going to be thinking about rates of change where the objects involved
don't seem to be changing at all.
That's what makes the derivative so important and so interesting because it can be applied
to these apparently static settings.
Let's give an example of this.
If you look at any two quantities that are dependent on each other, for example, let's
take a square, here's a square, its area is dependent on the length of the side.
It's very simple.
The area is the side times the side, that's the area of a square, or another example is
a circle.
If you have a circle here, here's a circle, the area of what's inside the circle is dependent
on the radius, pi r squared is the area of a circle.
Likewise, the circumference of a circle is dependent on the radius.
In fact, if you don't remember that dependence, let me review it for you now, that the dependence
is that there's a particular ratio between the diameter of a circle and its circumference,
and that's the famous number pi.
Remember the number pi?
If you take the diameter of a circle, and I'm going to demonstrate the number pi right
now to you.
This orange ribbon, by the way, the reason it's orange is because I come from the University
of Texas, and the color of University of Texas is burnt orange, orange ribbon.
This diameter, if we circle it around the circle, and I'm starting right here, you see
where that break is, I'm starting right here, and I'm going to go around the circle, and
you'll see how many times the diameter has to go around the circle to give the circumference,
and you see I'm going around, see how well this is working, going around, that's two
times, and here comes the third time around, notice it's very precise, by the way, two
times.
The third time around, you see where I am, I've not quite made it all the way around
the circle, and then I need to go a little bit further to get all the way around the
circle, and it turns out I have really extremely good eyesight, and that I noticed that I needed
exactly 3.1415926 lengths of these to exactly go around the circle.
So that is the, that's actually not the exact number pi, because the exact number pi has
infinitely many decimal points, but that's the first few digits of pi.
So the number pi is the ratio of the diameter of the circle to the circumference.
Well there are many other cases of dependent quantities that have nothing at all to do
with geometry even.
For example, you have the relationships between the demand of a product and its price, or
the supply of a product and its price.
If you charge more for an item, fewer people will buy it.
If you can sell an item for more, more people will produce it.
So these are the supply and demand curves in economics.
They are all measuring the relationship between two varying quantities.
Another example, the temperature of water at different depths in the ocean.
It's a varying quantity.
As you go deeper, it gets colder.
And the derivative then is going to help us to understand how dependent quantities influence
one another.
And the fact that we can use this concept that came from understanding the instantaneous
speed of a moving car, the same ideas are going to be used to explain things such as
areas of squares, areas of circles, and issues associated with supply and demand curves.
So that is the concept of the day is abstracting the derivative to other dependent quantities.
And that's the real power of mathematics and the derivative in particular.
So let's start then with the square and see what kind of a question we would ask to take
this square and look at its area in a dynamic fashion.
It looks like a static issue, this area of the square, it looks about as static a question
as you can think of what is its area.
But instead, let's think of it in this fashion, that if you take a square of certain size,
suppose that you change the size by a little bit.
You make it a little bit longer here and then likewise a little bit wider so that it becomes
a bigger square like this.
You see you added a strip on the top and you add a strip on the side.
Well as you do that, you increase the area because the area is dependent on how big it
is.
And the question is, how fast do you increase the area for a given rate of increase of the
length?
You see these quantities depend on one another.
In other words, if I add one inch here, how much area do I add?
I add a certain amount of area.
If I have a small square, just a little square like here, little square, and I add an inch,
you see I add less area than when I have this big square and I add an inch, I add more area
because it's longer.
It becomes all the way here.
It's got a strip if you were painting it.
It'd be more paint to paint an inch strip on this big square than if you had a little
tiny square and you added an inch strip there.
So there is a relationship.
The influence of a change in the length of the side varies depending on how big the square
is that you start with.
Well that's what the derivative is going to help us to quantify to make an actual, get
it an actual number that measures the influence of the change in the length to the change
in the area.
So here's the way we look at it.
If we see this picture of a square with a little bit of strip added to it, let's ask
ourselves what would we mean by measuring the rate at which the area is increasing for
a change in the length?
How would we think about the meaning of such a change?
One way to think about it is, suppose you thought of this changing in time that it was
growing gradually, the length was growing gradually, and so the whole square was growing
gradually, then both of those quantities, the area and the length, would be changing simultaneously.
And we could find the ratio, how fast is the area changing for a change in the length
of the side.
And that's exactly the point of view that we're going to take.
In other words, we're looking at the fraction, as we see here in this picture, it's the fraction
that says if we have a square of a slightly bigger size, x plus delta x, remember delta
x always is a number that just means a little tiny change in x.
It's a little tiny number, just think of it as a tiny number, that x plus delta x squared
is the area of the bigger square, the square whose side is x plus delta x.
If we subtract x squared, that's the area of the original square, this portion, then
the numerator here on top of this line is telling us the area that I'm pointing out
right now, it's this total area, the pink and the blue area.
That is this difference, the area of the big square minus the area of the small square.
When we divide by delta x, we're getting a rate at which the increase in area divided
by the increase in the length of the side.
So it's telling us how influential is a little change in the length to the change in the
area, it's a rate.
Now notice that this fraction here is very familiar to us, the reason it's familiar to
us is because it is the fraction associated with the derivative, because remember when
we were talking about the car moving, we said well where is the car at one instant minus
where was the car right before and then we divided by the elapsed time.
The fact that the look of it is the same means that mathematically it's the same.
We're going to get the same answer.
We're interpreting the concept of derivative which was a particular way of analyzing motion.
We see that the same analysis can be applied to the area of a square and therefore insights
that we had about this fraction that when we thought about it in terms of motion will
be equally applicable when we're thinking about it in terms of a square.
Well let's think about this fraction and see if we can understand what value it will have.
If we think about these rectangles here, this pink rectangle and this pink rectangle, if
we temporarily ignore this little blue one in the corner because it's pretty small, let's
just ignore it for a minute.
Then if we divide the areas of these two pink rectangles by delta x, what will we get?
Now I want you to look visually and see what you would get if you divided the sum of this,
the area of this pink rectangle and this pink rectangle by the width of this rectangle,
delta x.
Well, okay, let's think about it.
If you take a rectangle and you divide by delta x, which is the length of one side, you're
going to get the other side because the area of a rectangle is the length times the width.
Since we have two of them, when we divide by delta x, we get this length plus this length,
two times x.
So we can see visually that this fraction, we can see it geometrically, that this fraction
is very close to two times x.
The only problem is this little tiny blue square up in the corner.
What happens when delta x becomes a tiny, tiny number?
That blue square becomes negligible, becomes almost nothing.
And yet when we're dividing by the delta x, we continue to get the two x.
So in the limit, which is what the derivative is doing when we took smaller and smaller
delta x's, we wanted to see what number, one number it converged to, the answer is going
to be two times x.
If we look at this same situation geometrically, that is, we draw the graph of the area function
for a square.
The area of a square of size x is x squared.
Then once again, we can see that this ratio is the characteristic triangle associated
with taking derivatives, and that when we make the delta x go to zero, that ratio will
turn out to be the slope of the tangent line.
That's what we saw last time.
And that slope then will be exactly two times x.
So all of these ideas, I hope, are converging together, that we saw in the original picture
of our car moving down the road, where its position was t squared.
We saw that the speedometer was always at 2t.
And here we see the exact same thing geometrically.
It doesn't seem to have anything to do with time.
It has to do with a square.
And we see that if its area is growing, the rate of growth of the area geometrically is
two of its sides.
So those ideas are, I hope, becoming convergent, though the same idea of the derivative.
Let's look at another example.
This time, let's look at our circle.
The area of a circle has a formula, pi r squared, very famous formula.
And incidentally, in lecture 10, we're going to see why the formula is correct in a really
neat proof that the ancient Greeks used to find the formula.
It's really neat.
You'll love it.
But meanwhile, we'll just, it's familiar, and so we'll assume it, the area is pi r squared.
So it's this number of 3.1415 times the radius times itself is the area of a circle of radius
r.
And let's see, once again, how the influence of changing the radius a little bit, how that
influences the area.
The rate at which a change in the radius changes the area.
Well, we look at a picture.
And here's the picture we look at.
We have a circle of a certain size.
Here in this example, I've used the size 3.
So we have a circle of radius 3, whatever.
Suppose we look, we compare the area of this inner circle to the area of a circle that
is slightly bigger.
And let's just to pick a specific number, let's say the radius is 3.01, just slightly
bigger.
Then this fraction here, the area of the bigger circle minus the area of the smaller circle
divided by 0.01, is telling us the rate at which the area is growing given a change in
the radius.
And if we actually work this out, we'll see that the area of the difference of this thin
little band around the edge of the circle, approximately how big is it?
Well, it's like a ribbon.
It's like a very thin ribbon.
It has a certain length, namely the length of it is approximately equal to the circumference
of the circle.
In fact, the inside of that band is exactly equal to the circumference of the circle.
And the outer one is a little bit bigger, but it's a little band.
And so its area is approximately what you would get if you cut the band and made it
straight.
It's not quite a rectangle, but it's almost like a rectangle.
And it's almost like a rectangle, which has as one long edge, the circumference, and as
the real thin edge, the 0.01.
So that means that the numerator here, the top of this fraction, is just approximately
the product circumference times 0.01.
And when we divide by 0.01, what do you get?
The circumference.
So what that says is that the rate at which a three-unit circle grows, if you grow the
radius by a little bit, the rate is 6 pi, meaning that if you grow the circle by, say,
0.01 inches, you would expect 6 pi times 0.001 more area.
You see, it's relating the rate at which the radius is growing to the rate at which
the area is growing.
So here we see that the derivative of the area function pi r squared is 2 pi r, the
circumference.
So once again, the idea here is to try to interpret the derivative geometrically in
these situations, where we can guess what the derivative of a function is by visualizing
it geometrically.
Well, so let's, once again, the area of a circle is pi r squared.
We can look at it graphically, like we did in the last lecture.
And the graph of the area of a circle is this parabolic curve.
It increases steeply as the area increases, as it gets bigger, a little bit of increase
in radius adds more area.
And therefore, the graph of the area curve is steep.
It is pi r squared.
And the slope of the tangent line at any point is going to be equal to the circumference.
It's the derivative, and the derivative is the slope of the tangent line, but we just
saw that the derivative, the rate at which the area changes with respect to radius, is
exactly equal to the circumference.
So those are all examples of seeing, interpreting the derivative visually.
Let's take another example and look at the derivative for a totally different kind of
a setting, namely in economics.
So suppose that we have some curves that represent the relationship between the demand for a
product and its price.
So if you have a certain good that you're selling, if you raise the price, fewer people
will pay that price to buy it, though buy fewer items.
And so we can draw a curve here, and here we see the demand curve for a good.
What it means is that as you increase the price, that goes this way, the quantity, the number
that people will buy, descends.
However, if the good could be sold at a high price, more suppliers would get in the business
of producing it.
And therefore, the supply curve is an increasing function of price.
If the price is so low that a company can't make any profit at that price, nobody will
produce it.
And so at a lower price, no supplier will supply it.
At a high price, a lot of people will supply it.
The place where the demand curve and the supply curve cross is the place where you expect
the price to be.
So this is a typical supply-demand curve.
Now let's analyze it from a derivative point of view.
A derivative says the rate of change of one quantity with respect to another.
So here we have two varying quantities.
We have price and demand.
And then we have another pair of quantities, price and supply.
What is the interpretation of a steeply declining demand curve?
Well, let's see if we can understand it from the point of view of derivative.
Derivative says what is the influence of a change in the price to the change in the demand?
What's the rate at which a small change in price, how does it influence quantitatively
the change in demand?
If you have a steeply declining curve, demand curve, that means that a very small change
in price causes the demand to plummet.
So a steeply declining demand curve means you're in a business where if you increase
the price by just a little bit, the number of people who want it goes way down.
Or conversely, suppose you have a very steep supply curve.
What that says is that if you increase the price, if people are willing to pay a little
bit more, then a lot of people will get into the business of producing it.
So a steep supply curve means that the producers are anxious to produce more goods if the price
can be raised.
So if these curves are rather steep, then you have a more volatile situation.
You would expect small changes in price to make big changes in both the demand and the
supply.
Suppose the demand curve sort of tapers off here and the supply curve, you see it's sort
of almost level here at this midpoint.
Well then at those points, it means that people are rather indifferent to the price.
If the price increases a little bit, about the same number of people will want it and
about the same number of people will supply it.
So this is an example where you can think in terms of the rate at which one quantity
is changing with respect to another to get some insight.
But let's talk about a very practical situation, and that is suppose that you take the entire
earth and you decide that it's not really well-dressed, and so you need to put a belt
around the equator.
And so you do this.
Take a belt, a very long belt.
In fact, the belt is about 25,000 miles long.
And you put the belt just snugly around the equator, and we assume that the equator is
an exact circle.
You put a belt around it, and then it's just snug.
It just touches at every point.
It's just exactly the length of the equator.
And then you decide, well, okay, let's give the poor earth a little breathing room and
we'll add six feet to the belt.
So we add six feet to the belt, and therefore the belt now just hovers around.
You center it on the earth, and it just hovers around.
So let's suppose that I'm the earth, and here, now I've added six feet to the belt,
and so it now hovers around, and it sticks out from the earth.
So now my question to you is, how far away do you think this six feet longer belt is
from the earth?
So we've got 25,000 miles around, and we added six feet.
How far do you think it sticks out?
This is the question.
How far will that belt be hanging from the earth?
Well now, I hope that you'd think that if you just add six feet out of 25,000 miles,
probably you would guess that it's just a little tiny, tiny bit away from the earth.
Isn't that what you'd guess?
No?
Maybe not, but maybe that's what you would guess.
I think there's a picture of the belt that you see, slightly bigger belt.
So let's just see how far it actually will be away from the earth, and the way to think
about that is by the derivative, because here we're talking about a relationship between
the circumference of a circle and a change in the radius.
In this case, we're augmenting six feet to the circumference, and we're asking ourselves
how much does the radius change?
So if we look at it inversely, if we change the radius a little bit, how much change in
radius results in a six foot change in circumference?
Well, we know how to do that.
That is the derivative.
It measures the rate at which one quantity, the circumference, changes relative to another
quantity, the radius.
We know the formula.
The circumference of a circle of radius r is 2 pi r.
It's about six times, a little more than six times, the radius is the circumference.
So the derivative of this, if we drew the graph of this function, the circumference
function, 2 pi r, it's just a straight line.
Meaning that if you have twice as long a radius, the circumference is twice as big.
Three times as big a radius, three times as big.
Well, the derivative is telling us the slope of this line.
Well, the slope of this line is just 2 pi.
What that says is that for an increase of one foot in the radius, no matter what radius
you have, no matter what radius you start with, if you increase the radius of that circle
by one foot, you will add exactly 2 pi feet.
So for example, suppose you have a circle that is the size of the equator of the earth.
So its radius is about 4,000 miles.
And then we increase the radius by one foot.
How much will we increase the circumference?
By 2 pi feet.
2 pi is about 6.
It's a little more than 6.
So what that says is that, no, when we add 6 feet of belt and we center around the earth,
it's not just going to be a microscopic distance away from the earth, it's going to be a foot
away from the earth.
So just adding 6 feet of belt puts the belt a whole foot away from the earth.
You could actually crawl under it.
So isn't that amazing?
Adding 6 feet of additional belting will just give it plenty of breathing room.
And it comes from an analysis of the derivative, the rate at which the circumference is changing
with a change in the radius.
So what we've seen here is the idea that you can use the derivative to measure the rate
at which varying quantities vary.
And we've seen these wonderful geometric examples of that that illustrate the power of the derivative
to apply to many settings besides just motion, which was the generating idea for derivative.
In the next lecture, we will see the way derivatives are actually used in real life,
which is that we have formulas that describe relationships,
and then we can just easily generate formulas that describe the rate of the change of those,
the derivative of those formulas.
And that's what happens in actual practice.
So that will be the next in this series of lectures about the derivative.
Thank you.
.
