We're about to start some lectures about the integral, and the first two lectures are
going to be examples of ancient Greek approaches to problems about finding areas and volumes
of familiar objects.
The methods that they used to find these were actually the exact methods that will later
become the integral 2,000 years later.
So the integral is a procedure by which we take something that we're interested in and
divide it up into little tiny pieces and combine them to get a hole.
In the case that we've met the integral before, you saw that a car moving on a road, you saw
how fast it was going, and we added up the little amounts of distance that you'd go
in short intervals of time to get the total distance traveled.
But don't worry about that, because today what we're going to be doing is discovering
the wonderful formulas, some of which you're familiar with for familiar objects, and seeing
why are they true.
So this is great.
Let's start with possibly the most familiar formula that all of you know, which is the
formula for the area of a circle.
Everybody knows that the area of a circle is pi r squared, but do you know why?
Well you will very shortly.
So let's just take a circle, here's a circle, and what we're going to do with this circle
is simply divide it up into little segments like pieces of pi.
And then we'll take that collection of pieces of pi and rearrange them.
And the way we rearrange them is that we take every other one and put it upside down.
So you can see that we took this circle, broke it up into one, two, three, four, five,
six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve pieces of pi, and then we put them alternately
up, right, down, up, down, up, down, up, down, twelve of them.
Now think of this object that we've created.
Well, the top of this object has a little bit of a scallop to it, but its length is
exactly half of the circumference of the circle.
The reason it's half is because half of that circumference is at the top and half of it
is at the bottom.
Well the circumference of a circle of radius r, by definition of the number pi, pi is the
ratio of the diameter to the circumference, so that means that half of the circumference
is pi times r, pi times the radius.
So this scalloped object here is pi times r at the top.
The radius is the distance along this slightly slanted line.
And then of course it's pi times r at the bottom.
Well this doesn't look quite like a rectangle, but it's getting pretty close.
Now let's look at it.
If we divided this circle instead of into twelve sectors, suppose we divided it into
many more sectors, and then we created this exact same object, it would look almost exactly
like a rectangle.
And in fact if we broke this up into, if you envisioned breaking this up into say a billion
pieces and putting half a billion upright and half a billion down, you would see it indistinguishable
from a rectangle of height r and width pi r, and therefore the area of a circle is pi
r squared.
So that is the method for finding the area of a circle.
Now notice by the way that another way to think about finding the area of a circle is
to think about adding thin bands to a circle and having it grow from a point by adding
thin bands out, out, out until it becomes whatever size that you're trying to reach.
And that method actually is a calculus kind of method because we saw that the derivative
of the area is just equal to the circumference of the circle.
So let's move on from a circle and start talking about another familiar geometric object,
namely a triangle.
What is the area of a triangle?
Well the area of a triangle is actually very simple to compute if the triangle happens
to be a right triangle.
So here we have, if I put this triangle over here, here we have a right triangle, and it's
very simple to find the area of a right triangle because a right triangle is just half of a
rectangle.
And therefore we know that the area of a right triangle is just the base times the height
divided by 2.
But then the question becomes, well how about if you have a triangle that's not a right
triangle?
Well that's where this really neat observation comes in.
And that is, if we move the vertex of the triangle in a horizontal line parallel to the
base, and we just leave the base fixed, and we let the edges of the triangle grow and
shrink to accommodate that motion, then what we will find is amazingly, I hope you find
this amazing, that every horizontal line segment will stay exactly the same length between
the sides of the triangle.
So even when we have a triangle that's sort of slanch wise, you see it, when the triangle
is leaning over, nevertheless every little horizontal segment is the same size.
And therefore the area of this triangle is exactly the same as it was for the vertical
triangle because if you think of the area as being made up of just pieces of small bits
of area, it's exactly the same amount of area that can be moved back.
So this is a physical demonstration that the area of a triangle is just equal to one half
the base times the vertical height regardless of where that top point is.
Isn't that cool?
Now let me, I have some computer animation of this also that might be more convincing
to show you an approximation to the area of a triangle could be obtained by putting a
bunch of little rectangles on top of one another that just, in this case those little
rectangles are slightly more, the total area of those rectangles is slightly more than
the triangle.
But now from our observation of what happens when the base and the vertex move relative
to one another, we see that those rectangles are just going to slide over.
And here we see the same rectangles covering up the new triangle.
The same rectangles of the same width and the same size are just covering up this new
triangle so that the approximation to the area of the triangle by just this stack of
rectangles can be slid over to show that the area of a slid over triangle is exactly the
same as the area of a right triangle.
Consequently we see that the area of a triangle is just one half the base times the height
regardless of how slanch wise it is.
Well anyway I think these things are neat, I don't know, okay now let's talk about, let's
move on now to three dimensional space.
So the two things we've talked about so far were areas, area of a circle and area of a
triangle.
But now let's see if we've learned something that we can now apply to a more complicated
situation.
And the more complicated situation that we'll try next is to talk about a tetrahedron, what
in the world is a tetrahedron?
Well a tetrahedron is just a pyramid over a triangle.
So a pyramid like the pyramid of Cheops, like this pyramid right here, it has a square base
and then it comes up to a point at the top.
But a tetrahedron just has a triangular base and comes up to a point at the top.
Now I happen to have one here, sort of in pieces but here it is.
So you see it has a triangular base, triangular base, and here is the vertex on top.
So the volume of this tetrahedron, well at first we don't know what the volume is, unlike
for the triangle where a right triangle, it was pretty obvious what the area was.
It's not clear what the volume of any tetrahedron is, it shouldn't be obvious to anybody.
But on the other hand, we have the same kind of observation that we made about the triangle.
Namely, if you take this vertex of the tetrahedron, look what happens if I move it at exactly
the same height above the base.
All of these horizontal sections stay exactly the same size and shape.
You see?
In other words, what I'm saying is, what I want to conclude from this is that the volume
of any tetrahedron is determined only by the area of the base and its height.
Because any tetrahedron where I keep this at the same height, I keep the vertex point
at the same height, if I thought instead of having three of these intermediate layers,
suppose I had 10,000 intermediate layers that just filled it up, you see?
Then if I moved this at the same height, those intermediate layers would continue to
fill up the altered tetrahedron.
So the thing to learn from this demonstration, which incidentally I think is really amazing,
look how they move just in parallel.
See, when I keep this, they just move in parallel, and if I filled the whole thing up, they would
all move in parallel.
That means that the volume is exactly the same for every one of these tetrahedra.
So what this shows is that if I can convince you of a formula for the volume of any tetrahedron,
then we'll be able to know what the formula is for the volume of all tetrahedra.
In other words, we know that the volume of a tetrahedron is determined only by the area
of the base and the height, because as we changed the position of the height, we got
the same answer, just shuffling those words.
So this is now our next challenge.
Can we look at a tetrahedron and see what its volume is?
Well to do so, we're going to make an observation, and that is about a prism.
Now a prism, you've probably all seen prisms, prisms that you show light through and it
breaks the color into colors.
So a prism is just a triangle and then goes vertically upward.
That's what a prism is, and we see this picture of a prism.
Now what I'm going to show you is something that's a little hard to see, and I know it's
difficult to see, but you've got to be tough, and here it is.
A prism can be divided into exactly three tetrahedra.
Remember tetrahedron is like a pyramid over a triangle, and I've drawn the three tetrahedra
in three different colors, red, white, and blue, and here they are.
You see the white one?
The white one has a triangular base, the base of the prism, and then it just goes straight
up and its cone point is this vertex of the top face.
And then we have this red tetrahedron, which has, as its base, it's upside down.
Its base is this triangular top of the prism, and its cone point is down here facing downward.
So those two are actually fairly easy to see.
It's the blue one that is the challenge to see as a tetrahedron.
The blue one fills up the rest of the prism, and you can think of it as sitting with this
triangle as the base, and this vertex as the vertex.
Well, so we have a red, white, and blue tetrahedron that makes up the prism.
The truth is that all three of those tetrahedra have exactly the same volume as each other,
and therefore the volume of a tetrahedron is exactly one-third of the volume of a prism.
And the volume of a prism is very easy to compute because it's just the area of the
base times the height because that's all, it's just straight up and down.
It doesn't cone off to a point.
So why is it that all three of these tetrahedra have the same volume?
Well it's easy to see why the red one and the white one have the same volume.
They have the same height and they have the same base.
But now let's see about the blue one.
Well the blue one has the same volume because, let's think about it, it has this base, which
is half of this rectangle.
You see this rectangle here?
One of the faces of the prism.
But look, the other half is the white triangle of the white tetrahedron.
And both the blue and the white, see the blue and the white, tetrahedra can be viewed
as having these as their bases and then the same vertex.
You see?
So I'm looking at the white one.
Before we looked at the white one as having the base at the bottom and this vertex as
its cone point, but we're taking the same object and viewing it alternatively.
We're saying we can view it as having this as its base and this as its cone point.
But now we see that the blue and the white tetrahedra have the same volume because they
have equivalent area bases, namely just the two halves of the rectangle, and they have
the same height because they have the same vertex.
Therefore the volume of the blue tetrahedron is the same as the volume of the white tetrahedron.
The white tetrahedron has the same volume as the red tetrahedron.
They all have the same volume as each other.
So the formula for the volume of a tetrahedron is one-third the area of the base times the
height.
Isn't that cool?
Isn't that cool?
That really is pretty good.
One-third area of the base times the height.
Not bad.
But once we have the volume of a tetrahedron, then we're in a position to find the volume
of other things.
For example, a cone.
Let's think about a cone.
Well, a cone is sort of like a tetrahedron in that it has a base and then it goes up
to a point.
So the only difference is that it's got a circular base instead of a triangular base.
Just as incidentally, a pyramid has a square base instead of a triangular base.
And, by the way, as an aside, let's quickly say what is the volume of a pyramid?
Well, the volume of a pyramid is one-third its base times its height.
Why?
Because you could divide it up into two triangles, and you'd know that each half of the pyramid
has volume one-third base times height, and, therefore, the total pyramid has one-third
base times height also, because you just have two triangles next to each other.
Well, we'll do the same thing with the cone, namely, just by realizing that we could fill
up that circular base by little triangles.
And we could approximate the inside of the cone just by taking a lot of little triangles
that radiate out from the center, and if we took a huge number of such triangles, we'd
know that the volume of each one of the tetrahedra is so constructed is equal to one-third of
the area of the base times the height, and when we accumulate them all together, it's
just one-third the area of the base times the height, just as before.
Well, this is great.
So we now have the formulas for several familiar figures, the triangle, the tetrahedron, and
the cone, the circle, and it's now time to turn to something really interesting.
I mean, those were interesting, too, but this one is even better.
This one is a sphere, and in this lecture, we're going to be talking not about the volume
of the sphere, but instead the surface area of the sphere.
Now, this is a formula you probably don't know.
Maybe you remember it from some distant childhood memory of high school geometry.
If it came up in high school geometry, I can't remember, but the area of a sphere is sort
of a complicated concept because it's curved, and it's not clear exactly how we're going
to divide it up to get to that area, and it's actually a very clever method.
Here's how we're going to do it.
We take this sphere and enclose it by a cylinder.
A cylinder is just a straight up and down can whose height is exactly the same as the
height of the sphere, and it just touches around the equator, and we have a picture here on
the screen of this picture.
So this is a cylinder enclosing a sphere, and its height is supposed to be exactly the
same as the sphere.
And then what we're going to do is we're going to prove something that is really remarkable,
and that is that if you look at this sphere and you slice it horizontally between two
different latitude lines, you see if it's horizontal, you'd hit a latitude line and
then you'd hit another latitude line.
And you can see these latitude lines here on the, I hope, on the screen.
You can see these lines here.
The fact is that the area between two consecutive latitude lines is precisely equal to the area
on this cylinder between those same two heights.
Now, let's see if you understand this.
What this means, so we have this vertical cylinder here, and now we slice the whole picture
by two horizontal planes.
So we have a plane here at the top of this band, goes across, we have a plane that goes
across the bottom of the band, and those two planes, first of all, they enclose a belt
around the cylinder that's vertical, a vertical belt around the cylinder.
But they also enclose a sort of diagonal portion of this sphere, the Earth.
And it turns out that the fact that the sphere is slightly tilted exactly compensates because
it gives more area, you see, because it's tilted, it has more area.
But on the other hand, it's smaller, smaller radius than this outside one.
And those two exactly compensate so that the area between those two bands is precisely
the same.
In other words, this dark blue band on the sphere has exactly the same area as this vertical
band on the sidewall of the cylinder.
And let's think about this way.
Suppose you go right up to the North Pole, and you just graze the North Pole, and then
you cut down a certain distance.
So you'd have the northern polar cap.
The area of that northern polar cap, if you kept the planes exactly three inches apart,
and then you went down to the equator, and then you had just region near the equator,
the area would be exactly the same.
So if you're buying land on the Earth between two horizontal planes, it doesn't matter
where you put the planes, you have exactly the same area.
It's almost astounding to me that that's true, but it's true, it's true.
And that's what we're going to see now.
So now we're focusing our attention on what we see between these two parallel planes.
On the one hand, we have on the cylinder, we have this band of radius r.
R is the radius of the original sphere.
And then on the inside, we have this smaller radius, which we call s, which is the radius
of the latitude line.
Now really there are two different latitude lines, and so s can't really refer to both
of them because they're not quite equal.
But if we think about a very thin slice, they would be almost exactly equal.
And we'll call that distance s.
Now we have to look at a picture that is obtained by slicing the sphere vertically.
Now when we slice the sphere vertically and then we focus our attention on this band that
we're thinking about, what we would see is this picture.
We see this little band here is the part of the band that we see when we slice.
In fact, we'd see one piece here and we see another piece over here because we slice all
the way through.
And then these vertical lines here are what we get when we've cut this whole sphere with
a vertical plane like this.
And so our round cylinder that surrounds this, when we cut with just a line right through
the center, we just get a line, a straight line here and a straight line here.
That's what those two lines are on the outside.
These two lines are the parts of the cylinder.
And then in the band that belt around the cylinder, its height was what we call delta
H. Remember as usual, we always use delta H to
mean a small increment of, in this case, H for height.
So delta H is this height, the height between the two parallel bands.
Delta S is the diagonal distance on the sphere that goes between those two belts.
And you see it's at an angle.
It's at an angle.
Now we have actually seen this picture before.
You may remember this picture from when we took the derivative of the sign.
That happened in lecture seven.
Now you don't have to remember that.
But you might remember that, and it might help to make this familiar, because remember
we saw something about this little tiny triangle, delta H, delta S, compared to this big triangle.
What we saw was that those two triangles have the same angles, that they're similar triangles.
Let's see why.
Because this is a right angle, and this angle here, the angle at the origin of the sphere,
this angle plus the other angle of this right triangle have to add up to 90 degrees.
Therefore this angle right here is the same as the angle at the center.
For those of you who remember your high school geometry, you have two parallel lines cut
by a line, and these are alternate interior angles.
So this angle is the same as this angle.
The line where delta S sits is perpendicular to the radius, because it just grazes.
It's the tangent line.
It just grazes the sphere.
And therefore this is a right angle, and since this angle is the same as the center
angle, then this angle is the 90 degrees minus that.
So this angle is the same as the center angle.
This triangle is the same shape as this triangle.
Since they're the same shape, the ratios of their corresponding sides are the same.
Well, let's just see what those ratios are.
The hypotenuse, R, is to the side S, which remember is the radius of the smaller, at
that latitude height.
That's what S is.
S is the distance from the center out to the edge of that, at that latitude, where we're
cutting it.
So we have R, the hypotenuse is to S, as the hypotenuse of this triangle, delta S, is to
delta H.
Well, once we have this formula, we're home free, because look, we just do a little bit.
Here I've copied the formula again, R over S equals delta S over delta H cross multiplying
R times delta H equals S times delta S.
Now we'll multiply both sides by the fixed number 2 pi.
So we have this equation right here.
Now let's interpret it geometrically.
2 pi R, that's the radius of the big circle where the cylinder is.
And then if we think about delta H, that's the area of this vertical belt, because it's
the length around 2 pi R times its height, delta H.
Well what's the area of this slanted portion of the sphere?
It is 2 pi S, so that's the circumference of the smaller circle at that latitude, because
you see you're up near the top of the sphere, so the radius is smaller, it's S instead of
R, 2 pi S delta S, meaning that you multiply the circumference of the smaller circle times
the longer diagonal distance, you get the same answer.
But if you take the circumference times the diagonal distance, that's the area, or an
approximation to the area, of this portion of the sphere.
So what we've shown is that a little slice of the sphere is the same as the corresponding
area around the cylinder.
Well, what is the area of a cylinder, of this big cylinder from top to bottom?
What's its area?
It's just the circumference, 2 pi R, times its height, 2R.
You see because this is a sphere, so it's R here and it's R here, so it's a total
height is 2R, so the area of the total cylinder is 4 pi R squared.
But we saw, just by these slices, that the area of the sphere is identical to the corresponding
area of the cylinder.
So the area of the sphere also has area 4 pi R squared, which is a remarkable conclusion.
It's 4 times exactly, the area of the circle is 4 pi R squared, so it's exactly 4 times
the area of a circle of radius R.
Well this is a remarkable demonstration of the truth of an equation for a familiar geometric
object and it uses an integral like techniques, which we'll see later, because it broke things
into little tiny pieces and added them up.
So next time we're going to see an amazing demonstration of why the volume of a sphere
has the formula it does that was constructed by Archimedes and actually uses levers for
which he is so famous.
So we'll see you next time.
