In the last two lectures, we were introduced to ideas that really turn out to be the idea
of the integral.
And that is the idea of breaking up something into little tiny pieces and adding them together.
And the goal of this lecture and the next is to develop for you an intuition about what
it is the integral is going to tell you, what is its significance in solving problems
that you want to know the answers to.
So let me remind you of the big scope here of this series of lectures and how it's developed
so far and where this particular lecture fits into the big scheme.
So in lectures 2 and 3, we introduced the derivative and the integral.
And in lecture 3, we talked about the integral as a method of finding the distance traveled
if you know how fast a car is going at every moment.
And we'll remember how that was done.
Then if you recall, we then went to, in lectures 5 through 9, to a discussion about the derivative.
So we've sort of left the integral for a while.
We went to the derivative.
And the first step that we took in discussing the derivative in lecture 5 was to move it
from the rather verbally oriented presentation of the derivative that we saw in lecture 2,
we moved it to the context of a graph where we then saw the relationship of the derivative
to a graph.
But we're going to do the same thing today with the integral.
So this is the corresponding lecture to lecture 5 for the derivative.
This lecture corresponds for the integral.
In other words, what I'd like to do today is for you to understand exactly what the
integral means by remembering how we defined it in the case of a car moving down a road
and then see it graphically.
And when we see it graphically, we'll see that it has another interpretation.
And that's the real value of mathematics in general.
And in particular, the integral is that you can interpret the process that we found was
useful in finding distance traveled given velocity.
We find that that same process will give us other things.
In particular, we'll see how it can give us the area of under graphs.
And so that's our goal for the day.
So let's return to remembering how it is that we discussed the integral related to a car
moving on a road.
Remember that was the scenario where we saw the speed at every moment.
We were given, and in the scenario of lecture 3, we were taking a videotape picture of the
speedometer.
And then we tried to deduce from that videotape how far we went over a period of time.
So here was our car.
We see what the speed is at every moment.
And in order to figure out how far we went, we realized that knowing how fast we're going,
if we know how long we went at that fixed speed, we would know how far we went.
It'd be very simple.
If the speed always remained the same, it would be a very simple matter to see how far
we went.
But now let's do that very simple matter graphically.
And by the way, let me make an aside about this.
You have heard this many times in these lectures, and I think it's an important philosophical
point about how to solve problems.
And that is, when we're faced with a problem, what I always do is start with the easiest
possible case I can imagine.
There's no point in floundering around about a difficult case if you can't do an easy
case.
So you learn things when you do an easy case very methodically, and then you can apply
it to more complicated cases, and it becomes easy, hopefully.
So now let's introduce this situation of a car moving down the road, but in a graphical
form.
So here's a graph that shows an example of what one might record for the speed of a car
during a three-minute time interval from time 0 to time 3.
And this is a particularly easy example, because the speedometer is constantly stuck
at the two mile per minute speed.
And you do this for three minutes.
Well, it's not rocket science to figure out how far you went.
Namely, since you were going two miles per minute for three minutes, the distance traveled
is the product of the speed times the time, six miles.
Well, this is comforting to know, but what we'd like to do is make an observation about
the process.
And that is, notice that that same product of the height times the width also is equal
to the area of a rectangle.
Well, in mathematics, if you see two things that just happen to be equal, then it's good
to recognize it and to say, ah, the process by which we computed the distance traveled
giving the velocity is also giving us an area, an area under a curve, under the graph of
a function.
In this case, the function is this very simple function that's just a horizontal line where
at every moment t, v of t is equal to 2.
So we see this relationship between area under a graph, on the one hand, the numerical value
of that area is exactly equal to the numerical value of the distance traveled.
Now let's press forward and see if that insight is going to hold up for more interesting
occasions of the velocity.
In other words, cases where the velocity is not just a constant, but where the velocity
is changing.
So let's look at this example.
So here's a more interesting case of a car moving where its speed is constantly increasing.
In fact, its speedometer is always stuck at the speed 2 times t miles per minute.
So this is a car that very quickly is going very fast because after one minute, it's going
two miles per minute, which is 120 miles per hour.
After two minutes, it's going four miles per minute, which is 240 miles per hour and so
on.
So this is sort of a theoretical car.
It's going very fast.
Now let's see if we can remember the method by which we computed how far the car will
have gone in a three minute period.
What was our method?
Remember the method that we had from lecture three?
It was to divide the time interval between zero and three minutes into short intervals
of time.
And then make the assumption that the car, instead of changing its speed, we say suppose
that the car were just going at a constant speed during each of those small intervals
of time.
In other words, if we look at the tops of these rectangles, we see that this is a speed
that the car went during the interval from here to here.
And we just assume that the car went at that constant speed for that whole time.
And then for this next interval of time, we assume that the car went at this speed the
whole time.
Well, you can see that a car moving in this jerky fashion at this speed for this interval,
at this speed for this interval, at this speed for this interval, at this speed for this
interval, that the distance traveled by that alternative speed profile would be somewhat
bigger, you'd go further, than the car actually traveled.
Because at every moment of time, you would be going faster than the speed indicated by
the white line.
So, when we add up the product of these top speeds times the width, the speed times the
width, the speed here three times the width, and so on, if we add them up, that long, tedious
multiplication and addition problem, we're getting two things.
On the one hand, we're getting distance traveled, and on the other hand, once again, we see
that we're getting an area.
It's the sum of the areas of these pink rectangles.
To get a closer approximation to the actual distance traveled, remember what our method
was.
It was to divide the interval of time into many, many more pieces.
On the grounds that during those small intervals of time, our speed didn't vary so much.
And therefore, if we had just assumed we went at a constant speed during a shorter interval
of time, we're getting closer to what actually happened during that shorter interval of time,
because the speed's not very much.
Once again, also notice that the sum of the speed times the width is giving us the areas
of each of these individual rectangles.
So we're seeing a convergence of ideas here, that the same process that's used to find
the distance traveled is also giving us the area under that velocity curve, the area under
it and above the axis, this axis here.
So in particular, we see that the sum of these, well, for each individual rectangle, the height
of this rectangle times its width is, on the one hand, the distance traveled by a car that's
going at the steady speed for that short amount of time, and on the other hand, that
same product is equal to the area of one of these thin little rectangles.
If we add up all of the rectangles, which is what the integral does, on the one hand,
we're getting an approximation to the total distance traveled, and on the other hand,
we're getting an approximation to the total area under the curve.
So in particular, if we allow this process to go to its natural conclusion, that is continue
to take smaller and smaller intervals, divisions of the time, we will get the exact answer
as the final summative conclusion of that process.
Remember that the whole idea of the integral was that we took approximations, and then
we made the approximations finer and finer and finer, and then saw that those numbers,
the approximating numbers, were converging toward one value, and that that value was
the exact distance traveled.
Well, so right now, I'd like to introduce you to a bit of notation.
This is the notation that Leibniz introduced for the integral.
And the notation, here I'm showing this notation in this particular example, where the example
is that we have this function where the velocity function is 2t at every value, and we're trying
to compute how far the car went if it kept its speedometer at the 2t mark, how far did
it go in three minutes.
So what I'd like to do is talk about this notation and see what each of the pieces of
the notation refers to and why it was invented.
So it actually is a very descriptive notation, and also, by the way, attractive.
Don't you find it attractive?
This long, this long, elegant symbol, I think it's sort of attractive.
But not only is it attractive, but it reminds us of the genesis of the idea, because this
long, sensuous curve here is actually the letter s, it's an elongated letter s.
And that letter s stands for sum, because remember the process of the integral was adding up
all of those areas of those rectangles.
That was the way we got the approximation to the integral, and that's where this symbol
sum comes from.
But the total notation has many other interesting features that remind us of the genesis and
the meaning of the integral.
The next feature to look at is this dt times 2t.
If you recall, the sum that we take that is eventually giving us the integral, the approximating
sum, is always taking some value of 2 times t, namely, at any given time, it's how fast
you are going in that little tiny interval of time, which for this particular velocity
profile is just 2 times the time.
So the 2t here reminds us that at an individual moment in time, we were taking a rectangle
whose height was equal to 2 times the time.
And then the dt reminds us that we multiplied that height by a small width.
Remember we used the notation delta t to stand for a small increment of time, and delta
h to stand for a small increment of height, and delta s to stand for a small increment.
The deltas always meant just a little tiny increment.
And then the way to think of the dt is that the delta, delta was a Greek letter d, and
that in the limit, as you go to infinity and make it smaller and smaller and smaller and
smaller, it changes from the Greek letter delta to the Latin letter d.
So the dt represents a tiny width of time, a small increment of time.
And then the limits of integration are these numbers 0 and 3.
The limits of integration say that we're considering what's happening during, as the time changes
from time 0 to time 3.
You see, if you could ask yourself, well, how far did the car go between time 1 and time
2, then all you would do is replace the 0 with a 1 and the 3 with a 2.
So this notation then reminds us of the fact that the integral is defined in terms of a
sum of products.
Since we know that the value of the integral is equal to the distance traveled, and it's
also equal to the area under the curve, then if, in a certain example such as this one,
we have an alternative way to find one of those two things, in this case the area under
the curve, then it gives us a simple way to find how far we traveled.
In this case, since the curve just forms a triangle, well, we know how to find the
area of a triangle, it's just the base times the height divided by 2.
And since the base times the height divided by 2 is equal to 9, the height is 6, the base
is 3, so 1 half times 3 times 6 is equal to 9, then that tells us that the distance
that the car traveled was 9 miles in those three minutes.
So this is once again an example of interpreting knowing what the definition of the integral
means allows us to take advantage of its dual nature as both giving us the area under the
curve and the distance traveled if we have a velocity function.
So if we just think of this in a more general setting where I don't specify the specific
function, this is an example of a velocity curve that you may see if you drove down the
road.
Here you went at a certain speed and you slowed down a little bit and you sped up a little
bit.
Well, if you wanted to know how far you traveled between one time A and another time B, what
you would compute is the integral of V of t dt and you'd approximate it by the sum of
the areas of these rectangles.
Once again the same repetitive process that we've done, taking then a finer division would
give us a better approximation of the distance traveled and simultaneously as you see a better
approximation of the area under the curve.
So the theme here of this lecture is that the integral is simultaneously telling us
the area under the curve and the distance traveled.
Being able to interpret the integral in this way allows us to see some relationships about
integrals that are very useful when we're trying to actually compute an integral because
we can break it into parts to get the final answer.
One specific example of a relationship of the integral is this.
Suppose that we have an integral of some velocity profile, some function V of t, and
we take the integral from one time A to another time B.
Well we know that that's equal to the area under the curve.
We also know it's equal to the distance that the car traveled between, we looked at our
watch and we see A and then we, some minutes pass and we see B, that's how far it traveled.
If we then add to that the distance we traveled between time B and time C, we would get the
distance we traveled between time A and time C.
So this is very straightforward and we have this nice equation that relates the integrals
where the limits of integration are the only things that are varying here.
If you go from A to B and then you go from B to C, then the total distance you traveled
is the distance you traveled from A to C.
So this is very straightforward.
But one thing that we haven't talked about yet in this case of the car moving and in
the integral is the fact that sometimes you're not going forward.
We've got to deal with the case where when you're driving you sometimes go forward and
then sometimes you go backward.
Now when you go backward that corresponds to having a negative velocity because velocity
actually is telling you not only how fast you're going but which direction you're going.
So when you're going away from home, that's a positive number and then if you turn around
after you come to work and you come back home again then on the way back we count that as
a negative velocity.
And so I now have to be a little bit more accurate about what it is that the integral
tells us.
It doesn't actually tell us the distance traveled.
It actually tells us the difference between where we started and where we ended up because
if for example we go forward for a while and then we come backward, the integral is going
to tell us that this is our net change.
So you can't use the integral unless you always go forward.
The integral is not going to help you decide how many gallons of fuel you used.
It's going to tell you just the distance that you ended up traveling.
But the interpretation of the integral is the same as before, namely if you happen to
be going in the backward direction, so the velocity is negative and therefore the graph
of the curve goes below the axis, then the integral for the part where you're going backward
is computed in exactly the same way as before.
It's just telling you that it's giving you a negative answer.
So in other words, for a graph where you go partly forward, if this is a velocity curve,
during this time interval from here to here you're going in a forward direction and the
area of this region here is the distance you traveled during that period of time.
And then the area of this part labeled Roman numeral 2 is going to be a negative number.
It says how far you went in the negative direction.
And then here this one is in the positive direction.
So it's very easy to interpret the integral both in terms of the distance traveled and
areas under curves.
It's just that you have to use a sign, meaning positive or negative, to make sure that when
the graph goes below the axis you count that area in a negative fashion.
And then you combine them.
So in other words, the integral from this point A to this point B is the positive number
of the area of this region minus this area, so you're contributing a negative number here,
and then you add a positive area here.
That tells you that the net area, well, OK, it doesn't tell you the net area.
It tells you net area if you count this negative.
That's what it tells you.
This is positive.
This is negative.
This is positive, as you see in the formula.
But our combination formula that we saw before going from A to B and then plus B to C equals
A to C, this formula still holds.
It still holds, because all it says is that if we've made a net trip during the time interval
A to B, and that net trip we started here and we ended up, after going back and forth
and back and forth, we ended up here, and then we went from time B to time C and we
did some stuff and we ended up here, then the total change that we made is still just
the sum of where we ended up after between A and B and where we ended up between B and
C.
So this formula still holds for integrals.
Now let's go back to this example where the velocity is equal to two times the time and
see that the integral can actually be producing for us a position function.
Because you see, we just computed the integral from time zero to time three.
We said, suppose that were the integral that we, that was the distance, the amount of time
we traveled.
We traveled for three minutes and we wanted to know how far we traveled.
Well, but it's also true that we traveled for one minute, we traveled for 30 seconds,
we traveled for one and a half minutes, we traveled for a tenth of a minute, and at each
of those moments of time we could say, how far did we go?
So we actually are, the integral process could be applied to any of those smaller increments
of time and it would tell us how far we went between time zero and that small increment
of time.
And since that is true for every single moment, then it will produce for us an entire picture
of our travel during that interval of time.
And so here we see it graphically that as the time passed, the area of the triangle
was growing and we recorded that area by saying how, and we just recorded the area by putting
a point at the appropriate height.
So, so these two graphs are related in that this is the graph of the, telling the integral
at each moment of the velocity graph.
The distance traveled up to a particular time t.
So this is another way to see this.
For every time s that we chose, we just took the integral up to that varying quantity s
and we found the area underneath that little curve and we see that that area is indeed
just s squared.
And that's why we saw that our position function was just giving us the square of the time.
This is the, this method of accumulating our, using the integral to accumulate the distance
traveled knowing the velocity can also be applied to, to see how, how quickly a body
is going to be falling if we know the rate at which it's accelerating.
So this formula here is, is telling us that from the law of gravitation, we heard before
that the, the acceleration of a falling body, if you drop a rock, every second it's going
to be going 32 feet per second faster than it was before.
So after one second it's going 32 feet per second, after two seconds, 64 feet per second
and so on.
Well we can use an integral to accumulate that and we see that the speed is going to
be minus 32 s feet per second after s seconds.
And really it's the integral that accomplishes this.
And then once again, knowing what, if you know what the speed is, you can compute the
distance that you travel in exactly the same fashion.
So if you, if you actually take a specific value and you want to know how far a rock
has fallen after two seconds, what you would do is you'd say, well I know how fast it's
going in every moment, minus 32 t, I can take the integral and that will tell me how far
it has fallen in those two seconds, which is 64 feet.
So in general, if we just go to some arbitrary but varying time s, then the integral is going
to give us minus 16 s squared feet.
Now notice that once again we see this relationship between the derivative and the integral.
That the derivative of this function, minus 16 s squared, the position function, how far
something has gone, that derivative is equal to the speed function.
So the integral and the derivative are reciprocal quantities.
You may remember that when we were looking at the derivatives, one thing we talked about
is the whole trip.
If you take a trip from one moment to another and your speed, your positions vary from time
to time, you would know what your average speed is over that trip.
And that we saw that there was a particular moment when your exact speed was equal to
your average speed.
That was the mean value theorem for derivatives.
It just said there was some moment when you were actually going at the average speed.
And this makes sense because if you were always going less than that speed, you wouldn't
have gone the average.
And if you were always going more, you would have gone further.
So at some point there had to be an average and there's a corresponding mean value theorem
for integrals.
And all it says is that if your speed varies, you go faster and then slower over an interval
of time, you could have gone the same distance by simply sticking to a particular speed,
which you did travel, and just stay at that speed for the whole time.
So this is a very simple observation about speeds if you just think of a car and then
you translate it into the integral, we can interpret it graphically by saying the area
under this curve is exactly equal to the area of a rectangle whose height is one of the
values of this varying quantity v of t.
So the thing to realize then after this lecture about the integral is that its interpretation
graphically is that it is the area under the curve for a positive function or it's
the negative of the area above a negative function.
And that the symbolism for the symbol that denotes the integral reminds us that the integral
is equal to a sum of products of the height of the function times a little bit of width.
This particular lecture is, I view it as not the most interesting lecture you're going
to hear, but it sets us up for the next one, which allows us to then use this vision of
the integral as a sum of products of little things and interpret it in all sorts of different
things.
Where we take a volume of things, we take a volume of a sphere or a cone, we want to
say how much money accumulates in a bank account.
We have all sorts of things that can be viewed as adding up little pieces to get the whole
and that's where the value of the integral really comes into play.
So this is the basis on which we can build great things.
Thank you.
