In this sequence of lectures about the derivative, we started by looking at, first of all, what
the derivative means. And remember, it was generated by talking about a car moving on
a straight road, and we talked about finding the instantaneous velocity by seeing the position
of a car at one moment, position of the car at a slightly different moment, and dividing
by taking the difference of that to see how far we went, dividing by the amount of time
elapsed, and that gave us the average speed between two moments of time. And then we
took smaller increments of time to find the actual instantaneous speed of the car. And
then we saw, in lecture number five, two lectures ago, we saw that the same process for finding
the speed of a car was exactly the same process that we would use to find the slope of the
tangent line to a curve, that if we had a graph of a function, and we drew the straight
tangent line next to that that just touched it, that the steepness of that, the slope
of that, was computed in exactly the same way as computing the instantaneous velocity.
And since we computed it the same way, we get the same answer. So the derivative of
a function, of a function that tells us where we are on this straight road at every moment,
the derivative on the one hand tells us how fast we're going, and on the other hand, it
tells us that if we graph the function, then it tells us the slope of the line that just
grazes that graph. Or remember we said if we magnified that graph, that smooth graph,
it would become straighter and straighter and straighter, and that the derivative was
telling us simply the slope of that magnified straight piece of that curved line.
Okay, last time we saw that the derivative, the same process for derivative, could be
used to tell us about any two dependent quantities and the rate at which one quantity would influence
another quantity. When we changed the length of the side of a square, we said how much
influence does that have on the area of the square? What's the rate at which the area
grows given a change in the width? Well, one of the great powers of mathematics is abstraction.
The thing that makes it so powerful is the idea that if we have an idea, a mathematical
idea, then we can look at the mathematics itself without having always to be talking
about whether we're talking about a moving car, whether we're talking about a tangent
line, whether we're talking about an area of a square, that all of those mathematically
are the same. And that's the power of mathematics to deal in this abstract way. In particular,
in the example of calculus, what we really deal with in actual practice is specific functions.
That is where we describe a relation between two things, position and time, area to the
sides, a volume of a sphere. It's an equation that relates one quantity to another quantity.
And so the derivative then will tell us interesting information depending on the interpretation
of what that equation happens to be telling us. But the abstraction of mathematics says
that we can find the derivative completely in the abstract and then later interpret it
in all these different settings. So today's lecture has to do with easy ways of taking
actual equations and finding equations for the derivative. That is, if we have an actual
equation for where we are at every moment of a moving car on a straight road, if we
have a specific function that tells us where we are, we're going to talk about how we can
get a specific function that will tell us what our speedometer is reading. So this is
derivatives the easy way. And in fact, maybe we can think of derivatives as being easy
because even our car can do it. When we drive along the road, the speedometer in fact finds
the derivative. You see, so it really has to be pretty easy. Let's start with this example
of an equation where our position at every time is just two times the time. This is an
example where we're moving along a road at a steady speed because every minute we go
two miles. So at time zero, we're at the zero mile marker. At time one, we're at the two
mile marker. At time two, we're at the four mile marker. So we're just moving at a steady
rate and we see that the graph is just a straight line and that the derivative is just the constant
number two, meaning that our speedometer just sits at exactly the same point the whole time.
If instead of moving at the rate of two times t, instead of that being our position, suppose
it is any constant at all, 5, 10, square root of 2, any number you can think of, then the
graph would be a straight line and the derivative would just be that constant. So here we have
a whole family of derivatives that we can compute very quickly. Of course, it's a simple one
and we know how to do it. Now let's look at an example that's a little more complicated,
namely when we're moving along and at every time we're at the position t squared. Well,
if we're at the position t squared, we've seen the computation before of how we would
compute the average speed traveled. We look at any given time that we choose, any time.
When you see this t here, you should think of some specific fixed number like 5. Think
of a fixed number. This t is a fixed number. Well, delta t is a small increment of time
and so t plus delta t squared is where you are a little bit after time t. Subtracting
t squared says how much distance you travel, the change in the distance over that time,
dividing by delta t gives us the average speed over that interval of time. If we do the math,
as they say, we multiply out t plus delta t and we actually multiply it out. It expands
to this equation. We have a t squared here and a minus t squared here and they cancel
and we are left with these two terms in the middle and we can simplify it by factoring
out a delta t to get to this equation. We cancel out the delta t's and get to 2t plus
delta t. That was some algebra, not too hard, but the point is that the fraction of the
distance traveled divided by delta t for any choice of delta t is exactly equal to 2t plus
delta t. Ignore the algebra and instead just realize that this computation shows us that
for this little bit of time between one moment and a little time after that, the average
speed that we went was 2 times the time plus delta t. Well, if we choose delta t to be
smaller and smaller and smaller like 0.001 and 0.0001, you can see that these numbers
are going to become closer and closer to 2t. This is the computation that shows that indeed
the derivative of the t squared function is simply 2t. Well, once we've done all that
computation, then it's very simple to take the derivative of t squared. We just write
down 2t and we will start to see a pattern here. If we were going, if we have a function
of 5x squared instead of, so if you thought it in terms of t, by the way, it doesn't matter
if we use a t or an x, that it's irrelevant to what we're doing in taking the derivative.
Consequently, when we think of a function like 5x squared, its derivative is just going
to be 5 times as much as the derivative of x squared because at every moment we're just
5 times as far, so we will have had to go 5 times as fast at every moment. The derivative
is 5x squared is just 10x. Now, what we're going to do is look at, and it doesn't matter
what the constant is, we see that we have the same pattern. Let's look at the derivative
of x cubed function. Well, we can see this geometrically by thinking about taking a cube
and expanding it a bit and then seeing how much additional volume we're adding when we
add just a delta x to the width of the cube. Here we have our cube. Suppose that it's originally
size x and then we add just a thin layer of delta x on all, on three sides. We're thinking
of it emerging from a corner. Then you can see that the amount of extra volume you've
added is basically a slab on this side, a slab on the top, and a slab in the back because
that's what you're doing. You're thickening it up by this delta x on those three sides
because you're increasing the length of the side from x by the delta x. Well, if the derivative
remember is telling us the rate at which, in this case, the volume is increasing relative
to a change in x, and therefore to find that rate, we need to divide by the delta x. But
when we take this slab, say, on this side and divide by delta x, we just get the area
of this face, which is x squared. Then at the top, once again, it's a slab that's delta
x thick, but at the top, it is x squared in area. The volume of the top slab is also
x squared times delta x. Likewise, the back slab, which we can't see as delta x thickness
and x squared area, so its volume is x squared times delta x. The three of them together
comprise the total volume except for these little thin things like this little piece
here and the corner piece along the edges. Those little pieces are not mentioned. I haven't
talked about those. But when we choose delta x very, very small, those pieces are negligible
and go to zero. So we see then that when we divide these volumes by delta x, we're going
to get exactly three x squares, because this one divided by delta x is x squared, x squared,
and the back is x squared. So the derivative of f of x equals x cubed equals three x squared.
Now what that says is that the rate at which the volume of a cube increases as you vary
the length is exactly three times x squared. Well, the purpose of this lecture is to see
a pattern of the derivatives, to see a pattern of the derivatives. Now we've seen two of
them. We've seen the derivative, well actually three of them. We saw the derivative of a
constant number times t. Constant times t, its derivative is just a constant. Then we
saw the derivative of t squared or x squared. The derivative of t squared was 2t. And now
we see that the derivative of x cubed was 3x squared. And there's a pattern here. The
pattern that it follows is that if you have a function that is x to a power, then the
derivative of that function is n times x to the n minus 1 power. See, let's see why
this works here. For the constant, the function, linear function x, the derivative, that's
the same as x to the first power. The derivative is just 1 times x to the zero power, anything
to the zero power is 1, and therefore you're just left with 1. When you have x squared,
we saw the derivative, you bring down the exponent 2 times x to 1 less power, which
is 1. x cubed, we bring down the 3 times x to 1 lower than 3 power x squared. We extrapolate
out and do the further ones, x to the fourth power, the derivative is 4x cubed. By the
way, after students have taken calculus, what they think the derivative is, is that you
take the exponent down, you bring it down, and then you subtract the exponent by 1,
and that's the derivative. Now, it's correct that that's the answer, but what we've been
trying to emphasize in these lectures is that the derivative means something, that it's
conveying something, that if you are moving in a car at every position, you are at position
the time to the fourth power when you look at your watch. What this says is that your
speedometer will read 4 times the time cubed. Okay, so this is a collection of derivatives.
Now, if we multiply all of them by a constant, we get the same answer, same answer as you'd
expect, just the derivatives are multiplied by a constant, and if you add different things
of different powers, you just add the derivative, so here we have 5x cubed plus 2x plus 3, the
derivative, we bring down the 3, we get 15x squared, and so there's a mechanical way to
take derivatives. The fact that there's a mechanical way to take derivatives means that
people who have no idea what a derivative means can actually use calculus because they
can do this mechanical thing of moving down the exponent subtracting 1, they can do this
and therefore actually take derivatives and then knowing where derivatives come into their
problem, they can use it. So as a practical matter, the fact that it's easy to take derivatives
is an important reason for calculus being of such value in actual life. Let's look at
the derivatives in more generality. That is in sort of the visual sweep of the derivative.
Suppose you have a function that has two bumps in it like this. It comes up and then it goes
down and then it comes back up again. This is typical of a function of the third degree,
where it's a polynomial where the third degree power is the biggest power. Typically it comes
up, it goes back down, has one oscillation and goes up again. Let's look at the derivative.
The derivative, first of all, if we just take the derivative, we see that we use just this
mechanical method of taking the derivative, which is 3x squared minus 6x minus 1, and if we
graph that, you see that we just get a curve that has just one bump instead of two. This is
characteristic of the graph of the derivative compared to the graph of a function, that you
lose one bump. Let's just understand this visually. Remember the derivative at any point is telling
us the slope of the tangent line, slope of the tangent line. For example, here the slope of
the tangent line is 0 because it's horizontal, and you see that the value of the derivative right
under it is 0. Here the slope is going downward, so therefore the value of the derivative is negative.
Here the slope is 0 again, and the value of the derivative is exactly 0. So it's interesting that
the derivative process loses a bump in our graphs. Let's look at another example. This is an example
of a fourth degree equation, x to the fourth, and you can see it has this characteristic of one more
bump. Its derivative is a function that has a, the highest term is a cube, and it has this
characteristic of two bumps, as the cubic equations do. Notice we go from three bumps,
down, up, down, up, to two bumps, up, down, up, and so the the derivatives visually change the
number of bumps in the graph to to one less. Well, then what we have seen is some examples of
a mechanical way to take derivatives of polynomials. Polynomials are just things that have x to a
power plus some constant times x to another power plus a constant times x to another power. We now
know how to mechanically take the derivative. So let's look at a slightly different kind of a
function, one that's not a polynomial. And so this is a little bit, I have to admit I have some
trepidation in entering this realm, but I think that you're mentally strong and ready for the
sine function. So here we have a unit circle, a unit circle. So this is a circle of, that has,
has radius one, circle of radius one. And in that circle, if we take an angle from the
horizontal line, and we go up a certain angle from the center of the circle, then that angle can be
determined by how long along the edge of the circle we go. If we have a unit circle, the
circumference of the circle is two pi times one. So it's just two pi because there's the radius is
one. So the measure of an angle, you could measure an angle from the horizontal up a certain amount
by how far along the circle we go. If you go a certain distance up the circle, here we go, if we
go up like this around the circle, to a certain distance, any, any distance, and we call it,
it's, it's, it's traditional to call such choices by the, the Greek letters. And theta is the preferred
Greek letter to measure these angles by, and measuring angles by the length that it subtends,
as they say, along a unit circle from the horizontal. Then the vertical distance from that point on
the circle down here to the axis is the, called the sine of the angle theta. The sine is the,
is, is by definition the length of this vertical line. Well, you can see that as you, as you move along
the circle, that length changes. When you have a very small angle like this, you see that the sine is
a very small number because it's just this height. When, when you pick up a, an angle like this, the
sine is this height. When you pick this angle theta here, you see that the angle is this height. If
you pick the angle exactly 90 degrees or pi over two, it's, it's pi over two because it's a quarter
of two pi. So the vertical distance along the curve, this curve that will get you to be vertical is
just pi over two units. And the sine of pi over two is going to be one because it, it's just vertical,
and it comes from the top down to the middle, which is, we're talking about a circle of radius one.
So the sine, that is the height of that line, is a quantity that is varying as we vary the angle.
So the question is, as, as we're always asking in cases of derivative, is we're saying, if, at what rate,
when we vary the angle theta, at what rate is the height of that point changing? Well, let, let's do a
little bit of geometry and see how we would go about figuring that out.
If we change the angle, if we, we think of ourselves as at a fixed angle theta,
and then we make a little bit of a change to the angle, just like we added on a little thickness
to the square or we added on a little thickness to the cube, here we're going to add a little bit
to the angle, delta theta, and we're going to ask ourselves the question, at what rate is the height
of this point changing? See, it goes now up to here. So the height now is this, the length of this
vertical line. At what rate is that height changing compared to the change in the angle?
That would be the derivative of the sine function. So let's just do a little bit of, of geometry and
see how, how, how we can see that rate of change. The distance, the horizontal distance between
this point, between any point on the, on the unit circle, and the origin, the horizontal distance
also has a name. It's called the cosine of the angle. And you can see that the cosine of the angle
is, when the angles are very small, the cosine is almost one. And when the, when the angle is very
steep like pi over two, the cosine, there is no horizontal distance. The cosine is zero.
So the, the two, the sine and the cosine are doing sort of inverse dances to one another.
Well, here we have this picture then of a triangle whose angle is theta. It's a right angle triangle.
And we can start doing the analysis for computing the derivative of the sine.
And, and remember what the derivative of the sine is, the derivative of anything.
The derivative of anything is you say, okay, where was I at a given point, in this case theta?
Well, the sine was this length. Where was I at the time theta plus delta theta?
Well, I'm right here at this point. So how far, if I, if I were thinking of, of traveling at a rate
where I, I stayed at the mileage marker, always equal to the sine of theta, how far would I have
traveled? I would have traveled the distance from this point to this point. And you see that it's
labeled the sine of theta plus delta theta minus the sine of theta. So that length is that difference
in the sine. Now, the curved length is equal to the, the delta theta angle measurement.
Remember that when we move, we're, we're talking about how long it is around the circle,
delta theta. How much extra have, have we gone? It's the distance along the curve. But we're
thinking that delta theta is so small. Remember our magnified picture of a circle when we're,
if we look at a circle very, very close, it looks like just a straight line. It doesn't look curved.
If you look at a circle very, very close, it's just like a straight line. So, so actually the delta
theta that's, that's subtended by this little tiny angle delta theta is really on the circle
more or less like a straight line. And therefore we have this little triangle up here in the,
in the, up near the circle. And it's hypotenuse is delta theta. And this vertical side is sine
theta plus delta theta minus sine theta. Now, if we do a little bit of algebra, we see that the sine
of theta plus delta theta minus sine theta over delta theta, that fraction is equal to the number
we want to investigate to find the derivative of the sine. That's exactly the fraction because
it's the change in the sine divided by delta theta. But here is the clever part to this whole
analysis. This is the fraction we want to compute. Okay. Well, we're going to do just a tiny bit of
geometry. Notice that the tangent line to a circle is perpendicular to the radius. So here's the
radius. And the tangent line is perpendicular to it. So here we have a circle. And if we take a
point that's just tangent, then that line is perpendicular to the, to the line that goes
to the center of the circle. They're perpendicular to each other. 90 degree angle. So if since
this and this are perpendicular, look, look at where angle theta occurs in the picture.
Here's this angle theta. And since this big triangle here, or this is sine theta, this is
cosine theta, and this is one, this angle is theta. And so this angle here is 90 degrees minus theta.
And this is a right angle. Since this is horizontal and this is horizontal, we have a line through
it. This angle theta is exactly the same as this angle here, theta. Because these two angles,
this one plus this one also add up to 90 degrees. And so this angle right here is theta. Since this
angle and this, this is a right angle. And this is theta. This is 90 degrees minus theta. And this
is a right triangle. So this angle is theta. So let's assume that you didn't follow all those
details. But the point is that this little triangle is the same shape as this big triangle,
where this angle up here in the corner is theta.
Well, since this triangle and this triangle are the same shape, you just tilting it, tilting
it down and putting it on would make it exactly the same shape. Then you know that the ratio
of the side that's adjacent to theta in this little triangle divided by the hypotenuse,
which is this fraction here, is precisely equal to the same ratio relative to this big triangle.
Namely, the side that is right next to the angle theta, cosine theta, divided by the hypotenuse,
which is one. So we see that this angle, this difference quotient of the sine,
the thing that we need to compute the derivative of the sine, just equals the cosine over one.
So that shows us that the derivative of the sine function is equal to the cosine function.
An exactly similar analysis we could do using the cosine, these triangles are still
similar to each other. The same analysis would show us that the derivative of the sine
of the cosine is the negative of the sine. Those two reciprocal relationships can be seen
in this graph of the sine and the cosine curves, where the slope of the sine, see here it's going
up at a slope of one, and the value of the cosine is one. So the sine and the cosine functions are
two of the most important trigonometric functions, and the rate at which one of them changes
is related to the other one. In the case of the sine, the derivative of the sine is actually
equal to the cosine, and in the case of the cosine, the derivative is the negative of the sine.
So we have seen examples where we now have a whole list of derivatives where we can then just
plug in these derivatives at will, and if we have a function with those derivatives,
and we knew we were moving, say, in a car at one of these functions,
then we would instantly be able to see what our speedometer was reading at every moment.
