In this series of lectures about the derivative, we have seen the derivative interpreted as
the slope of a tangent line.
We've seen it interpreted as the speed of a moving car.
We've seen it interpreted as the rate at which the area changes with the change in radius
or size of a square.
So we've seen the derivative in many different contexts, and we've seen how to actually take
derivatives of formulas.
So we did all that in the past, but today what we're going to do is talk about applying
derivatives to something really important, and that is baseball.
So that's going to be the goal for the day, is baseball.
But we start out with other applications about derivatives, and in particular applications
about how a projectile moves when you throw it.
So baseball has come in, because if you throw a baseball, it flies in a certain shape, and
that's what we'll talk about later.
But the people who were interested in projectiles, one of the main things that they were interested
in is military uses.
For example, a cannon.
If you shoot a cannon, and a cannon is used all the time, you know, you shoot a cannon,
the cannon ball goes up in the air and comes down someplace, and it's of course important
to know where it's going to land.
So back in the, in ancient times, it was difficult for them to actually figure out the shape
of the path of a cannon ball, and it was difficult to aim a cannon under those circumstances.
And in fact, in some textbooks about cannon ball shooting, there are illustrations that
show the trajectories that they envisioned cannon balls as flying in.
So here's an example of a cannon ball flying, and you see that in this case, we have the
cannon ball going straight up in the air, exact straight line, and then it just stops
and drops straight down.
So that was one image of how it is that a cannon ball flies.
And then another, another image of the, of the, the flight of a cannon ball is this one,
and this one you see the, the, once again, the cannon ball goes straight up in the air,
and then just has a little bit of an arc and drops straight down.
Well, of course, we will see later in this lecture that those actually are not good representations
of the shape of the path of a cannon ball or a baseball.
But it's, it's interesting how it, how concepts of motion that were espoused by Aristotle
that were simply wrong were believed for centuries.
And in fact, frankly, I, I have great deal of difficulty believing that, that people
could not do the simple experiments to show that Aristotle was wrong.
Aristotle asserted that a heavier object will fall faster than a light object.
And the experiment to show that that is in fact false is one that I will do right now.
So here we have an apple on the one hand, and this is a very heavy apple, heavy apple.
And this is a brain and very light, very light brain.
And if we hold these two objects up and we drop them, we will see that they hit at exactly
the same time, the apple and the brain.
Well, you wouldn't think that, that, that kind of an experiment would have created a
conceptual obstacle to people over millennia before they figured out Aristotle was wrong
on this point of, of, of motion.
But in fact, it, it did.
And it was Galileo, the famous scientist Galileo Galilei, who lived in the beginning
of the 17th century, who actually showed that in fact the, the, the law of falling bodies
was different from that espoused by Aristotle.
And in fact, one of the most famous experiments that may or may not have happened in history
was the story that, that Galileo went to the top of the Leaning Tower of Pisa and dropped
balls, a heavier one and a lighter one down to demonstrate that, that in fact they fall
at the same rate.
And so Galileo had one of the advances in the study of motion that Galileo contributed
was that he espoused the idea that we currently believe that the, an object that is in motion
will tend to stay in motion.
Earlier ideas were that it required a constant push to keep it going.
So Galileo's view was that, that things have an inertia which just keeps them moving at
a steady rate unless something is influencing them.
And so Galileo was able, using that kind of an idea to describe the motion of falling
bodies and he actually had equations that described how fast and far a falling body
would, would fall.
And that's, we will be talking about that today.
But first I, I want to then move, move ahead to the later part of the century to Isaac
Newton because Isaac Newton was the one who formulated laws of motion that we, that formed
the basis for our concept of, of physics for the, for the next centuries.
And Newton, there's a, in 1665 there was a plague, the bubonic plague in England which
closed Cambridge University where, where Newton was.
And consequently Newton had to go to his family farm and spend a year or two at the, at the
family farm.
And during that, that amazing year he discovered all sorts of things including the ideas of
calculus that are formed the basis of this course as well as laws of physics.
And the story goes that, and, and this story I'm told by a historian may actually be true
that he literally was sitting under an apple tree and saw an apple drop from the tree and
that that inspired him to think about the idea of universal gravitation.
And whether, I don't know if it's true or not, but, but that, that's a story, a good
story anyway.
So his idea of universal gravitation is that, that, that the, the gravity of for example
the earth on, on, on a body like the apple is causing the body to accelerate at a certain
rate of speed.
And what that means is that the, the speed of a falling body will increase by a certain
amount every second.
Now, now let, let's explore that in, in detail, make sure that we have a clear understanding
of it.
Uh, the specific units involved are 32 feet per second, each second it speeds up.
So if I drop something from a tall building, it starts at zero speed.
After one second, it will be traveling at 32 feet per second.
After two seconds, it will be traveling at 64 feet per second.
So notice that it's the speed of this falling object that's increasing at a constant rate,
as opposed to, for example, the position.
It's falling much further in the, between the first and second second than it did between
the zero and the first second, because its speed is constantly increasing and therefore
its distance is increasing even more.
After three seconds, it will be falling at the rate of 96 feet per second and so on.
And any intermediate time, uh, T, that could be a fractional time or any, any other, uh,
number, the, you, you would know exactly how fast that falling object is going.
Now by the way, let me talk just a minute about the minus signs.
The reason that we have minus signs there is that, that you're falling downward.
And so we're thinking, if we think of positive as up, then you want to call negative as,
as down.
So this was the, the concept of acceleration, uh, and, uh, it shows that the velocity at
every time T is going to be minus 32 T.
Well remember that velocity of a moving object is related to the position of the object via
the derivative.
That means if we can find a function whose derivative is minus 32 T, then we will, that
is a function that will tell us where the object is at every time.
You see?
So in other words, Newton's law tells us how fast it's going to be going at every time.
Now we're going to use calculus, the derivative, but sort of in reverse.
We're going to find a function whose derivative is minus 32 T.
And the answer is, as we saw from last lecture, it's minus 16 T squared, because remember
the mechanical method of taking derivative, we just take the exponent, move it down, multiply
and reduce the exponent by one.
So minus 16 T squared is the position of the moving object.
So, um, if we, uh, we could compile a chart and see where an object that we drop will
be at every second, and also how fast it's falling.
So here we go.
After one second, if you drop an object from a, from a building, after one second, its
speed will be minus 32 feet per second.
And how far down will it be?
16 feet.
So it's negative 16, because the equation is negative 16 T squared.
And since T is one, negative 16.
At two seconds, its speed, which is increasing by 32 feet per second every second.
So its speed is 32 T, it's minus 64 feet per second.
And now its distance is negative 64 feet, it will have fallen 64 feet, because that's
negative 16 times 2 squared times 4, which is negative 64.
Likewise after three seconds, it will have fallen 144 feet.
So, uh, this tells us the, um, the position of a falling body.
Now let's, let's look at an example where, uh, instead of just dropping the ball, suppose
we throw a ball upward first.
Well if we throw a ball upward, it first has an initial speed, the speed where we let
it go.
And, and that speed of course is positive, because it's going upward.
But after a while, it reaches its apex and then falls.
So let's see if we can figure out how long it will be before this object reaches its
apex.
Well, that's easy to do, because the speed when we start is whatever the initial speed
is.
And let's, just to pick a number, to, to ground us in an actual number, let's suppose
that when we throw the ball up, its original speed is 48 feet per second.
Okay, 48 feet per second.
So we throw it up and then we let go of it, 48 feet per second.
Well gravity is acting on this ball, and the gravity is slowing it down.
How quickly is it slowing it down?
It's slowing it down by 32 feet per second each second.
So when we, when it leaves the hand, it's going at 48 feet per second upward.
But after one second, it will be going 32 feet per second less than that.
It will be going only 16 feet per second upward.
And after one, one and a half seconds, it will have reached its peak because its speed
then will be zero, neither up nor down.
So when it reaches its peak, then it turns around and falls.
So, so the velocity at every time is going to be the initial velocity of 48 feet per
second upward minus decreased by 32 feet per second for every second that elapses.
So here we have an equation for the speed of a ball that we throw up straight up in
the air.
Now once again, if we want to know how high the ball goes and where, how high it is at
every moment, that's easy to do.
What we do is we find a function that tells us it, it has to be a function whose derivative
gives this velocity because we know that the position function is related to the velocity
function via the derivative.
So if we can find a position function whose derivative is 48 minus 32t, then that function
will be telling us how high the ball is.
So here we are, here we are, and we found 48t minus 16t squared.
We know that the derivative of this position function is what we get because 48 times t,
that has a graph of a straight line, and its slope is 48.
So the derivative of 48t is 48, and then the derivative of 16t squared is minus 32t as
we saw before.
So this is the position function of a ball, how high the ball is at every time.
Now finally, let's turn to baseball because this is what we're really interested in.
So in baseball, what happens is that you have the batter at the plate, and the pitcher throws
the ball, and the batter hits the ball at some angle up into the air, it travels in
the air, and it heads toward the outfield.
And the question that we want to ask is where will it land, and how can we tell where it
lands?
Well, so let's be specific and ground this discussion in a particular example with particular
speeds, and assume the following case.
Suppose that when the ball leaves the bat, that it is traveling, of course it's actually
traveling at an angle, but we can view that angle as traveling at a certain speed horizontally,
and then it's gaining altitude at a certain speed.
So we can decompose its motion into those two different components, horizontal speed
and vertical speed.
Now remember Galileo's view about motion and inertia, and this was one of, it was re-annunciated
by Newton as one of his three laws of motion, which was that a body that is in motion tends
to stay in motion at the same speed unless some force acts on it.
Horizontally there's no force acting on the ball moving.
There's nothing that slows it down, so that when you, and you can see this by the way,
if you have ever been on an ice rink, and you took a puck, and you slid it and it's
very slippery, you know that it just keeps going at the same speed in the same direction.
Or the same air hockey is the same thing.
If you have air hockey, you have that little peg, if you just push it, it just keeps going
at the same speed in the same direction.
So the horizontal speed of this ball after it's been hit is, in this example here, we're
assuming that it is 100 feet per second.
So its horizontal direction is 100 feet per second, and every second that you measure afterwards,
if you want to know where it is, after one second it's 100 feet forward, certain distance
up, which we'll talk about in a minute, and then after two seconds it's 200 feet, three
seconds it's 300 feet.
So it's horizontally, it's easy.
Vertically we have the same situation as throwing the ball straight up in the air.
And we've done that analysis to see how high the ball will be at each moment.
And we saw that in fact its vertical component will be 48t minus 16t squared feet up in the
air.
If its vertical component was 48 feet per second, that's how high it's going to be.
So here after a certain number of seconds, if we wanted to describe its position after
t seconds, the position would be 100t, that's its horizontal position, comma, 48t minus
16t squared.
So that gives its horizontal placement and its vertical placement.
Now the first thing that we can do is we can compute where it will land.
It will land when its height is zero, right, because it starts at height zero, we assume
the batter right at the ground, height zero, and it'll land when its height is again zero.
Well we have an equation that tells us what its height is.
Its height is 48t minus 16t squared.
So that means that its height at any time, it'll land when its height is zero, and it
also starts when its height is zero, incidentally.
And so we just solve this little equation, 48t minus 16t squared equals zero, factor
out the t's, 48 minus 16t times t equals zero.
And if you multiply two numbers together like this, 48 minus 16t times t, and you get zero,
the only way to get zero is if one or the other of those factors is zero.
The only way you can get zero is to multiply by zero.
So either the t itself is zero, or the 48 minus 16t is zero.
And that of course happens when t equals three, just three times 16 is 48.
So the two times is when the ball is hit at time zero, it's at the ground, and when t
equals three is when it's at the ground.
And therefore we can compute that it lands exactly 300 feet from where it was hit.
Oh, that was a good hit, it lands in the field.
So this is the description for a ball flying through the air.
Now one thing I want to point out is that we have derived a mathematical formula that
describes the flight of the ball.
And that's really the strength of using calculus and using mathematics in general to describe
the world, is that you can take a formula that will predict for you exactly the salient
features of what it is you're talking about, in this case the baseball traveling in the
air.
It tells us exactly where that baseball is at every moment.
And then we can do things with that formulation as we just did, for example, finding how
far it's going to land.
So if we were shooting cannons, this would be exactly what we'd want to know.
If we shoot it at such and such a speed forward and up, where is it going to land?
And this is the kind of formulation that allows us to actually find that out.
However, unfortunately, if you are actually a baseball player playing in the field, you
are not privy to the equations of how fast it's going toward you and how fast it's going
up.
The question is, is there any way for this baseball player to find out where to stand
in order to be at the position where the ball will land, right, where the baseball player
is?
See, that's a very practical question.
OK, so let's see if we can do this.
So a baseball player, when the ball is hit, starts to see the ball rising from the bat
and it rises up into the air as the player is watching it.
So I'm the outfielder.
Let's say I'm the outfielder, and I see this ball and when it's hit, it's at the level
of my eyes, it's horizontal, and as time goes by, its height rises.
And here it is, it rises up into the air, rises, rises, rises, rises, rises, rises.
So what I'm seeing, I can't tell the distance, by the way, of the ball to my eye because
that would require way too much depth perception, and I'm not able to judge that.
But what I can tell is what direction I point to see it.
So what I actually see as time goes by is a change in the angle between the horizontal
and what I see at every time.
So what we're going to look at is how that angle is changing.
Well let's see.
Here is the line of sight where I'm standing out in the field and I'm hoping to position
myself exactly at the point where the ball will land, and that's what we have in this
illustration.
So suppose that I'm sitting here, then I know that if I were sitting at the place where
it lands, if I were sitting there, which I know is 300 feet in this case, but I mean
I wouldn't know it as the player, but let's just assume for a moment that that's where
I am standing, then the picture that I would see at every time t is that I would be looking
up at this angle to see the ball.
Now remember we talked about how we measure the angles of things.
When we measure the angle of a sloping line, a convenient way to measure that steepness
is to just look at the ratio of the height to the distance along here.
And if you just know the angle, that ratio is the same, it doesn't matter how far out
it really is, the ratio of the height to the distance out is going to be the same.
So when I look out at the ball and I see it at this angle, I can compute that ratio,
the slope of the line.
And in fact, let's go ahead and do that.
In this case, the height, this height over here is 48t minus 16t squared, and the distance
at time t from this 300 foot mark is 300 minus 100t, because the ball has traveled 100t feet
from the plate.
So if I look at this ratio, the slope of the line of sight at time t is this ratio, 48t
minus 16t squared over 300 minus 100t.
Now that's sort of a complicated thing, and you don't have to worry too much about it.
And we do a little bit of algebra, just factoring out these numbers here, simplifying.
You see the 16 divides out evenly, and the t divides out evenly, and down here the 100
divides out evenly.
And the interesting thing is that this 3 minus t cancels, and we can simplify 16 over 100
to be 4 over 25.
And what we see is that the slope of the line of sight at time t is 425 times t.
Now let's interpret that.
What does that mean?
What that means is that at every time t, there's a certain slope, and that slope is increasing
at a constant rate.
In other words, the slope at time 0 is 0, and the slope after 1 second is exactly 425th
times 1.
And then after 2 seconds, it's 825th times 1.
I mean, it's 825th, it's 2 times 425th, which is 825th.
You see, and at each time, the slope is changing at this predictable rate of 425th every second.
That's the rate at which it changes.
Now if we were positioned too far back, see, suppose that I were standing, instead of 300
feet away, I was standing too far back, then I would find that this rate of increase didn't
just change at that rate.
It slowed down as time went on, and in fact, it started going down and hit the ground later.
The slope wasn't just increasing at a constant rate, and if I were standing too close and
the ball went over my head, then I would find that the rate at which the slope was changing
was increasing as time went by.
It wasn't increasing at a constant rate.
But if I'm in the position where the ball is going to land, then the slope of the tangent
line, I'm sorry, the slope of the line of sight is increasing, is just a constant times
the time.
Now, I know this is all sort of fuzzy, but what I want to point out about this, what
the consequence is, is that you're standing at the right place.
If the derivative, remember the derivative is a measure of the rate of change, if the
derivative of this slope is a constant, that's when you're standing at the right place.
When a baseball player knows it's going to land right in his glove, it's when the derivative
of the rate of change of the slope is a constant.
Let me give you an example of what actually happens in real life.
Let's take an historical example of Willie Mays in the 1954 World Series.
This is what really happened.
You may not remember the 1954 World Trails, but I will refresh your memory.
Willie Mays was the center fielder for the New York Giants, and the New York Giants in
the World Series were playing the Cleveland Indians.
Willie Mays was playing out in center field, and there was a batter at the plate, and Willie
Mays was playing in a little bit close, if I recall.
I don't really recall, of course, but anyway, he was playing in a little bit, and the ball
was hit.
The ball was hit, and if you remember the scenario of it, it's really a wonderful picture, often
shown on sports highlights of the century, that what happened is the ball was hit, and
Willie Mays looked at that thing, immediately swiveled around, and ran full speed toward
the center field, and caught the ball over his head, and the game was saved, and he won
the game.
He threw the ball back to the second base and got the run out.
It was a wonderful and exciting thing, but now I'm going to tell you what really happened.
So here's what Willie Mays actually did.
When he saw the ball leaving the bat, he said, the derivative of the slope of my line of
sight is going too fast, you see?
He took a quick derivative, he said that derivative is going too fast, and so he had to turn around
and say, I'm going to move and position myself where the derivative of the slope of the line
of sight is becoming a constant.
So he ran backwards, taking derivative derivatives, line of sight, slope, slope, until he got
to the place right at when he caught the ball, where he said, yes, the derivative of the
slope is a constant.
What we can conclude from this is not only was Willie Mays excellent at calculus, but
indeed, every outfielder knows calculus.
Thank you.
