Well, we've been discussing the derivative now for several
lectures.
Remember, the derivative was first introduced in the context
of a car moving down a road to find out the instantaneous speed
of the car, but later we saw that the derivative also told us
things, if we drew a graph, it told us the slope of the tangent
line to that curve, and we saw that we could actually take
derivatives in mechanical sort of ways so that as a practical
matter we can find out these answers.
Last time we saw an application of the derivative to baseball,
and this time we're going to be talking about how the derivative
can be used to make ourselves living in the best of all
possible worlds.
We're talking about maximizing things and minimizing things.
We can apply this technique to maximizing the profit that a
company makes, and in fact we will see such a problem and deal
with one in lecture number 22.
We can use this technique to apply to such things as health
issues.
In lecture 23 we'll take sort of a humorous example of maximizing
our length of life, depending on how much exercise we do, but
today we're going to introduce the philosophy of how to maximize
a situation by looking at a particular problem.
The problem that we're going to be dealing with at first is the
problem that I'm sure many of you face frequently, and that is
suppose that you need to build a rectangular field that is
enclosed by 600 feet of fence next to a river in order to
enclose a field where your camels can roam.
Now this is a very practical problem, but it illustrates a
technique, and so it's really actually a great example of the
technique, so bear with me on the camels.
So here's the idea.
Here we have our fencing, 600 feet of fence, and here is the
edge of the river, and our goal is to build a rectangular
enclosure.
Now when we think about this problem, the first question that
comes to mind is, well, what are the different possible shapes
for this rectangular enclosure?
Well we could make it very thin and long, sort of like a camel run.
They could run back and forth, but they couldn't go
back and forth.
So it could be very thin, and if you make it extremely thin,
then it wouldn't have much area.
Or you could take some sort of intermediate size like this,
intermediate size, or you could make it very tall and thin
like this.
You could make just a little bit on the river and have a very
tall enclosure.
So the question is, what shape should you put the fence to
enclose the biggest possible area?
This is a prototypical kind of max min problem that is the
bane of the lives of all college students in Calcutta.
I hate these things, but I love them, you see, and I'm the one
you're stuck with, so you should enjoy it too.
So here, let's look at some examples here of how we would
approach this problem.
So we see all of the different possible shapes that have the
same 600 feet of fencing next to the river.
And when we start to approach the problem, the first thing that
we might consider doing, in fact, it seems like the natural
thing to do, is to pick some shape that seems like a likely
candidate for being the biggest and figure out how many
square feet there are for that choice of enclosure.
And it seems like a natural shape to choose a square as a
shape for the field.
And so we could say, just hypothesize that we made our
fence into a square shape.
That is, we used 200 feet of fence in each of the three
sides that are not against the river.
And we would see that we would have a 200 by 200 foot field
which encloses 40,000 square feet of area.
Well, that's fine, and we can say to ourselves, well, that's
something, but do we know whether or not that is the
maximum area that can be enclosed?
What's our strategy here, is what we're thinking about.
Well, in this course, the philosophy that we've taken to
the world is instead of looking at things statically,
instead of just saying, OK, it has 40,000 square feet,
now what?
Instead, we think dynamically.
We think not just that we fix our field at 200 by 200,
but that we're varying our choices.
And we think about, well, what happens if we make an adjustment?
In particular, suppose that we tried, as an experiment,
to make the fence a little bit taller and a little bit less
long this way.
We will always refer to the distance from the river out
into the field as the width, even when it becomes longer
than the other dimension.
In other words, suppose it were 201 feet coming out from the river
and then 198 feet across the river and 201 feet back down.
What would be the area?
Well, the area here would be, we've multiplied it out,
39,798 square feet.
Well, in a way, that's sort of confirmatory to our thinking
that a square might be the biggest.
Because when we made an adjustment in that way,
we got a smaller area.
Well, let's try adjusting it the other way.
Suppose we make it 199 feet up away from the river,
and that makes it 202 feet across and 199 feet down.
We multiply that out, 199 by 202,
and we get 40,198 square feet.
In other words, we see that the square is not the biggest
field that we can enclose next to the river.
And we see this, we see it by actually looking at numbers,
of course, but the philosophy of what we're thinking about
is if we have a choice,
if we want to investigate a particular possible area,
if we make an adjustment, we make a change,
we can see whether we're increasing the area
by making that change or decreasing the area
by making that change.
Well, that's where the derivative comes in.
The derivative is measuring the rate
at which one quantity changes relative to another.
So now let's think very carefully about this.
As we're thinking about all these different possible shapes,
what will be the characteristic of the shape
at which the area is maximum?
That is, what will be the characteristic
with respect to this dynamic view of change?
Will it be that when we change, the area will increase?
No. If we change it a little bit,
it's not going to increase whether we increase the width
or we increase the length.
Any change cannot make a bigger area,
otherwise it wouldn't be the maximum.
So we're looking for a place where a little bit of change
does not have a trend in any direction.
In the case of 200 by 200, we see it does have a trend.
If we make it wider along the river,
we actually increase our area.
So what we need to do is systematically look at all possibilities,
not just selecting a few because there are infinitely many.
So that's not going to work.
We need to look at all possibilities.
And the way to look at all possibilities is we say,
well, once we have chosen the width for the fence,
all is determined because if we have this 600 feet of fence,
once we've chosen this width,
well, we've got the rest of the fence left over.
The only way we can make a rectangular enclosure
is by completing the picture.
And we know how much fence is left,
and so we know how we know we're going to use w feet on this side,
we're going to use w feet on this side,
and the rest of the fence will be the length,
which is total, which is 600 feet,
minus 2w, which are the two parts of the fence that come out.
Well, now we are going to realize
that once we've made a decision about that width,
we also know how much area is enclosed
because we know what the length is and what the width is.
The area is just the product.
So we can see that once we've made a choice of w as the width of the fence,
the area is the 600 minus 2w times w,
which is 600w minus 2w squared.
Well, this then is, as you see, a function.
It's a function that associates for every choice
among all these hypothetical experiments that we could do,
all the possible ways to build this fence.
It's telling us what the area would be for each individual choice.
And now we have our concept.
Remember, the concept is that we're looking for a place
where an adjustment in the width, the adjustment in the choice,
will not either increase nor decrease the area of the fence.
If it increased it, well, then we should pick a bigger w.
If it decreased it, we should pick a smaller w, you see?
So we're looking for that special place where there's no trend.
In other words, where the derivative is zero,
where it's not increasing nor decreasing for changes of choice of w.
So let's just see here.
We can actually graph this function.
So let's just understand what this means.
This says, this is recording what would happen
if we hypothetically built all possible shapes of fence.
Because it starts with saying that we choose width equal to zero,
meaning that we just lay the fence right along the edge of the river
and doesn't have any width.
Well, it has no area.
And that is what this is saying, having this be a zero at zero.
Likewise, suppose we made it the width 300 feet.
Well, what does that mean?
That means that we took our fencing and we just laid it right next to itself
straight up in a line.
Well, there's no area there either.
It's only in the intermediate sizes of choices of w where we get area.
And we can see by looking at this graph, a of w equals 600 w minus 2w squared,
we see that we have this nice curve that represents for every choice of w,
we go up here to see what the area is.
Now, it's obvious from looking at the picture.
Once we've drawn that picture, it's completely obvious where the maximal choice of w is.
It's at the place where the derivative is zero.
It's at the top place because it's showing what areas you have as possibilities.
It's at the top.
At the top, the tangent line is horizontal.
But remember what the derivative tells us.
The derivative tells us the slope of the tangent line, the steepness of the tangent line.
Well, the steepness of a horizontal line is zero.
So now we have something to look for.
We're looking for a place where the tangent line has slope zero.
But we know how to find the slope of a tangent line of a function.
We take the derivative and the derivative of 600 w minus 2w squared is 600 minus 4w.
And then we say, under what circumstances is that derivative equal to zero?
Well, 600 minus 4w equals zero.
When will that happen?
It will be an equation when 600 equals 4w, and that will happen when w equals 150 feet.
So the answer is 150 feet.
That's how wide we should make the river.
And the fence, 150 feet.
And here is the picture then of the enclosure when it's 150 feet wide.
Now, I want you to notice something about our method.
The actual method of finding this maximum value actually never included,
didn't include finding the area of any enclosure.
We actually did that.
Remember when we tested out the square, we found the area if it were a square enclosure.
We said 200 by 200 is 40,000 square feet.
But the actual strategy that we used to find the maximum
didn't actually involve finding the area at all at any point.
Because all that involved was to find the derivative in order to locate a width
where there was no upward nor downward trend as we considered different widths.
In other words, where the derivative was zero.
So the actual technique never involved finding out what the area actually was.
Now, here I'm doing that.
I'm multiplying it out for you just to show you that it does have a particular area
and that the area is bigger than, for example, the square area was.
But that's just for, that's sort of an added bonus.
It's not really integral to the part of, to the technique of finding that maximal area.
Let's check out that it's maximum by seeing that if we vary the width by a little bit in either direction,
we go down in area.
We enclose less area.
And sure enough, you can see, here's this picture where we make it a little bit taller.
We make it 151 tall, which leaves only 298 for the width.
And we see that when we multiply those two numbers, we get a number 44,998 square feet,
which is slightly smaller than the area enclosed by our maximum 150 by 300.
And likewise, if we make the other adjustment, making it slightly wider,
sure enough, we have that that product is once again slightly smaller than the 45,000.
And that's, of course, what we expect at the, at the maximum.
You adjust either way and you get worse.
So this is the, this is a wonderful example of how you find maximum and minimum values
if you are talking about some varying quantity.
If we have an arbitrary graph that is representing the relationship of one varying quantity to another
varying quantity, whether it's, for example, what the price of a good is on one axis
and what the demand is on another axis, that you can see that you will get a graph.
And if you're seeking places where that you have found a maximum value,
you don't have to look at all the values to see where that's likely to happen.
All you need to do is find those places where the derivative is zero.
And you can see if you have this rather complicated graph,
well, there are only one, two, three, four places where the derivative is zero.
Once you find those places where the trend is neither up nor down,
you can just individually check them and see well which one is the biggest.
You've reduced an infinite problem of checking all possible widths of area to just finding a very few.
In the case of the camel example, we actually only had one,
but in an example like this, you might have four or five that you check.
So I also, by the way, included in this picture the fact that it might be that there's an endpoint possibility
where the maximum is something that you may never reach.
It may not be a point where the derivative is zero.
It may be a point where it's an extreme.
So this technique of finding maximum and minimums,
what I'd like to leave you with on this is that it is once again an example of a dynamic view of the world
where you're looking, instead of looking at the absolute quantities that you're interested in, like the areas,
we look instead at the change and how the things are changing.
And so that's a different perspective.
And I find it sort of philosophically satisfying to see that different point of view.
Well, I'd like to look at some other examples of finding maxima and minima that are of a totally different character.
And so for this, I'd like to begin with an example of a problem that was posed in 1696.
Now, remember that calculus was just invented at that time.
Calculus had been invented by Newton and Leibniz in 1660s and 70s.
And so it was a relatively new point of view.
And it was being mined for all of its implications.
And one of the things that was happening was that people would pose questions,
challenge questions, they called them, and publicize these questions and have people work on them.
And one of the challenge questions that was posed by a mathematician by the name of Johann Bernoulli was called the Brachistochrone problem.
Brachistochrone comes from the Greek words, meaning brachy, meaning shortest and crone, meaning time.
And here was the problem that Bernoulli posed.
He said, suppose you have two points in space, two points.
They're not on top of each other, but they're just two points.
And he said, suppose that you want to roll a ball from the top point down to the bottom point.
The question was, what shape path should you make?
Sort of a groove, think of it as a path on which a ball will roll.
What path should you make so that the ball will end up at the bottom in the quickest possible time?
Well, this was an interesting challenge problem.
One thing that makes it interesting is that there is an obvious answer to the question of what is the shortest path between the top point and the bottom point.
It's the straight line.
And you might think that that's the fastest path to make the ball roll is just on that straight line because it doesn't have to go as far as any other path.
So that's the first guess is just the straight line.
Well, it turns out, as we will see later, that that is not actually the path of fastest descent.
But this problem was circulated to people, to mathematicians around Europe at that time.
And Bernoulli was famous, Johann Bernoulli was famous for having controversies with his brother, Jacob Bernoulli.
In fact, there were eight Bernoullis who were very famous mathematicians and physicists who lived during that century.
And they would fight with one another.
And so one of the things that Johann wanted to do is to pose a problem that his brother couldn't get.
You see, that was part of the challenge.
But in fact, his brother did get it.
There were five mathematicians, in fact, in Europe who were able to solve this Brachristochrone problem.
And one of them was Sir Isaac Newton.
Newton received this problem in the mail.
And at the time, he was the master of the mint.
It was 1697 when he received this problem.
And he found these challenge problems annoying.
And part of the reason that Bernoulli posed the problems was to try to show that Newton and his method wasn't really as good as Leibniz and Leibniz's.
Strategy for calculus.
So he would pose these problems.
And this was one of them.
Well, so Newton had been working at the mint and came home from the mint and said,
and he'd been living with his niece, Catherine Conduit.
And his niece wrote this about what happened.
When the problem in 1697 was sent by Bernoulli, Sir I.N., Isaac Newton,
was in the midst of the hurry of the great recoinage and did not come home till four from the tower, very much tired.
Worked very hard.
Worked all the way to four o'clock.
But did not sleep till he had solved it, which was by four in the morning.
So he had solved this problem in 12 hours.
He was able to solve this problem.
And incidentally, the solution of this problem requires inventing a whole type of calculus called the calculus of variations.
It's just, it's amazing.
But I also have to say that in reading some history, I'm not a historian,
but I read some history about calculus.
And I have to tell you that the same story was told about another problem.
So I'm not sure how accurate this was.
I'm also told about Leibniz solving this problem.
So it's not, I'm not 100% confident that this history is right.
But what I wanted to do is to demonstrate the solution to this problem.
It turns out that the correct path for the ball to follow is a path that is constructed in a way by a wheel.
And so I'm going to need some assistance from the audience.
So Virginia, would you come here and we will demonstrate this path by actually drawing the path.
And the path that I'm about to draw is called the cycloid because it comes from a circle.
And this is a big circle as you see here.
And the path is made by simply rolling the wheel along the ground and seeing what path it makes on the surface.
So here we go.
Roll, roll, roll, roll, roll, roll, roll, roll, roll.
And that, that's pretty neat.
That is the, there.
Now, you turn it upside down, and this is the path of fastest descent.
So this is the path along which, if you drop a ball, it will end up at the bottom at the
quickest possible time.
Now you're wondering, oh, is that really true?
Why is there a reason?
So what we need to do is actually demonstrate that this is true.
And so we've actually made some roller coasters for balls over here that will demonstrate
at least that this path, which is the same as the path we just generated there, that
this path, the cycloid, is going to be the path of quickest descent.
So to demonstrate this, we'll actually take two balls and roll them down.
Now, of course, it won't demonstrate that this is the fastest necessarily, because there
may be other paths.
And indeed, the thing about this problem is that it's not just one quantity that's varying,
but there are many different shapes that you could imagine to go from one point to
the other.
Any curve could go.
Even a ridiculous one that goes up and down wouldn't be the fastest, but you'd have to
consider that.
So the reason that this problem is much harder than the camels is because of the possibilities
are so much more varied.
But at least let's see that this straight line path from a point that is at this height
to this point down here, let's see that at least this cycloid path is faster than the
straight line path.
So I'm going to put the, we have black and blue balls, and we're going to put the blue
on the fast curve path and the black one on the straight path, and I'm going to let them
go and we'll see which one arrives at the bottom as soon as I hope you can see this.
OK, ready?
One, two, three.
Did it work?
Let's try it again.
OK, so which one was the blue one on the curve path on the cycloid, the black one on the
straight one.
Ready?
We'll try it one more time.
Ready?
Let's do it one more time just to make sure, OK, so the blue one, blue one.
By the way, I did want to say one other thing about this cycloid curve which is really amazing,
and that is that it turns out that this is not only the brachrystochrone, but it's also
called an isochrone, meaning that it doesn't matter where I start the ball on this curved
path, it will arrive at the bottom at exactly the same amount of time.
OK, let's see here.
So let's, so just to, well, I'll see if I can, I'll just try it one more time.
OK, well anyway, enough for the rolling ball time.
I wanted to tell you one other problem of maximization problem that comes from ancient
times, and that is so-called Dido's problem.
So Dido was the queen of Carthage, and she was given as much area for Carthage as could
be enclosed by the hide of an ox.
And well, it doesn't sound very like a lot of stuff, but what she did, and this comes
up in Virgil's Aeneid, by the way, and what she did is she cut the ox hide into very thin
strips, and then she had a, after doing that, she had, of course, a one loop of string,
and the question is, the mathematical question of Dido's problem is, what shape can you put
a given length of string in to enclose the biggest area?
And it could, you might think of a square or a hexagon, or you might think of all sorts
of different shapes, maybe an oval, maybe an ellipse, but of course the answer is, as
you probably would guess, the answer is a perfect circle.
And so this was a reference to the, from ancient times, about a problem that was a very practical
one, how can you enclose the biggest area with the hide of an ox?
Well this completes our series of discussions about the derivative, and in the next two
lectures we're going to talk again about ancient times, and we're going to be talking
about ancient precursors to the integral.
And these are wonderful because they give geometric methods for finding out things like
the formulas for the area of a circle and the volume of a sphere that are very geometric,
and they use the ideas that we have seen before, and we'll see again in the integral.
So I look forward to them.
Bye for now.
These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by the teaching company.
The lecturer is Professor Michael Starbird.
Professor Starbird is a professor of mathematics and a university distinguished teaching professor
at the University of Texas at Austin.
He received his BA from Pomona College and his PhD in mathematics from the University
of Wisconsin.
In 1974, Professor Starbird joined the Department of Mathematics at the University of Texas
at Austin.
During his tenure, he has accepted visiting positions at the Institute for Advanced Study
in Princeton, the University of California at San Diego, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
From 1989 to 1997, Professor Starbird served as associate dean of the College of Natural
Sciences, and he is a member of the Academy of Distinguished Teachers.
In his interest to bring authentic understanding of significant ideas in mathematics to the
non-mathematician, Professor Starbird has developed and taught an acclaimed class that
presents higher-level mathematics to liberal arts students.
He has also authored a book on the subject.
The Heart of Mathematics, An Invitation to Effective Thinking, co-authored with Edward
B. Berger, was the recipient of a 2001 Robert W. Hamilton book award.
A popular lecturer on campus, Professor Starbird has won numerous teaching awards, including
a Minnie Stevens Piper Professorship awarded to ten professors each year in the state of
Texas, the Gene Holloway Award for Teaching Excellence, the oldest teaching award at UT,
the President's Associates Teaching Excellence Award, and the Friar Society Centennial Teaching
Fellowship, which is awarded to one professor at UT annually.
Professor Starbird prepared the course guide that comes with these tapes.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical
notes, and bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
These lectures are titled Change and Motion.
Calculus made clear.
