During the last 10 lectures, we have visited first the derivative for five lectures, and
then the last five lectures were about the integral.
This lecture is on the fundamental theorem of calculus again.
As you recall, we discussed the fundamental theorem of calculus in lecture four, but at
the time of lecture four, there are lots of things we did not know about the derivative
and about the integral.
It's time now to revisit the fundamental theorem of calculus, the theorem that connects the
derivative to the integral, and to see that connection this time using notation and also
interpreting it in the ways that we have seen that the derivative and the integral can be
interpreted.
Let's first of all cast our minds back to the ancient past when we were first thinking
about what it was that a derivative and an integral mean.
Remember that these ideas were generated by thinking of a car moving down a straight road.
So here we have a car, and it travels along a road, and at every time it has a position
on the road, and that was the position function, and then we knew that if we took the derivative
of the position function, that derivative gave us the instantaneous velocity at each
moment.
So that was the generating idea of derivative.
Now subsequently in lecture five, we saw that the derivative had a different kind of
interpretation in a different setting.
For example, if we had a graph, we saw that the derivative represented the slope of the
tangent line to that curve, and the reason was, here is a graph, we see this graph, and
we see this point, and the derivative of that curve at the point is the slope of the tangent
line.
Well, we saw that the reason that was true is that the definition of the procedure by
which we got the velocity from the position.
And that procedure was to say, OK, where am I now?
Where will I be in just a short interval of time?
Subtract the two to find how far I went, and then divide by the small change in time to
get the average velocity during that short interval of time.
That was the strategy.
That was the procedure that was the defining concept for the derivative.
Then we saw that that same procedure gave us the steepness of the line tangent to a curve.
What that means is that the derivative is a versatile process.
It's a process that tells us more than one thing, depending on the interpretation of
the functions that are involved, whether it's the position function or whether it is some
other function.
For example, we saw that if we take the function that gives us the volume here, that the derivative
of the volume of the sphere is the surface area of the sphere.
And in fact, just to remind you, you see that the formula for the volume of a sphere is
the volume of a sphere of radius r is 4 thirds pi r cubed, and the derivative of that formula
is 4 pi r squared.
And we saw that the surface area of a sphere is 4 pi r squared.
Well, likewise, the integral was first introduced in terms of a car moving down a road.
It was introduced because in the context of trying to find out how far a car would go
if you had a videotape of the speedometer.
And remember the idea of finding how far the car went was that we said, OK, if we know
how fast we're going, say, at every second, we can see how far we went during each second
approximately by assuming that the car went at a steady velocity during that second.
And then we said how far it went during that second and the next second.
We added to them up to get the total distance traveled.
So the integral was a whole process of taking sums.
Well then later, we saw that the integral could be reinterpreted when we looked at a
function graphically.
It was reinterpreted as the area underneath the curve and above the axis.
And we saw it, or if it went below the axis, then it was the negative of that area.
So we reinterpreted the process of the integral so that in a different context, it gives us
a meaningful answer to a different question.
It started out giving us a meaningful answer to the question, if I know how fast a car
is going, how far will it have gone between one time and another?
That was the generating idea for defining the integral as we did.
But then we saw that that same solution applied to a different set of problems, including
what is the area under a curve?
How do we find the area under a curve?
Well, we took this curve, this was the characteristic picture for finding the area under a curve.
We see this graph and we divided up the interval into little pieces and above each one we made
a rectangle at the height of the curve.
And then we added up the areas of those little rectangles to get an approximation to the
area under the curve.
So the integral then had an interpretation in these different settings in different ways.
We also saw how the integral could be used to talk about the volume of objects when we
viewed them dynamically as growing, for example, a cone when we think of it as layers of disks
added on top of each other to fill up a cone.
We saw that the process of accumulating that volume was, once again, the integral process.
So the integral has all these different interpretations.
Now we want to see if we can, once again, put these two ideas together.
Once again, we'll revisit the fundamental theorem of calculus and reinterpret it in
light of these different meanings for derivative and integral.
So let me remind you that the fundamental theorem of calculus is this in its most basic
form.
It said the following.
If I want to take an integral of something, if I think of it as the velocity, if I have
the velocity of a moving card, every moment I see a speedometer says, and I want to know
how far it goes, I take an integral.
On the other hand, another way to find that same answer was to say, well, if I have a
position function whose derivative is the velocity function whose integral I'm trying
to take, then it's very easy to know how far I went.
I just say, where was I at the end, where was I at the beginning, and subtract the two.
Let's look at exactly what I said in its notation, in using our new notation for the integral
and for the derivative.
So here's our, remember our notation for the integral from A to B of v of t dt.
On the one hand, by the definition of the integral, the way we defined it, we know that the value
of this is going to be the distance traveled.
Actually, more precisely, it's the difference between where we end up and where we started,
because if we are ever traveling backwards, we subtract that distance.
So we saw that the integral from A to B of v of t dt is the, is the, is the, so to speak,
net distance accomplished between the times A and B.
Remember that if we have a position function, then that same computation can be accomplished
by saying where were we at time B, where were we at time A, and we subtract the two to see
the net distance traveled.
But that's the same as the integral from A to B of the derivative of the position function,
because the derivative of the position function just tells us the speed at every moment.
So if we're talking about a car moving along a road, and we know that its position at every time
is P of t, that's its position at every time, that's all it says is you look out the window
and you see what the mileage marker says.
And so that's given by some, some P of t function.
Then we know that the process of taking the derivative, that infinite process of taking
the differences of positions at time t plus delta t minus P of t over delta t,
that whole process gave us the speed at each moment.
Well, if we knew this note at every moment, then we would know how far we went between
time A and time B simply by saying where were we at time B, where were we at time A,
and subtracting.
Said another way, the integral of the velocity function is equal to the position function
at the top limit of integration minus the position function at the bottom limit of integration.
So this formula right here, we know it's true when we interpret the integral and the derivative
in terms of this car moving on a road.
But that means that it's also true even if we're talking about the integral and the derivative
having different interpretations in these different contexts.
Because what, what, what this is referring to, this equality is referring to the processes
of the derivative and the integral.
In other words, suppose that I have a, just an arbitrary derivative,
arbitrary function capital F, and I don't tell you whether it's the position function
of a car moving down a road.
But I, I, I say, I do know it's derivative.
Suppose I know it's derivative.
Well, then the, the integral of that derivative is just going to be the function evaluated
at the top limit of integration minus the function evaluated at the bottom limit of integration.
I personally like to think of the fundamental theorem of calculus in this way.
If I'm given a, a, a function capital F of x, and it could be some complicated function,
it can have all x's all over and division and multiplication and all sorts of complicated things.
If I have this, if I'm faced with this kind of function, I say to myself, well,
I could think of driving down a road with mileage markers and just keep the car exactly at the
mileage marker given by that complicated function.
You see, even if the function is talking about something entirely different,
the function's talking about volume, the function's talking about price and demand.
In the abstract, I can think of it as just the position of a car.
And therefore, I know that the relationship that I would have via the fundamental theorem of calculus
is going to still hold true even if instead of giving the position of a car,
it's giving me something entirely different.
So, so I know that the, the relationship between a function and the integral and derivative processes
that show that the derivative process is the opposite of the integral process
is going to hold true regardless of what the function is.
That's the strength of the abstraction of mathematics.
That once we see a relationship, a mathematical relationship between processes or between functions,
then it holds true regardless of how we interpret those or what setting we find them.
So let's, let's proceed and, and realize now that if we're trying to actually find an integral,
the best strategy for doing so is to find some function whose derivative
is the function whose integral we're trying to take.
You see, let's go back to this previous slide.
Here in this previous slide, you see, if you're trying to take the integral of f prime of x dx,
suppose you don't know it's f prime of something, you're just given that function.
Then if you could find the f for which the thing you're trying to integrate is the derivative,
then you'd be in good shape because all you'd have to do is plug in the value of the top limit of integration
and subtract the function evaluated at the bottom limit of integration.
So if we are given an integral, our challenge is to find a function whose derivative is that thing.
So we're trying to do the opposite of derivative.
And in fact, that's what it's called, antiderivative.
If we're given the function 2x, an antiderivative of 2x is x squared.
All that means is that the derivative of x squared is 2x.
And we saw that before for that particular function.
We saw that that is, in fact, the derivative of x squared.
We saw before that if you have a function c of x, its derivative is the constant c.
c is just a constant, so like 5 times x.
The derivative is 5.
That's because 5 times x is simply a straight line with slope 5.
So its derivative is the steepness of that line, 5.
Well, looked at backwards, see, every time you know how to take a derivative,
you know how to take an antiderivative because it's just looking at that equation backwards.
The derivative of a constant times x is the constant.
So that means an antiderivative of a constant is the constant times x.
So the idea is whenever we have a derivative formula,
we automatically have an antiderivative formula because we just look at it backwards.
So, for example, if you take the derivative, you may remember,
you probably don't remember from lecture, way back in lecture 5,
but you could check it on the chart.
In lecture 7, we actually had a chart of different derivatives
where we showed what the derivative of various functions was.
And we saw that the derivative of x to the n plus 1 divided by n plus 1,
the way we took that derivative is we just took the exponent and moved it down
and then we reduced the exponent by 1.
There was a mechanical process for taking the derivative.
And so we see this formula that the derivative of this expression is x to the n.
That means that the antiderivative of this side of the equation
is whatever it is we took the derivative of to get it.
So the point is that every derivative formula has a counterpart that is an antiderivative formula.
So if you know how to take a derivative, you know how to take antiderivatives.
Well, it turns out that taking derivatives is very simple.
We had a chart in lecture 7.
We had this long chart where we saw how to take derivatives of polynomials.
And we saw how to take derivatives of some trigonometric functions like sine of x.
And it was fun and you loved it.
You may not remember that.
This is really great.
But what we didn't do in that lecture, but what is true,
is that if you combine functions together,
if you once you know how to take a derivative of one function
and you know how to take a derivative of another,
you can combine them and take the derivative of all sorts of combinations.
For example, multiplying them together, dividing one by another,
taking an exponential of one to a power.
All of these kinds of things become sort of mechanical ways of finding derivatives.
So finding derivatives is easy in general.
So what that means in this lecture is if you ever have a derivative formula,
well, you can just do the opposite, look at it backwards,
and you have an antiderivative formula.
You look at such an equation and you go backwards.
Well, okay.
So what that means is that if you are faced with an integral
and you actually want to get an answer to an integral,
and the integral had this nice sleek s thing,
and then you have some function in there,
what you say to yourself is,
boy, I wish I could find a function whose derivative is what I see in there.
And if you can ever find that function, that's an antiderivative.
And if you can find that antiderivative, then you're in business
because you can find this integral not by dividing up the thing
into little tiny pieces and multiplying and adding,
which is the definition of the integral and the meaning of it.
But you can get that answer in a very quick, short-cut way
by just plugging in the value at the top
and plugging in the value at the bottom and subtracting.
So in fact, let's do a couple of these just to show you very quickly.
Let's take a few just integrals.
The integral using our antiderivative formula here.
So remember, here is the fundamental theorem of calculus written out.
It says that the integral from a to b of f prime of x dx equals f of b minus f of a.
So let's just do some examples.
Suppose we want to take the integral,
here's the integral from 1 to 4 of, let's say,
x to the fourth power dx.
Well, remember our antiderivative formula that we had in this previous slide.
It said that the antiderivative of x to the fourth power and antiderivative
was x to the fifth power divided by 5.
Well, once we know that the derivative of x to the fifth divided by 5 is x to the fourth,
we can easily take the integral from 1 to 4 of x to the fourth
just by plugging in the 4 into x to the fifth over 5,
plugging in 1 to x to the fifth over 5 and subtracting.
And so we see we can actually compute the answer by doing that multiplication.
So when we took this integral of x to the fourth from 1 to 4,
it would have been a very complicated procedure to divide up all the numbers
between 1 and 4 and take first, divide them into, say, tenths and then increments of a hundredth
and then take the value of the function at each point
and then multiply to get the area of that real thin rectangle and then adding all those up.
That would be the procedure of getting the integral.
And it would give us the same answer when we did that by taking smaller and smaller things.
But we found the answer.
We actually got this number in a very quick way when we could find an antiderivative.
And that's the power of the fundamental theorem of calculus.
And let me tell you that students, when students leave calculus classes,
if I give them an integral, they may have forgotten
that the definition of the integral involves breaking up the interval
from the lower limit of integration to the top limit of integration to pieces
and adding up these little rectangles.
Rectangles may no longer even come to their mind
because they get so accustomed to the idea that to take an integral to actually get the value,
what you do is you find an antiderivative
and just plug in the top number and plug in the bottom number and you get an answer.
What's amazing about the fundamental theorem is that the answer you get has a meaning.
And the meaning is the definition of the integral.
That's the miraculous thing about it.
It would be easy to get some sort of answer.
The amazing thing is it tells you something you want to know.
So now you may have noticed that throughout this lecture,
I've always said an antiderivative.
I said an antiderivative.
For example, I said, what is an antiderivative of 2x?
And I said x squared is an antiderivative of 2x.
And I was very careful about this.
And if you go back and play the tape and listen very carefully,
I always said an antiderivative.
And you may have said, well, why doesn't he say the antiderivative?
Why didn't I say the antiderivative of 2x is x squared?
And why does an antiderivative?
And the answer is that we have to understand the fact that there are more functions
than one have the same derivative, not just one function.
And there's a very simple reason for this.
More functions than one have the same derivative.
The reason is this.
Let's go back to the idea of a car moving on a straight road
and looking out the window at the mileage markers that go all along the road.
When we look at those mileage markers, and at every moment of time,
we look out and we see what the mileage marker is.
You know, there's a mileage marker at every single spot.
It's really an amazing road.
We look at the side.
Then that, remember, was the position function.
And from that position function, we got, by using the derivative, the velocity function.
Well, suppose that you had competing politicians who were from different cities
and they had independently created the mileage markers on the road
that started from their hometown of birth, their birthplace,
because they wanted to commemorate themselves.
So, for example, suppose you're driving from Austin, Texas to Dallas, Texas.
Now, on that road, Waco is about halfway between about 100 miles.
It's about 200-mile trip. Waco is about 100 miles.
Now, suppose you're driving to Dallas and you've just passed Waco.
And it turns out that there were two politicians who both were involved in the building of the road.
And one was born in Austin and one was born in Waco.
Then the one that was born in Austin would start the mileage markers from Austin
because then the mileage marker would say,
how far are you from the source of everything, namely my place of birth?
So this is the mileage marker.
So on that scheme, on that side of the road, that's what you have, these mileage markers from Austin.
Now, on the other side of the road, you have the politician from Waco
was the one who was responsible for the other side of the road.
And so that politician started the mileage markers at zero at Waco.
And then just put the mileage markers on from then on, you see, on that side of the road.
And now here we have a picture of what you would see.
So now, as you drive down the road, you don't have just mileage markers on one side of the road,
but you have mileage markers on both sides of the road.
Well, let's think about it.
So as you drive down the road, if you look out the left window, you get one position function
that's measured by the mileage marker from Waco.
And then if you look out the other side of the road, you get the position function
measured from the position from Austin.
So, but as you drive down the road, first of all, you're just doing one trip.
I mean, you're just one car in one trip.
It's just that you've got two ways of measuring where you are.
If you found your speed, you're going to get the same answer for the speed
because you're only going one speed at each time.
And regardless of whether you computed it on the basis of the mileage marker out your left window
by doing the derivative, or you computed it by looking out the right window
and taking the derivative of the mileage markers to the right,
you're going to get the same answer, right?
Because you're just, all it is, is that these two things differ by a constant.
You see, as you go down the road, you see that here the one mile mark from Waco
is the 101 mile mark from Austin.
The two mile mark is 102, three mile mark is 103.
And if we think very carefully back to the way the derivative was defined,
remember what we did?
We said here is the formula to remind you.
It's P of t plus delta t minus P of t over delta t.
And look what happens.
If P of t plus delta t, if you used the mileage markers that were 100 bigger,
they cancel out because all you're talking about is the difference
between where you were at one moment of time from where you were at another moment of time.
You don't care what the absolute number is.
So if you have two functions that differ by a constant, their derivative will be the same.
Let's look at it in a different way.
Suppose that you have two functions, and you can think of these if you wish
as position functions of a moving car, or you can just think of it in the abstract.
Remember that the derivative of any smooth function is just telling us how steep the tangent line is at every point.
Well, if I have two functions that are just transposed, one is just shifted up from the other,
then the slope of the tangent line is exactly the same above every point.
For example, at this point, it's horizontal.
And if I go up to this one, it's also horizontal.
So the slope of the tangent line is the same, which means the derivative is the same.
So this then is a, this then, these two functions that just differ by a constant
will always give us the same slope of the tangent line, and therefore will have the same derivative.
Let's remember one other example of a function whose derivative we took.
Remember we took the derivative of the sine function.
This was back in lecture seven.
We saw using that pretty picture of the circle, and there was a little triangle up there,
and we took the quotient and found similar triangles.
It was a really neat proof that we saw that the slope of the tangent line of the sine function was just the value of the cosine.
In other words, we saw that the, for example, here where the sine function is going up at steepness one,
sure enough, the value of the cosine is one.
Here where the sine has tangent line that's horizontal, sure enough, the value of the cosine is zero.
So the cosine is telling us the slope of the tangent curve to the sine at every point.
So we have this expression for the relationship between the sine and the cosine.
The derivative of the sine is the cosine, and the derivative of the cosine was minus the sine.
What that means is that we can actually take an integral that involves, for example, the sine.
How do we do it?
Well, since we know that the derivative of the cosine is minus the sine,
we want to take the integral of the sine.
We say, OK, what function has derivative sine x?
Answer, negative of the cosine, since we could change these minus signs and put them on the other side.
So the integral of the sine is minus the cosine, and all we do is we plug in the pi, and we plug in the zero,
and we realize that the cosine of pi, that's 180 degrees, pi radians, the cosine of pi is minus one.
So minus minus one is plus one, and minus minus cosine of zero is one.
So that is plus one again, one plus one equals two.
And what this says is that under the sine curve between the point zero and where it hits again on that axis,
between zero, the area under that nice sine curve is exactly equal to two.
We'll find that this is a useful formula when next time we make an application of that information for computing of all things probability,
the probability of throwing a breadstick on the floor and hitting a line.
But that's for the next lecture.
