During the last several lectures, we've been talking about the integral, and we've understood
the integral in various settings. We saw it first as coming, arising from a car moving
down a straight road and accumulating velocity to get distance traveled. We saw it graphically,
that means the area underneath the curve of a function, the graph of a function, and
we saw in the last lecture on the fundamental theorem of calculus that we can actually compute
this long tedious addition process by just taking an antiderivative of a function and
then subtracting two numbers to get the value of that integral, which is the sum. Well, it
turns out that the value of calculus in general, both the derivative and the integral, lies
in its applications to all sorts of different areas of the world. And so it certainly shouldn't
come as a surprise to us that one of the areas of the world in which it's applied is to mathematics
itself. So today we're going to talk about an application of calculus to a branch of
mathematics, probability. Now, probability, as you know, is the study of events where
you don't know what the answer is going to be. There are random events that happen and
you try to make a quantitative description of what is likely to happen. I view it as
one of the really wonderful conceptual advances in the world to think about taking things
where we don't know what's going to happen and yet we can make sense about saying, to
what extent don't we know it? Can we give a number to what the probability is that something
will happen when we don't really know what's going to happen? Well, that's a wonderful
conceptual idea. And what I'd like to do is to start with a brief description of basic
ideas of what we mean by probability. And probability actually did arise from games
of chance. So this is, it's not an accident that I will choose this die as a way to illustrate
some ideas of basic probability. So the idea is this, a die is a cube. It has six sides
and each side has a number on it, one, two, three, four, five, six number spots. If we
roll the die on the table, one of the faces is on top and of course we don't know which
one will be on top. It could be any one of the six numbers. And since the sides of the
die are viewed as more or less symmetrical to each other, there's an equally likely chance
that the number will come up in any one of the six numbers. And so we say that the probability
of one of the numbers arising on the top is one over six, because it comes out at one
time for each six times. Now, I actually had my children do an experiment to see whether
or not this probability really played out in real life. And I made them take some dice
and throw the dice a thousand times and carefully record what numbers came up. And in particular,
I asked them to count how many times the number three would come up in a thousand throws of
a dice. And so they threw these dice, you know, very, very good. They threw the dice
and sure enough, they came up with exactly 164 times out of those thousand throws were
a three. Well, now let's think about whether or not that seems to be confirmatory about
the actual probability of the dice landing three. Remember, our philosophy is that the
that since there are equally likely, there are six equally likely outcomes for the die
to come up, we would expect a three to arise a sixth of the time. Well, if you take six
into a thousand, you actually get 166 and two thirds. That's the exact number. And sure
enough, it came up very close to that 164. Now, I will confess to you that if it had come
up, for example, just say 50 times, I would have made him do it again. So there's a certain
amount of rigging the data. But this actually happened. It really was 164. You have to take
my word for it. But the reason that I did this experiment is because I wanted to point
out one of the features of probability, which is that if you perform an experiment many,
many times, the ratio of the number of times it comes out in a certain way divided by the
total number of times you do the experiment will tend to approach the probability as you
as you take more and more experiments. In other words, if we shook a die, not just a
thousand times, but say a million times, we would expect that the fraction of number of
times it came out of three divided by that million to get increasingly close to the number
one six. It's not that you'll hit it right on the nose. You won't get the closest number
like 164 isn't the absolute closest number to 166 and two thirds. That would have been
167. But it's it's fairly close. And as you choose more numbers, you get closer and closer
to the actual probability. Now, this is an important point to understand for the rest
of this lecture, because in the rest of this lecture, we're going to be talking about a
probability whose answer is much more subtle than one sixth. It's a number that is actually
a peculiar number that we'll talk about and you'll enjoy. But but for now, the the the
thing to remember is that if you repeat an experiment, the fraction of successful outcomes
that is outcomes that you're talking about compared to the total number of things that
you do will tend toward the actual probability. Okay, so now let's turn our attention to an
18th century French scientist by the name of George Louise Leclerc comte de Buffon.
Now Buffon was a scientist who had an experiment in probability that was very famous and it's
known as Buffon's needle experiment. And what he did is he suggested the following probabilistic
event. He took a a a stick or a needle. It's called a needle in his and in the literature.
He took a needle and and he said, suppose that you have a striped paper or table or floor
where the stripes are parallel to each other and they're exactly the distance apart that
is equal to the length of the needle. Okay, and and then suppose that you take your your
stick and you randomly throw the stick on the table. Well, sometimes you'll throw it
and it'll when it lands, it will cross the one of the lines. And sometimes when you throw
it, it will not hit a line. So so those are the two possibilities doesn't hit a line does
cross a line. Okay, well, so the question is, what is the the probability if you just throw
these things randomly? What is the probability that that stick will hit the line? Well, now
this may be sort of, you know, mildly interesting in in some ways. But maybe it will become
more interesting to you when I tell you that using this analysis of throwing a needle randomly
on this on this floor with parallel lines actually allows you to compute the value of
the number Pi completely surprising why in the world but throwing sticks on the on the
ground, let you get some approximation to the number Pi. Well, that is the surprise for
the day. So how does Pi arise from throwing sticks onto a floor? Well, in order to do this
analysis, the first thing that one could do to actually approach this problem is to just
try it. Just try it. And and we could we could do that we can we can try it by throwing these
these sticks over and over again, and seeing if they hit. Now, if we actually do it with
just breadsticks, it we couldn't do very many repetitions. In fact, after I do about three
of them, they break. But that's that's a difference. So it would take a long time to do to throw
throw needles on on lines and count them up. But fortunately, we have computers. Now computers
are very good at doing such repetitious things. And in fact, there is there are several websites
that you can find if you search on the funds needle that will actually perform this experiment
on the screen for you. And you can just let it run. And it'll see how many times that
the needle hits the line and how many times it doesn't hit the line. So I ran one of these
programs. And I made it run for 100,000 times. It threw the the the needle randomly 100,000
times. And it came out to hit the line exactly 63,639 times and hit the line. So so you can see
that the the probability of the breadstick hitting the line is something like the fraction
63,639 divided by 100,000. That's getting to be an approximation to the actual probability of the
breadstick hitting the line. Because it's it's it's I've repeated the experiment so many times
that you expect the actual fraction of the experiments to approximate the the actual
probability. Now the interesting thing is that we can compute the actual probability
completely theoretically. And we'll do that. And that's where the calculus comes in. We
can compute the probability completely theoretically. And then we use this evidence
about the 63,639 over 100,000 as an example to to be able to say, ah, well then that fraction
must be an approximation of this theoretically attained probability. Okay, so let's let's
proceed and we'll make this a little clearer as we go. So here's our situation. We have
parallel lines. And we throw the breadsticks one after another or the needles we'll call
us called needles. So we throw the needles one after another. Each needle is exactly the the
length of this this line. And for the sake of this demonstration, let's call that length two.
It turns out it's easier to call it two than one as you'll see as you'll see later.
So let's suppose that each stick is of length two. And we think about where could that needle
land? Where could it land? And how are we going to describe where it lands? Well, let's let's
think about this. The first way to describe where it lands could be by saying where the center is.
We know that the center is going to be within one unit of one of these parallel lines because the
parallel lines go on forever. And so you can't be more than one unit away. No point can be more
than one unit away from the nearest line. So if we have a point and we the first way to describe
where it is is how far that point is from the line. So that's some number between zero and one.
Zero if the center is right on the line and one if the center is right between two of the lines.
The second parameter that we can can discuss about how where it is, is what angle it's landed at.
You see? So if you know where the center is and you know what angle it sits at, you know where it is.
And in fact, you'll be able to tell whether it hits the line. In other words, if I tell you that it
landed at 45 degrees, and by the way, we've got to be specific about how we're measuring the angles.
So let's measure the angles in the following way. We take a line parallel to the lines of the table
and then we measure counterclockwise up until we hit the direction of the needle.
And so that'll be the angle. That's how we're measuring the angle. So if we know the angle
and where the center point is, we should be able to figure out when it hits the line. Let's be more
specific. So first of all, let's note that if the breadstick is actually perpendicular to the lines,
then the angle is 90 degrees, or since we're in a calculus class, pi over 2, measure. Remember,
we always measure how far around a unit circle you go to measure the angle. And since the whole
unit circle has circumference 2 pi, then pi over 2 is a quarter of 2 pi. So pi over 2 plus pi over 2
is pi, and then twice that is 2 pi. So it's a quarter of the way around a circle. And indeed,
that's what this angle is. You see it's a quarter of the way around the circle. So that orientation of
the breadstick would correspond to having angle pi over 2. Now, if we take a particular
location for the center point, we can think about moving that breadstick at a particular angle
and moving it up until we hit one of the parallel lines. So at a given angle, there are some locations
for the center point where the breadstick will hit the line and some locations where it will not hit
the line. And once it hits the line, once you actually hit, then you will continue to hit as
you get closer all the way to zero. So what this is is every angle has a particular distance where
it first starts to encounter the line. Let's see if we can be specific about that. If we're talking
about a particular angle theta, and you can think about 45 degrees or you can think about any
particular angle you want, if you hold the breadstick at this angle and you move up, when do you first
hit? Well, you first hit when the sine of theta is equal to the distance that the center is from
the line. Because you see, remember the sine of theta was the height around a circle of the radius.
So let's remember how the sine worked. If you have a radius and you go up a certain angle theta,
so here you go, up an angle theta, theta meaning the distance that you travel around here,
then by definition the sine of this angle is just the vertical distance of that point.
That was the sine. So at a given angle, the place that it will hit is where that vertical
distance is equal to the distance from the center point to the line. Remember I picked this breadstick
to be length two, so that half of it was length one. And that's the secret for why I did that,
so that the sine would be exactly that distance. So that means that every we can describe in the
set of all possible locations of the breadstick, we can describe those positions in which the
breadstick hits and those descriptions in which the breadstick does not hit. So let's look at
this rectangle. You see this big rectangle here has two coordinates. The bottom coordinate is the
possible angles of the breadstick. It could be anywhere from zero, which would be horizontal,
to 180 degrees. And any angle in between there is a possible angle for the breadstick.
So that is this parameter from zero and pi. Pi is 180 degrees. So that is the parameter of this
parameter. Now, for every such angle, we have a distance that the center of the of the breadstick
is from the line. So for every angle, it could be either distance zero apart from the line, which
is if it's right on the line, or it could it could be further away all the way down to distance one
away from the line, if it's right exactly centered between two parallel lines.
And now, so this rectangle, every point in the rectangle represents one possible landing position
of the needle. Well, which of those positions represent a hit? And which of those positions
represent a miss? Well, let's think about that. Well, remember, for any given angle,
which in our graphic here means like taking this number theta, for any given angle,
when do we start to hit? Well, we start to hit when the distance away from the line is less
than the sign of theta, less than the sign of theta. That means if we go up from theta,
all of the points straight down from the sign of theta, down to the bottom,
represent places of of hitting, because they represent here's sign of theta where it first hits,
and then as we get closer, it continues to hit. But notice that when the angles are shallower,
if it's close to zero, that would be a place like over here. When the angle is closer to zero,
you don't hit, except if you're very close to the line. You see, you don't hit it at this angle,
you have to be way up here before you hit. So the point is that
if we shade in white, as you see here, those locations that represent hitting of the line,
the boundary of those two locations is exactly the sign of theta. In other words, for every theta,
it's everything less than the sign of theta that is equal to the represents a hit.
Okay, now remember our goal. Our goal was to try to understand the probability that if you throw
a needle down on these parallel lines, what's the probability that you actually hit a line?
Well, now we have a graphical representation that allows us to try to compute that,
because we know that this entire rectangle, this entire rectangle, is the all possible positions
is all the positions that correspond to a hit. The part up here corresponds to a miss.
Well, what is the area of the whole rectangle? That's easy. Area of a rectangle is its length
times its width. Well, that's interesting because its width here is pi. Its height is one,
so the area of the whole rectangle is pi. If we knew what the area underneath the sign curve was,
then we would know the probability because it would be the area under the sign curve
divided by pi. It would be the ratio of the hits to the total. Well, let's just see.
The area under a curve is given by the integral. That's what the integral does for us.
So the area under the sign curve, the area of this white part is exactly equal to the integral
from zero to pi of the sign of theta d theta. That's what the integral tells us. It tells us
if we have any graph of any curve, the integral tells us the area under that curve. So once again,
what we're doing is interpreting the integral in a setting. I mean, here we know that integral
gives us area under a curve, but now that particular area under the curve we've been talking about
means something. It means those places when you throw the breadstick or the needle, it hits
the line, and that's the way mathematics is used. So now the question is, can we actually find out
what the integral from zero to pi of sign theta d theta is? Well, the answer is yes. And why can
we do it? Because we remember back to the last lecture on the fundamental theorem of calculus.
So remember in the last lecture, when you're computing an integral of something,
how do you compute that integral? What you do is you say to yourself, can I find
another function whose derivative is the thing inside the integral? Can I find another function,
in this case, whose derivative is the sign of theta? Well, let's think about it. Remember back to
lecture seven. In lecture seven, we computed what the derivative of the sign was and what the
derivative of the cosine was. And we discovered that the derivative of the cosine was minus the sign.
And therefore, the derivative of minus the cosine is equal to the sign of theta.
So now we see that in order to compute this integral from zero to pi of sign theta d theta,
since we know that the derivative of minus the cosine of theta equals sign theta,
in order to compute this integral, all we do is plug in the value pi and then the value zero
into the expression minus cosine theta and subtract the two to get the answer.
Okay, the cosine of pi, what's the cosine of pi? Pi is 180 degrees. The cosine, remember,
is measuring the horizontal distance of that point on the circle. So remember here, if you have an
angle, the cosine is this distance. So over here, the cosine, for a point over here, the cosine
is a negative value because it comes back here to minus one to the center, zero. So the cosine of pi
is negative one. Likewise, the cosine of zero is one. Cosine of zero is one. Therefore, you see in
our expression here, the value of minus cosine of pi is minus minus one, that's plus one, and then
minus minus the cosine of zero, well, minus minus is plus, the cosine of zero is one. So we have one
plus one equals two. So what that says is that even though this sine curve looks, it's a very,
you know, it's a smooth curve. And amazingly, the area underneath that curve is exactly two,
precisely two units of area. Rather amazing. Okay, now we have, so we use the fundamental
theorem of calculus to find out what the integral from zero to pi of sine theta d theta was. We saw
it's exactly two. But now we know what the probability is. The probability that is that when we
throw a needle randomly, it's going to hit a line. The probability is, remember we said, the shaded
portion divided by the total area. But now we know what the shaded portion is. It has area two. And
we know that the total area, since it was a rectangle, pi by one, has area one, pi. Therefore,
the actual probability is two over pi. So what does this mean? This means if you throw a
breadstick or a needle randomly onto a floor that has parallel lines, and the needle is exactly as
long as the distance between those lines, it will hit a line with probability two over pi. Well,
so what? Well, here's one thing that we can deduce from this. Suppose we actually just do the
experiment many, many times. Then we would expect that the number of times that the needle hits
the line, the fraction of times that it hits the line compared to the number of experiments we do,
will be getting closer and closer to the number two over pi. Well, if we can get numbers that are
getting closer and closer to two over pi, then by just doing very simple algebra, we can see
that pi is just by cross-multiplying, we can see that pi is approximately equal to
two times the number of times you did the experiment divided by the number of times
the outcome came out the way it was. So doing this experiment actually allows us to approximate
the number pi. You see? So now we've looked at this thing sort of backwards. We theoretically
found out what the actual probability was, and then by doing the experiment, we know that the
experiment is going to converge toward the number two over pi. And so after doing the experiment
a lot of times, we know it's getting closer to two over pi, and then we can do this little algebra
and see that we can get an approximation to the number pi. Let's just see in this specific case
that we actually did it on the, well actually did it, that means on the computer did it, we did it,
we got the answer 63,639 out of 100,000 experiments, hit the line. That is approximately equal to
two over pi, so that means that pi is approximately equal to this fraction, which is equal to 3.1427269.
Now, what is pi actually? Well, pi actually start the decimal expansion for pi actually is 3.1415926
and so on. Notice that this number is fairly close to this number. They agree in the first
two decimal places, and then they start to disagree in the third decimal place. Now,
that was a lot of experiments just to get two decimal places of pi, but it actually does illustrate
a method of approximating pi. That is interesting in that you don't actually, in a way you're not
doing anything concrete, you're doing something random, but the random behavior leads to an
exact precise answer. And if you did this experiment not 100,000 times, but millions,
billions, trillions, gazillion times, and then did this little computation, you'd get closer
and closer and closer to pi. And theoretically, you would continue to get more and more digits and
get as many digits as you want. Now, I have heard, whether it's true or not, that Buffon actually
did this experiment using French breadsticks and throwing them over his shoulder and do a
tiled floor and use that experiment to actually estimate the value for pi. So whether it is true
or not, I don't know, I don't vouch for that experiment, but it is an interesting application
of calculus to the world of probability.
