We have been talking for all of the first lectures about the derivative and the integral.
And the very first lecture, I made the point that calculus was the exploration of two ideas,
and those two ideas were the derivative and the integral.
Well, when I first started preparing these lectures, I actually had a different point of view,
a different title, I said, calculus is a study of three ideas.
And the three ideas were the derivative, the integral, and the limit.
Now, I haven't really mentioned the limit too much in the previous lectures,
but today is the day that we get to the limit.
And the reason that I decided to just say that the derivative and the integral were the two ideas of calculus
is that the limit plays a different kind of a role from the derivative and the integral.
The derivative and the integral actually do things you want done.
They make, allow you to figure out things.
They allow you to figure out the speed that you're traveling or the volume of a solid or things that you want to know.
The limit is the, at the core of the mathematical underpinning of the derivative and the integral.
And it's a necessity, it's very important, and it took more than 150 years between the time that the derivative and the integral were invented
to the time they were actually explained correctly, mathematically.
So the limit concept, as we know it now, as we really understand it,
wasn't clarified for more than 150 years after calculus was invented.
And in fact, it was a major obstacle to calculus, to the acceptance of calculus.
In fact, I want to read you a couple of passages about calculus and it's early going.
One is from Newton in the way he describes calculus.
Now, remember that when we were talking about things like derivatives,
remember how I would always say, well, we take small amounts of time and then we see how far we went.
We divide by the change in time and we get an approximation to the speed.
And then we take a smaller one, we get a better approximation.
And then we take a smaller one, we get a better approximation.
And then, and then it got a little vague, it got a little vague.
And I said, so we see at the end, it's really such and such.
Remember, that's what happened.
Now, it's that little vague part that we're going to be talking about today.
What exactly does it mean to actually go to the limit and consider all of these infinitely small little increments?
Back in the days of Newton and Leibniz and predecessors to them,
the problems were phrased in different kinds of ways.
In some cases, they would think about infinitesimally small quantities.
And infinitesimally small quantities were quantities that were viewed as bigger than zero,
but not as big as any actual number.
So it was really a, there was a lot of vagueness there.
And when you took things like these, like the derivative process,
when you allow this delta t to go to zero, that phrase, go to zero,
well, what does that mean?
It means that it sort of disappears.
And we have phrases like this, and so this is from Newton.
Newton, fluctuations, that was his word for derivatives,
fluctuations are as near as we please as the increments of fluence.
Fluence were things like position function.
Fluence generated in times equal and as small as possible.
And to speak accurately, they are in the prime ratio of nascent increments.
Yet they can be expressed by any lines, whatever, which are proportional to them.
Now that means very little to me, and it meant very little to people at the time.
Two, it is, they were trying to cope with the idea of these quantities.
And they used the words nascent and evanescent, which was, I mean, evanescent,
what a great word.
I don't know exactly what it means, but things that are just appearing, nascent,
I think, means just coming from nothing, and evanescent disappearing.
And these words were a puzzle to people.
As I say, even at the time, George Barkley, who was an opponent of calculus,
was saying that the foundation of calculus was simply not rigorous.
And he was right, it wasn't rigorous at that time in the 18th century.
But he would refer to these evanescent properties as the ghosts of departed quantities.
And because there was a lot of vagueness about this.
Well, so we're going to be talking about this limit process and see if we can make some sense of it.
And well, we will enjoy this.
We will enjoy this.
Yes, we will enjoy this.
And at least I will enjoy this.
And I'm not sure about everybody else.
OK, so this is, let's think about Zeno's paradoxes again.
Zeno's paradoxes are good examples of limiting processes.
And one of the, I'll talk about two of Zeno's paradoxes,
and we'll see how the limit can apply to them.
So the first one is the arrow paradox.
OK, so somebody across the room takes a bow and arrow and shoots the arrow right toward me.
It's heading toward my heart, but I don't worry.
I don't worry because I know the arrow is going to come halfway,
and then the arrow will come half of the remaining distance and half the remaining distance
and half the remaining distance and half the remaining distance and half the remaining distance.
And since there are an infinite number of those halves of the remaining distance,
it'll never actually reach me because it has to accomplish an infinite number of little intervals,
and therefore I don't have to worry.
This was one of Zeno's paradoxes.
Well, the resolution of that paradox, or one way to think about the resolution of that paradox,
is in terms of the limit.
That what happens is that the arrow has a limiting quantity, namely my poor heart,
and that it actually reaches, and it reaches that limit.
Even after an infinite number of stages, it actually accomplishes the limit.
Let's look at another one of Zeno's paradoxes.
Another one of Zeno's paradoxes involves, and here we have good samples of these people,
involves a race between Achilles.
This is Achilles dressed up as a Jedi knight.
Here's Achilles, and this is a tortoise.
See? It's a tortoise.
Now, since Achilles, you may remember Achilles, is very fast.
He could run extremely fast, and in particular, he could run quite a bit faster than a tortoise.
In order to make things fair, we'll give the tortoise a head start.
Here is Achilles, and here is the tortoise.
The tortoise has a head start, and this is another of Zeno's paradoxes.
The way this paradox goes is it says, well, Achilles can never pass the tortoise,
can never, can never really catch up with the tortoise, and here is the reasoning.
The reasoning is that, suppose that Achilles is going, say, ten times as fast as the tortoise.
So Achilles goes all the way to where the tortoise begins, but the tortoise has gone a little bit forward.
You see? Because the tortoise, though slower, still does make some progress during that time.
So the tortoise has moved on a little bit in front.
And then Achilles continues, so he doesn't really stop here.
It's continuous time, but just for purposes of demonstration,
Achilles arrives at the place where the tortoise started, and then the tortoise has moved on forward,
and Achilles comes up to where that tortoise is, but the tortoise has moved a little bit in front.
Because, though slower, the tortoise still is moving forward, say, at a tenth the speed of Achilles.
Now, and then Achilles goes, catches up to where the tortoise is at that point, and the tortoise moves slightly ahead,
and so on, and so on, and so on forever.
You see? So what Zeno said was, well, look, since Achilles, every time Achilles catches up to the tortoise,
the tortoise has moved some, though small portion distance forward, Achilles never catches the tortoise.
Now, how are we going to deal with this idea? When does Achilles catch the tortoise?
Well, this is a problem that, so Zeno raised this question in the middle of the fifth century B.C.,
and then, let's see, 2,350 years passed, and we have a clear resolution of the problem.
So it's sort of a simply stated issue that required quite a bit of thinking to get straight.
So let's, first of all, look at a couple of demonstrations of this race between Achilles and the tortoise
to see if we can be more specific about when it will be that Achilles catches the tortoise.
So here we have the picture, and we've put Achilles and the tortoise on this timeline,
I mean, on this line that shows the position of Achilles and the tortoise,
and we gave the tortoise a one-unit head start, and let's assume that Achilles is 10 times as fast as the tortoise.
So when Achilles gets to position one, which is where the tortoise began,
the tortoise has moved to position 1.1 because it's going a tenth as fast,
so it goes a tenth of a mile, or whatever the increments are,
in the same amount of time that it took Achilles to go the one-unit.
Then when Achilles catches up to that position, in other words, goes another tenth of a unit,
the tortoise goes a tenth of that a hundredth of a unit.
So now you see that the tortoise is at position 1.11, and Achilles is at the position 1.1.
Now we move on, Achilles catches up to the tortoise, gets to position 1.11,
the tortoise has moved on at a tenth rate to point 1.111.
So you can see that the positions that Achilles gets to and that the tortoise gets to
when Achilles catches up to the last place is always 1.1111.
In the limit, the answer is that Achilles catches the tortoise exactly at the point 1.1111..
Meaning forever.
So that is a decimal number, a specific value where Achilles and the tortoise catches up to the tortoise.
So we have a description for that position.
Now by the way, that particular position is a real number.
And we'll talk about real numbers in the next lecture and we'll look at that exact number in a different way
to see what its value is in a different format.
But back in the time of ancient Greece, the ancient Greeks did not have a clear idea of number.
They did not have the idea of the real number line that we learned in elementary school.
That was a new concept that came about actually even after very late.
And so they weren't in a position to give a name to that place where Achilles catches up to the tortoise.
And it brings up this idea of limit.
Now I think the time has come to start to face the actual meaning of this term limit.
And we'll begin with an example.
So here's an example.
A limit is we've been speaking of it in just sort of loose terminology as we have with the derivative and the integral.
What it is is that we get numbers that are close to something and then we say in the limit it gets to that number.
Well, let's see if we can formulate a context in which that can be made a more specific statement.
The context is to have an expression.
So what we see here is an expression.
In this case, x squared minus 4 divided by x minus 2.
That's an expression where if we put in values for x, we get an actual number.
We would get just a number just by multiplying that number by itself.
For example, suppose we put in the number say 3 for x.
Well, 3 times 3 is 9.
9 minus 4 is 5 divided by 3 minus 2 is 1.
5 divided by 1 is 5.
So if we take this expression, just forget this part over here and we just look at this expression, x squared minus 4.
We can plug in different values for x and get different numbers.
So everything's happy with that, very easy.
And in fact, the way we would refer to this technically is that this is a function.
It's a function because for every number x we present, we can do this multiplication x squared minus 4 and divide by x minus 2 and we get a number.
Well, everything's fine with that expression except for one troublesome place.
That one troublesome place is the value x equals 2.
Because what happens if we plug in the value x equals 2?
Well, if you do the multiplication, you see that the numerator is 2 times 2 minus 4, that's 0.
That's OK.
The problem is the denominator.
If you plug in 2, you have 2 minus 2, which is 0.
So if you actually plug in the number 2 to that expression, you don't know what you get.
You don't know what you get because you plug in the top is 0, the bottom is 0.
You get 0 divided by 0 and that's a meaningless expression.
OK, so this then is where the concept of limit comes in.
Instead of saying, instead of plugging in the value x equals 2,
we have to do something a little more clever.
And what we do is we say, OK, is there a trend?
In other words, as I take numbers x that are getting close to 2 but not equal to 2,
does this expression, this fraction, have a tendency toward one specific number?
If it does, we'll call that one number the limit of that expression,
x squared minus 4 over x minus 2, when x approaches 2.
OK, in order to see what, in order to take this limit as x approaches 2,
our challenge now is to look at the values of this expression when we plug in numbers x that are close to 2.
So let's look at a chart at what happens when we choose values of x that are close to 2.
If we plug in the value 2.1, and we put it in here, 2.1 squared minus 4 divided by 2.1 minus 2.
If you just plug that into your calculator, you would find you'd get the value exactly 4.1.
Suppose that we take the number x equals 2.1, and we plugged it in.
Now, you notice we can't plug in the number 2 because that would be 0 divided by 0, and we wouldn't have an answer.
But for any other number, we're not dividing by 0.
And therefore, it's easy to compute.
We just put in the numbers, multiply them out, and see what we get.
So if we take the number 2.01, and we plug it in to the top and the bottom, we get the answer 4.01.
So I hope you have enough confidence to take my word for it that all I've done is plugged it into a calculator.
And you can do this in the privacy of your own home if you don't believe me.
Just do it with a calculator.
Now, here's another one.
2.001, if you plug it into this expression, I square it, subtract 4, divide by 2.001 minus 2, we get the value 4.001.
Likewise, if we take numbers that are close to 2, but less than 2, we can plug those in also, and we get values.
In the case of 1.9, we get 3.9, 1.99, we get 3.99, 1.99, we get 3.999.
We actually get the values of the expression.
Now, remember our goal is to make sense of what it would mean to evaluate this expression as x gets close to 2, but not equal to 2.
Well, we can start seeing a trend here.
As we choose values of x that are very, very close to 2, like this one just is 1,000th bigger than 2, you can see that the value of this expression is very close to 4.
Or this one, this value here is 1,000th less than 2.
And when we plug it into this expression, we get a value 3.999, that's just 1,000th away from 4.
So we're getting the sense that this indeed does have a limit, and that is to say that the limit is meaningful, that as we plug in values of x close to 2, this expression is getting close to one particular number.
And that number, just looking at this, you can see that that number is 4.
So we would express this by saying the limit as x approaches 2 of x squared minus 4 over x minus 2 is 4.
Now, I still haven't come down to tell you, I haven't come right out and said the definition of the limit.
I mean, so far I've still been sort of vague, I'm saying, OK, as we choose the number x close to 2, we see that that expression gets close to 4.
And in fact, we believe that as we choose x's that get increasingly close to 2, that expression gets increasingly close to 4.
But I haven't actually come out and said, OK, can we pin that down and define what it means to be a limit?
I mean, why, for example, couldn't there be some number like 4.0000001?
That was the limit.
You see, I haven't really distinguished those yet for you, because it's also getting, seems close to those numbers, you see.
So we've got to figure out the definition.
Well, OK, so let me remind you of another example where this problem of potentially having a fraction that 0 over 0 comes up.
It came up every single time we did a derivative, every single time, because the definition of the derivative involved a difference in the top divided by a number that was getting close to 0.
Let's see this fraction.
On the one hand, it was a ratio of the difference in the function values between a particular point, in this case 1, and another value nearby, in this case 1 plus delta x.
If we're talking about the function x squared, we've seen this before.
What we're doing is finding the slope of the line segment between two points on the graph, two nearby points.
And we see that if we take this fractional expression, we can actually do the math, and we see that the slope, the steepness of that line, is 2 plus delta x for any choice that we make of delta x.
So in other words, if we pick delta x to be 0.001, then the value of the slope of that line will be 2 plus 0.001.
Well, the actual definition then of the derivative, which was computing that fraction for smaller and smaller values of delta x, that derivative is actually equal to the limit as delta x approaches 0 of 2 plus delta x, and we want to say that is equal to 2.
The reason it's equal to 2 is because if we choose values of delta x as close to 0 as we want, this expression gets as close to 2 as we want.
Well, I still haven't said the definition of the limit.
I'm really putting it off, and maybe if we get to the end of the half hour, maybe we won't get to it at all.
But if we graph the expression 2 plus delta x, it's obvious that as we choose numbers delta x close to 0, the value is equal, is getting closer and closer to 2.
OK, now we could express this limit concept graphically by just saying if we have any function at all f of x, like our x squared minus 4 over x minus 2, if we just plug in values for x that are getting close to some number,
here called C, to say that the limit equals L just means that as you choose numbers x that are close to C, then the value is getting close to L.
OK, so now the time has come to actually define what it means to say that the limit as x approaches C of f of x equals L.
Are you ready?
Conceptually, it means that for any challenge region around the proposed limit that you care to give me, for any challenge you give me, no matter how small, I can choose an even smaller region around C that will...
I can choose an even smaller region around C so that every value of the function in the smaller region has its function value within the challenge.
Now here we have the actual mathematical expression that defines the limit.
This expression was constructed in the year 1854.
Now remember calculus was invented in the 1660s and 1670s.
So this is nearly 200 years after calculus was invented.
And this definition, which I intentionally wrote using the symbols and the terms that mathematicians use to express this concept, was invented by Weierstrass.
And as I've often said, this has been taught for the last 150 years, since 1854 till now, to calculus students during that 150-year period, and three students have understood it in that period of time.
So, but you all are going to be the next group of people to understand.
Now here is the explanation for this.
Why is a great tennis player great?
Why is a great person who's wonderful at returning serves so good?
It's not because of something you say that the tennis player can swing a racket at a certain speed, or you wouldn't describe it that way.
The way you describe it, you'd say a person is a great person that's great at returning serve.
If for every serve that comes, that person can find a way to get it back.
That's what it means to be a great return server.
Well that's the philosophy of this definition of limit.
The philosophy is that for every, this upside down A means for every epsilon bigger than zero, epsilon is any number bigger than zero.
It's just a number.
What this says is that if I present you with a challenge, so we're discussing the idea that the function f of x as x approaches c has a limit l.
Graphically that means that the values of x are getting closer and closer and closer to l as the values of x get closer and closer and closer to c.
And we're trying to pin that down without having to talk about like an infinitely close to c, because infinitely close to c doesn't have any meaning.
See, and infinitely close to l doesn't have any meaning.
So instead of that, we say for any challenge distance around l, no matter how small, that's this epsilon by tradition, it's always epsilon.
For any challenge just distance around l, that makes a band around l.
You see up from l plus epsilon to l minus epsilon for any band of size l around sounds epsilon around l.
There's a response to that challenge.
The response means that you can find this small neighborhood of the number c, which is what x is approaching.
And that's the size delta.
Probably delta is even smaller than epsilon was.
It's thinner.
And it's so small that if I choose any number x that's within delta distance of c, then the function value of it is inside the band.
It's within epsilon distance of l.
So for every challenge, and then I could get another challenge that's thinner.
And then my response is even thinner.
So for every challenge, there's a response so that for every epsilon bigger than zero, there's a delta bigger than zero such that if the absolute value of x minus c is less than delta, then the absolute value of f of x minus l is less than epsilon.
That's a wonderful phrase to learn to say with, it's like a tongue twister.
And I recommend that you use it at the next party you attend.
We can actually then define such things as the derivative of like a function x squared as in technical terms, it's the limit as delta x approaches zero of the expression that we have talked about before.
And then we can actually compute the limit by doing this algebra, the sequence of algebra steps.
And at the end, we actually can compute the limit as delta x goes to zero.
If we plug in the number two acts, we'll see that it satisfies that epsilon delta definition.
Well, we won't see it, but in fact, it does.
And you could see it if you could if you could follow all those epsilons and deltas.
So I thought it would be amusing for us to actually see the technical definition of limit.
It's definitely a challenge.
It has this philosophical property of the challenge distance and the response size.
And it's sort of fun to think of defining something in that way where it's not so much a specific answer as every challenge has a response.
And that's sort of an interesting feature.
That's why it took these hundreds of years to actually formalize the definition of limit.
Well, next time we're going to be talking about the real numbers, which is really the playing field on which this concept of limit, derivative, and integral all takes place.
