Well, today we're going to take up the topic of the real numbers and the concept of continuity.
Now the real numbers are, it sounds like a simple idea because they're real, but in
fact probably real numbers are more abstract than you might think, so I'd hate to burst
your bubble on the real part, but let's start nevertheless talking about real numbers.
Well the first numbers that were thought about by people were of course the counting numbers,
one, two, three, four, and so on, and they are whole numbers and they represent what
you want to do to just count finite numbers of things, but of course there are other
whole integers and those include the negative numbers and zero.
Interestingly, historically these numbers like zero and negative numbers weren't viewed to be the same
entities as the whole positive numbers even by the ancient Greeks, so Archimedes who's doing all these
wonderful mathematical things didn't have the concept of zero, it's hard to imagine the
collection of ideas that could be so developed in one direction and yet didn't have our concept of number.
Well, so what we're talking about then today is to develop the concept of all the numbers, and so we've
now have the positive and negative integers, and as soon as we have positive whole numbers, the next
kind of numbers that you think about are fractions, like if you're halfway between one and two,
well that's one and a half, any fraction of two whole numbers is a ratio and it represents a number.
So if we put in a few of these numbers here we'd have a whole bunch of fractions, and when I say a whole bunch,
what that means is that there really are infinitely many of them.
In fact, between any two real numbers, between any two numbers at all, you could have infinitely many
fractions, for example between zero and one, you certainly have a half, a quarter, a third, a fourth, a fifth, a sixth, a seventh,
an eighth, all those numbers are between zero and one, and between any two numbers you have infinitely many fractions.
But that's still not all of the possible magnitudes.
If you view a number as measuring a length, for example, the length of a potential line, then you have all sorts
of different lengths that are, some of those lengths are not actually expressible as a fraction of two whole numbers.
For example, if you remember the Pythagorean theorem, the Pythagorean theorem says that if we have a right triangle,
and here's a picture of it, here we have a right triangle, if each of the two sides is one, then the Pythagorean theorem
says that the hypotenuse has length whose, so that the square of one side plus the square of the other side is the square of the hypotenuse.
So that means that this hypotenuse is, has length equal to the square root of two.
Square root of two, the number whose times itself equals two.
Well, it turns out that that number is not expressible as a fraction of two whole numbers.
Not expressible, but it is a length, it's a particular length.
If we want to write down all of the real numbers, we have to include that particular number.
It has a decimal expansion, and in fact, we then move to the concept that every possible magnitude, every possible length, corresponds to a number.
And we can express the size of that number by a decimal expansion.
First by saying, well, what two whole numbers is that number between?
And then we divide that interval up into ten parts and say which of those ten is, is the number in.
And here, so here I've shown an example.
Suppose we have a number that lies somewhere between one and two.
Well, then we can take an expanded view of that interval between one and two so we can see it better, and we see that it can be divided into ten parts.
And then if we, if we know what the second decimal places after the decimal, if it's an eight, then the fact that it starts 1.4 says that it has to be in this interval between 1.4 and 1.5.
And if the next number is an eight, then we know it's going to be in the one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eighth position in that next grouping of ten.
See, this is broken into eight parts.
If the next one is a two, then we know that the next position is going to be in the zero, one, two part.
So now this description, by the way, notice that all of these things in the real number line, they're not actually magnified to be bigger.
Actually, what we're doing is looking smaller and smaller.
We first look here and then break that little tiny interval into ten tinier parts and break it into ten tinier parts and so on.
And the idea of the real numbers is that you can continue this process of dividing into ten parts forever.
And so if you want to specify an exact point on the real number line, you need to tell me, well, which of the ten parts is it?
You know, first of all, what whole numbers is it between?
And then which tenth is it between there at the next size of division?
And then dividing that into ten, which of those ten is it in?
And then dividing that into ten, which of those ten is it in?
But it's not enough to do it five times, not enough to do it six times, not enough to do it a hundred times, not enough to do it a billion times.
You have to tell me which tenth to go in every single time to infinity.
So every real number is represented not by just a finite number of numbers, but by an infinite string of numbers.
Now, you may say to me, oh, you're just wrong.
You're just wrong because look, here's a number, 1.1.
It doesn't have infinitely many numbers in it.
It's 1.1.
But it's actually 1.1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, forever, because you never move beyond 1.1.
So I've got you there.
Now, I'd like to return to Zeno's paradox of Achilles and the tortoise to get another concept of real number.
As you recall, we have Achilles here, once again dressed up as a Jedi knight, and he's ready to race this tortoise.
And we're assuming once again that he races at ten times the speed of the tortoise.
Now, remember Zeno's paradox was that the Achilles catches up to where the tortoise started,
but then the tortoise has moved on a little bit because the tortoise, though slow, does in fact move that 10% of the speed of Achilles.
So the tortoise is a little ahead, Achilles catches up, but the tortoise moves a little bit forward.
And let's be specific about where it moves.
So let's suppose that the tortoise has a one unit head start.
One unit head start.
Well, then when Achilles gets to position one, the tortoise going 10% of the speed is at position 1.1.
When Achilles takes that next tenth of a unit step, the tortoise has made a hundredth of a unit step.
So the tortoise is at 1.11.
When Achilles catches up to that, the tortoise is at 1.111.
So on, so on, so on, so on. When does Achilles actually catch up with the tortoise?
Well, Zeno said it never will.
It can't happen because there are infinitely many steps. How do you know?
But now our vision of the real numbers has been altered, and we realize that every real number is represented by an infinite string of decimal places.
And in this case, the infinite string is 1.111111 forever.
And that is a real number. See, that is an actual specific point.
Well, it's a real number, but it's a number that you may not be familiar with.
You know, 0.1111 forever, what would you call it?
You know what I mean? You could call it 0.1111 forever, but that's a little long and tedious.
It turns out that that number has another name.
So let's look at the number.
Let's just look at the decimal part, 0.11111, since it's the part after the decimal.
That's the interesting part, the one we'll just remember.
So let's just call that number n, just because it's a number.
So we'll use the letter n to stand for it.
And notice something about this number.
If we multiply that number by 10, the way you multiply a decimal number by 10 is you just shift the decimal point by one place.
So you get the number 1.11111.
The number n is 0.111111.
If we subtract 10 times the number minus the number we get.
Well, look what happens over here.
Isn't this great?
All of those 0.1111 forever occurs in the top and 0.1111 forever occurs in the bottom.
And we're subtracting the bottom from the top.
They all disappear.
The only thing that's left is 1 minus 0, which is 1.
So we see that 9 times this mystery number is equal to 1.
Therefore, the number itself is just exactly equal to 1 ninth.
So what this says is if you ask the question, when will Achilles exactly catch up with the tortoise?
It will happen precisely at one and a ninth.
That's a specific number.
Now, most people find this fine.
It's fine.
It's everybody.
Fine, catches up one and a ninth.
I knew he was going to catch the tortoise anyway.
We're done.
Move on.
But there's an image here about real numbers that we have to become accustomed to.
And the vision of real numbers has a somewhat counterintuitive feel for people before you get used to it.
And that is you can think of the real numbers as a lot of points lined up next to each other.
But these points, they're lined up next to each other, but what do we mean by next to each other?
In other words, if I'm a point on the real number line, is there a point that's right next to me?
Well, let's see.
I mean, this is, in fact, this was really at the heart of Zeno's paradox that Zeno was thinking about the world.
And he was thinking about the possible positions.
And the Greeks were thinking about the question, does the world come in discrete little pieces where there's a position and then there's a next position next to it?
And then there's a next position next to it.
Or alternatively, can you divide positions infinitely so that there's no such thing as right next to the position?
Well, let me, I'm going to talk a little bit more about this, but let's examine another number that you might be familiar with.
And we'll examine the number 0.99999 forever.
Now, that's a number.
The reason it's a number is because we know exactly what it means.
We take the interval between 0 and 1 and we go to the last tenth of that.
And then we divide that into 10 parts and we go to the last one of that and so on and so on forever, always the last one.
Now, the question is, do we know that number by any other name?
0.99999.
Well, one way you might think about it is, first of all, that number is very close to 1, right?
Well, the answer to that is yes and no.
It's actually, it's not really very close to 1.
Well, let's do the same procedure we did before and see if we can see if there's another name for this number.
If we multiply it by 10, we just shift the decimal point over.
So we get 9.99999 is 10 times our number n.
You agree with that because we just shifted the decimal.
Now, let's subtract as we did before.
We subtract the number n from 10 times itself.
And look what happens to all these nines.
Well, they're at the top, they're at the bottom.
When we subtract, we just get on this side, 10 n's minus 1 n is 9 n on on this side, 9 minus 0 is 9.
9 n equals 9, n equals 1.
OK, so what that says is that the number 0.99999 is the number one.
It's not close to the number one.
This equation doesn't say, oh, it's just the one that's right next to one.
This is saying that the 0.999 is the number one.
It's a different name for that point.
If you think of points on the real number line, those two names are both nicknames for that same point.
There is no such thing as a number that's right next to any number in the real line.
Let's think of it another way.
I mean, a lot of people find this counterintuitive.
That is that they don't accept that 0.999999 forever is the same thing as the number one.
They want it to be right next to the number one.
But that's not the image you can have of the real number line.
That's just not true.
It's the reason that the Zeno's arrow actually reaches your heart when the arrow is coming toward your heart
and gets closer and closer and closer and closer and eventually hits.
It's the eventually hitting where it's actually 0.999999 equals 1, not just close.
Let's think of it in a different way.
Suppose that you had another real number, that these two numbers actually were different numbers from each other.
Well, if there were different numbers, then what would be the average of those two numbers?
It would be some number between them.
If you have two numbers, the average is a number between them.
In fact, halfway between them.
Well, let's think about this.
Between the number 0.999999 forever and one, what would that average number be?
Well, it would have to start, its decimal representation would certainly have to start 0.999999
because if it ever got an 8 in there, it'd be on the wrong side of 0.999999.
So it would have to be 0.999999 forever.
So that says that the number that's halfway between is the number itself.
So 0.999999 is the number one.
So this is a little different image of real numbers from what you might be accustomed to.
Another way to phrase the idea of real numbers is that a real number is actually a limit, like we met last lecture.
It's a limit of numbers that are approaching the infinite decimal, namely those numbers where you truncate the decimal
after 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 places.
So in this case, what we're saying is that if you look at the number 0.9 and then 0.999 and 0.999 and 0.999
and all of those numbers are converging to and have one as a limit.
And that's the definition of the infinite decimal number.
Just as when we had 0.111111 was the limit of the different locations that the tortoise and Achilles went to at the different times.
They got closer and closer and closer and it was at the limit is where they actually came together and were at the same place at the same time.
So here is Zeno's arrow proceeding toward your heart and actually making it in the limit after going half, a quarter, an eighth, a sixteenth, a thirty second.
The way what we would express this as is saying that the limit of the positions of that arrow at the limit is 0.
Okay.
Once we have a concept of the real numbers, we can talk about an idea of the world continuously flowing,
whether it's position or time continuously flowing or the real numbers continuously flowing.
Now this is a concept that is the opposite of this concept is a discrete view of the world.
And the challenge here is to realize that you have a bunch of points, the real numbers, that together form a continuum.
And if you think about it, it's a little bit complicated if you think about what's happening.
Because if you think about things that don't touch each other, no two points touch each other on the real line.
And yet the conglomerate of them form something that can't be broken apart.
That's the image that we have to have of continuity.
Well, continuity is a concept that captures the idea that you have a quantity whose values are predictable by their neighboring values.
Let's think of a simple example of moving in space, of just a real person moving around in the world.
Suppose you knew exactly where a person was at every instant of time, except for 12 noon.
You knew what they were up to, 11.59, 11.59, 9.59 and so on.
And you knew where they were at 12,000, 0.1.
You knew every single instant where they were.
Then you would know where they were at 12.
There was no choice.
You couldn't have a person who knew where they were at every single time.
They would be converging to one position at noon and that's where they were.
They didn't have a choice.
They couldn't be a foot over here.
They had to be right there.
So this is the concept of continuity.
Continuity says that if you can predict the location of a moving object,
then that shows that that is a continuous relationship because you're showing that the value of that changing quantity is predictable from the neighboring values.
If we represent this graphically, you know that we've sometimes represented a car moving down a road, for example, graphically,
where we look at position on this axis and time on this axis and we think of a body moving in space.
Then it's clear that at this 12 o'clock moment, we can predict its position if this represents the graph of the other times you had to be right there.
And when we see this kind of expression, we think in more general terms of a function,
a function that is relating one varying quantity, in this case time, to another varying quantity, in this case position.
So let's look at an example of a potential position graph and see how we react to it.
So here is a position graph and you see here, think of a person.
A person moves along like this and when we get up to 12 o'clock, all of a sudden there's somewhere else and they keep moving.
Well, this is not going to happen.
This is not going to happen.
I mean, here is this moving turtle.
It comes up to 12 o'clock and then instantly it's over here and you would say something's wrong.
This is not what happens in real life.
And so this is an example of a relationship of a function that is not continuous.
Continuous from the point of view of a graph just means that the graph can be described without lifting your pencil.
So for example, this is a perfectly continuous kind of a position graph.
Or in general, I wouldn't have to say position.
I could just say it's any function that can be written without lifting your pencil.
So this is an example of a continuously varying quantity.
As you vary this quantity, the thing which is dependent on this varying quantity continuously varies in the sense you can predict where you will be at every moment if you know the neighboring values.
So other examples in real life which are continuously varying, the temperature with time, temperature changes.
Sometimes it can change quickly, but it never changes instantly.
It's 80 degrees and then the next instant it's 120. That doesn't happen.
But it changes continuously with time.
And the image of this that we have then is that the predictability.
Continuity means predictability and it means that you can draw the graph without lifting your pencil.
So those two things are sort of convergent properties.
The reason they're the same is because if I can draw a graph without lifting my pencil, I know where I'm going to be at every instant because it's where my pencil is dragging at that moment.
And likewise, if something varies continuously, then I know that I would draw it without lifting my pencil.
Those two things are the same.
So this is the concept of continuity.
Essentially every relationship that we've discussed in this course has been a continuous function.
For example, the area of a circle, the formula ar equals pi r squared, the area of surface pi r squared.
Well, that varies continuously. If you have a slightly bigger circle, you know that the area is going to be slightly bigger.
It doesn't just jump to different sides.
So this is continuity.
There's a, I want to get to a philosophical idea of continuity that really is striking.
And that has to do with the connectivity of the continuum.
That is of the real line.
In what sense does it hold together?
Why can't you just break it into two parts that just sort of fall apart?
Well, the answer is an interesting strategy that mathematicians sometimes use to great effect.
And the strategy is that you simply define a quantity to be what you want.
So let me say what it means in this case.
Suppose that you take all the numbers you can think of.
For example, maybe you originally could just think of fractions, just fractions of whole numbers.
Those are the only ones you can think of. You couldn't think of any other numbers.
You didn't know about irrational numbers.
So you had all these numbers here.
Well, that would not be a continuum in the sense it's not connected because you could take a magnitude like the square root of 2.
Improve that the square root of 2 is not rational, but just assume that that length is not expressible as a fraction.
Well, then every single fraction is either less than the square root of 2 or it's bigger than the square root of 2.
Every fraction of whole numbers is either less than it or bigger than the square root of 2.
So the square root of 2 would represent a division, a potential place to divide the fractions into two groups.
One that are all smaller than all the ones that are in the other camp.
See? That would be a division.
And that would be a place where the number line could be broken, where everything would be in one side or the other.
Well, the clever definition for real numbers to make it a continuum is to say this.
If you ever find a possible division point of the fractions, call it a number.
In other words, the divisions of the rational numbers of the fractions, the fraction numbers,
every possible division of it into two camps so that everything is less than this and bigger than something else.
If you can ever divide it, then you call that a number.
You put a point there.
So then you can't divide it anymore into two camps that are all bigger or less
because that particular place that you thought was a potential division point, you declare it to be a number.
You put a number there.
You create a number.
So you've created an obstacle to every possible division.
So by creating these obstacles, you actually have created the inability of the real numbers to break into two parts by definition.
Because every possible breaking of it into two parts is you've declared that to be by definition a number.
Now, this is really abstract.
You know, this is pretty abstract stuff because we're saying, what is this?
This, by the way, these are called Dedekind cuts named after the mathematician Dedekind who was trying to formalize the concept of real number.
You see, the real numbers were not a well understood idea at the time of Newton and Leibniz.
They did not understand the idea that real numbers had these properties that we've been talking about today.
This was not there.
And it was not until the 19th century, 150 years later, that people actually came to define these properties as we've been talking about as the real numbers.
And defined in this way, we have a concept of the ideas about the real numbers that we've been talking about.
You don't have a number that's right next to another number, and you have no place to divide the real line into two pieces so that it falls into two parts.
Well, so the real numbers are the playing field on which all of the mathematics we've been talking about have taken place.
We have to have had the real numbers in order to know that when we did the process of the derivative or when we did the process of the integral.
Remember how we talked about them?
We said, OK, we take for the derivative, we take a position at one moment, a position at another, we divide, we get a number, and then we take a smaller interval of time and we do the same process again and again and again.
Well, suppose that those numbers, those average velocities that we got, suppose they were converging down to something that didn't exist, we would be stuck.
But this concept of the real number says there is a number at every potential such place.
And that is where the, so every possible gap, if there's something missing, that's declared to be a real number.
And so all of these processes that we've been talking about, the integral was the same thing.
Remember, we approximated, say, the area under a curve by these little rectangles, added them up, got thinner and thinner ones, and we got closer and closer to some value.
Well, that value has to be a real number because there are no gaps.
Well, this is an introduction then to the concept of real numbers.
In the future lectures, we're going to be talking about putting derivatives and integrals in different settings, seeing where they apply in different parts and actual applications in the world, and also how we can use the ideas of derivative and integral to talk about things that are not quite so simple as a car moving on a straight road.
So we'll look forward to that in the coming lectures.
