During the last two lectures, we were talking about the concept of limit and the concept
of the real numbers, which are related.
And remember, we were talking about specifically the paradoxes of Zeno, and we talked about
the Achilles and the tortoise and where they would catch up with one another, and we talked
about the arrow arriving at its destination.
Well today we're going to start with the Zeno's paradox of the arrow, and view it in this
case as an infinite addition problem.
That is, suppose that we view this arrow once again as traveling from one place to another,
and we analyze the question that Zeno asked, namely it goes halfway, and then it goes half
the remaining distance, and it goes half the remaining distance, and half the remaining
distance, and so on forever.
And we would like to say that the accumulation of all of those half of half of half of half
of half of the accumulation accumulates to the total distance.
Well if we look at this as an addition problem, what we're thinking about is adding up an
infinite number of numbers and getting a finite number.
That's the kind of issue we're going to be exploring today, and so let's start by actually
putting some numbers to this question of Zeno's arrow paradox.
So let's assume here that the arrow starts out at the point zero.
It's traveling from zero toward one, and in its first part of its journey it comes here
to the point of half, so it gets halfway, and we've accumulated half of the distance.
Then in the next interval of time it goes to the three quarters mark, having added an
additional quarter to its total distance traveled.
Then it adds another eighth distance to get to the seven eighths mark, and then it adds
a sixteenth to get to the fifteenth, sixteenth mark, and so on and so on and so on.
Since the totality of its journey is one unit, we can write down an actual equation that
expresses the idea that the number one is equal to the infinite addition problem, the
infinite sum, one half plus a quarter plus an eighth plus a sixteenth plus a thirty second
and so on forever.
Now of course in one sense we can't do an infinite number of additions.
There's no calculator that we could plug that into because we'd run out of time, and in
fact that was Zeno's issue.
How can you accomplish all this because it would take too much time?
But we saw before the concept of limit, and in this case the concept of limit is that
if we add up just a few of the terms, say a hundred of them, we'll have some number,
and that number will be very close to one, and then if we add up some more terms, for
example the first thousand terms, then we will have a number, and that number is even
closer to one, and as we add up more and more numbers we get a sequence of numbers that
are getting closer and closer and closer to one, and in fact one is the limit of that
set of numbers.
In other words, if we add up just most of the numbers in this infinite addition problem,
not most of them, because most of infinity, what would that mean?
Not most, but if we add up a large finite number, the first finite number of those,
we'll get a number that gets increasingly close to one.
So in the case of Zeno's arrow, we have a problem that is in a sense clear because we
know what the total distance it travels is. We know that the arrow eventually arrives
at the point one, and that it accomplished it by going half way and then a quarter more
and an eighth more and a sixteenth more and so on.
So that's why I started with this particular example, because it's one where we have an
infinite addition problem whose answer we know. It's one.
But suppose that we have an infinite addition problem whose answer we don't know. Well,
that's when this concept of an infinite addition problem really becomes interesting, because
having an infinite number of things that are adding up to an answer we don't know is what
allows us to approximate the actual exact answer and eventually get to the exact answer
if we think of adding up infinitely many numbers.
So let's look at a problem where the answer might involve an infinite sum of numbers,
but where we don't know the answer in advance. Here's a simple kind of a problem that's involved.
Suppose you consider a regular clock like this, and here it is at exactly four o'clock
as you see. Well, as time goes by, both the minute hand will move and the hour hand will
move, and at some future time the two hands will be pointing in exactly the same direction.
They'll be exactly on top of one another. Well, we can think about trying to solve the
problem of exactly when will they be on top of each other as an infinite addition problem.
Let me show you why. Because your first guess might be, well, when 20 minutes is passed,
that is when the minute hand has moved down to the four, will they be on top of each other?
No. No, because we're assuming that we have a perfect clock where the hour hand is moving
during one hour, it will move one-twelfth of the way around. So it's moving at one-twelfth
the speed of the minute hand. And therefore, when the minute hand has arrived at the four,
20 minutes later, the hour hand will have moved 20 over 12 minutes further on. It will
be pointing in a slightly lower direction. Well, then we can again move the minute hand
to where the hour hand then is, but then the hour hand has moved a little bit, and so on,
and so on, and so on. That's an infinite process. Let's see it written down so we can actually
understand it better. Here you can see on the screen the situation. Here we have the
clock starting at four o'clock. Now the minute hand moves to 20 minutes to see at the four,
and you see the hour hand has moved a slight bit. Indeed, you can see on this chart how far the
minute hand has moved and how far the hour hand has moved correspondingly. So here we say when
the minute hand has moved 20 minutes, the hour hand has moved 20 over 12 minutes. Then for the
minute hand to catch up to that new location, the minute hand moves 20 over 12 minutes, and
but the hour hand moves a 12th of that distance, 20 over 12 squared. And this pattern continues.
In order for the minute hand to catch up, it must move the 20 over 12 squared minutes to catch up
to the new location of the hour hand. But the hour hand moves forward 20 over 12 cubed. You see always
a 12th. The hour hand is always moving one 12th as fast as the minute hand is moving. That's the nature
of clocks. Well, you see that we have an infinite addition problem to accomplish to find the moment
when both the hour and the minute hand are on top of one another. When the minute hand's on top of the
hour hand. So we can compute this and it's a very clever method of computing an infinite sum of
numbers. So I want to show you this to you. You see the total number of minutes that we're trying to
compute can be expressed as this infinite addition problem. And you see I have it written here that this
total is equal to 20. That's the first 20 minutes that the minute hand moves plus 20 over 12. That's
the next one that catches up. The minute hand catches up to where the hour hand was before plus 20 over 12
squared plus 20 over 12 cubed plus 20 over 12 to the fourth power and so on forever. That is the infinite
addition problem whose answer we want. Well, here is the clever method of finding a specific answer to this
infinitely long addition problem. It's very clever. What we do is we say we have designated the final number
by a letter m for minutes. And here we notice that if we take m and multiply it by a 12, so a 12 of m,
what does it do? It shifts every term one place to the right. We still have an infinite addition
problem, but notice that the first term, the 20, as now after we multiply it by a 12, is now 20 over 12,
which was the second term in this top infinite addition problem. And the 12th of the second term,
20 over 12 in the first line gives us 20 over 12 squared because we're multiplying everything by a 12. Therefore,
if we line up these two infinite addition problems on top of one another, we have on the top row the number we want,
m, and on the next row, we have one 12th of m equals this other infinite addition problem. Well, notice the way
they're lined up that the second row is exactly the same as the first row except that the first term is omitted.
So if we subtract the second row from the first row, on the one hand, we have 11 12th of m because we subtract
one 12th of m from m, this number we're looking for, the m, the minutes at which point they're on top of one another.
So 11 12th of m is just equal to 20. And now that's a very easy matter to see then that m is exactly equal to 21 and 9 11th minutes.
So that's a very specific number that is the result of an infinite addition problem.
And the infinite addition problem arises naturally from trying to solve an actual real life problem.
So this is an example where these infinite addition problems are called infinite series. A series just means an addition problem,
infinite addition problem. So these are infinite series. And here this is a good first example of how an infinite series can be used to
solve a problem. But infinite series can be used for other purposes also, infinite addition problems.
And that is to try to give us a sense of how big some numbers are that we can otherwise not compute exactly.
The most famous number in mathematics is the number pi. It's a famous number because it refers as we well know we've talked about before.
It's the ratio of a diameter of a circle to the circumference. It's the number of times you have to take the diameter and wrap it around to get exactly the circumference.
Well, it doesn't come out even. It doesn't come out even. It doesn't even come out to any fraction.
It turns out that the number pi cannot be expressed as any decimal number that stops at some point and then just has zeros after that.
There is no pattern to the decimal notation of pi. It's what's called an irrational number. It's not a fraction.
But we are left with the challenge of how can we find the exact value for pi? Well, the answer is we can't find the exact value for pi.
There's no way because it would require writing down infinitely many decimal digits that don't have a pattern.
So there's no way we can actually write down the entire decimal representation for pi.
But it's very important in practice and theoretically to try to get as good an approximation of pi as possible.
And the way that we do this is to express pi as the result of an infinite series.
So here we have an example of an infinite series whose value is pi.
Now, actually what we see is pi over 4 is expressed because it just looks nicer to say pi over 4 in the way this particular infinite series came up.
Pi over 4 happened to be the more natural one. But you see that pi over 4 is equal to 1 minus a third plus a fifth minus a seventh plus a ninth minus an 11th and so on forever.
So this is, you might think of it as addition and subtraction because there's some negative numbers in there.
But if you added up those numbers, 1 and you subtracted a third and then you added a fifth and you subtracted a seventh and so on, you would get a number that got closer and closer to the exact number pi over 4.
And of course, multiplying that by 4, you would get the exact number pi.
So here's an example of an infinite series, an infinite addition problem that's telling us the actual decimal representation of a number whose exact value we do not know.
What it means is that if we add up a certain number of those terms, we can get closer and closer approximations of pi.
And indeed, I've done this here and you can see that after adding up 10 of those numbers in the sequence, we get an approximation of pi.
And as we add up more numbers, we get closer and closer to the actual value of pi.
Now, by the way, I have to tell you that pi has actually been computed to billions of decimal places right now.
And there's an interesting history of pi of how many decimal places people knew pi to at various eras.
And now we're up to literally billions of decimal places of accuracy for pi.
So that's close enough for government work probably.
So this is one example of an infinite series that gives pi.
There are several other infinite series that give pi.
This one gives pi squared over 6 and we can once again see by adding up a certain number of those terms how close our approximation is to pi.
So the value of this concept of infinite series is to be able to find answers to questions and approximations of numbers that we want to know the answer to.
One of the most common kinds of values that we want to seek are the trigonometric functions.
Remember, we met the sine function before.
The sine function was just this that if we went on a unit circle a certain amount of distance around the circle,
then the height of the point as we move, if we move theta distance around the circle,
that height is called the sine of theta or the sine of x if it's x distance around the circle.
Well, and as you see when when x is a very small number,
if you've just gone a little way around the unit circle and the sign is very small,
and as you go a long way, if you go, for example, up to pi over two units around the circle,
which is a quarter of the full distance around the circle, which is 2 pi,
then its height or its sine is equal to 1.
Well, it turns out that you can use this concept of an infinite addition problem,
not only to just get to a particular number like pi where we added up particular numbers,
you know, 1 minus a third plus a fifth minus to get a number associated with pi.
But here for the sine function, we can add up numbers that will give us the sine of any value.
In other words, this expression right here, sine of x is equal to x minus x cubed over 3,
by the way, 3 with an exclamation point, that doesn't mean you just read it loud,
it means it's 3 times 2 times 1 plus x to the fifth over 5 factorial,
5 times 4 times 3 times 2 times 1, it just saves some writing,
minus 7 x to the seventh over 7 factorial and so on.
This expression means that if you take any angle at all x,
and then you do this addition problem, and notice all the steps in that addition problem
are just multiplication and division, addition and subtraction,
it's the four arithmetic operations.
And yet those four arithmetic operations, if you carry them to infinity,
you can get the value of the sine of any angle, that is the height at which any angle sits.
Let's do a specific example so that you can see, you can confirm that this will actually work.
In the case of pi over 6, which incidentally is 30 degrees,
that's an example where we can actually know what the answer is for the sine.
And let me just show you why that is.
Because if you take six equilateral triangles, they fill up a circle,
that is because an equilateral triangle has angle 60 degrees for each angle,
and if you take six of those, it surrounds the center, so it's 360 degrees, they just fit.
And if you align them like this, this is like a honeycomb for bees,
if you align them like this, you'll see that, of course, this distance right here
is one-half of the radius of the circle.
And therefore, the height of this distance, which is exactly pi over 6,
it's one-twelfth of the total distance around the circle,
the height here is exactly one-half.
So that says that the sine of 30 degrees, or in our measure, pi over 6,
what are called radians, that's the distance around the circle, is equal to one-half.
So this is the exact answer for the sine of pi over 6.
And we can see it by this alternative method.
But now let's confirm that our previous formula for the sine actually gives us this approximation
by seeing in this infinite sum, we see sine of pi over 6 is equal to this long addition problem.
And here, in this next table, we see what the answer is as we add up a certain number of the terms.
When we do each of those processes, we get a number that's getting closer and closer to a half.
And in the limit, it actually is a half.
It's really neat to see the approximations of the sine curve by this long, infinite polynomial.
We can see it geometrically.
If we look here, here is the sine curve, you see it's sinusoidal, it's a very nicely curve.
Well, we can approximate that curve by looking first at the polynomials
that are just the first few terms of that infinite addition problem that we claim is equal to the sine.
So here, the first approximation is just a straight line.
Well, you see it's not a very good approximation to sine because it's a straight line and the sine curve goes up and down.
But look at what happens when we look at the first two terms, x minus x cubed over 3 factorial.
Well, the graph of this curve looks like it has a little more of the sine kind of shape to it.
It goes up and down at least.
And look what happens when we do the third term.
Well, the third term, it looks like we lost ground and maybe in a way it looks like it doesn't look as much like the sine curve as before.
But let's go on to the next one and we see that it gets closer and closer and closer.
So that in this series of pictures, you see the sine curve there being approximated more and more closely by these polynomial equations
that are the first few terms of the infinite series.
Well, I want to end this lecture today by telling you an interesting story about paint cans.
And this is in an interesting world in which the paint cans have the property that they are infinitely long.
And the reason that this is interesting, let's look at this example of this paint can.
You can see it here on this graph.
It circles the x-axis and it starts at the point x equals 1.
And at that point, it's just a circle of radius 1.
And then like a horn, like a sort of trumpet or what do you call it, a coronet,
it comes down in a sleek fashion, always circling the x-axis and it gets closer and closer to the x-axis.
In fact, at the point 2, the radius is just a half.
At the point 3, the radius is a third.
At the point 4, the radius is a fourth.
At point 5, the radius is a fifth and so on forever.
So you see that it is a horn that goes on forever out into the distance.
Well, this particular thing you may think it's not very good paint can,
I'm thinking of holding it upright to make it really a paint can.
And what's interesting about it is that it holds just a certain amount of paint.
It holds a certain amount of paint and in fact it doesn't hold infinitely amount of paint
because it gets thinner so fast that it will not hold infinitely much paint.
In fact, let's see why it doesn't hold infinitely much paint.
I mean, what we need to do in order to see that it doesn't hold infinitely much amount of paint
is we need to see, well, how much paint is held between x equals 1 and x equals 2?
Well, it's the volume of that sort of truncated horn there.
And then we would need to add to that the volume of paint between x equals 2 and x equals 3.
And then add to that the volume of paint between x equals 3 and x equals 4 and so on forever.
So you see we have an infinite sum of volumes and we're asking ourselves the question,
is it possible that that infinite sum of volumes is just some finite volume, just a certain number of gallons,
or is it possible that it goes on forever and gets bigger and bigger and you could never fill it with any amount of paint?
Well, it turns out you can fill this and here's a good geometric way to see that.
We'll just take the part of this horn between 1 and 2 and just put it upright as you see.
So here you have a circle and it comes up and we've just truncated the part of the horn between 1 and 2
and put it vertically where you see it.
And notice that it fits inside a square that is 2 by 2 whose height is 1
because the height is just the distance between 1 and 2.
You see we cut it off between 1 and 2 so its height is 1
and its base, since the radius of this circle is 1 at the big end,
then it fits in a circle in a square whose side is 2 and you can see it fitting there.
Well, now let's look at the next two parts of the horn.
Well, the next part of the horn is at the start, its big end is just one half in diameter, I mean in radius.
That is 1 in diameter.
So if we take that next unit part of the horn and we put it upright,
you can see it would fit in just another strip whose width is 1
and the total width is the same as the first square so that it's 2.
It's 2 in this direction and it's 1 in this direction
and this next one piece will fit in that half of that rectangle.
And then the next one going from 3 to 4, from one side is 1 third in radius
and the short side is 1 fourth in radius, we can put that upright
and fit it neatly in the other half of the rectangle
so that we can see that in this rectangle that's now 2 by 1 by 2
and 1 high in that box we can fit those first three parts of the infinite horn.
Now, if we take another strip, we can take the next four pieces of the strip
and just line them up in a rectangle whose width is just one half
because you see the very biggest piece here has radius a quarter
and so it fits right in and the next four all fit right in this part of the box.
Well, if we do this infinitely, you can see that we have taken the whole infinite horn
and put it inside a box whose height is 1, whose width is 2
and whose length is 2 plus 1 plus a half plus a quarter plus an eighth plus a sixteenth and so on
and we can see that that whole number is 4.
So the total volume, we put the entire volume into a can that's 4 by 2 by 1.
So in other words, the amount of paint it holds is only eight,
less than eight cubic units of paint.
But the interesting thing about this is that the walls of this container are infinitely big.
They're so big that you couldn't possibly paint it with any finite amount of paint.
So this is a can that you can fill but you can't paint the boundary of.
To see that, what we do is just look at this picture once again
and we will instead of having it curving down, suppose it just went straight
from the half radius mark out to one and we unrolled it.
Here you see this portion unrolled.
Now we unroll the next two units and you can see that those next two units will fill up rectangles
that elongate this strip like a toilet paper strip is now twice as high.
And then the next four units will fill up the next portion that's one wide
and you can see it, the first four portions are going to fill up something
that once again adds another pi length to this infinitely uncoiled strip.
Then the next four contribute the same amount.
The next eight contribute the same amount.
The next 16 contribute the same amount.
You can see that you keep adding an infinite amount of strips so that the total area is infinity.
So not all infinite addition problems add up to a finite number.
In fact, it's only the ones where they get smaller quick enough so that they converge to one number.
Well, so this was an example of the idea of infinite addition problems.
Every time you pick up your calculator and you put the sign of a number,
it does this infinite addition problem to compute the answer.
Of course, it doesn't have to do infinitely many of them.
It only has to do enough so the eight digits you see on your calculator are correct.
And so infinite series are things that are actually a very practical value in everyday life.
Thank you.
Thank you.
