In the last lecture, we were discussing the idea of applying the concepts of calculus
to situations in which more than one varying quantity led us to one answer.
That is to say, if we knew the length and the width of a rectangle, we would know the
answer of what the area of that rectangle is.
So that was a case where several varying quantities all influenced one outcome quantity.
Well, this lecture then is the other way around, the opposite application, namely where one
varying quantity leads to several different numbers.
Let me give an example of this.
So this is really very simple.
You all experienced it every single day of your lives.
We've always been talking about a car moving on a road, but you may have noticed that up
until today, the car always was moving on a straight road and just moving back and forth
on the road.
Once you told the mileage marker on the road, then you knew where the car was.
But in real life, you may have noticed that a car doesn't just move on a straight road.
You drive around.
You drive around.
And so, for example, if you're driving around the city, you drive in curvy ways, and there
are all sorts of different positions you take at different times.
So what that means is that if you think of the position of a moving car at a given time,
what you're really telling yourself is a position that is given by, say, two coordinates.
If you think of moving on the plane where you have an x-coordinate and a y-coordinate,
you know how far to the right or left of the origin you are and how far over down you are.
Then if I have something moving around the plane, then at every moment, I'm giving, it's
telling me where I am in both coordinates.
Or if you have a mosquito flying around the room, well, at every time you look at your
watch and the mosquito is in a particular place.
And you could measure that place by setting a particular origin coordinate and saying,
well, how far this way is the mosquito, how far this way is the mosquito, and how far
up is the mosquito.
And at every moment of time, you look at your watch and you'd have three numbers would come
out of that.
So this is an example.
Then today, what we're going to be discussing is the idea of varying quantities where one
varying quantity, like time, is influencing several other quantities.
So let's start by looking at an example.
Here's an example of a bug crawling around the plane.
And here you see the bug crawling around the plane.
And notice that the bug crawling around the plane is time-stamped so that at every moment
of time, we know where that bug was.
And we can notice that by knowing where the bug was, we actually know two coordinates
for that bug.
What kind of questions are we likely to be interested in answering?
Well, we're talking about calculus.
And calculus, remember, is a dynamic subject.
We're trying to talk about motion and change.
So the kinds of questions we can ask about this moving car are the same questions that
we ask about the car that was moving on a straight road.
Questions like, if you know where the car is at every moment, can you tell how fast it's
going?
Well, the answer is yes, we can tell.
And it's related to the derivative.
But the derivative, remember, was just talking about a car moving on a straight road where
we just subtracted to find the difference of how far it went divided by how much time
elapsed.
And so now we're in a slightly different setting.
So we have to think a little bit differently.
How can we adapt the ideas that we had from the simpler case of a car moving on a straight
road to the somewhat more complicated case of a car moving on the plane?
What other questions are natural to ask?
Well, let's see.
So we said, how fast are we going?
What direction are we going?
See, this is a new question, because in the straight road, we're always going in the direction
of the straight road or backwards.
But now we can go off at any angle.
So we can ask ourselves, can we tell by knowing where we are at every moment?
Can we know what direction we're going?
And what does it mean?
What direction we're going?
If we're in a curve, what does it mean by saying what direction are we going at a given
moment?
Now in fact, if you have a car with a compass on it, then that compass is telling you what
direction you're going at every moment.
Even if you're curving, it shows you what direction you're going.
But what do we mean by the direction we're going?
That's something we have to think through.
For a curved line, what are we going to mean by the direction we're going?
So we need to know what do we mean by instantaneous speed?
What direction are we going, instantaneous direction?
What's another kind of a question we could ask?
Well, the other kind of question we asked that was related to the integral before was
how far have we gone?
If we drive around, drive around the road, and in a curved kind of path, how can we
compute the total distance that we traveled?
Not just where we ended up versus where we started, but actually the curve distance that
we traveled.
So in other words, this answer is the answer we would need if we wanted to know how many
gallons of gasoline we're using up, because it really takes into account the total distance
traveled on this curvy path.
So these are the kinds of questions that are natural to arise that are very similar to
the questions we asked in the simpler case of a car moving on a straight road.
And now we're applying it in this different setting, showing the versatility of calculus
once again, and we'll see that the power of first mastering a simple case to then apply
to a more complicated case, and this is the take home lesson for how to approach all problems
in life.
Do the simple cases first.
OK, so let's get down to brass tacks here and think about a specific example of what
kind of data we would be interested in knowing in order to answer the question, how fast
are we going and in what direction.
So here we have our car, and it's moving in a certain direction, and maybe it's curving.
Well, if we know how fast it's going, its component of motion is in one direction.
That is just to say, just on the plane, there are two numbers that define a position.
There's this direction and this direction.
Now if we know how fast we're moving in one direction, and we know how fast we're moving
in another direction, that's going to tell us what direction we're headed that's somewhere
in between.
Let's go back to our baseball example.
Remember when we had a person hitting a baseball?
This person hit a baseball and it was moving at 100 feet per second in the horizontal direction.
Remember that?
And it was moving 48 feet per second in the vertical direction.
Now knowing those two factors of movement, can we figure out how fast it is going and
in what direction in this diagonal direction?
The ball actually, when it leaves the bat, you see, it actually goes in a diagonal direction.
It doesn't just go horizontal, it doesn't go up, it goes in a diagonal direction.
But that diagonal direction includes a change in this direction and a change in this direction.
Notice that the direction the ball is traveling is related to the speed at which it is either
rising and going horizontally.
It's related to the speed of those two components.
Not for example, how high you are.
It doesn't matter if the ball started up here in order to know what direction it's going.
It doesn't matter that it starts up here and is going at this speed and this speed.
It's the speed.
You get the same answer.
So how are we going to resolve the knowledge of how fast it's going horizontally and how
fast it's going up into one answer of how fast it's going altogether?
That is the challenge question.
How can we put those things together?
Well, the answer comes just in the picture that you see here.
If we have knowledge of how long this horizontal distance is and how long the vertical distance
is, then if we were just going in a straight line, we would know how fast and how far we
were going in this diagonal distance.
If we could solve this problem, see, suppose we went 100 feet this direction in one second.
And suppose we went 48 feet in one second in this direction.
Now incidentally, we don't actually go 48 feet in the vertical direction for the ball
hitting because it quits rising quite that fast after a second.
Remember, its speed reduces because of gravity.
But nevertheless, suppose that gravity weren't there for a moment and it literally did go
48 feet up when it went 100 feet or over.
How could we compute how far it actually went in that one second?
Well, we see the triangle here.
You see the triangle.
It is 100 wide.
It's 48 tall.
And what we want to know is the length of the hypotenuse.
And now it must ring bells in your head of your high school math, the Pythagorean theorem.
This is what we need to use in order to find that distance.
And it's equal to, and everybody remembers the Pythagorean theorem, it's that the sum
the square of this side plus the square of this side is equal to the square of the hypotenuse.
Or said another way, the hypotenuse, the length of this diagonal side, is equal to the square
root of the square of this side plus the square of this side.
OK, so let's first think just globally about what's happening.
Instead of a ball traveling, let's think of our car.
If our car is going in some diagonal direction, in order to figure out what direction it's
going, we need to use the Pythagorean theorem.
If we know how fast it's going in the x direction and how fast it's going in the y direction,
we can resolve those two using the Pythagorean theorem to see how far we're going in the
actual diagonal direction that it's going.
OK.
Well, since we've mentioned the Pythagorean theorem here, I think we need to prove it.
See this is a course where things are not left to mystery, but where we actually see
why they're true.
So in the case of the Pythagorean theorem, let's just take a minute and actually see
a proof of why it's always true that in a right triangle, such as this, right triangle,
at the square of the short side plus the square of the other side at the right angle
is equal to the square on the hypotenuse.
And the proof that I'm going to show you of this Pythagorean theorem is due to an Indian
mathematician from India in the 13th century by the name of Bhaskara.
And it's an absolutely wonderful proof, as you will soon see.
OK.
So that's what we do.
We have this right triangle, and the first thing, since we're talking about a square
on the hypotenuse, we make a square whose length of the side of the square is the hypotenuse
of the triangle.
And we accomplish this by taking four identical right triangles and assembling them with their
hypotenuses outward, that is to say facing the outside of the square, and then we fill
the center with a square that just fills it up.
And you can see that these neatly fit together because of the fact that at every corner we
have both of the two non-right angles of the right triangle.
Well, everybody then has to agree that the area of this figure is the square on the hypotenuse,
because it's a square whose sides is the hypotenuse.
OK.
Now, I'm going to reassemble these same pieces.
If I do so, of course, I maintain the same area.
So I'm going to reassemble them.
I'm going to take this triangle, and I'm going to move it over, rotate it over so that it's
here.
And I'm going to take this piece, and I'm going to rotate it around so it is here.
So you see now I have this sort of thickened L configuration, and you may wonder so what
until I show you by putting this dividing line here that this configuration is comprised
of two squares.
This square has what is the length of this side?
It's this longer side of the right triangle.
And this side used to be right here.
So this is a square of one of the sides.
And look at this.
This is a square.
This is the shorter side of the right triangle.
And this, when it was rotated around, was a fit in right here.
So this is also the shorter side of the right triangle.
So this is the smaller square.
So the original area square on the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares, actual
physical squares, of the other two sides.
Isn't that an amazing proof of the Pythagorean theorem?
So this was sort of an aside just to make sure that we understand.
But now we have to return to the question that generated that nice excursion into Greek
geometry.
That was that we were trying to say that when we're moving along, if we know how fast we're
going in this direction and how fast we're going in this direction, that is, in the directions
of the coordinate axes, then we can find how fast we're going in the actual direction we're
going by using the Pythagorean theorem.
OK.
So let's take a specific example.
So here's a specific example that we have of a path.
And as you can see, it's labeled by the way we compute the position at every time, which
is 1 third t cubed minus t is the x-coordinate and the other coordinate is t squared.
And you can see what that means.
At time 0, if you look at your watch and it says 0, then there you are at the origin.
You see it because 0, 0.
At time 1, at time 1, you just plug in 1 for t and you have 1 third minus 1.
1 third minus 1 is minus 2 thirds.
So the x-coordinate is minus 2 thirds.
It's to the left of the y-axis.
And then it's up t squared at t equals 1.
1 squared is 1.
So you see you're at the point minus 2 thirds comma 1 and so on.
And in fact, in this animated picture, you see the point moving along that nice curve.
OK.
Now, let's ask the questions that we're posing about the motion of an object moving around
in the plane.
First, how fast is it going at every moment?
Well, let's think about it.
If we take a particular point in time, the car is located at a particular place.
How fast is its x-coordinate changing?
Well, what this means is suppose that we looked at this moving car, but we ignored its motion
back and forth in one of the directions and we just saw whether it was moving to the right
or the left.
Then that change would be represented by how much the first coordinate, this 1 third t
cubed minus t, how fast is that coordinate, the first coordinate changing?
Well that's the problem we've already solved.
We know if a car is just moving on a straight road, we know how to compute how fast it's
going.
We take the derivative.
Take the derivative.
Unfortunately this is an expression whose derivative we know.
The derivative of 1 third t cubed minus t is exactly equal to t squared minus 1.
So what does that mean?
That means if we look at our watch, for example, at time 2 minutes, we look at our watch at
time 2 minutes, then what this says is that the speedometer, if the speedometer is just
measuring how fast we're going in the x direction, in just one direction, all we do is we say
it's t squared minus 1, 2 times 2, 4 minus 1, 3.
We're going 3 miles per minute.
That's all it says.
Now what about the other direction of motion?
Well the other direction of motion, the y-coordinate is changing, its position is t squared, but
once again that's something whose derivative we know.
If we look at it just by how much we're changing in this particular direction, we're at position
t squared, its derivative is 2t.
Well now we're in a position to ask the question, how fast are we going?
Well the speed that we're going is going to be just the hypotenuse of a triangle where
in one direction it is t squared minus 1, and the other direction it's 2t.
So for example, at this point t equals 2, you can see that its x side is 3, its y side
is 4, and therefore the actual speed is 5 because 3 squared plus 4 squared equals 5
squared.
9 plus 16 is 25.
So it turns out that the speed at time 2 is 5 miles per minute.
Now so we can find the speed at every moment.
Now I want to shift gears and talk about how far the car has gone during a particular
interval of time.
And in order to find how far the car has gone, we have to think about what we mean by the
length of a curved path.
Because a curved path, you see it's not 100% clear what it means, what the length of a
curved path is.
If you think very carefully about that, because if something is curved, it's not really completely
clear.
But we've discussed this before, and what we saw was that if you have a smoothly curving
path and you look at it with increased magnification, what does it begin to look like?
A straight line.
Just like as we said before, if you're sitting on the earth, on the whole earth, and you're
sitting in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean on a little boat, well the earth is curved.
But if you just look around you, the water looks completely flat in the immediate neighborhood
of yourself.
So if you take any smoothly curving line and you take a point on it and you magnify it,
you'll start to see it as just a straight line.
Looks very much like a straight line.
Well that is what motivates our concept of the distance, of the length of a curved path.
Namely, here's what we do.
It's a very simple procedure.
What we do is we just take a lot of points on the path, individual points, and connect
them up with straight lines, straight lines between them.
Now when we do that, and here we'll see it in the picture, when we do that you can see
that the straight lines are slightly shorter in each case than the curved path, because
by definition a straight line is the shortest distance between two points, and the curved
path is slightly longer.
But as we get finer and finer divisions of the curve, because at the magnified image
of this curved path, it becomes more and more close to being straight.
You can see if we took points that were just one millionth of an inch apart, then the straight
line and the slightly curved line would be very close to one another.
So here we're left with a challenge of can we, if we added up the lengths of straight
lines between points on our graph, we just took those straight lines and added them up,
we would have an approximation to the length of the curved path.
But if we took smaller divisions and then took straight lines, many more like a million
straight lines, and added up their little lengths, we would get a better approximation
to the length, and then if we made it into a billion pieces and took little tiny, tiny
straight lines and added them up, we would get even closer to it.
And once I've said this idea of adding up, adding up to get closer and closer, I hope
you're immediately thinking integral, because that's what the integral does.
The integral is a sum.
It adds up things for us.
So let's just see exactly what it is that we're adding up.
Well, okay, at every moment, if we want to know how fast and in what direction we're
going, we know how to find that out.
That's what we discussed before.
We look at how fast we're going in one direction.
That's the derivative of the first coordinate.
We see how fast are we going in the other direction.
And then we resolve the two by the Pythagorean theorem.
So now let's look at this equation right here.
What this says is that the speed, the velocity, how fast we're going at any given time t,
is what we get from the Pythagorean theorem applied to the speeds at which we're going
in the two component directions.
It's just the square root of the square of this side plus the square of this side.
You see, x prime of t, that's the derivative, that's the speed at which you're changing
your x coordinate.
You square it because it's the side of a right triangle.
You see, well, how fast are you going in the y direction?
That's how fast you're going up and down.
You square it, and then you take the square root of that to find the length of this diagonal
segment, which is the total speed that you're going.
So if we go for just a short amount of time, delta t, then we won't go, the derivative,
remember, is saying how fast per unit time, how fast per minute.
But if we just go for a little tiny bit of time, not a whole minute, we just go for like
a hundredth of a minute or a thousandth of a minute.
If we want to know how far we've gone, we would say, okay, I'm going at this rate, v
of t, and I multiply it by the time that I'm going at that rate, delta t.
But remember, this is the rate at which I am traveling instantaneously at time t.
That's how fast I'm going in that diagonal direction.
And if I go in that direction for some short interval of time like delta t, then vt delta
t is telling me how far I've gone in that little tiny bit of time.
And think of delta t as just a number.
It's a number like 0.01.
So if I'm going at, for example, three miles per minute for 0.01 minutes, I multiply 0.01,
the number of minutes, times the three to get how far I went in that short interval
of time.
Well, if I wanted to approximate the distance that I traveled between time 0 and time 3,
what would I do?
I would take some small increment of time, and I would do this long addition problem
that you see here.
You see, I would find at time 0.1.
I would see how fast I was going.
And I would multiply 0.1 by that speed.
And then I'd see how fast I was going at time 0.2.
And I'd multiply that by the time elapsed.
And then I'd see how fast I was going at time 3.
And each time I computed that, how fast I'm going, I use this expression.
I use the Pythagorean theorem.
But you can see that this long addition problem, as always, a long addition problem is an integral.
And you see what the integral is.
It's just the integral from time 0 to time 3 of how fast we're going dt.
The delta t changes into a dt.
But the velocity at each moment is just equal to the square root of the square of how fast
I'm going in one direction plus how fast I'm going in the other direction.
Now we're going to actually now do this problem.
That is, how far did the car go between time 0 and time 3 if it's traveling along the specific
path given by this formula 1 third t cubed minus t as the x-coordinate at every moment
and t squared as its y-coordinate at every moment.
So that's moving on that path that you see here, between 0 and 3.
Now the question is, how far will it have traveled?
And the great thing about this is that in doing this problem, we will use essentially
every idea from all the lectures.
So I'm going to actually say which lecture every idea comes from as we do the problem.
So let's just march through it.
First, we know that its position being 1 third t cubed minus t as the x-coordinate and t
squared being the second coordinate.
We know that the speed in each direction is t squared minus 1 for the first coordinate
and 2t for the second coordinate of independent motion.
That came from lecture 2, which said that if a car is moving on a straight road, the
derivative was telling us how fast it's going, and from lecture 7, which told us how to actually
take a derivative of things like t cubed.
Then this expression now for the length is the square root of the square of t squared
minus 1 plus the square of 2t.
And so we get this nice integral from 0 to 3, and the fact that that integral is telling
us the distance traveled is what we've been talking about in this lecture.
So it used the Pythagorean theorem, and it used the analysis of motion on a plane instead
of in a straight line.
So this was lecture 20.
It also used ideas from the baseball lecture, which was lecture 8, that when things going
in at an angle.
Then we do a simplification of the algebra, and I put that down as high school algebra.
That's what allowed us to actually multiply these numbers.
And then once we see that that is a perfect square under the square root sign, we see
it's the integral from 0 to 3 of t squared plus 1 dt.
So that's algebra again.
But now we're trying to take an integral.
So we'll use the fundamental theorem of calculus.
The fundamental theorem of calculus says if you're trying to take an integral, try to
find another expression whose derivative is the thing you're trying to take an integral
of.
From lecture 7, we see that that was t cubed over 3 plus t.
That's an expression whose derivative is t squared plus 1.
In other words, that's an anti-derivative of t squared plus 1.
So once we know that the derivative of t cubed over 3 plus t is equal to t squared
plus 1, then we know that this integral from 0 to 3 is obtained by just plugging in the
3, the upper limit of integration, to t cubed over 3 plus t, and then plugging in 0 and
subtracting.
When we plug in 0, we get 0.
When we plug in 3, we get 3 cubed is 27 divided by 3 is 9, plus 3 is 12.
So the total distance traveled between time 0 and time 3 was exactly 12 miles, and we
used every single thing that we've learned.
