We've been exploring the basic ideas of calculus,
the derivative and the integral,
and we first introduced them in the case of a moving car,
and then we explored each one individually
and saw that it applied to all sorts of different computations
like the area under a curve and finding volumes
and the relationships between volumes and surface area.
In the last two lectures, we saw that these ideas,
the derivative and the integral,
can actually be applied to different kinds of settings
and functions like a car moving on the plane
or talking about the area of a rectangle
that was depended on two varying quantities.
So we've seen calculus in all sorts of different applications
and areas, and today we're going to start a series
of three lectures about its applications
in three different parts of the world.
This first one is talking about the applications
of calculus to physics.
And physics is, of course, the most natural place
for calculus to be applied
because it was in the realm of physics, of motion,
of things moving that the ideas of calculus
actually were generated.
In the next lecture, we'll talk about the applications
of calculus to business and economics,
how you can get rich if you know calculus.
Well, okay, you won't get your money back
if that doesn't happen, but okay.
And the third one in this series will be a lecture
about biology issues, things like how much exercise
should you do to stay healthy and live long.
So these are all applications of calculus,
but I think it's completely appropriate
to start with one of the first triumphs of calculus.
And that was to help explain the motion of the planets.
In the year 1600, about the year 1600, Kepler,
who was an astronomer and a scientist,
proposed three laws of motion.
And his three laws of motion were all deduced purely
from observation.
He and Tycho Brahe, the famous astronomers,
would take these extremely detailed notes
about the locations of the planets and the stars,
and had this massive amount of detailed data.
Now, of course, this was before the invention of the telescope,
but it's amazing how accurate that data was
without a telescope.
So they had this great amount of data,
and Kepler, from the data alone,
not from any concept of physical principles,
deduced three laws of planetary motion.
So these three laws are first,
that the planets go around the sun.
That was the first thing, the planets go around the sun.
That was the first departure from the norm.
The planets go around the sun, but not in a circle.
Instead, they go around in an ellipse.
Now, first of all, let me explain what an ellipse is.
An ellipse is a curve.
It's like an oval-shaped curve.
And the way you actually would get an ellipse
is to take a cone like this
and cut a plane through the cone at an angle.
And you'd see that it would cut through
in this sort of oval kind of shape,
and that shape actually is an ellipse.
Well, from ancient times,
people had a prejudice about circles.
Circles are perfect.
They're completely round.
They have symmetry.
Every line through the center, they're symmetric around them.
And there's an intuitive feeling
that a circle is the natural shape for anything in the world,
particularly things out in the heavens
that are supposed to be perfect
and that were viewed as perfect by the ancients.
So people kept going back to a circle,
even though the data didn't support a circle
as the shape of orbits.
But they tried to adjust the circle.
Since the circle didn't work, they said,
well, how about if from a circle,
a planet instead of just going around,
say the Sun in a circle,
how about if there were little circles on circles
called epicycles?
And they used epicycles to get better approximations
to the actual orbit of the planet.
And of course, earlier, they were having the orbits
going around the Earth, not around the Sun.
So Kepler's idea of replacing this perfect circle
by this rather imperfect shape, the ellipse,
was a conceptual departure
that was of great moment and importance.
But as a matter of fact,
one of the things we'll see at the end of this lecture
is that this prejudice toward circles,
of seeing circles on circles
and approximating what actually is an elliptical shape
by circles on circles,
actually led to a whole branch of calculus
that we will see applied to the realm of music.
So it actually turns out that that concept
of approximating by circular kind of motion
other kinds of curves is of actual use in everyday life.
Well, so Kepler's three laws.
The first law was that the planets go around in ellipses.
The second law is that the planets sweep out
equal areas in equal times.
What that means is if you draw a radial line
from the Sun to, say, the Earth,
and then you let time pass,
you'll find that the amount of area that is swept out
over any given amount of time
is the same at every time of the year.
In other words, if you look at how much area swept out
in one day when the Earth is at a distant point from the Sun,
you'll get exactly the same area
as if you looked at the radial line
from the Sun to the Earth moving for one day
when it's closest to the Sun.
That means, of course, that it's moving faster
when it's closest to the Sun
in order for that area to be equal.
Now, I wanted to say something about this image
that we have here of the Sun and the Earth and its motion.
And you'll see this in textbooks
or pictures of the planetary motion.
Once you see that the planets actually go around the Sun
in an ellipse, you tend to draw what you view
as a prototypical ellipse, a big elongated ellipse
where it's actually very clearly oval-shaped.
Well, the reality is that if you actually drew
a picture of the orbit of the Earth,
it's very close to a circle.
It deviates very little.
And in fact, an ellipse which has two points called foci
are very close to each other.
So a more accurate depiction of the orbit of the Earth
would be just a circle.
That's what it would look like from a distance.
But in order to show these ideas,
we exaggerate the picture and make it look like an ellipse.
The third of Kepler's laws had to do with the length
of the years of the planets.
And it was a relationship between the distance away from the Sun
and how long the year was for the planets.
The more distant planets have a longer period
in which it takes them to go around the Sun one time.
Well, these three laws of Kepler are correct.
However, he also had other observations that were simply wrong.
At the time of Kepler, there were not the same number of planets
known as there are now.
There were fewer planets.
And it turns out that the number of planets that were known
at that time was the same as the number of regular solids.
There are five regular solids.
The regular solids are things like a cube,
regular meaning that they have exactly the same size
and shape of every face.
And there's a cube, a tetrahedron, an icosahedron,
a dodecahedron, and an octahedron.
Those are the five regular solids.
We don't have to know about them,
but he had a concept that these solids had such a special role
in geometry that he inserted one inside the other
exactly inscribing one inside the other.
And the sizes of these various inscribed regular solids
corresponded somewhat to the distance that the planets
were away from the Sun.
And so he hypothesized that there was a cause-and-effect
relationship there, that that was another observation he made.
That observation was simply false.
And it's just viewed as a coincidence and we move on.
But these other laws of motion are actually correct,
and this is where Newton comes into the picture.
At the end of the 17th century, in 1687,
Newton published his Principia,
the mathematical principles of nature.
And in that book, he talked about the laws of motion,
such as the universal law of gravitation.
He talked about what it is that causes a body in motion
to change its motion.
Namely, a force would be applied to it,
and that gravitation was an example of a force
that was changing the motion of a moving object.
And in particular, what he showed was that the planetary motions,
that is, for example, the elliptical shape of a moving planet,
could be deduced from his universal law of universal gravitation
and his other laws of motion,
such as force equals mass times acceleration.
Now, this is not a physics course,
and I'm not going to explain those in any detail,
but the point is that Newton described a few simple
laws of the behavior of moving bodies
from which Kepler's laws could be deduced as consequences.
Now, Newton did not claim to explain
why the law of universal gravitation is what it is.
He just said that if you have two masses,
the force with which they attract one another
is inversely proportional to the square of the distance apart,
and it's proportional to the mass of each body.
But he didn't say why that particular law would work.
Why is it inverse square law?
Why not inverse cube law?
Why not something else?
In fact, he explicitly said,
I frame no hypothesis.
So in a way, he transformed the angels of the past
that would push the planets to angels of gravity
that pushed them toward the sun.
There's no explanation for the law of gravitation,
but in the modern world, this was a huge conceptual advance.
Namely, the advance was not to explain what you don't know,
but simply to describe it mathematically,
get a mathematical model from which you could deduce
what you actually observe
and not try to explain why it is
that that mathematical model is true.
Except insofar as further mathematical models
might have the law of universal gravitation as a consequence.
So you see, we step from mathematical model
to more refined mathematical models.
Well, so Newton was able to deduce Kepler's laws
from his laws of motion.
I wanted to say that one of the obstacles that Newton had
in trying to describe using his law of universal gravitation
is the fact that the planets are not just points.
If you're standing on the planet,
suppose we're standing on Earth,
and we take an object like a ball,
and we drop the ball.
Now, we know that it falls toward the Earth,
and suppose you want to figure out what is the speed
with which it falls.
Well, it turns out you can say
that the gravitational attraction of this ball
is the same consequence as if all of the mass of the Earth
were centered at the center of the Earth.
But it's not obvious that that's so.
It's not obvious at all.
Why don't the mountains in Australia
pull it this way with a certain force?
And the ocean over here in the Indian Ocean
pulls it a different way,
and the Mount Everest pulls it a different way.
Why is it that the cumulative effect
of all of those different pieces of the mass,
why can they all be resolved into just assuming
that all the mass is centered at the center of the Earth?
Well, this was a problem that stumped Newton
for several years, and he worked hard
to finally, using calculus, which he had invented,
was able to show that, in fact,
that is an assumption that is legal to make.
That is that a body is attracted to a spherical mass
that is uniformly distributed mass,
as though it were a point mass at one point.
Now, what that means is this,
and I can't resist giving a baseball demonstration
of the effect of this.
Suppose that we had our baseball player,
like we talked about in lecture 8,
and this baseball player hit the ball,
but instead of the analysis that we did in lecture 8
where it went out into the field and it landed on the ground,
suppose that the entire Earth,
which is sort of a nuisance anyway,
suppose the Earth weren't there, just the batter,
and the Earth actually were a point mass right at its center,
then what would happen to the ball?
Well, the ball would go up,
and then it would just keep going down
and wouldn't hit the ground because there's no ground.
We're assuming that all the Earth
is just centered at that center point.
Now, you're the outfielder.
Of course, you're not standing on anything,
but that's okay.
So you're the outfielder, and the batter has hit the ball.
Now, you remember, or Willie May's example,
what's required to figure out where to stand
in the computation that we did in lecture 8
of seeing the derivative of the slope of the line.
It was a wonderful thing,
but here we don't have to do that.
It's a much simpler process
because after the batter hits the ball,
if you're the outfielder, all you need to do
is stroll slowly up to the plate
and stand exactly at the plate
and turn in the opposite direction
from which the ball was hit and wait.
So in other words, if the batter hit the ball like this,
then you turn around and you put the glove
exactly where the bat hit the ball,
and you just hold your glove there and wait.
The ball will go up,
will travel around the center of the earth,
which we're assuming all the mass of the earth is at the center,
it will travel down, it'll whip around,
it'll be a very elongated ellipse
because it won't go out very far,
it'll whip around that center, come back,
and be coming right back into your glove
at exactly the speed at which it was hit.
So you don't even have to move.
So this is very useful if you happen to be a baseball player
on a world that doesn't have any ground to it.
Now, knowing the laws of physics
and how the planets move in ellipses,
they actually influence one another's orbits as well.
Not only are they each going around the sun,
the sun is pulling them, but they're also pulling each other.
And using the fact that that causes them actually not to go in ellipses,
but they're distorted by one another's gravity
that perturbs their orbits a little bit.
If you look at their orbits very closely,
you can deduce that in some cases
there are other bodies acting on them than what you think.
This was a method by which Neptune was discovered.
Neptune, when it wasn't known, was a very difficult to see.
Neptune is very difficult to see.
It's far away and it's dark.
It's only illuminated by the sun, you see.
And so what happened is people used the models of universal gravitation
and saw the perturbation of the other planets
and realized that a reason for why these other planets
were not exactly in the orbits that you'd expect
was there must be some other gravitational force influencing them.
And using those kinds of calculations and calculus,
they were able to actually pinpoint what direction to look.
And then they looked in that direction
and sure enough found a new planet.
So this was a wonderful example of an application of a mathematical model
to finding something in the world.
Well, we're not going to talk about how to describe an ellipse
from the universal law of gravitation,
but let's say a word about the second law of Kepler's law
because it has to do something we've seen before.
Kepler's law that says that the area that is swept out by the planet
in equal time is equal area.
That actually can be described in this picture.
You see, here's the sun and here's our planet moving.
Now, it turns out that you don't need the inverse square law of gravity
to figure out that a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times.
It turns out that any central force will do the trick.
In other words, if the only thing that's changing a body
is a force that tends toward one fixed point,
then this equal area law will apply.
The simplest case of this is suppose that no force is applied.
So you have a body that just moves on a straight line.
Remember, a body that is in motion tends to remain in motion
and just move in a straight line.
Well, now let's look here at our model of a triangle.
Remember that if this body is moving at a straight line,
then what happens?
We know that the area is equal.
So I'm going to move the sun instead of the body
because that's the way this model works.
So I'm moving the sun instead of the body,
but notice that the effect is that in equal,
this distance will be equal because if you're going at a steady rate,
say in one minute, it will have traveled this distance.
Well, then if it's just going in a straight line,
you see the area of this triangle is the same as it moves by.
And so we saw in a previous lecture
that the area is just determined by the height of the triangle
and the length of its base,
and therefore it sweeps out equal areas in equal times
if it's going in a straight line.
Well, so then the only question is what happens when you turn?
Well, let's make a...
This doesn't actually happen to planets,
but let's suppose that it just made a turn at an angle like this.
If it made a turn at an angle,
then it's what would be the old velocity.
Let's suppose this is the distance that the planet went in one minute,
and it turned in this direction by virtue of a force toward the sun.
Then the distance, the speed at which it was going in this direction
would be the length of this arrow.
And so this is its new speed in this direction
because it's a resolution of two forces
of how fast it was going in this direction
plus the force toward the sun
caused it to change direction and go in this direction.
Well, the area of this triangle here
of the smaller triangle and the big triangle
are basically the same.
If you think of the sun as, say, several million miles away,
and this as a very small change.
You see, you don't have to have this long.
You could just have a little tiny moment of time changing there.
So that this little part of the area becomes negligible as this becomes shorter,
and yet what it means is that this triangular area
is approximately equal to the area swept out by the body as it's moving in this line,
but now it's moving in this line.
And since it's moving in this line,
once again, its area will be the same by our same triangle demonstration.
So when it makes this turn,
we still have it still sweeping out equal areas in equal times.
Well, let's move on to another application of calculus to physics.
And this one is the application that allows us to actually observe the planets.
And what it is is that if you have a big telescope,
the way big telescopes work is that the light from the stars come into the telescope,
they bounce off a reflecting surface, and they all converge to a focus.
And the question is, what shape should you make your reflecting mirror
so that all of these rays, which are coming in basically parallel
because they're coming from such a great distance,
they're coming in basically parallel,
what shape should you make the telescope so that the rays focus on one point?
They bounce off and hit one point.
Well, the answer is it's the curve that we've discussed in several other lectures,
namely the curve x squared.
This is the function x squared.
First of all, in what direction will a beam of light bounce off at a point on a curved surface?
Well, once again, we think our vision of a curved surface, of a smoothly curved surface,
is that at every point, if we magnify it, if we look at it very close, it looks like a straight line.
And what direction does that straight line go in?
Well, that straight line is the direction of the tangent line,
whose slope is given by the derivative.
So this was back in lecture five that we saw that relationship between the graph of a curve and the derivative.
So here is the tangent line, and when a beam of light comes down from straight up,
parallel to the y-axis coming straight down,
it will bounce off making an equal angle of where it comes in to where it goes out.
So here's the light ray it comes in, it bounces off.
Now, our question is, why is it that if we took some other point, like over here,
why would it bounce off and hit the same place?
But I'm going to claim that it does, and that it always hits in the point 0, 1 quarter.
That exact point, all of these vertical rays will bounce off and hit exactly at that point.
Let's see why that's true.
Well, it's just a little bit of geometry that does this, and it's really neat,
and it uses the fact that we know what the slope of this tangent line is.
If we take an arbitrary point whose two coordinates are x,
that means it's x distance across, and it's x squared, x squared high here,
remember that we know that the slope of that tangent line is exactly equal to 2 times x.
This was when we were moving in our car, and we always kept at the roadside of t squared,
and we saw the speedometer was always 2t.
And then later we said we interpret that as the slope of the tangent line.
So we see that its slope is 2 times x, and since this distance from the x-axis up to the point is x squared,
then what do you have to divide x squared by to get a slope?
You see, looking at this triangle right here, just down to the axis, straight across,
the slope of that, which is the slope of the tangent line, has to be equal to 2x.
So x squared divided by this length has to be 2x.
Well, you just do the algebra, and you see that this length then has to be x over 2.
It turns out that the tangent line always hits exactly halfway between the origin and the vertical.
So that's an interesting piece of geometry right away,
and that's what's going to tell us why it is that the reflected beam always hits at the point 0.25.
So since this is x over 2, this is also x over 2.
And if we go all the way down to a quarter distance below the x-axis,
what we can do is draw this figure, and we're going to prove that this little triangle right here
is exactly the same as this little triangle right here.
And that's what we want to do because this angle between the tangent line and the incoming beam of light
is exactly equal to the angle that's opposite it.
In other words, if you draw two straight lines and they cross,
the angle on one side is exactly equal to the angle they form on the other side of the point where they cross.
But if I can prove to you that this little triangle is the same as this triangle,
then this angle will also be the same, and therefore the angle at which it bounces off is equal,
and therefore that's the correct line.
Well, to prove that, we just do a little bit of geometry using, once again, the Pythagorean theorem
to compute the distance of this line.
Well, the way we do that, we know how long it is from here to here.
That's x.
We know how far it is from here to here.
That's x squared minus 1 quarter, because you see we're 1 quarter up, and this is at height x squared.
So the distance from here up is x squared minus 1 quarter.
So the Pythagorean theorem says that the length of this diagonal line is x squared,
the square root of x squared plus x squared minus 1 quarter squared.
And that, if you just multiply it out, is exactly x squared plus 1 quarter.
So that means that this side is the same length as this side, and therefore we have,
and of course this side is the same as itself, and therefore we have that these two triangles,
by the way, this length comes down a quarter, and this line goes up a quarter.
So this length is the same as this length.
It's just a straight line that hits right in the middle of this segment,
and it goes up a quarter here and down a quarter here, so this is going to be bisected.
That means that the three sides of this triangle are exactly equal to the three sides of this triangle,
so their angles are equal, and therefore this angle of incidence where the light comes in,
it will bounce off at exactly the same angle to hit the point 0 a quarter.
We just used the variables x and x squared.
It didn't matter what x and x squared were to do this demonstration.
And therefore it means that at any point, if we hit and bounce off the tangent,
it'll hit at 0 a quarter.
And we can see that every single line that we draw comes down, bounces off,
and comes right back into 0 a quarter.
And that's why it is that telescopes are made in that particular shape.
Well, I promised you that I would talk a little bit about an application of a calculus to music.
And what we're going to do is do that by playing two notes.
And we'll sing two notes.
Da, da, da.
Two notes.
And we can see the waveform.
On your screen here, you see the waveform of these notes.
They're perfect notes, incidentally.
Notice there's no oscillations.
Perfect notes, perfect notes.
And you notice that the second one is slightly faster in its oscillation up and down than the first one was.
Now, if we play both those notes at once, we have a little chord.
And if you hear a chord, the oscillations of the first and the oscillations of the second
add up or subtract to one another to form a waveform that's much more complicated.
And we can see the waveform of the combined sound of the chord.
And you see that it has a pattern to it, but it's much more complicated.
It turns out that you can take a combined form such as this, a chord,
and decompose it to find out what are the individual notes that made up the chord.
It's that process that uses epicycles.
It's called the Fourier transform, and it uses the approximation of this complicated function
into its component, sine, and cosine parts, which are telling the individual notes.
We'll conclude this lecture then by having a sort of a movie credit script
of some equations that are used in various applications in physics.
You'll see equations that are used in mechanics, in fluid dynamics, in waves, in thermodynamics,
in electricity and magnetism, optics, chemistry.
There are innumerable applications to technology of all sorts.
And of course, this is just the beginning.
So we've seen a little introduction of the applications of calculus to physics.
And in the next lectures, we'll see applications to business and economics and biology.
