One of the arenas in which calculus is applied is the area of business and economics, how
to get rich.
Now that is something of real value.
So the way that we think about things in business and economics and how calculus applies
to it is to think about the fact that we have dependent quantities in business and economics
as we've seen one quantity depending on another in all sorts of settings.
In the case of business and economics, if you are in business, you have a company and
you're producing goods.
It's interesting, you always produce goods, not bad, which I think that's good.
You're producing goods.
Now if we think about this, as you're producing a quantity of whatever it is you're producing,
you know that at a certain quantity you'll make a certain amount of money and it'll cost
a certain amount to make those things.
And if you know how much money you're going to make and you know how much it costs you
to make them, the difference of those two is how much profit you make.
And of course you want to make the most profit.
So this whole setting is the idea of when you hear a question like, well, you want to
make the most of something, you have to think back to our concept of optimization and derivatives.
So we ask a question, could derivatives have anything to do with analyzing how many objects
to make in order to maximize the profit?
Okay, so let's start to think about this in a graphical form.
Let's look at this graph that demonstrates a potential graph that relates the quantity
of an object that you're producing to the two features that are varying, the revenue
that you would get and the cost of producing them.
Now let's just look at this qualitatively.
For now we're first going to just talk about this by the way in general terms and then
later we'll do a specific example with actual numbers so that we ground it in specificity.
But for now let's just think in general terms and realize that the cost of producing something,
if you see the graph here that I've drawn as a potential cost graph, it has the property
that there's an initial startup cost.
So just to produce one of something can cost a lot of money because you need to set up
the equipment or buy the equipment or something, you need to develop it.
So just producing that first thing costs a lot of money.
And then as you produce more of them it costs a certain amount.
Now this is a very simple example since it's a straight line.
That's just implying that it costs a certain incremental amount to produce one more item
each time.
In fact probably there would be economies of scale which would make that curve actually
tip down a little bit as you go further forward.
Now here is the revenue graph.
One of the things that we see when we see this revenue graph is that we're glad to
see that the revenue graph crosses above the cost graph at some point.
That's good because we want to be in that part where the revenue is higher than the
cost.
That's one thing that we're looking for.
Now the point at which the difference between the revenue and the cost is the biggest.
That's what we're looking for because we want the most profit.
So in the graph, looking at the graph, we're looking for the place, and you see it here
with the dotted line, you're looking for the place where the difference between the cost
graph and the revenue graph, how much money you bring in and how much it costs you to
produce that number of things, we're looking for the place where that length of the line
is the biggest.
Now let's think about derivative for a minute.
Let's think about derivative.
Derivative is measuring rate of change.
In this case, we're talking about revenue with respect to quantity.
So the derivative is saying, if I produce more goods, then what will be the incremental
increase in the revenue?
And same with the cost graph.
Well, so now what I'm going to claim is that the place where you make the most profit is
the place where the derivative of the revenue graph is exactly the same as the derivative
of the cost graph.
Well let's think of why that's true.
So derivative is the marginal additional revenue you would get by producing one more
item.
It's the rate at which your revenue increases if you produce one more item.
That's what the derivative of the revenue would be.
Likewise, the derivative of the cost would be how much does it cost to produce one more
item?
Now let's suppose that the slope of the revenue graph were steeper than the slope of the cost
graph.
So in other words, we're at a point like here, you see where the slope of the revenue graph
is steeper than the slope of the cost graph.
Well, what does that mean?
That means that if we produce one more item, what happens to the revenue?
It increases at a faster rate, that is more dollars, than the cost increases.
Therefore you're better off producing that one more item, because you're making more
money than it costs you to make it.
You see?
Okay, so that's why you wouldn't be at a maximum profit situation if the derivative
of the revenue was bigger than the derivative of the cost.
But now let's look at another situation, like up here.
Now here, the derivative of the revenue is less steep.
Your increase in revenue at this point, you get a little bit more, but not much more by
producing one more item.
And yet look, the derivative of the cost is continuing at that same rate.
Because the derivative of the cost graph is bigger than the derivative of the revenue
graph.
Well, what does that say?
That says, if you produce one more item, it costs you more to produce that one more
item than the additional revenue you're going to get.
Therefore you're better off not producing it.
In fact, you better go backwards and produce less because you'd expect that the costs would
go down faster than your increase in revenue is going.
So the place where the two derivatives are exactly the same is the place at which the
profit is maximum.
So that's sort of interesting already, that the derivative is involved in finding the
maximum profit.
Let's do a specific example so that we really see what's going on here.
So suppose that you're producing a good.
And you have an understanding of what price, how the price affects the number of goods
you can sell.
And here's a formula, a specific formula to ground our discussion.
Suppose that you know that if you sell an item for P dollars, then the number of items
you will sell will be 20,000 minus 50 P. So this is the demand for the item at a certain
price.
It's the number you would sell at that price.
And let's understand this a little bit.
This says that if the item doesn't cost anything, if basically you give it away, 20,000 people
want it.
OK?
They'll take it for zero.
And yet if you charge $400, you see 400 times 50 is 20,000.
So if you charge $400 for each item, no one will buy it.
It's too expensive.
The quantity that's sold is zero.
And then somewhere in between, if you sell it for any amount you plug in in between,
like $100 per item, then you can compute how many you would sell at $100.
Just multiply 100 times 50, which is 5,000.
And you'd say 20,000 minus 5,000, you'd sell 15,000 items if you sell it for $100.
OK.
Now, just doing a little bit of algebra just solving for P. We have P is equal to this
fraction, which can be simplified to 400 minus Q over 50.
So this is just a little algebra that shows us that we can take our price and see how
many we're going to sell at that price.
So this is sort of a realistic thing that it depends on what price you sell it at, how
many you're going to sell.
So the revenue for producing a particular number of goods, the revenue that you're going to
get is going to be the price that you sell that number of goods at times the number you
sell.
You see?
So the revenue for producing Q goods, in other words, if you price it so that Q is the number
you sell, you price it so that Q is the number you sell, then the amount of revenue you're
going to get is this number, which is the price per item, times the number Q that you
sell.
And then once again, this going from here to here is just multiplying Q through by the
distributive law and getting 400 Q minus Q squared over 50.
So what we have now is an equation that relates the revenue for a particular choice of number
to produce.
Well, remember our strategy for maximizing profit.
The strategy was let's take the derivative of the cost graph and the revenue graph, and
then we will compare the two and see when the two things come out equal.
So here we have the derivative of the revenue graph, 400 Q minus Q squared over 50 is 400
minus Q over 25.
Now you may or may not remember this, but these were examples of derivatives that we've
taken before.
You see the 400 Q just means it's a line of slope 400, so its derivative is 400, and we've
talked about Q squared and its derivative being 2 Q.
And so combining those, we see that the derivative is 400 minus Q over 25.
Now we've got to talk about the cost graph.
The cost function is C of Q equals $100,000, we're assuming it costs $100,000 to start
the production, and then that it costs you $30 per additional item.
So as you see, the cost graph C of Q is equal to 100,000 plus 30 Q.
Well the derivative of that graph, of that function is just C prime of Q equals 30 because
it means that it costs you $30 for each additional item that you're going to make.
So our challenge now to maximize profit is simply to say, when are those two derivatives
equal to each other?
Well, that's what we do.
We just say, when is 400 minus Q over 25 equal to 30?
It's a very simple equation.
We just solve it, and we see that Q is 9,250 items.
But now we can go back to the top here and see how much we need to sell them for so that
9,250 is the number that will be sold.
So we just look at this equation and plug that back in to see that the price we should
charge for each item is $215.
So this analysis tells us that if we want to make the most profit, what we should do
is to sell 9,250 items and charge $215 per item.
So that's a nice application of derivative to an economic situation.
Well, let's take another example of a business application of calculus.
This is something that if you're in business that you often do, you have to make choices
about how much stuff to store.
You see, there's this concept of just in time business now where you get things just
at the last second.
You never store anything.
You just, you never have an inventory.
You just get it just in time and out the door.
You see, that's one problem.
But on the other hand, the problem with it is that there's a balance here.
There's a balance.
And the balance is this, that in some things that you produce, it costs a certain amount
to set up the production run.
There's a fixed cost for the production run.
And then you can make a certain number at a certain cost after that production run.
But if you make a lot of them, then you've got to store them because they don't sell
it once.
So they're just strong.
But on the other hand, if you decide, well, I don't like to store all these things because
it costs so much to store them, then you have to do, you just make a few of them.
But then it costs, the setup costs come more often.
So you've got to, you know, how often do you actually produce things?
Should you produce them just once a year and then store all these things as they're sold
throughout the year?
You produce a whole year's worth?
Or should you do it 12 times a year, do it each month?
Well, you see, it's a balance of the inventory cost versus the increase in production costs
of doing it more frequently.
And so what do we have?
We're trying to, in this case, minimize the cost.
So let's think about an example where, let's suppose we know how many we're going to sell
during the year.
And we know how much it costs to store an item for a year and just make the decision
of how frequently we should set up a production run to actually produce them.
So let's, let's ground our discussion once more in a specific example and that, that
I think we'll, we'll show you that how calculus here, come once again, comes to the rescue.
So let's look at this example.
Suppose that the setup cost for any production run is $2,000.
So this is the, no matter how many we produce, there's this fixed initial cost of $2,000.
And then of course it costs per item, but we're not talking about that because that
cost per item would, would come into effect regardless of if we do a lot of them at first
or just a few at first.
So there's a setup cost of $2,000 per time of setting it up.
And let's assume that there's a storage cost of $3 per year.
If you, if you have to leave something in a warehouse, it's $3 per year, per year.
And let's suppose you sell 12,000 of these items during a year.
That's what you expect to sell.
But we'll also make another assumption, which may or may not be valid in real life.
And that is that you sell them continuously at an even pace throughout the year.
Well, the picture that we have of the storage then of these items is that we, we first make
a production run and we produce a certain number of these items.
And then they're in storage.
And then we wait and they're, they're sold.
That's this downward trend is how many are in storage over time.
So there's, we start with, after the end of the production run, we have the most that
we ever have in storage.
And then over time, the, the, they're sold and they leave the warehouse and then we get
down to zero and we have another production run.
And then we have this storage and they come down and we have another production run and
so on.
This would represent having one, two, three, four production runs during, during that year.
Okay.
Now, the question is though, what is given this data that we have here, what is the optimal
number of production runs that will decrease the cost taking into account, count both the
cost of keeping inventory and the cost of setup?
Well, okay.
So let's think about how many setups we're going to make.
The, the number of setups that we make are, are going to be some numbers.
So we'll call it Y and each one costs $2,000.
So the cost for the setup part of our expenses is 2,000 times Y.
The storage cost is what, whatever the number we produce at every run, if we call that number
X, then on average, the number that are in storage are just half of that number because
you, you see from this graph that you start with the number you've just produced and then
it gets diminished to zero as things are sold and then you go back to producing all
of them there.
And if we assume that they're sold at this even rate, then you can see that on average
you're storing half as many as you produce in every, any individual run.
And we, we assume therefore, so the, the, the average is, is that you have half X items
in storage costing $3 per year.
The total storage cost then for the year is 1.5, half of the three dollars, three dollars
times X over two or 1.5 X is the storage cost.
Now, so the total cost for these two things, inventory and setup are 2,000 Y plus 1.5 X,
but you see X and Y are related to each other.
X times Y is 12,000, we're assuming you're selling 12,000 during the year.
So the number you produce each time times the number of times you produce it is the 12,000.
Well, that, this allows us to say that Y is 12,000 over X and the reason for that is that
we can eliminate the Y from our equation and so that our total cost here instead of having
a Y here, well, Y is equal to 12,000 over X and that's, that's what we, we put in.
So this, this little equation is exactly the total cost equation, but where instead of
the Y, which is the number of setups, we, we have put in what that number is 12,000 over
X or X is the number that are produced in each setup.
Okay, so here is our, here is our equation, 2,000 times 12,000 over X plus 1.5 X.
That is the cost. Well, now we've got to think calculus, we've got to get our calculus heads
on here. Our calculus heads say, well, look, for different choices of X, different choices
of X, we're going to get a different number there. We would plug in, if we choose X equal
one, X equal two, X equal three, we get different number and therefore that there, for every
number we have a cost. Well, if, if we graph that cost, it's going to have a place where
it's lost and that's, that's the number we want to produce. We want to produce a place
where it costs the least. Okay, so, so the point is that now looking at this in the abstract,
and you know, from my point of view, see, I, I'm, I teach calculus. So from my point
of view, as soon as we set up this equation, I'm not thinking about inventory. I'm not
thinking about set up costs. I'm not thinking about anything. Now all we're thinking about
is this, this equation. It has nothing to do with anything except that it is a varying
equation and we're trying to find the place where it's minimal. But I know that if I,
if I drew a graph of something, the place where it's, it's an extreme such as the minimal
is where the derivative is zero. So the strategy is I'm going to take the derivative, I'm going
to set it equal to zero, and I'm going to see what value of X makes that thing the minimum.
So let's go ahead and do that. So here we have this formula for T of X. We take its
derivative and the M here stands for million. You see, because you have 2000 times 12,000,
that's 24 million divided by X squared. We, we actually didn't, I have to, I have to confess
that we didn't, I didn't tell you what the derivative of one over X is. One over X is
a curve that goes down like this. But, but the pattern of reducing the exponent by one
works even for negative exponents. So it's X to the minus one, and it becomes X to the
minus two times minus one. So, so the derivative here is equal to minus 24 million over X
squared plus, well, 1.5 times X, its derivative is just 1.5. So now we have a formula, and
we can, we can see this formula right here. It has one variable, which is X. And just
solving this formula, well, here's how we solve this formula. We just, we, we move this
to the other side. We say 24 million over X squared equals 1.5. Multiplying through by
X squared, we have 1.5 X squared equals 24 million. If you divide 1.5 into 24, you get
16 million. And that's equal to X squared. Well, the square root of 16 million is 4,000.
So that little bit of algebra that we see here shows us that X equals 4,000 is the number
you should produce each time, and therefore it takes three runs of 4,000 to produce your
12,000 items at the least possible cost. So that's an example of, of using the derivative
to find the answer to minimizing the costs in the, in the production and inventory scheme.
Well, okay, so, so these are examples of applications of the derivative to business applications,
both of those two had to do with, with derivative, maximizing things, maximizing profit, minimizing
cost. Those are the first two examples. So, so, so these are examples of applications
of the first two examples. But, but there's another, another side to business and economics
which is, involves the integral. There are lots of applications of both the derivative
and integral in, in business and economics, and in particular in personal economics. So
suppose that you have a, you're, you're planning for your retirement, and you decide to pin
your hopes of a, a happy and, and wealthy retirement on a vending machine. Okay, so you, you purchase
a vending machine and it, and it sells, it sells stuff and it, it does quite well and
it makes for you $100 a day. Not bad. That's pretty good, $100 a day, a vending machine.
The question is, how much money will you have after, let's say, 20 years? So you're going
to retire in 20 years. How much, how much money would you make if you got $100 every day from
this source? Well, this is, this is an interesting problem. I mean, in one sense, you could say,
well, I know exactly how much I would get. I would just take my, my $100 a day and then
I'd just see how many days there are in 20 years, multiply it out and that's how much
money I have. Well, that, that wouldn't require calculus. Might require a calculator, but
it wouldn't require a calculus, but it, it would require a calculus if instead of, of
just taking the money and putting it in a shoe box, suppose you then assume that you
took that money and you invested it in a bank account. Well, if you invested in a bank account,
well, if you invest the money in a bank, then that money will accumulate interest. And so
you have two things going on here. You have a steady stream of, of income that's coming
in $100 a day and then you put it in a bank and the bank is also accumulating money. But
notice it's getting a little bit complicated because of the fact that you put the money
in every day and money that's been there longer will earn more interest than the money
that you just put in yesterday. So it's a, it's a sort of a complicated kind of a situation.
Well, when we have this kind of a situation, the, the way that, that to attack the problem
is to say, okay, let's be very methodical and just write down how much money, when the
money arrives and how much money it earns. So let's just draw a, a line that represents
the time from right now to 20 years later. Okay. So we look at this line and, and we,
we can think to ourselves, well, at every time during that 20 year period, certain
money is coming in and the money that comes in during that period is going to be there
for the remaining part of the 20 years. So if I knew how to compute how much money
that if I deposit today, how much it will be worth if I deposit today in 20 years, but
if I deposit it two years from now in 18 years, four years from now in 16 years, if I could
do that, I would add up all of those little bits of money that what I get from today,
how much it becomes what I put in tomorrow, how much it becomes what I put in the third
day, how much it becomes that kind of tedious thing. Whenever you see something that is
sort of a tedious repetition thing that involves addition, what do you think of? Integral.
Integral, because that's what the integral does. It tediously adds up a lot of individual
increments. In this case, for example, we see if we take any particular time t, we'll
just call it time t. And we think of it, even though it's $100 a day, we could think of
it as just continuously coming in. It's the rate of $100 a day, but we could think of
the money as just accumulating every instant. If we do a graph, it would be $100 just straight
across. Then the amount of money we have in a very short interval of time is going to
be between t and t delta t is, if we think of t in years, because we're talking about
20 years, delta t, think of it, remember as always, delta t is just a small interval of
time, like 0.01 of a year. It's a fraction of a year. Well, $100 a day is the same as
$36,500 a year. So the amount of money that comes in any delta t period of time is this
$36,500 times delta t. Well, now look, we have this very long addition problem involved
that at every time, at every interval delta t, we say that we earn $36,500 times delta
t dollars, and then it stays in the bank, and we'll assume it's earning 5% of interest
in the bank. It stays in the bank for how long? Well, for 20 years minus t, because
at t, we're already at some time mark between zero and 20 years, and so we have only that
much left. So we have this long addition problem that you see, where in English it says how
much money did you get during the short interval of time times how much will it have become
at the end of our 20 year period. Since we have this long addition problem, and you can
see that it's all similar to the kind of a sum that becomes an integral, we can actually
write down an integral that accomplishes this sum. And when we actually write down that
integral, the integral involves exponential functions because when you put money in a
bank, it grows exponentially. So at the end of 20 years, that money will have accumulated
to be $1,254,345.74. Not bad. Well, we've seen specific examples of the derivative applied
to business situations, and here we saw an example of the integral applied to business
situations. But in fact, the calculus comes up in many settings. Things of mortgage rates,
inflation rates, the monetary trends, many applications in business and economics involve
derivatives and integrals. So this is just the tip of the iceberg.
