During the last two lectures, we saw calculus applied first to physics and to music.
And then in the last lecture, we saw calculus applied to business and economics.
So today's lecture is going to see how calculus can apply to biological issues in the biological
world.
We'll talk about population of elephants and germs.
We'll talk about big biological questions.
The question that really involves us most personally is the question of how long will
we live?
This is a good question.
Now some people have the theory that each of us is allocated a certain specific number
of heartbeats.
And once we've used up those heartbeats, we're done.
Well if we have that view of reality, and incidentally I don't think there's any reason
to believe that is actually true, but nevertheless, if we think that that's what actually happens
in life, then we're faced with a question, namely how much should we exercise?
The reason that that question comes up is that we know that if we exercise, then we
get in better condition.
And when we're in better condition, our heart beats at a slower rate, fewer beats per minute.
Well if your heart is beating at fewer beats per minute, you're going to live longer.
But on the other side, if you exercise at the time you're actually exercising, of course
your heart is beating faster.
So you're using up these valuable beats to exercise in order to accomplish the reduction
in your resting heart rate.
So you see we are faced with a balance problem.
If we exercise all the time, it may be that our resting heart rate goes down and becomes
quite slow, but if we're using up so many heartbeats and exercising to accomplish that,
then maybe we actually shorten our lives because we're exercising too much.
And on the other hand, if we don't exercise at all, then our heart beat is quite fast
because we're in such rotten condition.
So how are we going to describe this question and use calculus to tell us how much to exercise?
Well in order to use calculus, what we need to do is to describe a relationship between
the amount of exercise we do and our resting heart rate.
So let's look at a potential model that is a mathematical formula that would describe
that relationship.
So let's look at it this way.
First of all, for convenience, let's talk about a unit of exercise in terms of how many
extra heartbeats we invest during exercise.
So we'll say a unit of exercise is 3,600 heartbeats.
Now why did I pick 3,600?
Well 3,600 is about an hour's worth of extra heartbeat exercise because you see if your
regular heartbeat is 70 and you exercise so your heart rate is 130, then you're using
60 beats per minute extra.
And if you do that for an hour, which would be hard by the way, if you did it for an hour
then you would use up 60 times 60 or 3,600 heartbeats.
So we'll call that an exercise unit.
And then we need to describe a relationship between our resting heart rate and how many
units of exercise we do per week.
So I'm thinking this model is going to describe if we do a certain amount of exercise each
week, I'm considering that we do this over a long period of time, so we do it each week,
then what will our resting heart rate descend to?
And the idea is that our resting heart rate will become slower as we do more exercise,
but there's a limit to how slow it's going to go, it's never going to go, say, below
a certain number.
Well, so here's what I propose as a formula for the resting heart rate.
So here's a formula that says our resting heart rate will be R of U, where U is the
number of units of exercise we invest in our resting heart rate.
And let's think of it as 25 divided by U plus 1 plus 50.
Now let's talk about that equation and see if it makes any sense at all.
What it says is, first of all, if we do no exercise whatsoever, so we're complete slugs,
we do no exercise, then U is 0.
No extra exercise, all we're doing is resting all week long.
It sounds sort of nice, just rest.
Well then, if U is 0, you can see that our resting heart rate, I'm supposing here, is
going to be 25 over 1, because U is 0, so it's 25 over 1, that's 25 plus 50.
So that's 75.
So I'm assuming that for this individual that we're talking about, the resting heart rate
is 75, that's when you start, no exercise.
Now suppose that you do some exercise.
So you invest a certain amount of hours per week in doing exercise, then look what happens
to our resting heart rate.
For example, suppose that you do one unit of exercise, that's 3600 extra heartbeats
invested in exercise, then your resting heart rate would be 25 over 1 plus 1, 25 over 2
plus 50, so your heart rate would have descended instead of, because 25 over 2 is 12.5, your
resting heart rate would have descended to 62.5 by investing every week one unit of heart
rate.
Notice by the way that if you invest increasing amounts of exercise, in other words, you increase
U, what you'll find is that 25 over a bigger number of course becomes a smaller number
and increasingly small, and if you exercised every hour of the day all week long, you would
find that you'd be dividing 25 by 100 or something, you just have little fraction plus 50.
So in this model, the model describes the situation in which the lowest that your heart
rate will ever get to is 50.
So we've described this model, and once we've described this model, we're in a position
to use calculus to see how much exercise we should do in order to make our lives longest.
That's equivalent to saying how much exercise should we do so that the number of heartbeats
we use each week is the least, see, because then that's how you tell how long you're
going to live if you use the least heartbeats per week.
Well, so let's write down an expression that says how many heartbeats we will use depending
on how much exercise we do, okay?
So now let's think about it.
Well, part of the time we're resting, and then part of the time we're exercising.
So what we need to do is to combine those two to see how many heartbeats we use all
the time.
Well, so here is an expression that describes that, T for total number of heartbeats for
a given choice of U units of exercise is, well, 10,000 is approximately the number of
minutes in a week.
You just multiply 24 hours times seven days times 60 minutes in an hour.
You get actually exactly 10,080.
That's the exact number of minutes per week.
That's sort of interesting, 10,000 minutes per week.
And at each minute, how many heartbeats will you use?
Well, you will use your resting rate of heartbeats for every minute that you're at rest.
Plus, you'll also add the number of heartbeats that you use during exercise.
The exercise heartbeats, remember, are extra ones above the resting rate.
So the total number of heartbeats that you use per week is going to be the amount you
use in the resting portion, which is every minute times the resting rate, plus the excess
that you use in exercise, which is 3,600 times U, because there are 3,600 heartbeats per unit
of exercise.
Well once we have a mathematical expression, then this is the power of abstraction.
Now it doesn't matter if we're talking about heartbeats, if we're talking about exercise,
if we're talking about just abstract quantities, calculus helps us to find where a particular
expression will have a maximum value or a minimum value.
Now here we're trying to minimize this value because we want a place where the total number
of heartbeats is the smallest.
Well so how do we do this?
We saw this already before in a couple of lectures.
We saw it in lecture 9 when we talked about optimization.
We saw the perspective of seeing how a quantity is changing, namely by looking at the derivative
and finding those locations where the derivative was zero, because those were the places where
we would find a minimum or a maximum.
So our goal here is simply to take the derivative of this expression and then set it equal to
zero.
That's the strategy.
So here we take the derivative and you can see taking the derivative gives us this somewhat
complicated expression, it has some big numbers in it, but that is the derivative and we can
then just do the little bit of algebra to actually compute what the value of U is, the
number of units of exercise that will minimize the number of heartbeats per week.
You can see that I've actually done the work here on the screen and we just do the algebra
and find that if we do seven and a third units of exercise, then we will live the longest.
Well now that's a lot of exercise, it's about an hour a day, but I want to make a point
about this issue and that is that maybe living the longest is not the real goal.
Mathematic can tell us how to live the longest if this model is correct, it tells us how
to live the longest, we would exercise seven and a third hours per week, but maybe that's
not really the goal because suppose that you don't like to exercise, suppose at the time
when you're exercising you don't really want to count that as living.
Then you have to change what it is you're trying to maximize or minimize.
So, in fact, I would say that for most people it's not the total number of years that you
live that you're trying to maximize, but instead what you're trying to do is maximize a different
quantity, namely those parts of life that are pleasurable that you like to do.
Now for example, suppose that you wanted to maximize the pleasurable heartbeats, that's
really what you want to maximize, well then you have a different strategy, you have a
different equation. First of all, you know what the total number of weeks that you're
going to live will be if somebody tells you the total number of heartbeats in your life
and you know how many heartbeats you use per week, then that fraction would give you the
number of weeks you live. But if we're trying to maximize the number of weeks you enjoy,
then what we're really trying to do is to maximize the number of weeks, here we want
to maximize the pleasurable weeks, which is the number of weeks times the fraction happy
heartbeats per week divided by total heartbeats per week. And then that is something that
is a personal choice. Do you enjoy exercise? Do you view those as happy heartbeats? Or
do you find the exercise to be unhappy heartbeats? Well, I actually use this example to make
a particular point about the relationship of the mathematics to reality. And that is
two things. One, does the model accurately reflect reality? All of the mathematical words
work of maximizing the length of life and so on. That is completely independent of reality.
If the model doesn't accurately reflect reality, then doing this mathematics doesn't tell us
anything useful. So the first thing is the model has to reflect reality. The second thing
is that we've got to be careful to actually maximize or minimize the quantity we're actually
interested in and not something that seems like we're interested in. So we have to be
very careful to use the mathematical function that we're concerned with and then apply mathematics
to it. So calculus can only go so far. Calculus is an abstract subject that describes the
relationships of dependent quantities to one another. And then we can get insight into
those dependent quantities. But mathematics can never in itself produce the insight that
gives those relationships. For that we need to look at biology and look at statistics
and look at our own data about our own existence and lives. What is the correct function of
how much exercise diminishes the heart rate? You see, that is not an issue for mathematics.
It's not an issue for biology. But once we have it, we can apply mathematics.
Well, one of the most important biological issues that we face in the world has to do
with population. Population of people, in the case of epidemics, population of germs,
infected people. And when we look at the at population, we're immediately confronted
with mathematical issues. Namely, can we model the number of people or elephants or
any other animal? Can we model the number of the population over time in some reasonable
way? So what we're going to do is try to develop some models that describe how population
will grow and see the consequences of these models. So first of all, let's look at the
example. The simplest concept of population growth might be this. Suppose that you assume
that the population simply grows by doubling every year. That's a very simple model of
population growth. It's exponential. So that is to say that one year you have a certain
number of population, the next year you'd have twice as many, the year after that you'd
have four times as many as you started with, because it's two times two. The next year
you'd have eight times as many as you began with, because it's two times two times two.
So it's two to the cubed power. That's why it's called exponential growth, because you'd
have that number up in the top of the equation. Well, exponential growth of population cannot
happen for long. The reason it won't continue is because the entire earth contains only
so many resources. There are only so many people who can live on the earth. And yet,
if you have exponential growth that's indicated by a growth function that stir curves increasingly
steeply upward, then the numbers involved will soon overwhelm the resources in the world.
So exponential growth, even at 1% a year, just cannot continue forever. So in thinking
about how population actually grows, we have to be a little bit more refined. And indeed
what we'll say is this, when the population is getting toward the maximal sustainable population,
then the rate at which the population increases should slow down. You see, because if, for
example, suppose we're at the situation where we have the maximal number of people on earth,
that you can't add a single more person, you don't have enough food. Well, then that population,
we would expect no growth, because there's no more resources to handle those extra people.
So that would be a case where there's no growth and we just have a steady state population.
If the population is less than the maximum, what we expect is that the population will
increase rather steeply when there are plenty of resources around, because people have lots
of food and they have money and they have things they can do. A population will increase
sharply, but then when it gets closer to the maximum sustainable, the rate at which the
population increases declines. The rate, that is the derivative. Derivative tells us rate
of change, the rate at which something is changing. So the better guess for a model of
population growth would be that the derivative of the population with respect to time, that
is the rate of change of population, would be proportional to, well, okay, so it's asking,
how much additional population would there be in a year? Well, the number of additional
people would be proportional to the number that there are now times some factor like
the maximum population minus the current population. It'd be proportional to that. So here we have
this formula that the change in population should be some constant times the product
of the current population times the difference of the maximum sustainable population to minus
the current population. So this is an example of an equation that notice involves a derivative
and if population actually followed that equation, we would find that the population
steadily went toward this maximum population and then became stable. Well, this brings
us back to the theme, does the model reflect reality? Or maybe there's a slight difference
that gives us a different perspective. Here is a graph of population of elephants over
time. Now notice that it doesn't have the character that we saw, that we expected from our model
of population growth that we've been talking about. In fact, what we see is that the population
increases and then declines and increases and declines. This is quite a different kind
of a look to it than what our model is. So what do we conclude? We conclude that perhaps
our mathematical model is not reflecting reality. Well, there's a different way of looking at
population growth that is very similar, but not exactly the same. And that is, suppose
that you view population change as not a continuous matter, but rather as a yearly matter. That
is, you take the population now and then it's not that it changes continuously in little
increments every single day, but instead things happen that a year later cause the population
to grow. Let's think of fish in a pond. Okay, so we have a population of fish in a pond.
The number of fish that will be in the pond one year from now will be equal to the number
of fish in the pond today, which I'm calling piece of n. So saying this is the nth year
that we're measuring the population of the fish, piece of n plus some constant times
this product of the population now times the maximum sustainable minus the population.
So it's the same model that the increased population is proportional to this product
of what we have times the maximum sustainable minus the population. It's this model, which
by the way is called the Fairholst model, that it's the same issue, but instead of being
a continuous process time every single second, now we're thinking of it as just jumping from
one year to the next. So you'd think this model would result in a very similar kind of description
of how populations change, but there you'd be dramatically wrong. Because it turns out
that if you look at this model of population that one year you see what it is and the next
year you use this formula to see what you get in the population in the next year and so on,
you'll find that the population does not necessarily cause the population to grow,
and so on, you'll find that the population does not necessarily converge toward one number.
Let's look at some examples. I've changed the equation just slightly by doing a little
bit of algebraic manipulation that we won't talk about, but you can think about this as
related to the example before. We just got rid of that sort of constant term and are
just looking at the important part, which is the rate at which things are changing,
that we have a constant times the value at one moment times one minus the value. We use
one instead of the maximum sustainable population just to normalize the numbers and make them
simpler rather than saying 10 million. Let's just use one, and so that Yn is sort of viewed
as the proportion of the maximum sustainable population. You have to use just a related
quantity to this population model, and in this example where you use 2.6 as the constant
factor, if you take a starting population and you say, well, at one year this is the starting
population, then if I graph this equation, that is where this is a variable, I see this
inverted parabola graph, and if I want to know what the population will be the next year,
all I do is I take the value, I take that number, multiply it by 2.6, multiply it by
one minus that number to get a value, this value, and then I take this value and I then
apply the same thing again to see what the population will be in two years, and so in
order to do that, I take this, the value, I see what this number is, you see it here,
and I go back to the axis and I go straight up, and I see what the population will be
in the next year, and in this case, it eventually gets to, in this particular case, it gets
exactly to this point here in which when I look at the value, I get back to the same
level of population, and the population just stabilizes. Everything seems great, very,
very straightforward, boring. Let's look at a different example. If we change the constant
by just a little bit, we can have a rather different kind of situation. This is a situation
where if you plug in values for yn, you'll find that the population does not just converge
to one number and tend toward one number and stay there. Instead, in this case, the population
can bounce back and forth between two numbers. So one, at one time, the population is big
and then the next year it becomes smaller, the next year it becomes bigger because you
can overshoot the maximum sustainable population. You see, if you have these fish that are all
happy in this pond and they're propagating happily because there's lots of resources around,
then the next year, there are a lot of these little baby fish, and the population can temporarily
be more than the amount of food in the pond can hold. So what happens? The population
of this big population can't be sustained, and so the next year, the population decreases.
Then it increases again because once it's decreased, there are plenty of resources again. So you
see that in this case, we have an oscillating situation between two values of population,
but it gets more interesting. What gets more interesting is that if we choose certain values,
the population doesn't either go stabilized to one value nor does it bounce back and forth
between two values, but it may do many more interesting things. Depending on what you
start with as the initial population, it could do all sorts of stuff. It could come and just
stabilize. It could bounce around and have a sequence of populations that go from being
very big to very small. It's not a predictable situation of future populations. If we look
at this example, what this example is showing is the populations in future years, if you
just start with one population, what will the future populations look like? Every single
line represents one of the years. We start here and we say, okay, after one year, if
we start with this population, this fraction of the maximum sustainable population, we
go up to the graph to see what the population will be in the next year, and then we take
that value and we say, okay, well, let's do the same thing again and see what the population
will be in the next year. Well, that means taking this value and going to the next year,
taking this value and going up on the graph to see what value the graph tells us will
be the population in the subsequent year, and then we take that value and we go to the
graph and we see what the population will be in the subsequent year, and then we follow
that year after year after year. In this case, the populations won't have any pattern at
all. You will find that the populations predicted by this very simple model, instead of converging
to one number, actually behave in what's called a chaotic way. It's a mathematical term called
chaos, and it is chaos, because what it means is that the populations attain every possibility.
They go above the maximum sustainable and then they bounce way down so that there's just a
fraction, and then they go up to higher and higher and then bounce down, and every single
value, not literally every real number, but between any real numbers as close to any number
that you can think of, the population at some time will be that fraction. There's no pattern
to how those populations grow. The reason I wanted to bring this up is to show you an example
of a mathematical reality that is different from calculus. This is something that is not
the way calculus behaves, and it shows that perhaps in the real world there are examples
of things we want to describe whose descriptions involve something other than looking at smooth
and predictable equations. So it gives some indication of a future beyond calculus.
