Well, I have to tell you that I approached this last lecture with a certain amount of
sadness and actual nostalgia for our journey together.
But I want this lecture to be somehow summing up to see that calculus really is everywhere
and calculus is very fundamental to everyday life, and I thought that the best way to start
that is to introduce a method that was invented jointly by two mathematicians, Newton, we
met many times before, and Raphson, which was a method for helping us to find solutions
of equations.
Now finding solutions to equations is what we actually do in mathematics all the time.
If we want to understand some part of the world, then we often have an equation that
describes it, and finding an actual value at which that equation is satisfied is what
we want to do.
For example, let's think about our baseball example, where we hit the baseball, it went
up in the air, and we want to know where it lands.
Well, in a way that is an equation, and in fact we can see the equation right here.
Remember we described its position, its height, as 48t minus 16t squared.
This was if the ball had a vertical speed of 48 feet per second when it left the bat.
In order to find out at what time it would actually land, we have an equation to solve.
The equation in this case was very easy to solve, 48t minus 16t squared equals zero,
and we solve that equation, we see t equals three.
That satisfies this equation, where we have a formula on one side equal to zero on another.
Graphically, if we graph a function where it crosses the x-axis, that's a value that
we often want to know.
And this Newton-Raphson method is a method for taking our knowledge about calculus, particularly
derivatives, and employing it to approximate a solution to an equation.
And let me show you the strategy.
Suppose that we have some varying quantity that's described by some graph of a function,
and it goes up and down, and occasionally it hits the axis.
And we want to know, well, where does it hit?
Well, as we're moving along the curve, if we get somewhat close to where it hits, sometimes
we have an idea of what that value is.
It's close.
Well, the idea of Newton-Raphson is how to make close really close.
That's the strategy of the Newton-Raphson method.
The way it works is this.
It says, OK, if we're somewhat close to where this graph is crossing the axis, if we're
somewhat close, well, what does the derivative tell us?
Remember the derivative?
If we look at a curved, smoothly-curving line and we magnify it, that smoothly-curving
line begins to look like a straight line.
And that straight line is telling us the trend of the graph.
So the Newton-Raphson method is very simple.
It says, well, let's just pretend that instead of this thing being a curve, suppose it actually
were a straight line going exactly in the direction of that tangent.
Then it would hit someplace pretty close to where the curved line hits.
Let's look at this graphically.
So here you see a smooth graph.
You see that smooth graph and where it crosses the line?
Well, if we take a point on that smooth graph and we just take the straight line down to
hit, you'd see that we're close but not exactly where it hits.
But we get somewhere in the ballpark.
Back to our baseball example, somewhere in the ballpark.
So how can we do even better?
Well, by the way, I should say it's very easy to find where a straight line hits the x-axis.
That's the kind of equation we all can solve.
It's very easy algebra to do that.
So when we have this curving line coming down, we say, OK, let's take the tangent line and
see where it crosses.
And then we say, well, let's just go down from that value.
We'll see what value on the graph is right above or below that point of intersection
of the tangent line with the x-axis.
And that will give us a point that's even closer to the exact intersection of the curved
graph with the line.
And then we do the same thing again.
That is to say, since we're closer, we have a better guess.
We say, well, at that point, there's a trend of our graph.
There's a straightness to it if we look up really close.
And that will head us even closer to the exact intersection.
Not quite because the thing will curve a little bit away, but we'll get even closer.
And then we'll go up to the graph and take the tangent line, go straight back and back
and forth, back and forth, back and forth until we're converging toward the exact value.
OK, so this maybe is a little bit too abstract.
So let's ground it in a particular example to show how this is doing.
And you will be really impressed with how just a couple of steps of this method can
get us incredibly close to the exact answers.
So let's take an example.
Suppose that you want to know a value like the square root of 5.
Square root of 5.
Now, the square root of 5 is a number that is somewhere between 2 and 3.
Because 2 times 2 is 4, 3 times 3 is 9.
So it's probably closer to 2.
So it's some number between there, but it's actually an irrational number.
It's a number where we can't just write it as some easy fraction.
It's got infinitely many decimal digits that have no pattern to them.
They just go on and on.
And suppose we want to get a number that has 8 decimal digits that are very close to a
number where, when multiplied by itself, gives us 5.
So that's our goal in life, our goal in life.
Well, there's a graph that expresses that square root of 5 as an equation to solve.
And it's a very simple equation.
Namely, we can just look at the equation x squared minus 5 and ask, when is x squared
minus 5 equal to 0?
Because if x squared minus 5 equals 0, what is x?
x squared is 5.
X is the square root of 5.
So we have a formula, f of x equals x squared minus 5, that is a graph that crosses the
x-axis exactly at the point square root of 5.
So if we can use this clever method to find an actual value that's very close to where
that curving graph crosses, then we will have found a point very close to the square root
of 5, a number whose square is 5.
Well, so what is the method?
The method is we first make a guess.
What we've already talked about a guess, a good guess is 2.
2, that's a guess for the square root of 5.
It's not right, but it's close, it's 2.
And so what we can do is we can take the number 2 and we can ask ourselves, what is the derivative
of this function at the point 2?
So graphically, what we're doing is we look at the curve, we go to the point 2, which
you see is x value is 2 and its y value is minus 1, since 2 squared is 4 minus 1 is,
I mean minus 5 is minus 1, 4 minus 5 is minus 1.
So at that point on the graph, 2 comma minus 1, we can find the derivative and see the
slope of the tangent line.
And you see we've drawn there the straight line that just grazes the graph.
Now you see if we follow that straight line, we will hit the x-axis at some point.
It's a point that's not exactly where the curving graph hits, but it's nearby.
And in fact, we've actually computed the value of that in this next graph.
You see that the actual value of where it hits is at the point 2.25.
That's the actual value of intersection.
Now the Newton-Raphson method then is to go back and look at where that straight line
hits and now we move straight up to the graph to see where it is that the graph lies straight
above 2.25.
Well, that's easy to do because we have a function, x squared minus 5.
So if its first coordinate is 2.25, its second coordinate is 2.25 squared minus 5.
It's the formula that the function is describing.
We just plug it in.
This gives us another point on the graph.
And you can see that that point is closer to the x-axis than the original point was
where we started.
Our first guess was just 2.
Our next guess, 2.25, is better.
Now we look at the straight line that we get by taking the derivative.
The derivative is telling us the trend.
So that gives us a straight line that's just tangent and it hits even closer to the actual
point of intersection.
Now remember that if you looked at that point of intersection very, very closely, one of
the themes of this course was that if you take a smooth curve and you magnify it, what
you see is something that looks more and more like an exactly straight line.
And so if we can get into that area where the line looks really straight, then when
we go straight down on the derivative, we're going to hit very close to the same place
because it doesn't curve much.
And that's what we do.
So we do that again.
We go straight down the derivative till it hits and then we go up to the curve and we
repeat.
We find the derivative at that new point.
We see where it hits and repeat, repeat.
We can repeat as many times as we wanted.
We can repeat infinitely many times.
And we're getting closer and closer and closer each time.
To make this impressive, let me just actually show you some numbers to show you how quickly
that process gets to very close to the answer we want.
So here is our table.
And you can see that after our first guess of two, when we took that slope of the tangent
line and we saw where it hit, the value was 2.25.
Now 2.25, when we square that, we don't quite get 5.
But we do the same process again.
That is, right above the point 2.25 on the graph, we take the tangent line and we see
where it hits.
And we can compute it.
It's very simple.
It hits at the point 2.236111111 forever.
Well this number, 2.2361111 forever, is amazingly accurate to the square root of 5.
And it's just the second iteration of this process, making a guess of two, which wasn't
the greatest guess, picked a whole number.
And then we just did this twice.
We went to 2.25, we went up to the graph, drew the tangent line, came back down again.
And look at what happens when we square that approximation.
2.2361111 squared is 5.0019 and so on.
It already is so close to the square root of 5 that you've got three zeros after the
five.
If we do the process just one more time, so this is a total of three times.
That is the process being we go to the curve.
We draw the tangent line and we see where that tangent line hits the x-axis instead
of where the graph does.
We get the value to look at what we get.
We get five point and there are eight zeros before we get some number that's not equal
to zero.
So this process is amazingly effective at extremely quickly going from just a very rough
guess to getting an extremely precise answer to an equation.
So the Newton-Raphson method is an example of using this perspective of a smooth curve
being described by locally as a straight line as a method for finding solutions to roots
of equations.
Well we have been talking all of these lectures about smooth curves and how they describe
motion and how they describe economics and how they describe biology and how they describe
physics.
This was the perspective that we've taken on this whole course and it is amazingly potent
and I would love to tell you about many of additional aspects of the world that it describes.
Let me just at least show you a couple, namely in the realm of beauty.
The calculus is used to describe such things as the shape of an arch that is of the strongest
arch that can be held up.
You'd use calculus to solve that and the answer comes out to be something that has aesthetic
qualities as well as just practical qualities of strength.
You can see in these Roman arches that these are practical solutions to equations associated
with calculus.
The Golden Gate Bridge, look at how that hangs down there.
Those are all shapes that can be described in calculus terms trying to minimize something
like the energy of the chain or maximize something like the strength of a beam.
Calculus has many applications in many areas and as we've seen, it's an example of a long
human journey that started from ancient times, that proceeded through lots of false starts
that dealt with confusions about how to deal with infinity, so abstract confusions.
It seems so completely extraneous to everyday life.
Can you imagine thinking about the infinite and infinitesimally small and trying to grapple
with those philosophical issues and then seeing that the solution to grappling with those
leads to calculus, which has immense applications in real life.
That to me is an interesting philosophical point that dealing with abstract questions
often has implications in real life and so that's a great aspect of calculus and also
the idea of abstraction itself.
The idea that we can solve problems in one setting and then apply them in many settings.
That we can look at these ideas of the derivative and the integral as abstract concepts and
then apply them to business and to biology and to physics.
The same ideas apply to all of these different settings.
That is an interesting idea in itself, the idea of abstraction, the idea of applicability
because we look at the mathematics itself.
The mathematics is just talking about relationships among ideas, not just about the specific thing
that generated that idea and that's a wonderful idea of mathematics.
The ancient Greeks thought that mathematics was talking about the world but we today don't
think of mathematics that way.
Mathematics now is internally consistent.
It's an exploration of concepts in the abstract.
It's not just applicable to the world.
It's things that fit together and then we see that the world sometimes is modeled by
the abstract relationships that we've described mathematically.
This is a very abstract kind of idea but to us in our modern age, we don't ask the
question is this mathematics true to the world.
We'll ask is this model within mathematics, does it reflect a particular part of the world
but we can develop mathematics that's completely abstract that has nothing to do with the world
at all and that's fine too.
But the fact that these ideas are generated from the world by looking at motion, thinking
of Zeno's paradox of a moving arrow, the reason that mathematics is so powerfully effective
in describing the world is that it comes from the world.
It particularly in calculus, it came from analyzing motion and then by understanding
it very, very well, we developed this whole conceptual construct that sure enough the
world follows because the world is logically consistent too.
But I have to say that now the time has come right at the end of these lectures to say
something that I have never discussed before exactly and that is that maybe calculus actually
isn't everything.
There are things that are not described by calculus and there are things in actual life
that aren't described well by calculus and so we have to start thinking beyond.
For example, when I was talking about a car moving down a road, you know we're thinking
about this car moving down the road, you notice that all of the graphs that we drew of the
car were smooth curves.
You notice when I talked to earlier today about the smooth curves and we applied Newton
Raphson, we're talking about things that were smooth.
But suppose you had this graph of a car moving down the road.
Well what happened?
Here we have a graph that represents, let's see if you can think about it, envision this
car moving.
What it says is this car here has a very specific speed.
Let's suppose it's going one mile per minute.
Here it abruptly has a speed of zero.
There's no transition.
It doesn't slow down.
Do you see that turn, that corner?
That corner means that you crashed.
That car ran into a complete brick wall.
It stopped instantly.
This was a tragedy.
That graph is a tragedy.
You should cry when you see that graph.
But the thing is that that graph, it's not smooth.
At that corner point, you can't say how fast the car is going.
It's meaningless to say how fast the car is going at that moment.
Because on one side of that moment, the car appears to be going one mile per minute.
On the other side of that moment, it's going zero miles per hour, zero miles per minute.
So how fast is it going right at that second?
No way of telling.
It's nonsensical to ask the question how fast it's going.
Let's think about it again.
Here's another curve.
You see this curve that has a peak comes to a point.
What happens if we look at that point?
We've talked about this many times, magnifying it, looking at it up close.
What happens if you magnify that peak up close?
You magnify it a hundred times.
You know what you'd see?
This picture.
Suppose you magnified it a thousand times.
What would you see?
The same picture.
You magnify it a million times, the same picture.
You do not, when you look at this curve up close, closer and closer and closer, it does
not become a straight line.
There is no trend.
And the whole of calculus, everything we've talked about for 23 and a half lectures, had
to do with varying quantities that were varying smoothly, where one was changing in a very
predictably smooth way in relation to another.
And this is an example where that does not happen.
Now the question is, what about the real world?
What happens in the real world?
Are there things that are not well described by smooth functions?
Let's look at an example.
This is an example of a graph that shows the Dow Jones average over a long period of time.
Now we can look at it and see some things about it.
It has a trend.
There is a trend.
You know there's an upward trend over many years?
There is a trend.
But if we look at it more closely and we look at it down to the weak level and then to the
day level and then to the hour level, do we see a smooth curve?
Do we see something that becomes smoother?
No, we don't.
We see something that becomes more jagged.
This is not a smooth curve.
So then the question is, to what extent do the methods of calculus, which depend, absolutely
depend on taking these limits?
Remember when we took the derivative, we always said, OK, well, if we want to know how fast
something is going, if we look at little tiny intervals of time, then that will be a better
approximation to how fast we're going than if we look at a bigger interval of time.
Because at that instant, well, near that instant is what's telling us the best information
about how fast we're going.
But now look at the stock market.
Is it true that looking at one particular minute, if you look just at the very neighboring
minutes of it, that that gives you the best information about the trend?
Absolutely not.
Because there could be a little tiny downward dip in a trend that is ever upward.
So now we have to say, to what extent is calculus applicable or not applicable to ideas in the
world?
Think about the last lecture.
If you remember the last lecture talking about biology, we looked at an example where
you had a model for the population growth of fish.
Do you remember that?
We had the model for the population growth of fish, and we noticed something about it,
but it did not seem to have a trend.
That there were instances where it seemed to just jump all around, and it didn't seem
to be converging toward one answer.
So this is another example.
To what extent is the continuous and smooth world actually the best description of reality?
Well one indication is looking toward mathematics itself.
Mathematics is the exploration of ideas in the abstract.
And so naturally mathematicians, one thing that we think about is, well, how about these
curves with these points?
How strange are they?
How unusual are they?
Well the answer is that they are not unusual.
The curves that don't have a trend are much more common than curves that do.
Smooth curves are the exception, are the vast exception to the actual, if you take a random
function and you draw it, it will have no derivative anywhere.
It will have no trend anywhere.
It will just be so jagged.
Here's an example of something that has lots of places that are just jagged.
You see all these points?
Every time you have a point, that's a place where there's no trend, where there's no derivative.
And this point here in the middle, there's no trend because if you look at certain nearby
points, and here I'm thinking of this as jiggling, jabbing infinitely many times, if you take
the top peaks of these points, you'd get a trend that it was going upward this way.
On the other hand, if you look at the bottom points, you see the trend is moving downward.
And if you took center points like this, you'd say the trend is moving sideways.
There's no trend.
So this is an example of a curve that has no derivative, has no derivative.
And mathematically speaking, in some general mathematical sense that can be made precise
in mathematics, as I said, most curves don't have any derivative at any point.
No trend at any point makes sense.
So that maybe is a hint that maybe the world that we see is better described in other ways.
Or parts of the world are better described in other ways than calculus.
Calculus is amazingly effective.
It has had enormous consequences.
It's extremely powerful at describing things, and always will be, by the way.
I don't think there's anybody who would say calculus will be out of vogue in a few years.
But on the other hand, new mathematics is coming along.
I want to make sure that you understand that mathematics is not a process that has ended.
And that it didn't end with calculus.
That things are going on.
New ideas are being developed all the time.
And ideas that can deal with functions, for example, that are not smooth.
That's a whole different kind of a realm, a whole different way of looking at things.
How are computer models of reality going to somehow supplant the Newtonian idea of a little equation that has wonderful consequences, like the equations of motion?
Is there some other alternative way of describing reality?
When you look at a cloud, you see something that has a lot of bumps to it.
Well, maybe a smooth approximation of saying to yourself, oh, that's like a round ball.
It's not like a round ball.
It's really got a whole lot of bumps in it.
And maybe a better description is not to force our minds to think of it as a smoothly varying thing, but to realize that there are other descriptions that are even more robust and more accurate for describing things.
Well, that's the future.
So after completing this whole series of courses, I think it's better to end not with thinking of ourselves as ending, but as beginning.
And I also think it's appropriate to end with a quote from Newton, because Newton was certainly the first inventor of calculus.
And he had this to say about his vision of himself.
He was a person of absolutely stunning accomplishment.
And this was his view.
I do not know what I may appear to the world, but to myself, I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the seashore and diverting myself in now and then finding a
smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me.
