So good morning everybody.
Today what I'd like to talk to you about is our efforts on cracking the morphogenetic
code.
And to think about why this morphogenetic code is important, we need to think about how remarkable
bodies are in terms of editing their own shape.
And all of these problems, birth defects, which are errors of initial patterning, traumatic
injury, cancer, or the defection of cells from the anatomical plan, and even aging have
one fundamental thing in common.
What they have in common is a failure of the ongoing control of complex anatomical structure.
And so in embryonic development, all of us start life as a collection of early blastomeres,
and then through embryonic development, we acquire this tremendous shape.
So here you see this cross section through a normal human torso.
And what you notice is an amazing increase in the amount of anatomical complexity to
go from here to here.
Now these processes can sometimes go awry, in which case you may have a tumor that still
contains individual tissues, hair, teeth, skin, and so on.
So cell differentiation is crucial, but not sufficient for obtaining this kind of pattern.
So we really need to understand where the information is that drives complex patterning.
Past embryonic development, we have a number of organisms that are telling us a proof of
principle that full regeneration as adults is possible.
There are planaria, which are flatworms that have this amazing property.
You can cut these guys actually in any direction that you want.
They will regenerate.
Every piece of these worms will regenerate exactly what's missing, no more, no less,
and they stop when they're done.
Not only that, we showed recently some work that these planaria actually keep their memories
through complete brain regeneration.
They are able to resorb their tumors when regeneration is activated, and there's actually
no sign of aging at the level of the organism.
So individual cells senescent dye, but the animal continues to regenerate itself, and
so is practically immortal.
So this is the result.
All of these amazing features are the result of this animal having incredible pattern control
over every piece of the organism.
Now regeneration is not only for so-called lower organisms.
We have vertebrates, such as these salamanders, that can regenerate their limbs, their eyes,
their ovaries, their jaws, their hearts, and so on.
And of course, even deer, which are adult large mammals, can regenerate a tremendous
amount of bone up to a centimeter and a half of new bone growth per day when antlers are
being regenerated, and of course, the human liver is known to be regenerative.
So fundamentally, this kind of process where a complex structure is amputated and then regenerate
is asking us to solve several problems.
First, the relationship of pattern to the genome, that is, where is the information stored
and processed, such that we are able to restore from damage.
And then as engineers, we ask the question, how far can we push shape change?
That is, what patterns are possible to obtain given a particular genome?
So these kinds of processes, both standard embryonic development, where everybody starts
at the same starting state and then reliably reaches one of these complex morphologies,
or in fact, very plastic events, such as this, where, for example, you can take a tail of
a salamander, attach it surgically to where the limb goes, and over time, this structure
will remodel itself into a completely new structure that's more appropriate to the large
scale anatomy.
So this, of course, is a process that starts in a very aberrant state and yet manages to
reach the correct final goal.
So how much of this is locked in or fully determined by the DNA, and what are the evolutionary
implications of this kind of plasticity?
So we think of this as a closed loop pattern homeostatic process whereby a set of gene
regulatory networks create proteins, these interact, then through emergent processes
you have complex shapes, but there's a feedback loop where both at the level of gene expression
and at the level of physics, there is correction going on that continuously tries to get back
to this anatomical state despite unpredictable perturbations.
And there's a fundamental theorem in cybernetics and control theory, which says that every
good controller of a system, and this is an extremely good controller of this system,
because, for example, every regenerating limb is exactly the same as the original limb.
Every good controller of a system must be a model of that system.
And so if that's true, then there's a counter paradigm idea that we could follow, which
is that bodies might be able to store this model of the pattern and thus be able to represent
an anatomical set point, that is, every kind of homeostatic process has to fundamentally
store a set point towards which it fixes.
And so, and we call this set point the target morphology, and if that's true, then we could
do several things.
We could target this control system, we could rewrite the set point, and then we could let
the cells build towards that plant.
And in our, in our Allen Discovery Center at Tufts, this is what we've been working
on.
I want to show you why this is important.
This is a two, just to briefly mention, two very fundamental problems that are still with
us, even in the age of genomics.
So here, here are planaria, and the thing about planaria are that they're largely reproduced
by fission and regeneration.
So each worm tears itself in half, the head end regrows a tail, tail regrows a head and
now you've got two planaria.
What this means is that in this process, they escape Weisman's barrier.
That is, if they acquire somatic mutations, mutations somewhere in the body of the organism
that doesn't kill the organism and happens in one of these neoblasts or stem cells, that
mutation is propagated to the next generation.
Now, this is not true for us.
If you have a mutation in your arm, the offspring don't automatically get it.
But with planaria, they accumulate mutations over time.
And so despite hundreds of millions of years of the somatic inheritance where they accumulate
mutations, in fact, the genomes are very messy.
These worms are mix-applied, the cells don't even have the same number of chromosomes.
So they accumulate all of this stuff.
And despite that, after many millions of years, they still regenerate with 100% anatomical
fidelity.
So here we have an interesting distinction between what's going on with the genome versus
what's going on with the anatomy.
And in fact, unlike mutant lines, which you can find in other species, Drosophila, C. elegans
mouse, you can get lines of species with various patterning problems.
There's no such thing except our two-headed worms, which I'll show you in a minute.
There are no patterning mutants in planaria.
These guys are incredible at keeping their shape despite this destabilizing process.
It is not well understood at all.
The other issue that isn't understood is if we try to make a prediction of what happens
when we take stem cells from a flat-headed worm and mix them in the same body with stem
cells from a round-headed worm, we let them sit there, then we amputate the head.
What kind of head shape will result?
The interesting thing about this thought experiment is that despite all of the work on molecular
genetics of stem cell differentiation, we don't have even the beginnings of a guess of what
to predict here, because none of the existing models address a fundamental question.
How do the cells know when to stop and what pattern causes regeneration to cease?
This is simply unknown.
These are the kind of issues that are required for us to understand.
We really need to get at the algorithms.
How do cells make these decisions?
What are they measuring in understanding what shape to make and when to stop?
In a computer science way of looking at things, it's clear that there's an extra revolution
in biology coming.
We thought about what key insights allowed computer science to drive a revolution.
What was it about early computer science that really impacted every aspect of our lives?
I think two arguments can be made that the first really important thing is the distinction
between hardware and software and a focus on the control of information, not just the
materials.
This is how people used to program computers.
You really had to be down in the hardware.
You were literally moving wires around.
Then eventually through progress in the field, we got a machine code which was still pretty
close to the hardware, but certainly better than this.
Now we have these top-level object-oriented languages that allow you to think about the
information flow and the computation of the problem and not really worry about the hardware
as much.
I think that in biology, we are still very much at the machine code level.
Everything we do is largely focused on understanding how to manipulate individual molecules, where
I think what we really need to also understand is the algorithms and the decision-making
among cells and to gain control of the computation that living matter performs in making decisions
such as when and how to regenerate or restore or repattern large anatomical regions.
If we really understood how these things work, we could not only defeat these major biomedical
problems, but we could also, of course, create new biological constructs and also make important
additions to robust robot technology.
What I want to do now is give you two updates on our work at the center that address some
of these issues.
These are the members of our new center.
Two of my colleagues, Kelly McLaughlin and Dave Kaplan, are here with us.
The two stories I'd like to update you on first has to do with our efforts to identify
novel inputs into patterning.
That is, what are the sources of information for patterning?
This involves a story recently that came out of our center on the brain as the first
functional organ in development.
What we basically found is that, and here you're looking at a very early frog embryo.
This is about two and a half days of development, so very, very early on.
What we found is that the very early brain in this animal, long before there's any behavior
or anything like that, it is absolutely required for patterning events throughout the animal.
For example, you can see what happens here.
What we did is amputate the early brain.
In the absence of the early brain, the animal continues to develop, but we see really characteristic
defects in innervation, in muscle patterning, and several other systems.
This brain is having an important patterning role at considerable distance.
Then what we found was that we could actually largely restore, not entirely, but largely
restore both the muscle and the peripheral innervation patterning by judicious misexpression
of appropriate ion channels and certain neurotransmitters.
There's this influence of the brain that's required for patterning to proceed, and to
some extent that can be compensated by interventions that we apply.
This was really remarkable for a number of reasons.
First of all, the brain appears to be the first functional organ.
This occurs even before the heart starts beating.
It instructs pattern at long distance, so every part of the embryo is actually receiving
this influence.
The brain does this while it itself is being constructed.
We showed a couple of years ago that in determining how big the brain should be, it's receiving
input from the rest of the animal.
The rest of the animal, its electrical properties are influencing growth and patterning of the
brain.
While this device is being put together, it is already functional, in fact, in this complex
loop, to pattern the other organs.
The other interesting thing that we found is that the brain protects the body from teratogenic
influences.
What I mean by that is that drugs that normally do not cause any sort of teratogenic problem,
they don't affect development, in embryos without a brain, they cause terrible problems.
The presence of the brain is able to protect the rest of embryogenesis from specific teratogens.
The next steps for this process is, of course, to try to use this assay in a gain-of-function
way to see if brain implants can improve regeneration and repair in various contexts,
to see if we can mimic brain activity with targeted interventions, and design better
screens for understanding teratogenesis.
Because it appears to not be true that you can simply sort compounds into the classes
of being a teratogen or not being a teratogen, because whether or not that occurs is really
determined by what's going on physiologically in the embryo.
The other thing I wanted to talk to you about is our efforts in non-neural bioelectricity.
The brain uses ion channels and electrical synapses known as gap junctions to drive the
electrical activity that is the substrate of the software of the brain, the activity.
Here what you're seeing is an act of zebrafish brain as the fish is going through its cognitive
programs.
And there are these efforts in neuroscience on neural decoding.
So the idea that you should be able to read out these electrical patterns and then from
that, using some sort of computational pipeline, extract the information content.
In this case, what image is this person thinking of?
So it turns out that in the rest of the body, we have something very, very similar.
That is, all cells, not just nerve and muscle, have ion channels.
They communicate with each other through these electrical synapses.
And what you're seeing here, this is an early frog embryo.
This is a movie originally made by Danny Adams in our group.
And what you're seeing here are all the electrical conversations that these cells are having
with each other as they determine which ones are going to make which organs.
And we think that the information encoded in these electrical states represent pattern
organizational influences that are going to be required both to make the animal in the
first place and then to repair it after damage.
So it turns out that bioelectricity is not something that showed up when brains evolved.
Lots of cells use electrical signaling.
This is an ancient, well-conserved signal.
Here you can see one single cell undergoing some very complex behaviors as it hunts for
its food.
And basically, it's the case that brains co-opted many of their tricks from far more
ancient usage of electrical circuits throughout the body.
So what did tissues think about before they became brains using this strategy?
And what tissues thought about was their own shape.
They thought about the shape of the host in which they located it.
They processed information and there's a tremendous amount of parallelism between the way that
electrical circuits are used to process information in the brain and in the rest of the body.
Now we developed molecular tools to be able to direct and characterize these states.
And so here you see a normal pre-pattern in this early embryo where each one of these
little circles is one cell.
That cell drives its voltage potential using channels in the membrane.
And so you can see this complex pattern across the anatomical scale.
Or you can also detect pathological states.
This is some of our work detecting tumors as their aberrant signature of bioelectrical
signaling before the tumors actually appear.
So the way we functionally manipulate these networks, we do not apply electrical fields.
What we do, and here's a typical cell network.
This might be an epithelium or a set of mesenchymal cells, whatever.
We have two basic options.
We can control the electrical synapses, so we can either open or close the electrical
communication among the cells using either genetic or pharmacological means.
So we can control the topology of this network.
So this is basically analogous to synaptic plasticity.
Or we can go in and directly, using either optogenetics or other tools, directly control
the voltage states of individual nodes in this network.
And so our strategy to rewire these circuits is first to computationally model the whole
circuit.
I'll show you how we do that.
And then to try to decode their pattern semantics.
And then to try to alter these patterns in vivo using either channel targeting drugs
or light.
And then to try to actually alter the outcomes of this patterning process that's driven
by these electrical circuits.
And in the past, we've had applications in birth defects, regeneration, and tumor reprogramming.
I'll give you one simple example.
This is attempted to induce regeneration in an animal that normally does not regenerate
its limbs.
So here's a frog.
Normally, you cut off the leg 45 days later, you either get a spike or nothing.
And so we came up with a cocktail that basically resets the electrical properties of the stump
to that of a developing early frog.
And so what that does is it kick starts the whole process.
So you've got some toes, you've got a toenail.
The leg actually ends up looking quite respectable here in terms of its patterning.
And you can see here that it's both touch sensitive and motile.
So a complex physiological state can kick start all of the downstream patterning modules
that it requires to build this leg.
Note that we did not have to do a micromanagement of every piece of this.
We didn't have to say here's where the nerve goes here, where the blood vessels go, here's
where the bone goes, and so on.
This is a very modular process.
The same thing actually can be seen here.
This is an early example of turning a portion of the gut into a complete eye.
And this, again, is a very modular event.
Once you induce an eye specific state here, the system does the rest.
The cells basically build this eye without us having to understand exactly how to microassemble
a leg or an eye.
And so one way that we're thinking about this is different from the sort of current assumption,
which is that the DNA is often thought to be the software, and then the cell is kind
of the hardware that reads it.
I propose a different view, which is that what the DNA does is it specifies the hardware.
The DNA tells you which ion channels each of your cells get to have.
But once you have those ion channels, there are complex electrical dynamics that go on
that are somewhat akin to information flow in things like flip flops where the physical
structure is set, but the information is stored in the pattern of energy movement through
the system.
And that is how computer memory stores information.
That these events here are up for grabs in an important sense, that we can go in and intervene
at this level, alter the physiology, and reach outcomes that are not constrained by the underlying
hardware.
One example of this from our Oakworth planaria showed that we can cut off the head, we can
alter the network topology of the resulting fragment, and as a result, cause this thing
to grow heads that are either flat, like this Pifelina, or round, like this S-Mediterrania,
and literally get it to build heads that are appropriate to other species.
Now, this is not only in terms of head shape.
They also get the shape of the brain and the stem cell distribution appropriate to these
other species.
There's about 150 million years of difference between them, and this is despite the fact
that the genomic sequence is untouched.
There's no genomic reprogramming that goes on here.
This is a purely physiological effect, and you can see that from the same genome you
can actually derive shapes of quite different species.
And in fact, you can go further and you can make, flatworms don't even have to be flat.
You can make flatworms that look like little spiky hedgehogs or little cylinders, or in
fact leave the plane of the sort of more or less two-dimensional body plane of this worm
and produce these tube structures on top.
So what's important from these examples is that the bioelectric network can redefine
anatomy without having to alter the genomic sequence.
And we then ask the question of, well, how about basic body plane, at least, surely the
number of heads an animal has is set by the genome.
And so the mainstream way of thinking about this predicts that if you made a two-headed
flatworm, which we can make by altering the bioelectric signaling between the two wounds,
then if you leave it alone for a couple of weeks and you amputate this ectopic tissue
and also the primary head, and you just take this normal gut and you culture that in plain
old water, given the wild type genomic sequence, what you're going to get surely is a single
headed worm.
I'm here telling you about this because that's not at all what happens.
What happens is that in perpetuity, if you keep doing this, once you've shifted the
stable attractor of this electrical circuit to a two-headed state, this thing will continue
to regenerate in water with no further manipulations, despite a normal genomic sequence.
So we see here that a target morphology of the species or the shape to which it repairs
upon damage can be permanently re-specified by altering the information in this electrical
pattern memory.
Now, why do I call it a pattern memory?
This is a very recent story that just came out from our group, which shows that what
you can do is you can take worms that are perfectly normal in their anatomy, so head
and tail.
They're also normal in their molecular histology, so the head marker is here, the head marker
is not in the tail, and so on.
So there's nothing molecularly wrong that we can detect in this worm.
And yet this worm is going to give rise to a double head, and this worm is going to give
rise to a single head.
Now why is that?
What could be different about it?
And it turns out that what we can do is rewrite the electrical pattern in this mature adult
animal, such that you can see here, this is a one-headed voltage pattern, this is a two-headed
voltage pattern, we can change the electrical pre-pattern, but notice that this is not reflective
of what's currently happening in the animal.
This is a perfectly good one-headed anatomically normal planarian.
What this is is a latent memory.
This is an electrical pattern that will become active if the animal is cut later on.
Until that happens, they stay one-headed and everything is fine.
If they get cut, they consult this electric circuit and they end up making two heads.
So the same physical body can store inside representations of distinct outcome future
states that it's going to acquire once it is cut.
So we think that there are significant parallels here between the way that electrical networks
store memories and make decisions in neuroscience, and that we're making some connection as models
towards that end, but the other very important thing is to make really clear computational
models of how this works.
And so we're in the process of doing that.
This is a new paper that just came out with the next version of our modeling tool.
Our modeling tool allows us to take realistic electric circuits from data that we know,
from proteins that are operating in the worm and our physiological data.
It makes a fully specified computational models of regenerative process.
And from those models, we're trying to derive state-space models like this that explain
why any given circuit has particular attractors that drive it to stable two-head, one-head,
or in fact, no-head states.
So this is an important effort for us to synthesize from molecular information to physiological
tissue-wide information to full anatomy-wide understanding of where these large-scale
features come from.
And so the second story I want to talk to you about is how we drive these kinds of advances
towards hopefully some sort of practical biomedical application.
And the arc that we tried to follow here is to identify the endogenous bio-electrical
pattern that is involved with some sort of organ that we care about, to build a computational
model of it, to test and refine the model, and then use that model to extract predictions.
And when we can extract predictions, we can also identify candidate treatments or interventions
that drive the system to a particular state.
And then, of course, we want to demonstrate efficacy in some model system.
So the application I want to show you has to do with the frog brain.
And so here's the early frog brain being developed.
And what was discovered is that the early frog brain has this very characteristic voltage
pattern here.
And in fact, and here it is, if you move across from left to right here, it's got these sort
of depolarized edges and then this hyperpolarized bit in the middle.
And when you expose this animal to various teratogens, what will happen is that you collapse
this interesting gradient so that everybody is up here.
And when that happens, the brain is terribly malformed.
You get these really bad malformations.
But if you try to hyperpolarize this thing naively, let's say to here, every cell goes
to here, this is just as bad.
And it makes perfect sense because it's not simply that every cell is at the same voltage.
You actually need this pattern for correct brain morphogenesis to occur.
And so what we were able to do was to use this computational model to understand where
the electrical differences between this middle portion and the edges are coming from and
then come up with a specific set of existing ion channel drugs.
And these are drugs already approved for human use in various applications.
But what the model does is it tells you exactly what you have to do to drive the voltage to
a particular pattern that you want to see.
And so when you do that, here's a normal frog brain.
You see forebrain, midbrain, hindbrain.
Here's in the case of the teratogen.
The forebrain is very, very shortened.
The eyes are touching the brain.
There's significant malformations here.
And in fact, on top of this, you can apply a couple of the drugs, actually one at a time
that was identified by this model.
And you basically rescue not only the anatomy of the brain, but also the gene expression
and the IQ of these tadpoles.
The tadpoles do have an IQ.
You can measure their learning speed and so on.
And they actually get their behavior back.
The other really interesting thing is that this is not only for chemical teratogenesis.
These are animals that are mis-expressing a dominant mutation in notch.
So notch is a really important neurogenesis gene.
And when they have this mutation, you can see compared to a normal brain, you can see
here that their brain is really quite screwed up.
And so even on top of this, really debilitating mutant phenotype, you can, by putting in appropriate
ion channels, you can rescue, again, entire anatomy of the brain, molecular markers, and
also their behavior.
So this is an example of using and targeting these bioelectrical states to overcome either
chemical teratogenesis or, in fact, a really dominant genetic mutation.
So what we're doing now is trying to put together a predictive simulator that would allow us
to take existing ion channel expression data from other workers, where we now pretty much
know what ion channels every tissue in the body has.
From our work on cracking the bioelectric code, we try to understand what VMEM pattern
is desired.
So let's say for brain patterning, for limb patterning, for all kinds of other anatomical
features.
And then what we would do is use this simulator as a way to predict and design cocktails of
existing ion channel drugs that could be applied, leveraging the differential expression
of ion channels throughout the body to try to rescue appropriate pre-patterns, such as
this early face pattern, where you get to see where the eye is going to go, the mouth,
and so on.
So the idea is that we're working on this kind of predictive platform for suggesting
ion channel drug interventions for specific uses.
And so one of the nice things about these models, and we also have some interesting machine
learning approaches to make it easier to do that, once these kinds of networks are developed,
they can be interrogated to find this kind of needle in the haystack.
This is our work showing that in the transition from normal pigment cell to melanoma, there
are very specific choice points that can be identified, that can be targeted to drive
body-wide outcomes.
And this is an example of using both machine learning and our bioelectrical modeling platform
to identify specific interventions that will let us have really rare, rare outcomes.
And so to finish up in summary, what I want to tell you is that endogenous bioelectric
circuits control gene expression and anatomy, and that the activity of these circuits can
be targeted.
Their function can be rewritten to alter species' default outcomes, either through
patterning or through gene mutations and so on.
That new computational and biophysical approaches are now coming online that will allow us to
rationally target decision-making on the tissue and whole body level, and I think this opens
many opportunities for addressing birth defects, degenerative disease, aging, injury, cancer
and so on.
And I also think that the major transformative advances in this field require us not only
to understand the mechanisms, the molecular mechanisms by which these things work, but
also the computations that cells and, more importantly, tissues perform to make decisions
about what they should be doing so that we can alter these decisions.
So I would like to thank the people who contributed to this work, and of course the Paul Allen
Frontiers Group for funding, and I leave you with a picture of our two-headed planaria,
which have been called Impossible Objects, because these guys arise from a genomically
wild-type animal cut in plain spring water.
So thank you.
I'll take questions.
Michael, in your model of bioelectrical fields being the software on the nucleic acid-encoded
hardware, are you looking at what presumably is small gradient field effects on the actual
cellular machinery to be asymmetric or polarized or make micro-decisions to set up these larger
morphogenic kinds of changes?
How are you going about that, if at all?
Yes, absolutely.
I don't have, just for reasons of time, I didn't bring all that stuff here, but we can talk
about this afterwards.
Basically, what happens is that in the model, small local changes percolate up, and so you
do start with localized cell level changes that percol up into large-scale decisions
where the cells coordinate with each other.
One of the things the bioelectric layer is very good at is for coordinating cell activity
across large areas, and so both in the case of brain development, cancer, some of these
other examples, what happens electrically in one part of the body has a massive influence
on another part, and so our goal is to understand in both directions.
We need to know what's happening at the cell level, drill down, which we've done.
We understand the transduction machinery to some extent, what genes are downstream, but
also to go upwards and understand the large-scale decision-making that this enables, because
the things that we're talking about often cannot be decided on a single cell level.
These networks are making decisions about things that are large, and so propagating
that information up is crucial.
Hey, Mike.
I love your work.
Most of what you showed us could be explained by the—I mean, I couldn't agree more that
the DNA is basically the set of tools and not a code for how to make an animal.
Most of what you showed us could be explained by the fact that you could rewire the circuitry
of a cell into a stem cell state, starting with the soft-to-bioelectric aspects, which
then feed to the nucleus, your chain-chain expression, and cells then reprogram themselves
into stem cells, so in a regenerative capacity to recreate the preexisting pattern, and then
you basically have sort of tissue-wide morphogens and so on, you know, classic developmental
things.
The only challenge to that idea would be the fact that you create this double-headed worm
in a completely—so what do you think—I mean, this is related to Jeff's question—what
do you think is happening there?
Because the issue is that you have to create cells that are in a stem-like state in order
to generate other cells and give rise to different types of these cells, but at the same time
they've got to sort of follow a different plan, so to speak, and it's not clear to
me where that type of information, where that type of plan would be, and maybe you just
didn't touch upon that.
Sure.
Yeah, right.
I simply didn't go into detail, and I can—you know, we can talk about this offline.
There's two important things in what you said.
The first is the issue of stem cells, and I'll just talk briefly about that.
It is true that, let's say, in culture with human stem cells, let's say mesenchymal
stem cells, you can use bioelectrical properties to control specific stem cell differentiation.
This is true.
In our particular example, in the case of the frog, there really are no—that's not
the case.
The frog does—it's tissue renewal, so every cell makes more of itself.
We don't—there's no reversion back to a stem-like state in the frog.
In the planaria, it's sort of the opposite.
Planaria have these adult neoblast stem cells that are like 30 percent of the animal.
They're always there.
Again, we have no evidence that we're making new stem cells.
It's literally—the stem cells are doing the thing.
As you said, it's the plan that the stem cell progeny have to follow.
This is actually an issue for all of our processes, because simply having specified
what cell types you have is not sufficient.
There's a next step, which is how do you organize all this stuff?
The worm is the model where we best understand it, and basically what we have now is a model
in which the information, at least let's say a very simple example, head or tail polarity,
is literally stored in the electrical circuit.
I'll draw it for you afterwards, that you could literally draw the electric circuit
in a way that it's stable, such that the cells on one end and the other are getting
different information, and that when you alter that, it will keep.
You can think of it as a flip-flop.
The easiest way to imagine it is a flip-flop, because it has two stable states, and the
other stable state is such that it will propagate to the other end, such that both ends are
head-like.
I'll show you how that works.
Can I quickly follow up on that?
You mentioned at the beginning the idea of these bizarre genomes that these animals have.
You said, despite those genomes, you can make a wild-type animal.
My question is, are the incredible regenerative capacities and new plans that these animals
can store not so much happening despite a bizarre genome, but because of the bizarre
genome?
Is there a way to go about testing that?
To what extent does genomic instability in somatic mutation propagation actually contribute
to the regenerative capacity?
That's a great question.
I show that problem precisely because I think it's a fundamental, interesting problem that
nobody has an answer to.
No one knows.
We're making models now of basically interacting cells in the same body that have different
genomic information.
It's a wide open field.
It's not discussed at all, never mind solved.
I really love the idea of the self-propagating organogenesis and the beautiful, elegant
studies with the planaria.
One thing, though, I wonder about, though, is when you jump to, say, mammalian systems
or other systems, why you focus specifically on the ion channels per se?
Because you could imagine the same self-propagating system occurring with epigenetic changes,
with transcription factors, with other sorts of events which are self-propagating in the
same way and perhaps fit into the mold, but not ion channels.
In fact, most of the literature on at least human morphogenesis would point towards some
of those other things.
Just to challenge you a bit, I guess this is if the electrical signaling is so important
in, say, mammalian system, one might see this in chronic electrical stimulation, which
is going on all the time with pacemakers.
There actually are lots of interventions that are already being used, and one could
predict that they would cause long-term changes, and at least to my knowledge, maybe it hasn't
been tested, but it's unclear if that occurs.
Sure.
Okay, two great questions there.
The one question has to do with, I'll take the second one first, about what is the evidence
for the importance of this in humans, and what about the electrical stimulation?
The kinds of electrical stimulation that occur in the most common medical use, so let's
say electrical stimulation for muscles and wound healing and things like this, are generally
not the kind of stimulation that will interact with this system, rapid, rapid spiking, whether
it be through a magnetic system or through controls of a peripheral nervous system.
That kind of rapid spiking is generally not anything that's going to directly affect
the system.
There is, however, a whole body of data on a different type of exposure that human beings
have, which supports these kinds of ideas, and that is the teratogenesis by channel-modifying
drugs.
So a lot of the drugs that actually modify these kinds of events are, in fact, teratogens
and are pretty dangerous both in, let's say, rat or mouse models and humans.
So you would not expect to see this with a kind of stimulation, you know, magnetic field
exposure.
None of those things really alter long-term, steady-state electrical properties of cells,
but you do get this from certain kinds of drugs that interfere with this system.
The other interesting question is, why focus on bioelectricity as opposed to chemical gradients?
So I certainly don't mean to say that chemical signaling systems are not important.
Absolutely they're important.
And all of these things that I talked about are, no doubt, the result of cooperation between
electrical, chemical, and physical forces, pressures, strains, tensions, and so on.
All of these things are important.
The reason we focus on bioelectricity is because electricity is remarkably well-suited for things
like memory and decision-making, and the reason is more so than diffusion.
I mean, I've seen people create specific circuits out of diffusing molecules, and it
usually ends up a very, you know, very, very fancy paper in nature, and so on, precisely
because it's extremely difficult to do this.
Electricity is, I think, evolution discovered very early on that for the same reason that
we make computers and so on, electrically as opposed to through chemical diffusion,
is that it's much easier to process information that way.
And specifically what I mean is a voltage-gated channel or a voltage-gated gap junction is
a voltage-gated current conductor.
This is in effect a transistor.
It means that using circuits made of those things, you can easily build up to almost
any kind of computational process that you want.
And could somebody make models of all this stuff that purely were with diffusing morphogens?
Possibly.
I'm not going to say it's impossible.
I have to see it first, you know, to judge that, whereas I think this is a really tractable
control system.
I think a lot of the decision-making, if you think about artificial neural networks, right,
they really show you how memory and decision-making can be implemented by electrical networks,
and then, of course, they work together with all the chemical grades.
Last question?
In the situation where you took the planaria and changed the head shape or structure, does
that propagate?
That is either by cutting or from the progeny, et cetera?
Right.
Yeah, that one does not propagate.
So unlike the two-head state, which is permanent, that one does not propagate.
And what happens with that is they regenerate the head appropriate to some other species.
They sit there for about 30 days, and at the end of 30 days, something suddenly kicks
in where they decide, wait a minute, this isn't right, and they will remodel and go
back to their original state.
So that one, that effect, does not propagate.
Do you have any sense of why that memory comes back or why you can't cause it to persist?
Have you guys sorted that out yet?
Yeah, we don't.
Our best models are for the head-tail decision, not for the head shape.
We don't have a great model yet for the head-shape thing, but we do know one thing that's a little
bit similar to that, which may give a clue.
If you take, there was a classical data that people would take a tail blastema from a salamander,
and they would want to know whether that thing becomes a tail because it's locally determined
or not, and they would attach it to the flank of that salamander, and the data where that,
in the short term, that thing makes a tail, and so you would say, OK, it's locally determined,
but then over the coming months, it would eventually remodel to the more correct pattern.
It seems like, so maybe, and this is pure conjecture, maybe what we have here is a two-phase process
where there's almost a short-term and a long-term memory that are distinct, but we really don't
understand that mechanistically at all.
So after we get through really analyzing the one head, two head thing, we're going to turn our attention to that.
Thank you very much.
You
