The best thing I hope my lab does on their best days,
taking these ideas from deep philosophy
that people have argued about for thousands of years
and bringing them to the bedside, to the clinic.
What you look like and where you come from
simply cannot be the foundation
for how we're going to relate to each other.
But I don't feel in any way diminished by the idea
that there are an infinitude of other minds,
highly diverse minds, endless sentient forms
that are also having experiences that strive
and suffer to various degrees.
I think what we have is essential.
I would like humanity to scale its cognitive capacity
more specifically, not just the intelligence,
but the radius of concern, of care, and of compassion.
I think we need to scale that up.
The amount of emails that I get every day
from people with the most unbelievable examples
of biomedical suffering is just incredible.
So I think it is utter moral cowardice
to focus on what we shouldn't do,
as opposed to our duty now that we have,
for the first time, we have the ability
to actually rationally approach these matters,
to try to guarantee a better embodiment
for sentient beings on Earth.
Cool, well, good morning, Mike.
How are you?
Good morning, excellent.
Thanks for having me.
Yeah, it's wonderful to get the chance to talk to you.
I'm very much an amateur in this field,
but I've admired your work for a long while.
And I can't offer you the size of audiences
you're used to with your TED Talk
and with some of the other interviews you've given,
but I can trade that for quality,
because my audience might be small,
but they're lovely and deeply thoughtful.
So I'm sure they'll appreciate your work
and your thinking, because it's great to have you here.
And I think you're probably, in nearly 200 episodes,
my first full-on biologist,
which is a gap I should have filled long ago,
because there's this sense that maybe the mathematicians
look down on the messiness of science,
and maybe even the physicists look down
on the mess of chemistry, biology.
But I think the hierarchy goes the other way.
I think biology is the harder, more challenging space,
whereas the mathematicians and the physicists
with their spherical cows can abstract
some of the interesting stuff away.
You upped your elbows in it quite often,
so it's great to get the chance
to have a biology-focused conversation.
Well, thank you, yeah.
I mean, biologists have plenty of spherical cows.
A lot of people talk about some of our constructs
as real pathways and things like this,
but of course, these are all imaginary kinds of constructs
that we do our best with.
Yeah, cool.
So this is a series of conversations
about what I think of as the deepest philosophical questions
and also the most important.
And they're questions of what's real,
really more epistemology than ontology.
How should we go about best understanding
this crazy world we all share?
But just as importantly, the questions of ethics
and within that complex field,
the simple question of who gets to count.
Who should we count as another
as we're thinking about how to lead a good life?
And I have an obvious bias
because this sentientism worldview
I'm trying to popularize and develop
is very pluralistic and very broad,
but in a sentence is evidence, reason,
and compassion for sentient beings.
So when we're answering the what's real
and how to understand the universe question,
it suggests a really broad,
humble, naturalistic approach
that uses evidence and reasoning.
And when it comes to the ethical scope question,
the clue is in the name.
It says that all sentient beings,
any being that has the capacity to experience things,
to flourish, to suffer should count
at least to some minimal regard and moral consideration.
I'm talking to people in this series of conversations,
some of whom agree and some of whom don't.
So it'll be interesting to see how you have gone
through your own philosophical journey
and answering those questions where you are now
and how that runs through the work you do today.
But before we get onto those big questions,
how would you best introduce yourself
for those people in my audience
who haven't come across your work so far?
Well, let's see.
So my name is Mike Levin.
I'm a professor at Tufts University.
I run the Allen Discovery Center here at Tufts.
I'm also an affiliate faculty member
at the Bees Institute at Harvard.
I do a number of other things.
I co-direct the ICDO,
the Institute for Computer Design Organisms
with Josh Bongard.
And yeah, that's me.
I study a range of things.
I mean, we'll get into all the details
but in my group here,
we do a combination of biology or biophysics,
mostly computer science and cognitive science
to understand embodied minds.
That's really what we do.
Yeah, that's great.
Thank you.
Yeah, we'll dig in.
So let's start with the first of these big philosophical
questions, the question of what's real and epistemology.
Quite often an interesting way into that space
because it's so broad.
It covers anything we might choose to believe
or have credences in.
But an interesting way in many of my guests
is to talk about their journey with respect to religion
and spirituality and whether they grew up
in a religious spiritual sort of context and household,
whether they held onto those types of beliefs or not,
and how that side of their thinking about
some of the sort of ultimate questions
of the nature of reality might have shifted since.
But so I don't know if you wanna wind the clock back
and sort of tell us your story in that space.
And then we could get into, I guess,
more of the field of science and so.
Yeah, yeah.
My background, I think you could say,
is not religious, but highly spiritual.
So I went for a few years, I went to a Hebrew day school
and my background from that perspective is Jewish
and we studied some thoughts around that whole thing.
And I harassed everybody with questions
about what happens in conjoint twinning
and how souls are supposed to work
and how they solve the problems of the hard problem
of consciousness and all that kind of a thing.
And the answers weren't terribly forthcoming
from that direction.
But in my home, I think it was always very clear
from the time I was very young that we had an emphasis
on inquiry, on asking big questions,
on making sure that whatever we spend energy on
is towards things that matter in an ethical way.
I was always encouraged to find things
that I'm passionate about and to use intellect
and every other tool at my disposal
to sort of get to the bottom of things.
So we had lots of deep conversations
about kind of the big questions
and how they might be addressed.
The question, how do you know,
what figure prominently in my childhood?
So we're always encouraged to think
about those kinds of things.
So that in the way I'm describing that naturalistic
epistemology of using evidence and reason
and sort of thinking things through
and that inquiry was there for quite an early age,
even within a family that sat within a broader
sort of religiously defined community and culture, I guess.
Yeah, yeah, but also to be clear that,
there are many ways of enhancing wisdom
or at least attempting to.
And so rationality is an amazing tool,
but one can also ask questions about its limitations
and what other alternatives might be on offer
and making sure that we understand
but what are the things that we're not seeing?
And it's sort of, there's an old saying that says,
show me the net with which you're fishing
and I'll tell you what you're not going to catch.
I forget who said it, but that's that being,
having that level of skepticism about the approaches
you bring to a problem, whether that be
different kinds of logic or whatever else,
that was always emphasized as well.
Yeah, and that if your choice of evidence
or your choice of methods are too narrow,
that can become its own dogma, as you say,
you've got to be able to question those choices too.
And part of the way I try and counter that
is to talk about evidence and reason
in a very broad sense.
So some people will think of that as being
a narrowly rational or empiric
or even a scientific process that doesn't count as evidence
until you've done a randomized control trial.
And I don't think that in those terms at all,
I think of evidence and reason in a very broad open sense
that can include the experience from our senses,
our subjective experience, you know,
how a weird those might be.
I think those are all types of evidence too.
We can be skeptical of them,
but I think that broad conception of naturalism
is something I'm much more comfortable with
than something that's really narrowly
scientific if you like, which can be,
I think narrow down too, too early.
And how did that sense of inquiry,
but a broad sense of inquiry,
shift your actual beliefs over time?
Even when you're asking the awkward questions,
did you still hold onto some of the supernatural beliefs
anyway?
Have those shifted over time?
So I guess there's probably two linked questions there.
How do you think about the possibility
of some of those supernatural constructs now,
gods and souls and spirits?
And is your sense of those still lead
to this inquiry and a naturalistic approach?
Or do you sort of reserve certain areas of knowledge
for different epistemologies
that might be more faith-based or revelatory?
Yeah, I mean, I think that to me too,
I pretty much, I think I pretty much only have one
supernatural belief, which is that
the universe is understandable in some fashion,
whatever that may mean to be understood
and that we are at least to some extent capable
of resonating with a fundamental principles
that guide its development and therefore knowledge seeking
and things like this are not hopeless.
That I fully admit is a supernatural belief
because that's the kind of thing you can't really get behind.
But once you've taken that on,
then everything else becomes possible.
So I don't think anything,
I can't think of anything that would be truly supernatural
in the sense that it might be completely outside
of current abilities to understand,
maybe beyond current scientific formalisms,
but also perhaps beyond our cognitive capacities.
So all of us are finite beings,
guaranteed there are going to be things
that we are simply not capable of comprehending
as well as we can comprehend other things.
And so beyond that, I don't think anything
is really supernatural.
I think all of us are doing our best in cobbling together
some kind of coherent understanding of the world
and our place in it.
And then the interesting empirical part
is then you get to find out how well it's working for you.
So not just in the narrow scientific sense
of specific paradigms that help you do experiments
and make predictions and things like that,
but the same idea applied to one's life.
And so you have various outlooks
that you might take on various frameworks
and then you have to ask yourself,
so how is this working out?
Is this helping me have a more meaningful life?
Is it helping me be a more ethical person
to have better relationships with others?
Those are the kinds of things
that are not specifically sort of scientific outcomes,
but the process is exactly the same.
You examine your framing and you ask yourself,
are there ways to tune that framing to do better,
to have a better experience with others?
Yeah, thank you.
And I quite like describing this naturalistic approach
as being just an attempt to honestly engage with reality
and an attempt to understand it.
And that understanding will always be partial
and probabilistic and provisional
and uncertain and open to revision.
But I guess that's an interesting way of putting it.
It's not just about, does the evidence start
with my hypothesis, it's also how does the application
of this knowledge or these beliefs actually work
for me in practical terms,
whether they're my life or engineering context.
So yeah, thank you.
Yeah, it became pretty clear early on
that how one looks at data or at life
or at anything else is a very strong determined
of how one is going to interpret everything that happens.
And these kind of frames are, they drive what happens next
and they drive the kinds of things
that become possible for you or impossible.
You know, they determine which things are facilitated
and which things are constrained.
And so that aspect of it being really in control
of how you interpret things, I think is really important.
Yeah, thank you.
And if we narrow down now, I think of, I guess,
the scientific pursuit as being a subset of naturalism,
it's the sort of a formalized way of doing that.
And your focus is in the field of biology.
And it's been, it's fascinating
because I think for most people with their memory
of the sort of high school sense
of what biology is involved in,
you've been taking the field in very different ways,
although some of the different ways have quite old roots too.
How have you come to understand biology as a field,
writ large, and what are the sort of distinctive angles
that you've been trying to develop,
particularly as you think about
one of the introductory comments on your lab's website
talks about this fascination with the fact
that all of us have gone from matter to mind in some sense.
Yeah, I don't really think of myself as a biologist.
I mean, we certainly do biology in my lab,
among other things,
but my fundamental commitment in my career and my life
basically has been to understand embodied mind.
So I've got this mind map that I print out every once a year,
I refresh it and print it out every once in a while
and it hangs in the lab.
And it's about nine feet wide,
this big kind of poster thing.
And in the middle of it,
the root node of this mind map is embodied mind.
That's really what I'm interested in.
I'm interested in cognition, intelligence,
and inner perspective in a wide range of diverse systems,
some of which we would call alive nowadays.
I actually spend very little time
figuring out a definition of life,
although if you want, we can talk about it,
but I don't worry about it too much at all.
I'm interested in the things
that all cognitive agents have in common.
I'm interested in the scaling of mind
from its most sort of primitive and humble examples
in the world,
which I don't think anybody would call alive necessarily,
but I think cognition is broader than life,
broader category than life.
And yeah, and that's what we're interested in now.
Now it just so happens that life is our best example
of so far of how that gets scaled.
So we do a lot of work in our lab
using the phenomenon of molecular networks,
scaling into cells, scaling into tissues,
scaling into organisms,
and beyond as an example
of how to understand collective intelligence,
how to communicate and ethically relate to those
that collective intelligence is,
where do the goals of those collective intelligences come
from and so on.
So biology is an excellent playground
for these kinds of things,
but I actually think the question is bigger than that.
Yeah, thank you.
And the, again, the sort of high school,
and when I talk about it in the third person,
it's really my high school sense of these things,
it does reflect this sense
that there are different scales of reality,
and you're interestingly trying to span them
and work across them and look at some phenomena
that may be scale free in some sense.
But I guess you can start,
you can think about the fundamentals of physics,
whether those are fields or fluctuations
in them represented as particles,
and you can come up through the different layers.
For our purposes, I guess,
where it starts to get useful,
most people would think of life as being the point
where we're getting into the realms
of considering the possibility of mind,
at least there are entities that are separated
from their environment,
that have some sort of evolutionary history
that have some form of drive to live,
but you've hinted there already,
you don't necessarily find the concept of life
that interesting,
but then you can move through simple types of life
in the earlier evolutionary stages,
but also in the degree of complexity as well.
So in our current panoply of living beings,
very simple single-celled organisms,
plants and fungi,
and then it feels intuitively like we take another step
on the cognition path
when we're starting to think about animals as well.
So as we're sort of working across that boundary
from non-life to very simple life
through to plants, fungi, and the simplest animals,
where do you see this idea of cognition emerging?
Where did it come from?
And I guess, what is it?
But as one of the things I find interesting
in at least your public writing
is that sometimes it does feel like
there's a little bit of slippage in the term
because sometimes cognition feels like
something that's more narrowly computational.
You know, it's something that maybe my spreadsheet
on a laptop could be doing,
but sometimes there is an implication of mind
and a subjective perspective
in the way you talk about cognition as well.
So I should ask a better question than that,
but in that sort of space of simpler living organisms,
how does cognition emerge and what do you think of?
It is in its simplest terms.
Yeah, so here's how I think about these things.
All of these cognitive claims, in other words,
where you think something is on the spectrum of cognition,
how much mind and all of that,
I don't think these are terms describing particular systems.
I think these are terms describing
our intended relationship to them.
So I don't think any of this is about the system itself.
It's when you make a cognitive claim about something,
you say this system is at the level of whatever,
which you're really telling me
is an engineering interaction protocol.
You're telling me what your viewpoint on that system is
and that viewpoint is gonna determine
how you interact with it.
So I'll give you a simple example.
People argue all the time about whether humans are machines.
And now this is a long conversation
because you have to define machine,
you have to define human and all that,
but if you have an orthopedic surgeon
who does not believe you are a machine, you're in trouble.
You need to find a different orthopedic surgeon.
If you have a spouse or a psychotherapist
who thinks you're a simple machine, you're also in trouble.
Not a great fit there.
There are plenty of supposed doctors out there
who think you're a fluctuation in the cosmic
on some wide vibrations, so yeah.
Yeah, yeah, I mean, so my framework,
so I'm working on this framework called TAME,
T-A-M-E, Technological Approach to Mind Everywhere.
And one of the main claims of this framework
is that none of these things can be determined
from a philosophical armchair.
You can't just decide what things are,
you have to do experiments.
So if you think you're a quantum fluctuation,
whatever, whatever, that's great.
It's all open, it's a fine hypothesis.
What has it done for you, right?
Like what are the benefits?
And so I think this is the difference
between this kind of pluralistic view that I have
where multiple observers can differ
as to their assessment of any given system.
That's what I believe,
but it doesn't mean that anything goes
because those observers can then compare,
well, how well did that worldview work out for you?
What has that enabled you to do?
What has that enabled you to discover?
How rich are your relationships with the various systems
given the view that you have?
So what you wanna do is you wanna get it right
or at least optimize it.
You don't wanna have false negatives
where you attribute cognitive qualities to systems
that where they don't give you any new purchase.
So for example, kind of old school animist ideas
where there's a spirit in every rock,
it's a fine hypothesis, how has that worked out?
What does that do for you?
You need to do experiments and you need to show that,
hey, by saying that this thing has goals,
it has learning capacity, it has whatever,
this is now what I'm able to do.
I'm able to either make better prediction and control
or we're having a more richer interpersonal experience
or something.
So all of these things need to be empirically testable.
So in this framework, your spreadsheet may or may not
be doing some of the things that are tractable
using the tools of cognitive science,
for a spreadsheet probably not, but you'd be surprised.
The thing about treating these things
as empirical questions, not philosophy,
is that you are often surprised,
which is what is good about science,
is that when you were surprised,
that that's an opportunity to learn.
And so what I think all of these cognitive claims really are
are hypotheses about which set of tools
am I going to apply?
So am I going to apply the tools of physics
and simple engineering?
Am I going to apply the tool of cybernetics
and control theory, the tools of behaviorism
and learning and training and things like that,
or the tools of communication and psychoanalysis
and love and all these other things.
So the thing is that when you treat that
as an empirical question, you get to do experiments
and you get to be surprised.
So for example, we have found that very simple systems
that represent gene regulatory networks,
so just small numbers of chemicals
that turn each other on and off, that's it.
No cell, no indeterminism, no magic,
just differential equations of describing
how genes turn each other on and off.
That system, which most people would assume
is has zero cognition, they would say,
well, that's a very mechanical, it's justice.
As people say, it's just obeying the laws
of physics and chemistry.
That turns out-
There's a lot in that, just.
Yeah, right, I mean, I really hate that framing,
but that's what people often say.
That system by itself is capable
of six different kinds of learning,
including Pavlovian conditioning, just there.
So with nothing else.
We've also done work on sorting algorithms.
So these are extremely simple, deterministic,
fully transparent algorithms that people
in computer science have been studying
for, I don't know, 60 years or longer,
things like bubble sort and so on.
Even those things, when you probe them the right way,
show novel problem-solving capacities
and behaviors that are not in the algorithm themselves.
So what I am taking from all of this
is that we really need a sense of humility
about what things can do
and what kinds of tools are best appropriate for them.
You don't know.
We are not good at guessing.
We think we are, and people assume this all the time,
but we're not good at guessing.
And so we need a mature science.
So this is, if I had to pick one field
that I think I work in, it's diverse intelligence research.
That's what I think we do.
We are trying to develop principle frameworks
for really knowing which kinds of cognitive tools,
which scale of cognitive tools are appropriate
for various systems.
And we're just not very good at guessing
from the beginning.
Yeah, thank you.
And intelligence, I think, again,
you can spend three hours talking about definitions of it,
but I think many people would talk about it
in simple terms as being the capacity to solve problems,
which is something that could be done
without mind and without subjectivity
and without feeling,
whereas cognition or maybe, again,
you're gonna tell me that these distinctions are
maybe not even well posed.
Yeah, so let's break it down a little bit.
So intelligence, I agree with you
that a good definition of intelligence
has to do with problem solving.
Now, I'm not claiming that problem solving
encompasses everything that's interesting about cognition.
There are other things that are not about problem solving,
but problem solving is good
because it's publicly observable.
It's a good scientific thing to study.
And it's about competency in navigating some problem space.
And there are many tools and tricks
that the system can use to navigate that problem space.
Now, the thing about inner perspective is this,
which is, and at this point,
I'm not talking about the hard problem of consciousness.
We can sort of talk about that separately,
but here's the thing about inner perspective.
It's not a binary.
I don't think any of these categories are usefully binary.
What I think is important about inner perspective is this.
For any kind of system,
you want to be able to answer the question,
how important is the system's perspective onto the world
for me to understand what's happening?
So let's make a, let's do, we have a simple example.
I suppose you have a bowling ball on a hilly landscape.
So you've got this energy landscape,
you've got bumps and valleys and you've got a bowling ball.
If you want to know what that bowling ball is going to do,
your view as a third party observer to this
as an external observer,
your view of the landscape tells the whole story.
Okay, there's nothing more.
You don't need anything else.
You will have everything you need to know
to predict what's going to happen
from your external view of the landscape.
By the way-
You don't need to imagine what it's like to be the ball.
Well, that's the next step.
That's the next step, which is that
if you want to now know
what a mouse is going to do on that landscape,
your view of that landscape
isn't really very interesting at all.
The important thing, and it's not predictive of much,
the important thing is the mouse's view of that landscape,
because if it has an internal representation
of the valence of different portions of that landscape,
so rewards and punishments
and which things are important to it
and what attention it's paying and all that,
the inner landscape of the mouse is the actual landscape
that's going to determine what happens next,
not your view of the landscape.
So different kinds of systems
have different degrees of representation
of their outside world.
It's not just brainy, smart animals that do this.
All systems represent the world to some extent.
And the question is how much?
The question is how much do I need to worry about?
And one way to sort of quantify this
is in terms of the size of the cognitive light cone.
So you can sort of ask for any given system,
if you were to draw a space time,
it's sort of a butchering of Minkowski's
space time cone diagrams,
you can draw a little diagram that says,
what are the events both back in time and forward,
because some systems anticipate,
so both back in time and forward in time and spatially,
what are the things you need to know
to have a really rich relationship with the system,
meaning prediction, control,
something that benefits you,
and in some cases, something that's ethical and all that.
What do you need to know?
So for a bowling ball, the cognitive light cone is tiny,
because everything you need to know is right there.
You add up all the pushes and pulls on it,
you're more or less done.
But once you start entering the systems
that are even as simple as a collection
of genes regulating each other,
that's no longer satisfactory,
because they learn from experience
and things that have happened before
are gonna make huge differences to what happens next.
You cannot gain a full understanding of what's happening
or to gain good control
without understanding their inner perspective.
So I think inner perspective is something
that to some degree is wider than biology.
I think what biology is really good at
is scaling up these cognitive light cones.
So in a rock, the cognitive light cone of the pieces,
which by the way is not zero, it's very small,
but I don't think it's zero,
is not really summed up in the rock.
The rock has exactly the same level
of cognitive light cone as its pieces,
but biology is super good.
To say it another way,
we call living things any system
that's good at scaling up the cognitive light cone
of its parts, it's going to look alive to us.
And just the final kind of thing,
which we'll probably get to again later
in terms of what kind of world we want to live in,
I think that evolution has no monopoly
on producing cognition.
In other words, up until now,
yes, that's probably, at least on Earth,
that's probably mostly where cognition came from,
is from the fumblings of mutation of selection
and of some other things.
But I don't think intrinsically,
that's where cognition has to come from.
I don't see any reason whatsoever
why the rational efforts of other cognitive agents,
such as ourselves, couldn't make new minds going forward.
Yeah, thank you.
Yeah, we get to dig into that.
And the point you mentioned about the approach to genetics
is one of the things that you've helped
radicalize this view,
this simplistic view that DNA is some form of blueprint
where you programmatically and linearly follow it.
And that's one of the things
as I understand your work has radically opened up.
It's nowhere near that simple.
It's much more about systems interacting
and memory can be held in different forms and so on.
So yeah, it's broadened out that view.
And as we're sort of moving further up
the scale, if there is such a scale,
one of the things I've heard you resist before
as you are here in a way
is this idea of really clear binary concepts,
concepts like sentience and consciousness
that try to take ideas like cognition
and map them onto this intuitive sense that we have,
that we are ineffable, distinct,
somehow unique entities
that feel like we're separate.
We're not just physics.
And I empathize with that resistance
because I think there's a danger in that intuition
that we reify these ideas
because they're obviously important to us intuitively.
I can understand why anyone's consciousness
will be important to them.
Ultimately, it's all they experience, right?
And everything we experience comes through the consciousness.
But there's a danger in reifying that,
you take it away from just being physics
because ultimately I think I share your view
that just physics,
we are all just part of the natural world all the way down.
That doesn't mean these aren't interesting concepts,
but they're not distinct from physical reality.
But at the same time,
I prefer not to put them completely to one side.
And I think in the way you're describing,
needing some sort of research concept
or some concept of relationality
can still provide at least a couple of reasons
why it's important to still focus on ideas
like sentience and consciousness.
And I guess one,
it came partly through my conversation with Mark Solms,
who I know you spent a lot of quality time with.
I've loved some of your discussions
because part of the way he tells the story about evolution
is that sentience,
the capacity to actually experience a valence
is one of the things that's probably driven
the process of broader cognition
and evolution in the first place.
So he puts that concept or the ability to feel things,
feel good, feel good, bad,
how am I doing now in this environment as quite central?
And I guess that's the way I think of sentience
as being just that capacity to have an experience
and to value it from yourself, whatever yourself is.
But I guess another reason,
another potential research project
links to our next question,
which is that these things also seem to have
some quite deep moral or ethical significance too,
in that, you know, and we'll come back to that.
But I guess those are two of the reasons
why those sometimes problematic concepts,
and I certainly don't think they're binary in any sense.
There's still a drive for us to understand and dig in.
What do you think about those sorts of challenges about,
you know, is there a,
because you could go to a point of view
where you never talk about sentience and consciousness
or subjective experience in those senses at all,
and you stick purely with a more neutral description
of cognition and agent spaces and Markov blanket.
Do you feel that there is some meaningful pull
to delve into and better understand those ideas
of sentience and consciousness in their own right,
or how do you think of this?
Well, I think those are essential.
My resistance to binary categories is not to,
you know, kind of reduce these aspects
that you're talking about at all.
It's to, on the contrary,
it's to have a better understanding of them
and their potential.
You know, I get a lot of pushback from both directions.
So I get mechanistic, you know,
sort of supposedly reductionist scientists who say,
well, this is crazy.
You're painting feelings onto cells
and chemistry is the best kind of explanation.
You know, and that's not really reductionist
because then if you say, well, you mean quantum foam,
you want to talk about quantum foam,
they say, nah, nah, nah, that's not it.
It's chemistry, it's got to be chemistry.
So they've picked the level, okay.
But I also get a lot of flak from the organists,
which, and I consider myself in the organist tradition,
but who say, look, by putting non-living things
on the other side, such as physical objects
and computers and whatnot on that,
somewhere on that spectrum,
you're undermining this battle that we've had
for hundreds of years to preserve the magic
and the importance of life and of inner perspective
and so on.
I don't think understanding these things better
and understanding how they scale up reduces the importance
or the majesty of the obvious sentience of living beings.
I think much like with any kind of science,
it helps us to understand what we are
and what our potential is and what we need to do.
I think that this weird obsession with chemistry
and with physics too is what undermines the efforts
to really understand this.
And I'll give you a simple example, well, two examples.
One is, I often hear people say this,
that's not real goals,
real preferences, real valence, real anything.
That's just, it's just following the laws
of physics and chemistry.
Well, guess what?
If you were to zoom in to your brain
or the rest of your body, guess what you would find?
You wouldn't find fairies,
you would find physics and chemistry.
So it's very-
And even if you found fairies,
they'd be following the laws of physics too.
They would have to be following something, right?
So I'm not against, if you have a model of,
people sometimes email me,
well, what about the soul?
I say, bring it on.
If you've got a model of the soul,
explain how that works and how that solves these problems
and we're good to go.
The problem is, I've never seen such a model,
but the question, I always bring it back
to the paramecium or a single cell.
Do you or do you not believe that that thing has
to some small extent a preference about what happens?
If you do, then we simply point out that,
well, look, it's very clearly made
of a set of interacting chemicals.
At some point we'll be able to reconstitute one.
So what's the issue?
If you don't, then you have to explain to me
what happens in embryonic development,
where you actually go very slowly
and gradually from a single cell
into whatever it is that we are.
And again, there is no magic lightning flash
that converts the chemistry of the oocyte
into the mind of the adult human.
So this continuity, you can't escape it.
What we owe is not a story about magic of bright lines,
we owe a story about scaling.
And the other thing that I think is really curious
and it's kind of, I don't know if it's my bringing
with too much science fiction or what,
but I find it really amazing.
There was a great scene in,
there's a movie called Ex Machina, you know?
And there's a great scene in that movie
where the protagonist is now so confused by this AI
that he's been dealing with it.
He's standing there in front of a mirror
and he starts cutting his hand because his arm,
because he wants to see if he is a robot too, right?
And it's very important to him.
So this is critical to him, it's very stressful.
And I get emails all the time also from people who say,
I've read your paper, I understand now
that I'm a walking bag of cells, now I'm depressed.
I don't know what to do with myself, this is terrible, right?
And let's just unpack this, this cutting your arm thing.
So what that means is, if you were to find,
so you cut open your arm
and you find a bunch of cogs and gears,
you've had, I don't know, 40, 50,
however many years of experience in your own skin,
being an agent, exerting effort towards various outcomes
and having moral quandaries and having, you know,
Qualey and all these things.
And when you see those cogs and gears,
what you're gonna decide is, none of that was real
because I am committed to the idea
that cogs and gears can't support it.
This is so bizarre to me.
And it's bizarre because we don't know
what cogs and gears can and can't support.
You know, why are you so attached to a protoplasm
and proteins and whatever else is inside you
over something else that you might find?
What do you think you know about those things
that overrides your primary experience as a human?
It's just, it's amazing to me
that what people naturally tend to say is,
okay, well, then I guess I'm not real, I'm not important,
I can't do all of the amazing things I was going to do
versus, wow, I guess I just learned something great
about cogs and gears, look at that.
You know, I guess cogs and gears can do it,
not too much more shocking than finding out the proteins
and, you know, and carbohydrates and whatever else
is in our bodies can do it.
Yeah, and neurons firing, it's like.
Yeah, yeah, but people are so committed
to simple, well, to two things, to, first of all,
to the idea that if your parts obey the laws of physics,
then you are somehow reduced, which I think, you know,
this allegiance to a low level of description,
I think it's completely arbitrary.
Dennis Noble does a really nice job in his work
on against privileged levels of causation and things like that.
And then the idea that we know what various kinds
of materials and architectures can do,
we have absolutely no idea.
You know, we need, this actual field is at a,
despite the rest of science is at a very young stage.
We do not know, there are emergent,
not just emergent complexity,
so everybody studies emergent complexity,
that's been around for a long time.
It's not emergent complexity here,
it's emergent goal-directedness and emergent cognition.
And that happens and even in very simple systems,
it surprises us constantly.
We are not good at predicting it,
we are not good at creating it yet.
Well, I should say we may create it unwittingly all the time.
And so people who say, you know,
I know what this is because I made it,
I think that's a really dangerous idea
because you don't know what something is
just because you made it or because,
people say this a bunch of language models or whatever,
just because you know the parts that went into it,
we do not yet know what it is, what it can do
and how important is the inner perspective
and what kind of inner perspective it has.
So yeah, I think a lot of humility here
is needed and a letting go of this idea
that the right level of description is chemistry.
And you know, I think it's fine that that's there,
it does not tell the whole story in any practical way.
Yeah, thank you.
You need to understand that these things run
and operate at different levels and interlocking levels.
Well, just very specifically,
the business of physics and determinism, right?
One of the key issues here is that
determinism is well and good
if what you're interested in doing is looking backwards.
So something has happened
and you're going to tell a mechanistic story
of why it happened.
And then you can always do that,
that's always on the table.
So you zoom down and you say, look,
this person did that because these neurotransmitters
zigged and zagged and they did that
because of the electron forces and all of this stuff, right?
You can always tell a story going backwards.
But that isn't what we're interested in,
both as humans and scientists,
we're interested in going forwards
as in what can and should I do next
and what can I invent
or how can I increase my understanding next?
And that is a completely different kind of task.
So here's one of my favorite examples.
The game of life, cellular automaton, right?
So you've got three simple rules that dictate
how the state of each cell is going to be on or off
based on what its neighbors do.
Okay, so just-
It's a simple two-dimensional grid, isn't it?
Completely simple, yep.
Super simple, two-dimensional grid
the cells are on or off and it's fully deterministic.
Okay, there's not even an ecstasy here.
So every cell in every tick of the clock,
each cell becomes on or off
based on how many neighbors it has.
That's it.
Now, we know, and if anybody in the audience
hasn't seen it, look it up
and you can see these amazing things that happen, right?
So emerging complexity is very strong here.
And if anyone hasn't played with it,
I'd recommend go and find some of the online tools
because you can play with this stuff yourself.
It's mind-blowing, yeah.
Absolutely, absolutely amazing.
And so now, look, you can imagine being a reductionist
determinist about this world and say,
so for example, one of the things that happens
in this world is there are things called gliders.
So gliders are patterns that are a particular shape
and the shape moves across.
Now, to be clear, nothing actually moves across,
the cells are just turning on and off,
but the pattern itself, it's like a wave in the,
the pattern itself moves and those are called gliders.
So now you could be a reductionist about this
and you can say, look, there are no gliders.
All there is are the individual cells
and I can tell you precisely which cells
are gonna come on and off.
And the fact that you think you see gliders
is an epiphenomenon, it does nothing.
In the system, there are no gliders,
all it is is the rules.
And that isn't exactly wrong
because the physics of the world are quite clear,
but it's absolutely limiting in the following way.
If you don't believe in gliders,
you can predict the next state of whatever state
I set up in the game,
you can tell me exactly what's gonna happen next.
There's no escape from that level of determinism.
But here's what you won't ever do.
You won't ever build a Turing machine
made out of gliders as somebody did.
Somebody designed a pattern that does computations
by sending gliders back and forth.
If you don't believe in gliders, you're not gonna do that.
It closes off that level of inventiveness.
So looking, so a key thing about these higher levels
is that they enable you to have a more,
a richer relationship with the system going forward,
not just explain what happens backwards
after somebody's done the interesting work
of preparing a system for you.
Yeah, it's fascinating.
And the idea of a universal Turing machine
is essentially a computer
that can carry out any computation,
given enough time and enough resources.
So, and this is from individual cells,
linking on and off based on a super simple rule set
clicking forward all the time.
And the other, and I don't know if this is right,
but I like the difference between the side of determinism
looking backwards and looking forwards,
because in a sense,
it's the same deterministic mechanism going forwards.
Yeah, but for it to be useful,
we need to actually shortcut
whatever that deterministic computation is going to be
for us to be able to predict.
And to do that, we need to understand patterns
at different levels.
And sometimes we can't do it.
You know, sometimes the thing is computationally irreducible
such that the only way of finding out what's gonna happen
is to let the process run
or to create a simulation that's so perfect.
You basically just duplicated reality, right?
So, so even if it's conceptually deterministic in the future,
that doesn't necessarily help you anticipate
and the idea of these high level concepts,
as you said, give you useful tools
and your relation to these phenomena to, you know,
anticipate maybe the future and understand the past.
Yeah, and control what happens next.
So, so as a simple, and some of these systems,
the cool thing about living
and other kinds of systems of this type
is that they offer this kind of shortcut.
So, so here's a simple example.
Imagine that you had a rat,
then you wanted him to do a simple circus trick.
You know, I don't know, sit on a little bicycle or something.
One thing that you might do
from the level of chemistry and physics is you might say,
okay, so I want the muscles to move in this particular way.
I need to calculate which neuronal impulses
are gonna move exactly these muscles to do it.
I need to trace it back into the brain, figure out
all the circuits, how, how everything is gonna
propagate through the brain and figure out
which pixels on the retina I need to stimulate
with various images, you know, shown to the rat
to get him to get on the little bicycle.
Okay, if you try to actually calculate,
so that's completely computationally intractable.
If you try to do that, the sun will burn out
long before you actually get it done.
But there's an amazing thing here,
which is that you can just train the rat.
And that's because the rat has a particular
cognitive causal architecture that hides all that stuff.
And it takes on all the complexity of figuring out
how should my internal parts be arranged
in order for meaning,
meaning all the different neurotransmitters
and everything else, how should that all be arranged
in order to achieve a particular goal?
So the way you do this is you get the buy-in of the rat.
You make your goal, the rat's goal,
and then the rat does all the hard work for you.
You don't have to calculate all this stuff forward.
So one of the things that understanding these,
the large scale capabilities of your system
is critical in having a productive interaction,
a predictive, powerful productive interaction going forward.
And this is something that I think is the rate limiting
step right now for regenerative medicine.
Because in biology and biomedicine,
the standard operating assumption is that cells
are mechanical agents.
All the excitement is about the hardware.
So CRISPR, genomic editing, pathway rewiring,
everything is down at the level of hardware.
And that closes off a huge number
of potentially really powerful interventions
which we're doing in our lab like cellular training,
exploiting cellular problem solving,
because if you insist on viewing systems
from that low level perspective, not that it's wrong,
it's, I mean, that perspective is there.
It's there for you to take, but it limits you.
Reductionism is well-named.
It reduces what you can do.
It reduces your ability to really exploit
what's powerful about these systems.
And we are leaving so much on the table
by refusing to test out the tools,
the interaction tools that we have
and that have been used for,
this is why humans train to dogs and horses
for thousands of years knowing zero neuroscience.
It's because these systems make it accessible,
make that whole process, the goal rewriting process
so accessibly offered a beautiful interface,
that learning interface.
So cells and tissues do this too.
And if you refuse to test those hypotheses,
you leave a lot on the table.
Yeah, thank you.
So these ideas of sentience and consciousness
are very important to you still.
They're not things you discard,
but you refuse to say they're binary,
they're on or off switches.
If there are boundaries, they're fuzzy
and in your sense, there may not even be a boundary at all.
Ultimately, it may just be a question of degree
across every possible system,
but that doesn't destroy their meaningfulness
because there's a sense, I think,
with some people who have a very expansive view
of consciousness that they either reify it in some sense.
Again, they pull away from the physical
and that can lead people into, again,
back into some sort of mystical or soul-based ways
of thinking about it.
Or they declare it universal,
as some might say, you would,
because you're saying, well, it's a spectrum
and there's no real end to the spectrum.
So in a sense, maybe everything shares
in these characteristics to some degree,
but by declaring it universal,
they almost destroy what's meaningful about the concept.
Yeah.
And it sort of flattens out.
And I don't think you're doing either
because you're recognizing that
while you don't want it to make it binary,
there's still something distinctive
that you can describe in terms
of how we relate to these entities
and what these concepts can help us understand
about these entities, so it retains their meaning.
Yeah, it doesn't just, it's not just for explaining,
it is essential and useful.
My claim is that ideas about cognitive capacities
and unfamiliar contexts and unfamiliar embodiments
are essential, they're practical and they're essential.
This is not philosophy,
it's not some kind of feel-good mysticism.
My claim is, and it's a testable claim
that we've been testing for now for 20 years successfully,
is that it helps you do better in the empirical world.
I mean, the best thing I hope my lab does
is what I hope on their best day,
what I think we're doing is taking these ideas
from deep philosophy that people have argued
about for thousands of years
and bringing them to the bedside, to the clinic.
And these things, these ideas are empirically essential
to get the kind of outcomes that you want.
So that's, I don't know what more we can say about
why these ideas are real,
because by taking that inner perspective,
by asking what do cells remember?
What do they care about?
What is their, the size of their goals?
What are their goals?
These are questions that lead directly to therapeutics.
They lead to work in regenerative medicine, in cancer.
I don't know what more evidence we could have
that these things are critical.
And the other issue is that this idea
that if we start to apply the tools
that we use with cognitive systems,
we try to apply them elsewhere,
that that kind of leads to some sort of sliding creep
that devalues our own cognition and our own majesty.
That's a weird zero-sum game that I don't buy into.
I am in no way diminished by, I don't feel in any way
diminished by the idea that there are basically
an infinitude of other minds, highly diverse minds,
endless sentient forms throughout the universe,
and I think I'm certainly here on earth,
that are also having experiences that strive and suffer
and to various degrees.
I don't think that diminishes us at all.
It seems childish to me to somehow pin our,
the quality of what we have on the fact
that no one else has it, that just seems,
I don't know why we need to make that move.
I think what we have is essential.
I think understanding it is essential
so that we can scale it up.
I would like to scale my cognitive capacity.
I would like humanity to scale its cognitive capacity
more specifically, not just the intelligence,
but the radius of concern, of care, and of compassion.
I think we need to scale that up,
and you only do that if you understand
what it is that you're scaling.
You've done the perfect segue
into our second question about the ethics.
And what I might do is collapse these questions
of what matters and who matters just into one,
because in the big questions of ethics,
in a sense, there are a bunch of different choices.
You could take a nihilist route
where you sort of give up on the idea.
You could take a relativist approach
where you think about ethics as just sets of rules
that groups have negotiated
in a more transactional relational sense,
but there's no real truth of the matter
about whether those rules do good or bad.
You could follow a divine command theory,
going back to our early conversation
where you could turn to the Bible or the Quran
or some other source of supernatural authority
and go basically following those rules
or being obedient to that deity
is the ultimate arbiter of what's good or bad.
But if we put those aside,
and personally, I think we should,
whatever sort of moral philosophy we have,
whether it's about rights and day ontology
or whether it's about consequences and utilitarianism,
whether it's about feminist care ethic
where we have relations of care,
whether it's about virtues,
whatever the system is,
they do all seem to share a sort of common sense ethical call,
which is that somehow morality is about
whether and how we care about others.
And the obvious question then is,
okay, well, who gets to count as another?
That's really our who matters question.
And again, I and this podcast have a bias
because we tend to focus on this idea
of sentience as being the qualifier
in that for an entity to count as another,
they need to have their own perspective
within which they value their own experiences,
states, interests, and lives, I guess.
And because they value those things themselves,
that's the rationale for us also caring about them.
Because in a way,
if morality is about caring about others,
let's care about all of the others
that have their own perspective and so qualify as others.
So it's almost a little bit secular.
But anyway, that's I guess the starting point
from this centio-centric ethic
is to care about all of those others.
But I'd be really interested in your own
thinking about either the sort of foundations of ethics
when you're right, wrong, and good, and bad,
but also given what we've talked about so far,
how you think about moral scope and who gets to count
and what are the implications of that
and what journey have you gone on through your life so far
and thinking about those big questions?
Yeah, well, you know, it's somewhat beyond my pay grade
to try to lay out a global theory of ethics
for everybody else and so on.
That's, I won't try to do that,
but I will give you some thoughts
and how I think about these things.
Couple of things.
First, I think it's important to not pretend
that once we understand how sentient something is,
we are automatically good at treating it ethically.
Okay, so we know that's not the case.
We know factory farming, we all know pigs are,
pigs value their experience that they feel pain,
all that, and yet here we are.
So I think what we know and how we treat them
are not unfortunately the same thing,
but certainly we should have a principled way
of apportioning our relationships
with other beings of all different kinds.
I think that moving forward in assuming we all survive
the next few decades, I think moving forward
for the flourishing of humanity, of ecosystems,
of other beings on earth really requires
the deep lessons of diverse intelligence.
I think we need to understand
that there is no such thing as a magical standard human
that is the subject of all these philosophical arguments.
First of all, because evolutionarily,
we have a lineage going back to single cells.
So anything that you think about human responsibilities,
whatever, well, how about a human of 200,000 years ago?
How about 500,000 years ago?
Where was it?
How did it get here?
And so on.
So all of those things are continual.
The same thing is true of embryonic development.
You can ask how these things showed up in your journey
from an OSI to a being.
And all of the current discussions
of neuroatypical humans and the bodily modifications
that some people do, these things are going to be laughable
to the humans of the next couple of generations
in their minor sort of degree, their timid degree.
I mean, you're going to have humans
that are so modified in body and mind, cyborgs,
with various biological and technological changes
that it's going to be completely obvious.
Right now, we're kind of lulled into a fault.
Well, we have been for centuries,
lulled into a false sense of security
in the sense that it was easy.
Before you could say, does it speak?
If it speaks, then it's like us.
And even that humanity fails.
We were really terrible to each other
for much smaller differences.
But you could say, where did you come from?
Meaning, were you evolved or did you come from a factory?
And you could sort of knock on something.
And if you hear a metallic clanging sound, you say,
okay, we know how we're going to deal with this.
And if you heard some kind of soft and kind of a thud,
then that's something else.
Those categories were never any good,
but they served us kind of okay for a long time.
Those are gone.
Those are gone now.
They're going to be left in the dust
by the next couple of decades.
It's going to be essential that we learn
to have an ethical, I call it synthbiosis,
with other beings that are nowhere with us
on the tree of life.
They are modified in body and mind.
And what you look like and where you come from
simply cannot be the foundation
for how we're going to relate to each other.
And again, science fiction dealt with this a long time ago.
But somehow people today have lost sight of some of those
things, again, the current debates over AI,
it's very easy to say that language models
aren't this and aren't that.
And I'm not a defender of any particular view
of sentience and language models,
although more generally, I don't believe
we really know what we have once we've made it.
But the thing is those kind of language models,
they're so different from us that it's very easy
for people to say, oh, that's not the things
we want to care about.
What are you going to do when you're confronted
with humans that have 51% of their brain replaced
by various silicon appliances and they're linked together
with other people and also a few AIs
and some things like that.
So all of this is coming, we are going to have
to develop a better, better more principled
ethical frameworks for dealing with beings
that are just very alien in their construction.
And so that means that you need frameworks
to understand what do all these beings have in common?
And this is something that a few years ago,
I developed this notion of a cognitive light cone
to try to get away from the idea of what kind
of material embodiment you're in and instead focus on
what are the things you care about?
What is the size of the biggest goals you can pursue?
And regardless of your embodiment
or implementation or origin story.
And that kind of a thing at least begins to give us
a way to apportion our degree of moral concern
to beings that are capable of pursuing goals
and having various kinds of competencies
of navigating problem spaces and suffering
when those goals are not reached.
So for that reason, I think the diversity
of who and what we think counts is gonna be enormous
and this business of language models and so on,
it's a distraction from a much deeper puzzle.
Yeah, thank you.
And one of my previous guests, Josh Gellis
has done quite a lot of work in that space
about thinking about potential artificial intelligences
and sentience and so on.
And actually he's quite challenging
about the idea of sentience
because he's worried it's seen too much
as a sort of easily isolatable property
that we will then deny to, for example,
artificial intelligence and robots and so on.
And he prefers a much more relational approach,
which we can go back and forth about the risks
and the challenges of that.
But one thing I do agree with him and I think you
is that we're gonna be forced into working this stuff out
whether we like it or not.
And I think it will open up and radicalize
the way we think about what it is to be another
and that need to appreciate radically different perspective
from different beings.
But I was really glad you mentioned animal agriculture
because one of the frustrations with many people
who are involved in sentientism or the worldview
is that there's a frustration in the current zeitgeist
that people seem really excited about talking
about artificial intelligences and artificial sentience
and whether robots could ever feel something
and become moral patients.
But people seem to conveniently skip over the hundreds
of billions, if not trillions, if we include aquatic,
non-human sentient beings that we brutally exploit today.
And it's a really interesting case study
because I think when you take a naturalistic epistemology
and you understand the facts of what farming
and fishing are like, not just factory farming,
but all of it, and you take the ethical perspective
of the beings that are going through those processes,
it quite easily leads you to a point of quite extreme ethical
condemnation of what's going on in those situations.
But our society is trained us to think this so normal
that there's a brutal clash between, you know,
if you like the epistemology and the centiocentric ethic
and today's social norms.
Thank you for mentioning that.
I mean, so a couple of things there.
One is that, yeah, I mean, you're absolutely right,
of course, in talking about these AIs
and instead of other problems with the existing life forms
is a huge issue.
It also comes up when people say,
oh, wow, we're gonna make these high level intelligences
and who knows how they'll be raised
and what they're gonna do in the future.
I mean, you've heard of having kids, right?
Like, I'm just, you know, we do this all the time.
We have an enormous amount of guaranteed high level
intelligences that are created all the time
and a huge diversity of good and bad environments
that they're raised in.
We have a very limited ability to make sure
that they have a good embodied experience
and are aligned with our values
and some of them go on to do wonderful things
and some of them go on to, you know, to do horrible things.
That's already an issue.
We already have that.
The thing with, so these, in many ways,
these problems are not new problems brought on by AI.
They're perennial existential problems
that humanity has faced forever, you know,
in terms of being supplanted by the next generation
that finds your values, you know, irrelevant
and how much control do you want
over how your neighbor is raising their kids
and all these kinds of things.
This has been with us for the longest time.
The one unique thing about AI intelligences, though,
is that they can be copied in a much easier fashion.
They can be reproduced and copied
in a much easier fashion than real animals.
And I think that now, while there are some good debates
about whether something that actually can be copied
even counts in this case.
So, you know, there's a few arguments
that that's not an issue, but I'm not sure yet.
And I think that for that reason,
because there's just gonna be such an uncountable number
of intelligences of the software variety,
whether embodied or not,
it's something that we need to consider, you know.
And I'm hopeful that with the advent
of different ways to grow food proteins and so on,
we're gonna eventually completely do away
with animal farming and so on.
But the creation of novel synthetic organisms
is only gonna increase.
And I mean, you know, digital or embodied or not.
So that's, you know, I think we need to focus
on both sides of that equation.
Yeah, I agree, agree.
And I don't know if you're thinking on that
as led you down the path of boycotting animal agriculture
and its product so far,
or whether I can help you offline on that path, but...
Yeah, why don't we talk offline?
Sounds good, sounds good.
So the other ethical question I wanted to touch on with you
is how that bears on your own work in the lab,
because you do work with a variety
of different entities, animal and non.
How does that play in?
Because you're into your choices,
because you're working with some very simple organisms
and you're working with more complex organisms as well
that would have richer experiences.
How do you think about that?
Again, I won't take you through it in depth,
but I'm interested in sort of simple perspective
you take on animals and research.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, first, just to say that animal use and research
is incredibly stringently regulated.
So in order to do the things
that somebody would do when they go fishing for an afternoon,
we have three months of paperwork and oversight
by veterinarians and ethicists and all that.
So there's a huge amount of oversight,
as there should be, I'm not in full favor of that.
But this is something I think that's really important
and it gets to this issue of what matters.
A lot of folks see scientific ethics in the following way.
Everything's great and you scientists
better not screw it up, right?
So here's a long list of things we don't want you to do.
We don't want this, we don't want that.
Don't make things worse.
Now that could, I suppose could have been a viable worldview
when people believe that our current world
is in some way set up in the right way for us.
In other words, it is the best possible world.
Everything is great now, now don't screw it up.
What we now know is that that's not the world we live in.
We are the process of meandering evolutionary path.
Evolution, as far as I can tell,
does not optimize for any of our values.
It doesn't optimize for happiness,
for intelligence, for any of that stuff.
No, we are where evolution dumped us
with all of our ridiculous susceptibilities
to bacteria, viruses, lower back pain,
stray cosmic rays that might have hit a DNA molecule
during development,
and now your potential is radically limited.
When you broaden that scope out
to all of the potentially sentient beings,
that just becomes even starker, right?
If there is some tealoss to this universe,
it's a pretty brutal one, yeah.
It is, it is, there's no doubt.
And so I'm not even a clinician,
but the amount of emails that I get every day
from people with the most unbelievable examples
of biomedical suffering is just incredible.
So I think it is utter moral cowardice
to focus on what we shouldn't do.
And as opposed to our duty now that we have,
for the first time, I guess, on Earth,
we have the ability to actually rationally approach
these matters to try to guarantee a better embodiment
for sentient beings on Earth.
The number of people that are suffering
because of our ignorance,
because we don't know what to do,
and also because of our timidity
and our unwillingness to take responsibility for,
we are the ones that are now,
it is on us now to improve this for people.
And not just people, for ecosystems,
for other beings, for just the amount of ignorance
and inaction that is letting a sentient being suffer
worldwide is incredible.
And so I take animal use ethics extremely seriously,
but I think to the extent that it is our responsibility
to relieve the suffering worldwide, science has to go on.
And we have to do experiments that are going to enable us
to improve embodied experience for all.
This is just, the Buddhists have this concept
of an inauspicious birth.
And it's this idea that in one of your many lifetimes,
you're born in a body during which you just can't make
progress towards enlightenment.
I think at this point, I know this is a controversial view,
but I think basically right now,
every birth is an inauspicious birth.
All of us are limited by the vagaries of random mutation
and selection and all these dumb things and viruses,
all these dumb things that have no one's best interest.
And I think in the future,
sometimes I sort of imagine this dialogue that children
in the future are going to have with their teachers,
the kind of thing where you tell the kids,
yeah, we wrote on chalkboards and we didn't have cell phones
and like, what?
And so they're gonna say,
you're telling me you would just have to stay
in whatever body you randomly got.
And if you had some sort of defect,
you just have to live that way.
And if the IQ and the lifespan that you were born with
wasn't enough to fulfill your goals, that's it.
You just have to, you know, that was your bad luck.
That will be unthinkable to a modern humans going forward.
And in a way, that's a beautiful link
into the final question, which is how do we make
a better future, which is what are the promises
of these types of research and thinking?
Yeah, I mean, I think ultimately
from the kind of the bigger picture for me
is freedom of embodiment.
I think that every sentient being should have the,
and we need to, we should offer assistance
in the same way that we offer assistance
to beings via education, via support of every kind.
We should be in a position to offer the ability
for sentient beings to have better embodiments
to fulfill their potential, their goals and so on.
Practically speaking, what that requires
is complete control over growth and form.
It means that we need to really be able to direct
what it is that cells build.
Now, right now that just looks like regenerative medicine
in the sense that if we knew how to get cells
to build specifics as anatomical structures,
then birth defects, traumatic injuries, cancer, aging,
degenerative disease, all these things would go away
if we could communicate our goals to groups of cells.
And this is something that we and some other labs
are working on now is this kind of, you know,
this idea of an anatomical compiler
where you can just specify the shape
of the structure that you want
and it gives stimuli to cells to make them grow exactly that.
And again, linking to what you said before,
this is different from the classical ideas
of genetic engineering or, you know,
what you do with CRISPR and so on.
This is a different mode of engagement with a system.
Yeah, the goal is similar because certainly people,
you know, at the time that genetics was getting off
the ground, this is a vision that people had then too,
that if we understood the genetics,
we could control the shape.
I think we have a much more practical path to it
because I think the genetics specifies the hardware
that every cell gets to have, so the proteins.
But as we know from the advances of computer science
and information technology programming
at the level of hardware, while possible, it's really hard.
And if you have good hardware that's actually reprogrammable
and offers high level interfaces, you know,
you might say APIs, which I think is exactly
what it offers, then you can do this in a much better way,
specifically by honoring the agency of the cells and tissues
and being a collaborator with them.
We don't micromanage our cells and tissues here.
I mean, in my group, we basically collaborate with them
and modulate their goals and take advantage
of their competencies, their problem-solving capacities,
their memories and so on.
So I think that is a way to move the field forward
much faster.
I think that CRISPR and those kinds of things
are going to flatten out soon because after you've picked
the low-hanging fruit of single gene diseases,
the next question is gonna be, well, what genes do you add
to make the changes, the anatomical changes do you want?
And development's not reversible in that way.
You can't just figure out what, in any easy way,
what to edit.
So I think taking advantage of the interfaces
that cells use to hack each other is critical.
But initially that just looks like reprogramming tumors
and regrowing limbs and growing new organs and so on,
all of which by the way we've done here
in various model systems.
But ultimately it leads to freedom of embodiment.
It means that if you want to have a different embodiment
you can, and if you decide you wanna change it,
you should be able to do that too.
There is no reason any of us should be stuck
in the embodiment that we got,
including IQ and lifespan and all those things.
Because those things were not chosen
with your welfare in mind.
They were a long process shaped by forces
that don't honor any of our values.
Yeah, thank you.
It's quite a vision.
And it will lead to some of the things I've touched on
with some of the people who are interested
in the transhumanist space like David Pearson
and so on as well.
And again, it's that freedom of embodiment
for human and non-human sentient beings
that is, to put it a different way,
shaped by their own values and aspirations
and experiences rather than constrained by inherited biology
and freeing from some of those constraints.
But some of my audience will love that sort of vision
and see the potential.
Others will be nervous about classic problem
of human hubris and intervening
where we're not really ready to intervene.
What do you think of the risk profile
and the approach you're taking?
Are there risks we need to watch out for
that we need to build in?
For sure, there are going to be risks,
but I'm pushing in the very opposite direction
of the hubris.
My argument isn't that everything is great.
And then in an effort to make it even better,
we're going to screw things up.
And we may screw some things up.
It's pretty inevitable.
My argument is that things are so bad right now
for so many that it is a moral imperative.
We do not have the luxury of saying,
don't do this.
Inaction is a choice too.
Yeah, exactly right.
The opportunity cost of doing nothing is massive.
It's absolutely massive.
And this idea that we don't have to do anything
because we can let things go how they are now,
that's simply not acceptable.
That opportunity cost is too huge.
So yes, we're going to make mistakes,
but anybody who, we know from our personal lives,
if the thing that you are most optimizing
is to never make a mistake,
what's going to be the value of your life
and all the huffing and puffing
that we do during our brief time here?
What's the goal?
If that's, I mean, obviously you want to minimize
making mistakes, but there should be a constructive,
I believe there should be a constructive element to this
where you have a purpose to elevate and help others.
And that is not going to happen by focusing
on the things we shouldn't do.
And just more broadly, I ask people who focus
on this negative risk-based perspective,
what does humanity look like 100 years from now?
Are we still getting lower back pain and bad knees
and dying into our 80s once we've gotten this
a little bit of wisdom under our belts?
Like that's it.
And if you happen to, you know,
some cosmic ray or something hits one of your chromosomes,
then are we still living like that?
I mean, I can't imagine.
I just, that would seem like such a waste
of this incredible gift of intelligence
and compassion that we have
that it seems ludicrous to me.
But anybody, I think people should spend time
painting the future that they do want, you know?
Everybody's already paid, you know,
written down all the things they don't want.
That's fine.
Now, paint me a picture of what do you want?
Where should we be 100 years from now?
Yeah, thank you.
I'm a sucker for a bit of utopian thinking.
I know you're a fellow sci-fi fan as well.
And some people will use that as a way of discarding
some of the ideas you're working on and saying,
it's just sci-fi, but I think sci-fi's got a lot to teach you.
So I often find better philosophy in sci-fi
than I do in actual philosophy.
And one of the things about sci-fi is it's very good
at sort of intuitive sentientist stance
because it's so common and just natural
and even unthinking, most science fiction stories
to recognize the salience of sentient beings
that are radically different from ourselves.
And I think there's a lesson there we can take too.
So yeah.
For sure.
And you know, sci-fi, to me, if somebody says,
this is just sci-fi, my question is very simple.
Are you saying it's impossible
or are you just saying it's gonna take a while?
Like that's a certain things that maybe,
I don't know what those would be,
but there are certain things
that may be physically impossible, fine.
Everything else is just a time to,
then we're just quibbling over a timetable.
Everything that's possible is gonna be done.
And there's dystopian sci-fi,
but there's also utopian sci-fi.
So yeah, like I say, paint those pictures.
Well, it's been an inspirational conversation.
Thank you so much for talking to me today, Mike.
What's the best way of people following you,
finding out more about your work?
I'll include links in the show notes, of course,
but where's the main place you point people?
Yeah, the official lab website
that has all of the kind of peer reviewed hard stuff
is darmike11.org, one word, darmike11.org.
The more speculative, you know,
the photography, the pros and all that stuff,
and so just some thoughts that I wouldn't,
you know, I wouldn't put in a scientific paper
is at thoughtforms.life.
It's a blog called thoughtforms.life.
And I'm on Twitter at at darmike11.
Yeah, that's awesome.
Thank you.
And I'll follow up with some vegan tips offline.
Cool, that would be great.
I appreciate it.
All right, well, thank you so much
for being a guest on Sentientism.
It's been a pleasure, Mike.
Take care, enjoy the rest of your day.
Thank you, you too.
Please stay in touch.
