What will be at stake will not just be equal products, but whether the liberal democracy
survives, whether the CCP survives, what the world order for the next century will be.
The CCP is going to have an all-out effort to infiltrate American AI labs, billions of dollars,
thousands of people. The CCP is going to try to outbuild us. People don't realize how intense
state-level espionage can be. When we have literal superintelligence on our cluster,
and they can stuxnet the Chinese data centers, you really think they'll be a private company,
and the government would be like, oh my god, what is going on? I do think it is incredibly
important that these clusters are in the United States. I mean, would you do the Manhattan Project
in the UAE, right? 2023 was the sort of moment for me where it went from kind of AGI as a sort of
theoretical abstract thing, and you'd make the models to like, I see it, I feel it. I can see the
cluster where it's strained on, like the rough combination of algorithms, the people, like how
it's happening. And I think, you know, most of the world is not, you know, most of the people feel it
are like right here, you know, right? Okay, today I'm chatting with my friend, Leopold Aschenbrenner.
He grew up in Germany, graduated valedictorian of Columbia when he was 19,
and then he had a very interesting Gaffier, which we'll talk about, and then he was on the
OpenAI Superalignment team, made a recent piece, and now he, with some anchor investments from
Patrick and John Collison and Daniel Gross and Nat Friedman, is launching an investment firm.
So Leopold, I know you're off to a slow start, but life is long, and I wouldn't worry about it
too much. You'll make up for it in due time. But thanks for coming on the podcast.
Thank you. You know, I first discovered your podcast when your best episode had, you know,
like a couple of hundred views. And so it's just been, it's been amazing to follow your
trajectory. And it's a delight to be on. Yeah, yeah. Well, I think in the shelter in Trenton
episode, I mentioned that a lot of the things I've learned about AI, I've learned from talking with
them. And the third part of this triumvirate, probably the most significant in terms of the
things that I've learned about AI has been you will go out of the stuff on the record now.
Great. Okay, first thing I had to get on record, tell me about the trillion dollar cluster.
But by the way, I should mention, so the context of this podcast is today, there's,
you're releasing a series called Situational Awareness. We're going to get into it. First
question about that is tell me about the trillion dollar cluster. Yeah. So, you know,
unlike basically most things that have come out of Silicon Valley recently, you know, AI is kind of
this industrial process. You know, the next model doesn't just require, you know, some code,
it's, it's, it's building a giant new cluster. You know, now it's building giant new power plants,
you know, pretty soon it's going to be building giant new fabs. And, you know, since that should
be tea, this kind of extraordinary sort of techno capital acceleration has been set into motion.
I mean, basically, you know, exactly a year ago today, you know, Nvidia had their first kind of
blockbuster earnings call, right, where it like went out 25% after hours and everyone was like,
oh my god, AI, it's a thing. You know, I mean, I think within a year, you know, you know, and
Nvidia, Nvidia data center revenue has gone from like, you know, a few billion a quarter to like,
you know, 20, 25 billion a quarter now and, you know, continue to go up, like, you know,
big tech capex, skyrocketing. And, you know, it's funny because it's both there's this sort of,
this kind of crazy scramble going on, but in some sense, it's just the sort of continuation of
straight lines on a graph, right? There's this kind of like long run trend, basically almost a
decade of sort of training compute of the sort of largest AI systems growing by about, you know,
half an order of magnitude, you know, 0.5 booms a year. And you just kind of play that forward,
right? So, you know, GPT-4, you know, rumored or reported to have finished pre-training in 2022,
you know, the sort of cluster size there was rumored to be about, you know, 25,000 H100s,
you know, sorry, A100s on semi-analysis, you know, that's roughly, you know, if you do the
math on that, it's maybe like a $500 million cluster, you know, it's very roughly 10 megawatts.
And, you know, just play that forward half a new year, right? So, then 2024, that's a cluster,
that's, you know, 100 megawatts, that's like 100,000 H100 equivalents, you know, that's,
you know, costs in the billions, you know, play it forward, you know, two more years, 2026,
that's a cluster, that's a gigawatt, you know, that's sort of a large nuclear reactor size,
it's like the power of the Hoover Dam, you know, that costs tens of billions of dollars,
that's like a million H100 equivalents, you know, 2028, that's a cluster, that's 10 gigawatts,
right? That's more power than kind of like most U.S. states. That's, you know, like 10 million H100
equivalents, you know, costs hundreds of billions of dollars. And then 2030, trillion-dollar cluster,
100 gigawatts, over 20% of U.S. electricity production, you know, 100 million H100 equivalents.
And that's just the training cluster, right? That's like the one largest training cluster,
you know, and then there's more inference GPUs as well, right? Most of, you know, once there's
products, most of them are going to be inference GPUs. And so, you know, U.S. power
production has barely grown for like, you know, decades, and now we're really in for a ride.
So, I mean, when I had Zuck on the podcast, he was claiming, not a plateau, per se, but
that AI progress would be bottlenecked by specifically this constraint on energy,
and specifically like, oh, gigawatt data centers are going to build another three gorgeous dam or
something. I know that there's companies, according to public reports, who are planning
things on the scale of a gigawatt data center. 10 gigawatt data center, who's going to be able
to build that? I mean, the 100 gigawatt center, like a state, where are you getting,
are you going to pump that into one physical data center? How is this going to be possible?
Yeah, you know. What is Zuck missing? I mean, you know, I don't know. I think to 10 gigawatt,
you know, like six months ago, you know, 10 gigawatt was the taco town. I mean, I think,
I feel like now, you know, people have moved on, you know, 10 gigawatt is happening. I mean,
I know there's the information report on OpenAI and Microsoft planning a $100 billion
cluster. Is that the gigawatt or is that the 10 gigawatt? I mean, I don't know. But, you know,
if you try to like map out how expensive would the 10 gigawatt cluster be, you know, that's
maybe a couple hundred billion. So it's sort of on that scale. And they're planning it. They're
working on it. You know, so it's not just sort of my crazy take. I mean, AMD, AMD, I think,
forecasted a $400 billion AI accelerator market by 27. You know, I think it's, you know, and AI
accelerators are only part of the expenditures. It's sort of, you know, I think sort of a trillion
dollars of sort of like total AI investment by 2027 is sort of like, we're very much in track
on it. I think the trillion dollar cluster is going to take a bit more sort of acceleration.
But, you know, we saw how much sort of chat GPT unleashed, right? And so like every generation,
you know, the models are going to be kind of crazy and people, it's going to shift the
overtune window. And then, and then, you know, obviously the revenue comes in, right? So these
are forward looking investments. The question is, do they pay off? Right? And so if we sort of
estimated the, you know, the GPT four cluster at around 500 million, by the way, that's, that's
sort of a common mistake people make is they say, you know, people say like a hundred million
dollars before, but that's just the rental price, right? They're like, ah, you rent the cluster
for three months. But it's, you know, if you're building the biggest cluster, you got to like,
you got to build the whole cluster, you got to pay for the whole cluster, you can't just rent it
for three. But I mean, the really, you know, once, once you're trying to get into the sort of
hundreds of billions, eventually you got to get to like a hundred billion a year. I mean,
I think this is where it gets really interesting for the big tech companies, right? Because like,
their revenues are on order, you know, hundreds of billions, right? So it's like 10 billion fine,
you know, and it'll pay off the, you know, 2024 size training cluster. But, you know, really
when sort of big tech, it'll be gangbusters is a hundred billion a year. And so the question is
sort of how feasible is a hundred billion a year from AI revenue? And, you know, it's a lot more
than right now. But I think, you know, if you sort of believe in the trajectory of the AI systems,
as I do, which we'll probably talk about, it's not that crazy, right? So there's, I think there's
like 300 million, you know, ish Microsoft office subscribers, right? And so they have co-pilot
now and I don't know what they're selling it for. But, you know, suppose you sold some sort of AI
add-on for a hundred bucks a month, and you sold that to, you know, a third of Microsoft office
subscribers subscribe to that. That'd be a hundred billion right there. You know, a hundred dollars
a month is, you know, a lot. That's a lot. Yeah. It's a lot. It's a lot. For a third of office
subscribers. Yeah. But it's, but it's, you know, for the average dollars worker, it's like a few
hours of productivity a month. And it's, you know, kind of like, you have to be expecting pretty lame
AI progress to not hit like, you know, some few hours of productivity a month of, of, of, of, yeah.
Okay, sure. So let's assume all this. Yeah. What happens in the next few years in terms of
what is the one gigawatt training, the AI that's trained on the one gigawatt data center? What
can it do with the one on the 10 gigawatt data center? Just map out the next few years of AI
progress for me. Yeah. I think probably the sort of 10 gigawatt range is sort of my best guess
for when you get the sort of true AGI. I mean, yeah, I think it's sort of like one gigawatt
data center. And again, I think actually compute is overrated and we're going to talk about that.
But what we will talk about compute right now. So, you know, I think so 25, 26, we're going to get
models that are, you know, basically smarter than most college graduates. I think sort of the
practice, a lot of the economic usefulness, I think really depends on sort of, you know,
sort of on hobbling. Basically, it's, you know, the models are kind of, you know,
they're smart, but they're limited, right? They're, you know, there's chat bot, you know,
and things like being able to use a computer, things like being able to do kind of like a
genetic long horizon tasks. Yeah. And then I think by 27, 28, you know, if you extrapolate the trends
and, you know, we'll talk about that more later. And I talked about in the series, I think we hit,
you know, basically, you know, like as smart as the smartest experts, I think the on hobbling
trajectory kind of points to, you know, looks much more like an agent than a chat bot and much
more almost like basically a drop in remote worker, right? So it's not like, I think basically, I
mean, I think this is the sort of question on the economic returns. I think a lot of the,
a lot of the intermediate AI systems could be really useful, but, you know, it actually just
takes a lot of slap to integrate them, right? Like GVD4, you know, whatever, 4.5, you know,
probably there's a lot you could do with them in a business use case. But, you know, you really
got to change your workflows to make them useful. And it's just like, there's a lot of, you know,
it's a very Tyler Cowan-esque take. It takes a long time to diffuse. You know, it's like, you
know, we're an SF and so we missed that or whatever. But I think in some sense, you know,
the way a lot of these systems won't be integrated is, is you kind of get this sort of sonic boom
where it's, you know, the sort of intermediate systems could have done it, but it would have taken
slap. And before you do the slap to integrate them, you get much more powerful systems, much
more powerful systems that are sort of on hobbled. And so they're this agent and there's drop in
remote worker. And, you know, and then you're kind of interacting with them like a coworker,
right? You know, you can take do zoom calls with them and you're slacking them. And you're like,
ah, can you do this project? And then they go off and they, you know, go away for a week and write
a first draft and get feedback on them and, you know, run tests on their code. And then they come
back and then you see it and you tell them a little bit more things or, you know, and that'll
be much easier to integrate. And so, you know, it might be that actually you need a bit of overkill
to make the sort of transition easy and to really harvest the games.
What do you mean by the overkill? Overkill on the model capabilities?
Yeah. Yeah. So basically intermediate models could do it, but it would take a lot of slap.
I see. And so then, you know, the like, actually it's just the drop in remote worker kind of AGI
that can automate, you know, cognitive tasks that actually just ends up kind of like,
you know, basically it's your like, you know, the intermediate models would have made the
software engineer more productive, but, you know, will the software engineer adopted? And then the,
you know, 27 model is, well, you know, you just don't need the software engineer. You can literally
interact with it like a software engineer and it'll do the work of a software engineer.
So the last episode I did was with John Shulman. Yeah. And I was asking about basically this and
one of the questions I asked is, we have these models that have been coming out in the last year
and none of them seem to have significantly surpassed GPT-4 and certainly not in the
agentic way in which they are interacting with as a co-worker, you know, the brag that they
got a few extra points on MMLU or something. And even GPT-4.0, it's cool that they can talk
like Scarlett Johansson or something, but like... And honestly, I'm going to use that.
Oh, I guess not anymore, not anymore. Okay, but the whole co-worker thing. So
this is going to be a wrong question, but you can address it in any order. But
the, it makes sense to me why they'd be good at answering questions. They have a bunch of
data about how to complete Wikipedia text or whatever. Where is the equivalent training
data that enables it to understand what's going on in the Zoom call? How does this connect with
what they were talking about in the Slack? What is the cohesive project that they're going after
based on all this context that I have? Where is that training data coming from?
Yeah. So I think a really key question for sort of AI progress in the next few years is sort of
how hard is it to do, sort of unlock the test time compute overhang? So, you know, right now,
GPT-4.0 answers a question and, you know, it kind of can do a few hundred tokens of kind of chain
of thought. And that's already a huge improvement, right? Sort of like, this is a big on hobbling
before, you know, answer a math question, it's just shotgun. And, you know, if you try to kind of
like answer a math question by saying the first thing that came to mind, you know, you wouldn't
be very good. So, you know, GP-4 thinks for a few hundred tokens. And, you know, if I thought for a
few hundred, you know, if I think at like a hundred tokens a minute, and I thought for a few minutes-
You're thinking much more than a hundred tokens.
I don't know. If I thought for like a hundred tokens a minute, you know, it's like what GP-4
does, maybe it's like, you know, it's equivalent to me thinking for three minutes or whatever, right?
You know, suppose GP-4 could think for millions of tokens, right? That's sort of plus four rooms,
plus four days of magnitude on test time compute, just like on one problem.
It can't do it right now. It kind of gets stuck, right? Like write some code, even if, you know,
you can do a little bit of iterative debugging, but eventually just kind of like,
it can't, it kind of gets stuck in something, it can't correct its errors and so on.
And, you know, in a sense, there's this big overhang, right? And like other areas of ML,
you know, there's this great paper on AlphaGo, right? Where you can trade off train time and
test time compute. And if you can use, you know, four rooms, more test time compute, that's almost
like, you know, a three and a half room bigger model. Just because, again, like you can, you know,
if a hundred tokens a minute, a few million tokens, that's a few months of sort of working time.
There's a lot more you can do in a few months of working time than, and then right now. So the
question is, how hard is it to unlock that? And I think the, you know, the sort of short
timelines AI world is if it's not that hard. And the reason it might not be that hard is that,
you know, there's only really a few extra tokens you need to learn, right? You need to kind of
learn error correction tokens, the tokens where you're like, ah, I think I made a mistake. Let me
think about that again. You need to learn the kind of planning tokens. That's kind of like, I'm going
to start by making a plan. Here's my plan of attack. And then I'm going to write a draft. And I'm
going to like, now I'm going to critique my draft. I'm going to think about it. And so it's not,
it's not things that models can do right now. But, you know, the question is how hard is that?
And in some sense, also, you know, there's sort of two paths to agents, right? You know,
when Cholto was on your podcast, you know, he talked about kind of scaling,
leading to more nines of reliability. And so that's one path. I think the other path is
this sort of like unhobbling path where you, it needs to learn this kind of like system to
process. And if it can learn this sort of system to process, it can just use kind of millions of
tokens and think for them and be cohesive and be coherent. You know, one analogy. So when you drive,
here's an analogy, when you drive, right? Okay, you're driving. And, you know, most of the time,
you're kind of an autopilot, right? You're just kind of driving and you're doing well. And then,
but sometimes you hit like a weird construction zone or a weird intersection, you know, and then I
sometimes like, you know, my passenger seat, my girlfriend, I'm kind of like, ah, be quiet for
a moment. I need to like figure out what's going on, right? And that's sort of like, you know,
you go from autopilot to like the system to is jumping in and you're thinking about how to do
it. And so the scaling scaling is improving that system one autopilot. And I think it's sort of,
it's the brute force way to get to kind of agents who just improve that system. But if you can get
that system to working, then, you know, I think you could like quite quickly jump, you know,
to sort of this like more identified, you know, test time, compute, overhang is unlocked.
What's the reason to think that this is an easy win in the sense that, oh, you just get the,
there's like some loss function that easily enables you to train it to enable the system to
thinking. Yeah, there's not a lot of animals that have system to thinking, you know, it like took
a long time for evolution to give us system to thinking. Yeah, pre-training it like, listen,
I get it, you got like trillions of tokens of internet text, I get that like, yeah, you like
match that and you get all these, all this free training capabilities. What's the reason
to think that this is an easy and hobbling? Yeah, so, okay, a bunch of things. So
first of all, free training is magical, right? And it's, and it's, and it gave us this huge
advantage for, for, for models of general intelligence, because, you know, you could,
you just predict the next token, but predicting the next token, I mean, it's sort of a common
misconception. But what it does is lets this model learn these incredibly rich representations,
right? Like these sort of representation learning properties are the magic of deep
learning. You have these models, and instead of learning just kind of like, you know, whatever,
statistical artifacts or whatever, it learns sort of these models of the world. You know,
that's also why they can kind of like generalize, right? Because it learned the right representations.
And so, you know, you train these models and you have this sort of like raw bundle of capabilities
that's really useful. It's sort of this almost unformed raw mass. And sort of the unhobbling
we've done over sort of like GP2 to GP4 was, was you kind of took this sort of like raw mass,
and then you like RLHF it into a really good chat bot. And that was a huge win, right? Like,
you know, going, going, you know, an RL, you know, in the original, I think it's truck GPT
paper, you know, RLHF versus non RLHF model, it's like 100x model size win on sort of human
preference rating, you know, it started to be able to do like simple chain of thought and so on.
But you still have a disadvantage of all these kind of like raw capabilities. And I think there's
still like a huge amount that you're not doing with them. And by the way, I think the sort of
this pre training advantage is also sort of the difference to robotics, right? Where I think
robotics, you know, you know, I think people used to say it was a hardware problem, but I think
the hardware stuff is getting solved. But the thing we have right now is you don't have this
huge advantage of being able to bootstrap yourself with pre training, you don't have all this sort
of unsupervised learning you can do, you have to start right away with the sort of RL self play
and so on. Alright, so now the question is why, you know, why might some of this unhobbling and
RL and so on work? And again, there's sort of this advantage of bootstrapping, right? So I, you
know, your Twitter bio is being pre trained, right? You're actually not being pre trained
anymore. You're not being pre trained anymore. You are pre trained in like grade school and high
school. At some point you transition to be able being able to like learn by yourself. Right?
You weren't able to do that in elementary school. I don't know middle school probably high school
maybe when sort of started some guidance. You know, college, you know, you're smart, you can kind
of teach yourself. And then sort of models are just starting to enter that regime. Right? And so
it's sort of like, it's a little bit probably a little bit more scaling. And then you got to
figure out what goes on top and it won't be trivial, right? So a lot of a lot of deep learning is
sort of like, you know, it sort of seems very obvious in retrospect. And there's sort of this
some obvious cluster of ideas, right? There's sort of some kind of like thing that seems a little
dumb, but there's kind of works, but there's a lot of details you have to get right. So I'm not
saying this, you know, we're going to get this, you know, next month or whatever, I think it's
going to take a while to like really figure out a while for you is like half a year or something.
I don't know. I think it's between six months and three years, you know. But you know, I think
it's possible. And I think there's, you know, I think, and this is, I think it's also very related
to the sort of issue of the data wall. But I mean, I think the, you know, one intuition on the sort
of like learning, learning, learning by yourself, right, is sort of pre-training is kind of the
words are flying by, right? You know, and, and, or it's like, you know, the teacher is lecturing
to you. And the models, you know, the words are flying by, you know, they're taking, they're
just getting a little bit from it. But that's sort of not what you do when you learn from yourself,
right? When you learn by yourself, you know, so you're reading a dense math textbook,
you're not just kind of like skimming through it once, you know, you wouldn't learn that much
from it. I mean, some word cells just give them through reading, reread and reread the math textbook,
and then they memorize, you know, like, you just repeated the data, then they memorize.
What you do is you kind of like, you read a page, kind of think about it, you have some internal
monologue going on, you have a conversational study buddy, you try a practice problem, you know,
you fail a bunch of times. At some point, it clicks, and you're like, this made sense,
then you read a few more pages. And so we've kind of bootstrapped our way to being, being able to
do that now with models, or like just starting to be able to do that. And then the question is,
you know, being able to like, read it, think about it, you know, try problems. And the question is,
can you, you know, all this sort of self place, synthetic data, RL is kind of like making that
thing work. So basically translate, translate translating like in context, like right now,
there's like in context learning, right, super sample efficient. There's that, you know, in the
Gemini paper, right, it just like learns a language in context. And then you're pre training, not at
all sample efficient. But you know, what humans do is they kind of like, they do in context learning,
you read a book, you think about it until eventually it clicks. But then you somehow
distill that back into the weights. And in some sense, that's sort of like what RL is trying to
do. And like when RL is super finicky, but when RL works, RL is kind of magical, because it's sort
of the best possible data for the model. It's like when you try a practice problem, and you know,
and then you fail, and at some point you kind of figure it out in a way that makes sense to you,
that's sort of like the best possible data for you, because like the way you would have solved the
problem. And that's sort of, that's what RL is. Rather than just, you know, you kind of read how
somebody else solved the problem and doesn't, you know, initially click. Yeah, by the way, if that
takes sounds familiar, because it was like part of the question I asked on showman, that goes to
illustrate the thing I said in the intro, where like a bunch of the things I've learned about AI,
just like, we do these dinners before the interviews, and I'm like, oh, what should I ask
on showman? What should I ask Dario? Okay, suppose this is the way things go, and we get these
in hobblings. Yeah. And the scaling, right? So it's like, you have this baseline, just enormous
force of scaling, right? Where it's like GP2 to GP4, you know, GP2, it could kind of like, it was
amazing, right? It could string together plausible senses. But you know, it could, it could barely
do anything. It's kind of like preschooler. And then GP4 is, you know, it's writing code, it like,
you know, can do hard math. And so it's sort of like smart high school. And so this big jump,
and you know, in sort of the essay series, I go through and kind of count the order's magnitude
of compute scale up with algorithmic progress. And so sort of scaling alone, you know, sort of by
2728 is going to do another kind of preschool to high school jump on top of GP4. And so that'll
already be just like at a per token level, just incredibly smart, they'll get you some more reliability.
And then you add these on hobblings that make it look much less like a chat bot, more like this
agent, like a drop in remote worker. And, you know, that's when things really get gone.
Okay, yeah. I want to ask you more questions about this. I think, yeah, let's zoom out. Okay,
so suppose you're right about this. Yeah. And I guess you this is because of the 2027 cluster,
we've got 10 gigawatt, 2027 10 gigawatt something 28 is the 10 gigawatt. Okay, so you'll be pulled
for it. And so I guess that's like 5.5 level by 2027, like whatever that's called, right?
What does the world look like at that point? You have these remote workers who can replace people.
What is the reaction to that in terms of the economy, politics, geopolitics?
Yeah, so, you know, I think 2023 was kind of a really interesting year to experience as somebody
who is like, you know, really following the ice stuff where, you know, before that,
what were you doing in 2023? I mean, open AI. And, and, and, you know, kind of went, you know,
I mean, I was, I was been thinking about this and, you know, like talking to a lot of people,
you know, in the years before, and it was this kind of weird thing, you know, you almost didn't
want to talk about AI or AGI, you know, it's kind of a dirty word, right? And then 2023, you know,
people saw chat, GPT for the first time in such a before, and it just like exploded, right? It
triggered this kind of like, you know, you know, a huge sort of capital expenditures from all these
firms and, and, and, and, you know, the explosion of revenue from NVIDIA and so on. And, you know,
things have been quiet since then. But, you know, the next thing has been in the oven. And I sort
of expect sort of every generation, these kind of like G forces to intensify, right? It's like,
people see the models. There's like, you know, people haven't counted them. So they're going to
be surprised. And it'll be kind of crazy. And then, you know, revenue is going to accelerate,
you know, suppose you do hit the 10 billion, you know, end of this year, suppose it like just
continues on this sort of doubling trajectory of, you know, like every six months of revenue
doubling, you know, it's like, you're not actually that far from 100 billion, you know,
maybe that's like 26. And so, you know, at some point, you know, like, you know,
sort of what happened to NVIDIA is going to happen to big tech, you know, like their stocks,
their, you know, that's going to explode. And I mean, I think a lot more people are going to feel
it, right? I mean, I think the, I think 2023 was the sort of moment for me where it went from
kind of AGI is a sort of theoretical abstract thing, and you'd make the models to like,
I see it, I feel it. And like, I see the path, I see where it's going. I like,
I think I can see the cluster where it's strained on, like the rough combination of algorithms,
the people, like how it's happening. And I think, you know, most of the world is not,
you know, most of the people feel it are like right here, right? But, but, you know, I think a
lot more of the world is going to start feeling it. And I think that's going to start being kind of
intense. Okay. So, right now, who feels that you can, you go on Twitter and there's these
GPT wrapper companies like, whoa, GPT Floreau is going to change our business.
I mean, I'm so, so bearish on the wrapper companies, right? Because like, they're the ones
that are going to be like, the wrapper companies are betting on stagnation, right? The wrapper
companies are betting like, you have these intermediate models and take so much left
to integrate them. And I'm kind of like, I'm really bearish because I'm like,
we're just going to sonic boom you, you know, and we're going to get the unhauled ones, we're
going to get the drop in remote worker. And then, you know, your stuff is not going to matter.
Okay. Sure. Sure. So that's done. Now, who, so the SF is paying attention now, or this crowd
here is paying attention. Who is going to be paying attention in 2026, 2027? And, but,
presumably this is, these are years in which the hundreds of billions of CapEx is being
spent on the eye. I mean, I think the, the national security state is going to be starting
to pay a lot of attention. And I, you know, I hope we get to talk about that.
Okay. Let's talk about it now. What happens? Yeah. Like, well, what is the sort of political
reaction immediately? Yeah. And even like internationally, like what people see like
right now, I don't know if like Xi Jinping like reads the news and sees like,
yeah, I don't know. Oh my God, like MMLU score on that. What are you doing about this comrade?
So what happens when the, like what, what are the, he's like sees a remote replacement and it
has a hundred billion dollars in revenue. There's a lot of businesses that have a hundred billion
dollars in revenue and people don't like aren't staying up all night talking about it.
The question, I think the question is when, when does the CCP and when does the sort of
American national security establishment realize that superintelligence is going to be
absolutely decisive for national power, right? And this is where, you know, the sort of intelligence
explosion stuff comes in, which, you know, we should also talk about later, you know, it's sort
of like, you know, you have AGI, you have this sort of drop in remote worker that can replace,
you know, you or me, at least that sort of remote jobs, you know, cognitive jobs.
And then, you know, I think fairly quickly, you know, I mean, by default, you know, you
turn the crank, you know, one or two more times, you know, and then you get a thing that's
smarter than humans. But I think even, even more than just turning the cramp a few more times,
you know, I think one of the first jobs to be automated is going to be that of sort of an AI
researcher engineer. And if you can automate AI research, you know, I think things can start
going very fast. You know, right now, there's already this trend of, you know, half in order of
magnitude a year of algorithmic progress, you know, suppose, you know, at this point, you're
going to have GPU fleets in the tens of millions for inference, you know, or more. And you're going
to be able to run like 100 million human human equivalents of these sort of automated AI researchers.
And if you can do that, you know, you can maybe do, you know, a decade's worth of sort of ML
research progress in a year, you know, get the some sort of 10x speed up. And if you can do that,
I think you can make the jump to kind of like AI that is vastly smarter than humans, you know,
within a year, a couple years. And then, you know, that broadens, right? So you have this,
you have this sort of initial acceleration of AI research that broadens to like you apply R&D to
a bunch of other fields of technology. And the sort of like extremes, you know, at this point,
you have like a billion, just super intelligent researchers, engineers, technicians, everything,
you're superbly competent, all the things, you know, they're going to figure out robotics.
Or we talked about it being a software problem. Well, you know, you have, you have a billion of
super smart, smarter than the smartest human researchers, AI researchers on your cluster,
you know, at some point during the intelligence explosion, they're going to be able to figure
out robotics, you know, and then again, that expands. And, you know, I think if you play this
picture forward, I think it is fairly unlike any other technology in that it will, I think,
you know, a couple years of lead could be utterly decisive in say like military competition, right?
You know, if you look at like go for one, right? Go for one, you know, like the Western coalition
forces, you know, they had, you know, like a hundred to one kill ratio, right? And that was like,
they had better sensors on their tanks, you know, and they had, they had better, you know, more
precision precision missiles, right? Like GPS, and they had, you know, stealth, and they had sort
of a few, you know, maybe 20, 30 years of technological lead, right? And they, you know,
just completely crushed them. Super intelligence applied to sort of broad fields of R&D. And
then, you know, the sort of industrial explosion as well, you have the robots, you're just making lots
of material, you know, I think that could compress, I mean, basically compress kind of like a century
worth of technological progress since the last decade. And that means that, you know, a couple
years could mean a sort of go for one style, like, you know, advantage in military affairs.
And, you know, including, like, you know, a decisive advantage that even like preempts
nukes, right? Suppose, like, you know, how do you find the stealth and nuclear submarines?
Like right now, that's a problem of like, you have sensors, you have the software,
like tech where they are, you know, you can do that, you can find them, you have kind of like
millions or billions of like mosquito-like, you know, size drones, and that, you know,
they take out the nuclear submarines, they take out the mobile launchers, they take out the other
nukes. And anyway, so I think enormously destabilizing, enormously important for national power,
and at some point, I think people are going to realize that, not yet, but they will. And when
they will, I think there will be sort of, you know, I don't think it'll just be the sort of AI
researchers in charge. And, you know, I think on the, you know, the CCP is going to, you know,
have sort of an all-out effort to like infiltrate American AI labs, right? You know, like billions
of dollars, thousands of people, you know, full force of the sort of, you know, Ministry of State
Security. CCP is going to try to, you know, like outbuild us, right? Like they, you know, their,
you know, power in China, you know, like the electric grid, you know, they added a U.S. is,
you know, a complete, like they added as much power in the last decade as like sort of entire
U.S. electric grid. So like the 100 gigawatts cluster, at least the 100 gigawatts is going
to be a lot easier for them to get. And so I think sort of, you know, by this point, I think it's
going to be like an extremely intense sort of international competition. Okay, so in this picture,
one thing I'm uncertain about is whether it's more like what you say, where it's more of an
implosion of you have developed an AGI and then you make it into an AI researcher. And for a while,
a year or something, you're only using this ability to make hundreds of millions of other AI
researchers. And then like the thing that comes out of this really frenetic process is a super
intelligence. And then that goes out in the world and is developing robotics and helping you take
over other countries and whatever. It's a little bit more, you know, it's a little bit more kind
of like, you know, it's not like, you know, on and off, it's a little bit more gradual, but it's
sort of like it's an explosion that starts narrowly. It's can do cognitive jobs, you know, the highest
RI use for cognitive jobs is make the AI better, like solve robotics, you know, and as as as you
know, you solve robotics, now you can do R&D and, you know, like biology and other technology.
You know, initially you start with the factory workers, you know, they're wearing the glasses
and the the AirPods, you know, and the AI is instructing them, right? Because, you know,
you kind of make any worker into a skilled technician, and then you have the robots come in.
And anyway, so it sort of expands, this process expands. Metas revans are a compliment to their
llama. Well, you know, whatever, like, you know, the fabs in the US, the constrained skilled workers,
right? You have, you have, even if you don't have robots that you have the cognitive super
intelligence and, you know, it can kind of make them all into skilled workers immediately. But
that's, you know, it's a very brief period, you know, robots will come soon. Sure. Okay. Okay, so
suppose this is actually how the tech progresses in the United States, maybe because these companies
are already experiencing hundreds of billions of dollars of revenue. At this point, you know,
companies are barring, you know, hundreds of billions of more in the corporate debt markets,
you know. But why is a CCP bureaucrat, some 60 year old guy, he looks at this and he's like,
oh, it's like, co-pilot has gotten better now. Why are they now? I mean, this is much more than
co-pilot has gotten better now. I mean, to them, like, yeah, because to shift the production of
an entire country, to dislocate energy that is otherwise being used for consumer goods or
something and to make it that all feed into the data centers. What part of this whole story is
you realize the super intelligence is coming soon, right? And I guess you realize it, maybe I realize
it. I'm not sure how much I realize it, but will the will the national security apparatus in the
United States and the CCP realize it? Yeah, I mean, look, I think in some sense, this is a really
key question. I think we have sort of a few more years of mid game, basically, and where you have
a few more 2023s, and that just starts updating more and more people. And I think the trend lines
will become clear. I think you will see some amount of the sort of COVID dynamic, right?
Like COVID was February of 2020. It honestly feels a lot like today, where it feels like this
utterly crazy thing is about, is impending, is coming. You kind of see the exponential and yet
most of the world just doesn't realize, right? The mayor of New York is like, go out to the shows,
and this is just Asian racism or whatever. But at some point, the exponential, at some point,
people saw it. And then just kind of crazy radical reactions came.
Right. Okay, so by the way, what were you doing during COVID? February?
Like freshman, sophomore, what?
Junior? But still, like, what were you, like 17-year-old junior or something?
And then, like, did you short the market or something?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Okay. Did you sell at the right time?
Yeah.
Okay. Yeah, so there will be like a March 2020 moment, the thing that was COVID, but here.
Now, then you can make the analogy that you make in the series that this will then
cause the reaction of like, we got to do the Manhattan Project for America here.
I wonder what the politics of this will be like, because the difference here is,
it's not just like, we need the bomb to beat the Nazis. It's, we're building this thing that's
making all our entry prices rise a bunch, and it's automating a bunch of our jobs.
And the climate change stuff, like people are going to be like, oh my god, it's making climate
change worse. And it's helping big tech. Like, politically, this doesn't seem like a dynamic
where the national security apparatus or the president is like, we have to step on the gas
here and like, make sure America wins.
Yeah. I mean, again, I think a lot of this really depends on sort of how much people
are feeling it, how much people are seeing it.
You know, I think there's a thing where, you know, kind of basically our generation, right?
We're kind of so used to kind of basically peace and like, you know, the world, you know,
American hegemony and nothing matters. But, you know, the sort of like extremely intense and
these extraordinary things happening in the world and like intense international competition is
like very much the historical norm. Like in some sense, it's like, you know, sort of this,
there's this sort of 20 year very unique period, but like, you know, the history of the world is
like, you know, you know, like in World War II, right, it was like 50% of GDP went to, you know,
like, you know, war prodigy and production, you know, the US borrowed over 60% of GDP, you know,
and in, you know, I think Germany and Japan over 100%, World War I, you know, UK, Japan,
sorry, UK, France, Germany all borrowed over 100% of GDP. And, you know, I think the sort of,
much more was on the line, right? Like, you know, and, you know, people talk about World War I
being so destructive and you know, like 20 million Soviet soldiers dying and like 20% of Poland.
But, you know, that was just the sort of like, that happened all the time, right? You know,
like seven years war, you know, like whatever 20, 30% of Prussia died, you know, like 30 years war,
you know, like, I think, like, you know, up to 50% of like large swath of Germany died.
And, you know, I think the question is, will these sort of like, will people see that the
stakes here are really, really high and that basically is sort of like history is actually back.
And I think, you know, I think the American national security state thinks
very seriously about stuff like this. They think very seriously about competition with China. I
think China very much thinks of itself on this historical mission and your nation, the Chinese
nation, a lot about national power, I think a lot about like the world order. And then, you know,
I think there's a real question on timing, right? Like, do they, do they start taking this seriously,
right? Like when the intelligence explosion is already happening, like quite late, or do they
start taking this seriously, like two years earlier on that matters a lot for how things play out.
But at some point, they will, and at some point, they will realize that this will be sort of
utterly decisive for, you know, not just kind of like some proxy war somewhere, but, you know,
like whether liberal democracy can continue to thrive, whether, you know, whether the CCP will
continue existing. And I think that will activate sort of forces that we haven't seen in a long time.
The great conflict, the great power conflict thing definitely seems compelling.
I think just all kinds of different things seem much more likely when you think from a historical
perspective, when you zoom out beyond the liberal democracy that we've been living in,
had the pleasure to live in America, let's say 80 years, including dictatorships, including all
obviously war, famine, whatever. I was reading the Gullig Archipelago, and one of the chapters
begins with Sojenitsyn saying, if you would have told Russian citizens under the czars that because
of all these new technologies, we wouldn't see some great Russian revival or becomes a great power,
and the citizens are made wealthy. But instead, what you would see is tens of millions of Soviet
citizens tortured by millions of beasts in the worst possible ways, and that this is what would
be the result of the 20th century, they wouldn't have believed you, they'd have called you a slanderer.
Yeah, and you know, the, you know, the possibilities for dictatorship with super
intelligence are sort of even crazier, right? I think, you know, imagine you have a perfectly
loyal military and security force, right? That's it. No more, no more rebellions, right? No more
popular uprisings, you know, perfectly loyal, you know, you have, you know, perfect lie
detection, you know, you have surveillance of everybody, you know, you can perfectly figure
out who's the dissenter, weed them out, you know, no Gorbachev would have ever risen to power,
who had some doubts about the system, you know, no military coup would have ever happened.
And I think you, I mean, you know, I think there's a real way in which,
you know, part of why things have worked out is that, you know, ideas can evolve and, you know,
there's sort of like some, some sense in which sort of time heals a lot of wounds and time, you
know, and solves, solves, you know, a lot of debates and a lot of people had really strong
convictions, but you know, a lot of those have been overturned by time because there's been this
continued pluralism and evolution. I think there's a way in which kind of like, you know,
if you take a CCP like approach to kind of like truth, truth is what the party says,
when you supercharge that with super intelligence, I think there's a way in which that could just
be like locked in and trying for, you know, a long time. And I think the possibilities are pretty
terrifying. You know, your point about, you know, history and sort of like living in America for
the past eight years, you know, I think this is one of the things I sort of took away from growing
up in Germany is a lot of the stuff feels more visceral, right? Like, you know, my mother grew
up in the former East, my father in the former West, they like met shortly after the wall fell,
right? Like the end of the Cold War was the sort of extremely pivotal moment for me because it's,
you know, it's the reason I exist, right? And then, you know, growing up in Berlin and, you know,
former wall, you know, my great grandmother, who is still alive, is very important in my life.
You know, she was born in 34, you know, grew up, you know, during the Nazi era, during, you know,
all that, you know, then World War II, you know, like South of the firebombing of Dresden from the
sort of, you know, country cottage or whatever were, you know, the day as kids were, you know,
then, and then, you know, then spends most of her life in sort of the East German Communistic
leadership. You know, she'd tell me about, you know, in like 54 when there's like the popular
uprising, you know, in Soviet tanks came in, you know, her husband was telling her to get home
really quickly, you know, get off off the streets, you know, had a, had a son who, who tried to,
you know, ride a motorcycle across, across the Iron Curtain and then was put in the Stasi prison
for a while. You know, and then finally, you know, when she's almost 60, you know, it was the first
time she lives in, you know, a free country and, and a wealthy country. And, you know, when I was
a kid, she was, she, the thing she always really didn't want me to do was like get involved in
politics because like joining a political party was just, you know, it was a very bad connotations
for her. Anyway, and she sort of raised me when I was young, you know, and so it, you know, it
doesn't feel that long ago. It feels very close. Yeah. So I wonder when we're talking today about
the CCP, listen, the people in China who will be doing the pro, their version of the project
will be AI researchers who are somewhat westernized, who interact with either got educated in the West
or have colleagues in the West. Are they going to sign up for the, the CCP project that's going to
hand over control to Xi Jinping? What's your sense on, I mean, you're just like fundamentally,
they're just people, right? Like, can't you like convince them about the dangers of super
intelligence? Will they be in charge though? I mean, since this is, I mean, this is also the case,
you know, uh, you know, in the US or whatever, this is sort of like rapidly depreciating influence
of the lab employees. Like right now, the sort of AI lab employees have so much power, right over
this, you know, like, they're going to get automated and then you saw this November event, so much
power, right? But both, I mean, both they're going to get automated and they're going to lose all
their power. And it'll just be, you know, kind of like a few people in charge with their sort of
armies of automated eyes. But also, you know, it's sort of like the politicians and the generals
and the sort of national security state, you know, a lot, you know, it's, I mean, there's sort of,
this is the sort of some of these classic scenes from the, you know, the Oppenheimer movies, you
know, the scientists built it and then it was kind of, you know, and the bomb was shipped away and
it was out of their hands. You know, I actually, yeah, I think, I actually think it's good for
like lab employees to be aware of this is like, you have a lot of power now, but you know, maybe
not for that long and, you know, use it wisely. Yeah, I do, I do think they would benefit from
some more, you know, organs of representative democracy. What do you mean by that? Oh, I mean,
I, you know, in the sort of the, in the open AI board events, you know, employee at power was
exercising a very sort of direct democracy way. And I feel like that's how some of how that went
about, you know, I think it really highlighted the benefits of representative democracy and having
some deliverative organs. Interesting. Yeah. Well, let's go back to the 100 billion revenue,
whatever, and so these companies, Nala cluster, yeah, the companies are deploying, we're trying
to build clusters that are this big. Yeah. Where are they building it? Because if you say it's
the amount of energy that would be required for a small or medium sized US state, is it then Colorado
gets no power and it's happening in the United States or is it happening somewhere else? Oh,
I mean, I think that, I mean, in some sense, this is the thing that I always find funny is, you know,
you talk about Colorado gets no power, you know, the easy way to get the power would be like, you
know, displaced, less economically useful stuff, you know, it's like, whatever, buy up the aluminum
smelting plant and, you know, that has a gigalot and, you know, we're going to replace it with the
data center because that's important. I mean, that's not actually happening because a lot of
these power contracts are really sort of long-term locked in, you know, there's obviously people
don't like things like this. And so it sort of, it seems like in practice, what it's, what it's
requiring, at least right now is building new power. The, that might change. And I think that
that's when things get really interesting when it's like, no, we're just dedicating all of the
power to the AGI. Okay, so right now it's building new power, 10 gigawatt, I think quite doable.
You know, it's like a few percent of like US natural gas production.
You know, I mean, when you have the 10 gigawatt training cluster, you have a lot more in
friends. So that starts getting more, you know, I think 100 gigawatt, that starts getting pretty
wild. You know, that's, you know, again, it's like over 20% of US electricity production.
I think it's pretty doable, especially if you're willing to go for like natural gas.
I do, I do think, I do think it is incredibly important, incredibly important that these
clusters are in the United States. And why does it matter? It's in the US?
I mean, look, I think there's some people who are, you know, trying to build clusters elsewhere. And
you know, there's like a lot of free flowing Middle Eastern money that's trying to build clusters
elsewhere. I think this comes back to the sort of like national security question we talked about
earlier. Like would you, I mean, would you do the Manhattan Project and the UAE, right? And I think,
I think basically like putting, putting the clusters, you know, I think you can put them in the US,
you can put them in sort of like ally democracies. But I think once you put them in kind of like
dictatorships, authoritarian dictatorships, you kind of create this, you know, irreversible security
risk, right? So I mean, one cluster is there, much easier for them to exfiltrate the weights.
You know, they can like literally steal the AGI, the superintelligence. It's like they got a copy of
the, you know, of the atomic bomb, you know, and they just got the direct replica of that.
And it makes it much easier to them. I mean, we're ties to China, you can ship that to China.
So that's a huge risk. Another thing is they can just seize the compute, right? Like maybe right
now they just think of this, I mean, in general, I think people, you know, I think the issue here
is people are thinking of this as they, you know, chat, GBT, big tech product clusters. But I think
the cluster is being planned now, you know, three to five years out, like it will be the like AGI
superintelligence clusters. And so anyway, so like when things get hot, you know, they might just
seize the compute. And I don't know, suppose we put like, you know, 25% of the compute capacity
in the sort of Middle Eastern decaderships, well, they seize that. And now it's sort of a ratio
of compute of three to one, and you know, still have some more, but even like, even, even only,
only 25% of compute there, like, I think it starts getting pretty hairy, you know, I think three to
one is like, not that great of a ratio, you can do a lot with that amount of compute. And then look,
even, even if they don't actually do this, right, even they don't actually seize the compute, even
they actually don't steal the weights. There's just a lot of implicit leverage you get, right?
They get, they get the seat at the AGI table. And, you know, I don't know why we're giving
authoritarian dictatorships the seat at the AGI table. Okay, so there's going to be a lot of
compute in the Middle East, if these deals go through. First of all, who's who is it? Just
like every single big tech company is just trying to figure out where they're going to be.
Okay, okay. Well, I guess there's reports, I think Microsoft or yeah, which we'll get into.
So the UAE gets a bunch of compute because we're building the clusters there.
And why, so let's say they have 25% of, why does a compute ratio matter?
If it's about them being able to kick off the intelligence explosion,
isn't it just some threshold where you have 100 million AI researchers or you don't?
I mean, you can do a lot with, you know, 33 million extremely smart scientists.
And, you know, and again, a lot of the stuff, you know, so first of all, it's like,
you know, that might be enough to build the crazy bio weapons, right? And then you're in a
situation where like now, wow, we've just like, they stole the weights, they seized the compute,
now they can make, you know, they can build these crazy new WMDs that, you know,
will be possible super intelligence. And then you just kind of like proliferated the stuff.
And, you know, it'll be really powerful. And also, I mean, I think, you know,
three acts on compute isn't actually that much. And so the, you know, the,
you know, I think a thing I worry a lot about is
I think everything, I think the riskiest situation is if we're in some sort of like
really tight neck, feverish international struggle, right? If we're like really close
with the CCP and we're like months apart. I think the situation we want to be in,
we could be in, if we played our cards, right, is a little bit more like, you know, the US,
you know, building the atomic bomb versus the German project way behind, you know, years behind.
And if we have that, I think we just have so much more wiggle room, like to get safety,
right? We're going to be building like, you know, there's going to be these crazy new WMDs,
you know, things that completely undermine, you know, nuclear deterrence, you know,
intense competition. And that's so much easier to deal with if, you know, you're like, you know,
it's not just, you know, you don't have somebody right on your tails, you got to go,
go, go, you got to go maximum speed, you have no wiggle room. You're worried that at any time
they can overtake you. I mean, they can also just try to outbuild you, right? Like they might,
they might literally win, like China might literally win if they can steal the weights,
because they can outbuild you. And they maybe have less caution, both, you know, good and bad
caution, you know, kind of like whatever unreasonable regulations we have. Or you're just
in this really tight race. And I think it is that sort of like, if you're in this really tight race,
this sort of feverish struggle, I think that's when sort of there's the greatest peril of
self-destruction. So then presumably the companies that are trying to build clusters in
the Middle East realize this, what is it? Is it just that it's impossible to do this in America?
And if you want American companies to do this at all, then you do it in Middle East or not at all.
And then you just like, I'm trying to build a three gorgeous dam cluster.
I mean, there's a few reasons. One of them is just like, people aren't thinking about this as
the AGI superintelligence cluster. They're just like, ah, you know, like cool clusters for my,
you know, for my chat. So they're building in the plans right now are clusters, which
are ones that are like, because if you're doing once we're inference, presumably you
could like spread them out across the country or something. But the ones they're building,
they realize we're going to do one training run in this thing we're building.
I just think it's harder to distinguish between inference and training compute. And so people
can claim it's training compute, but I think they might realize that actually, you know,
this is going to be useful for, yeah, sorry, they might say it's inference compute. And
actually it's useful for training compute too.
Because of the synthetic data and things like that.
Yeah. The future of training, you know, like RL looks a lot like inference, for example, right?
Or, or you just kind of like end up connecting them, you know, in time, you know, it's like
a lot raw material, you know, it's like, you know, it's, it's, it's placing your uranium refinement
facilities there. Sure.
Anyway, so a few reasons, right? One is just like, they don't think about this as the AGI cluster.
Another is just like easy money from the Middle East, right? Another one is like, you know,
people saying, some people think that, you know, you can't do it in the U.S.
And, you know, I think we actually face this sort of real system competition here, because
again, some people think it's only autocracies that can do this, that can kind of like top
down, mobilize the sort of industrial capacity, the power, you know, get the stuff done fast.
And again, this is the sort of thing, you know, we haven't faced in a while.
But, you know, during the Cold War, like we really, there was this sort of intense system
competition, right? Like East West Germany was this, right? Like West Germany kind of like
liberal democratic capitalism versus kind of, you know, communist state planned. And, you know,
now it's obvious that the sort of, you know, the free world would win. But, you know, even as
late as like 61, you know, Paul Samuelson was predicting that the Soviet Union would outgrow
the United States because they were able to sort of mobilize industry better. And so yeah,
there's some people who, you know, shippost about loving America by day, but then in private,
they're betting against America. They're betting against the liberal order. And I think, I basically
just think it's a bad bet. And the reason I think it's a bad bet is I think this stuff is just
really possible in the U.S. And so there's make it possible in the U.S. There's some amount that
we have to get our act together, right? So I think there's basically two paths to doing it in the
U.S. One is you just got to be willing to do natural gas. And there's ample natural gas, right?
You put your cluster in West Texas, you put it in, you know, Southwest Pennsylvania by the,
you know, Marcello Shale. Ten gigawatt cluster is super easy. 100 gigawatt cluster also pretty
doable. You know, I think, you know, natural gas production in the United States is, you know,
almost doubled in a decade. If you do that, you know, one more time over the next, you know,
seven years or whatever, you know, you could power multiple trillion dollar data centers.
But the issue there is, you know, a lot of people have sort of these made these climate
commitments and not just government. It's actually the private companies themselves, right? The
Microsoft, the Amazons and so on. And these climate commitments, so they won't do natural gas.
And, you know, I admire the climate commitments, but I think at some point, you know,
the national interest and national security kind of is more important.
The other path is like, you know, you can do this sort of green energy mega projects, right? You
do the solar and the batteries and the, you know, the SMRs and geothermal. But if we want to do that,
there needs to be sort of a sort of broad, deregulatory push, right? So, like, you can't
have permitting take a decade, right? So you got to reform FERC. You got to, like, have, you know,
blanket NEPA exemptions for this stuff. You know, there's like Nain state level regulations,
you know, that are like, yeah, you could build, you know, you build the solar panels and batteries
next to your data center, but it'll still take years because, you know, you actually have to
hook it up to the state electrical grid, you know, and you'll have to, like, use governmental
powers to create rights of way to kind of, like, you know, have multiple clusters and connect them,
you know, and have thick cables, basically. And so, look, I mean, ideally, we do both,
right? Ideally, we do natural gas and the broad deregulatory agenda. I think we have to do at
least one. And then I think this possible stuff is just possible in the United States.
Yeah. I think a good analogy for this, by the way, before the conversation I was reading,
there's a good book about World War II industrial mobilization in the United States called
Freedom's Forge. Yeah. And I guess when we think back on that period, especially if you're from,
if you read, like, the Patrick Hallison Fast and the Progress Study stuff, it's like,
the hat state capacity back then, and people just got you done, but now it's a cluster.
Wasn't it all the case? No, so it was really interesting. So you have people who are from
the Detroit auto industry side, like Knudsen, who are running mobilization for the United States,
and they were extremely incompetent. Yeah. But then at the same time, you had
labor organization agitation, which is actually very analogous to the climate pledges and
climate change concern we have today, where they would have these strikes while literally into 1941,
that would cost millions of man hours worth of time when we're trying to make tens of millions,
sorry, tens of thousands of planes a month or something. And they would just
debilitate factories for, you know, trivial, like pennies on the dollar kind of concessions from
capital. And it was concerns that, oh, the auto companies are trying to use the pretext of a
potential war to actually prevent paying labor that money deserves. And so the climate changes
today, like, you think, ah, fuck, America's fucked, like, we're not going to be able to build this
shit. Like, if you, if you look at Nipah or something, but I didn't realize how debilitating
labor was in like World War Two, right? It was just, you know, before at the, you know,
it's sort of like 39 or whatever, the American military was in total shambles, right? You read
about it and it reads a little bit like, you know, the German military today, right? It's like, you
know, military expenditures, I think were less than 2% of GDP, you know, all the European countries
had gone even in peacetime, you know, like above 10% of GDP, sort of this like rapid mobilization,
there's nothing, you know, like, we're making kind of like no planes, there's no military
contracts, everything had been starved during the Great Depression. But there was this latent
capacity. And, you know, at some point, the United States got their act together. I mean,
the thing I'll say is I think, you know, the supplies are the other way around too, to basically
to China, right? And I think sometimes people are, you know, they kind of count them out a little
bit and they're like the export controls and so on. And, you know, they're able to make seven
nanometer chips now. I think there's a question of like, how many could they make? But, you know,
I think there's at least a possibility that they're going to be able to mature that ability and make
a lot of seven nanometer chips. And there's a lot of latent industrial capacity in China,
and they are able to like, you know, build a lot of power fast. And maybe that isn't activated for
AI yet. But at some point, you know, the same way the United States and like, you know, a lot of
people in the US and the United States government is going to wake up, you know, at some point,
the CCP is going to wake up. Yeah. Okay. Going back to the question of presumably companies,
if are they blind to the fact that there's going to be some sort of, well, okay, so
they realize that there's going, they realize scaling is a thing, right? Obviously, their whole
plans are continued on scaling. And so they understand that we're going to be in 2020 building
the 10 gigawatt data centers. And at this point, the people who can keep up our big tech just
potentially at like the edge of their capabilities, then sovereign wealth fund, fund of things, and
also big major countries like America, China, whatever. So what's their plan? If you look at
like these AI labs, what's their plan given this landscape? Do they not want the leverage
of having being in the United States? I mean, I think, I don't know, I think, I mean, one thing
the Middle East does offer is capital, but it's like America has plenty of capital, right? It's
like, you know, we have trillion dollar companies, like what are these Middle Eastern states, they're
kind of like trillion dollar oil companies, and we have trillion dollar companies, and we have
very deep financial markets, and it's like, you know, Microsoft could issue hundreds of billions
of dollars of bonds, and they can pay for these clusters. I mean, look, I think another argument
being made, and I think it's worth taking seriously is an argument that look, if we don't work with
the UAE or with these Middle Eastern countries, they're just going to go to China, right? And so,
you know, we, you know, they're going to build data centers, they're going to pour money into AI,
regardless, and if we don't work with them, you know, they'll just support China. And look, I mean,
I think, I think there's some merit to the argument, and in the sense that I think we should
be doing basically benefit sharing with them, right? I think we should talk about this later,
but I think basically sort of on the road to AGI, there should be kind of like two tiers of
coalitions should be the sort of narrow coalition of democracies, that's sort of the
coalition that's developing AGI. And then there should be a broader coalition where we kind of
go to other countries, including, you know, dictatorships, and we're willing to offer them,
you know, we're willing to offer them some of the benefits of the AI, some of the sharing.
And so it's like, look, if, if, if the UAE wants to use AI products, if they want to run, you know,
meta recommendation engines, if they want to run, you know, like the last generation models,
that's fine. I think by default, they just like wouldn't have had this seat at the AGI table,
right? And so it's like, yeah, they have some money, but a lot of people have money.
And, you know, the only reason they're getting this sort of coursey at the AGI table, the only
reason we're giving these dictators will have this enormous amount of leverage over this extremely
national security relevant technology is because we're, you know, we're kind of getting them excited
and offering it to them. You know, I think the other who like who specifically is doing this,
like just the companies who are going there to fundraise or like this is the AGI is happening
and you can find it or you can't. It's been reported that it's been reported that, you know,
Sam is trying to raise, you know, seven trillion or whatever for a chip project. And, you know,
it's unclear how many of the clusters will be there and so on. But it's, you know, definitely,
definitely stuff is happening. I mean, look, I think another reason I'm a little bit,
at least suspicious of this argument of like, look, if the US doesn't work with them, they'll
go to China is, you know, I've heard heard from multiple people. And this wasn't, you know,
from a time at open AI and I haven't seen the memo, but I have heard from multiple people
that, you know, at some point several years ago, open AI leadership had sort of laid out a plan
to fund and sell AGI by starting a bidding war between the governments of, you know, the United
States, China and Russia. And so, you know, it's kind of surprising to me that they're willing to
sell AGI to the Chinese and Russian governments. But also there's something that sort of feels a bit
eerily familiar about kind of starting this bidding war and then kind of like playing them
off each other. And well, you know, if you don't do this, China will do it. So anyway, interesting.
Okay, so that's pretty fucked up. But given that, that's, okay, so suppose that you were right
about, we ended up in this place because we got the way one of our friends put it is that the
Middle East has like no other place in the world, billions of dollars or trillions of dollars up
for persuasion. And the Microsoft board, it's only, it's only the dictator.
Yeah. But so let's say you're right, that you shouldn't have gotten them excited about AGI in
the first place. But now we're in a place where they are excited about AGI. And they're like,
fuck, we want us to have GPT-5 where we're going to be off building super intelligence.
This Atoms for Peace thing doesn't work for us. And if you're in this place,
don't they already have the leverage? Aren't you like, and as you might as well just say-
I don't think, I think the UAE on its own is not competitive, right? It's like, I mean,
they're already export controlled. Like, you know, we're not, you know, there's like,
you're not actually supposed to ship NVIDIA chips over there, right? You know, it's not like they
have any of the leading AI labs. You know, it's like they have money, but you know,
it's actually hard to just translate money into like-
But the other things you've been saying about laying out your vision is very much there's
this almost industrial process of you put in the compute and then you put in the algorithms.
Yes. You add that up and you get AGI on the other end.
Yes. If it's something more like that, then the case for somebody being able to catch up
rapidly seems more compelling than if it's some bespoke.
Well, well, if they can steal the algorithms and if they can steal the weights.
That's really, that's really where sort of, I mean, we should talk about this. This is really
important. And I think, you know. So like right now, how easy would it be for a foreign actor to
steal the things that are like, not the things that are released about Scarlett Johansson's voice,
but the RL things are talking about the unhobblings.
I mean, I mean, all extremely easy, right? You know, I, you know, deep mind even like,
you know, they don't make a claim that it's hard, right? Deep mind put out there,
like whatever, frontier safety, something, and they like lay out security levels,
and they, you know, security level zero to four and four is this new resilient,
resistant to state actors. And they say we're at level zero, right?
And then, you know, I mean, just recently, there was like an indictment of a guy who just
like stole the code, a bunch of like really important AI code and went to China with it.
And, you know, all he had to do to steal the code was, you know, copy the code and put it
into Apple notes and then export it as PDF. And that got past their monitoring, right? And, you know,
Google is the best security of any of the iLabs probably because they have the, you know, the
Google infrastructure. I mean, I think, I don't know, roughly, I would think of this as like,
you know, security of a startup, right? And like, what does security of a startup look like,
right? You know, it's not that good. It's easy to steal.
So even if that's the case, a lot of your posts is making the argument that, you know,
why are we going to get the intelligence explosion? Because if we have somebody with
the intuition of an Alec Radford, to be able to come up with all these ideas,
that intuition is extremely valuable and you scale that up. But if it's a matter of these,
if it's just in the code, that, like, if it's just the intuition, then that's not
going to be just in the code, right? And also because of export controls, these countries
are going to have slightly different hardware. You're going to have to make different trade-offs
and probably rewrite things to be able to be compatible with that, including all these things.
Is it just a matter of getting the right pen drive and you plug it into the gigawatt data center
and exit the three gorgeous dam and then you're off to the races?
I mean, like, there's a few different things, right? So one threat model is just stealing
the weights themselves. And the weights one is sort of particularly insane, right? Because they
can just like steal the literal like end product, right? Just like make a replica of the atomic bomb
and then they're just like ready to go. And, you know, I think that one just is, you know,
extremely important around the time we have AGI and superintelligence, right? Because it's,
you know, China can build a big cluster. By default, we'd have a big lead, right? Because
we have the better scientists, but we make the superintelligence, they just steal it,
they're off to the races. Weights are a little bit less important right now. Because, you know,
who cares if they steal the GPT-4 weights, right? Like whatever. And so, you know, we still have
to get started on weight security now. Because, you know, look, if we think AGI by 27, you know,
this stuff is going to take a while. And it, you know, it doesn't, you know, it's not just going
to be like, oh, we do some access control. It's going to, you know, if you actually want to be
resistant to sort of Chinese espionage, you know, it needs to be much more intense. The thing,
though, that I think, you know, people aren't paying enough attention to is the secrets,
as you say. And, you know, I think this is, you know, the compute stuff is sexy. You know,
we talk about it. But, you know, I think that, you know, I think people underrate the secrets
because they're, you know, I think they're, you know, the half an order of magnitude a year,
just by default, sort of algorithmic progress, that's huge. You know, if we have a few-year
lead by default, you know, that's 10, 30x, 100x bigger cluster, if we protected them.
And then there's this additional layer of the data wall, right? And so, we have to get
through the data wall. That means we actually have to figure out some sort of basic new paradigm,
sort of the AlphaGo step two, right? AlphaGo step one is learns from human imitation. AlphaGo step
two is the sort of self play RL. And everyone's working on that right now. And maybe we're going
to crack it. And, you know, if China can't steal that, then they, you know, then they're stuck.
If they can't steal it, they're off to the races. But whatever that thing is, is it like literally,
I can write down on the back of a napkin, because if it's that easy, then why is it that hard for
them to figure it out? And if it's more about the intuitions, then don't you just have to hire
Alec Radford? Like, what are you copying now? Well, I think there's a few layers to this, right?
So, I think at the top is kind of like sort of the, you know, fundamental approach, right? And
sort of like, I don't know, on pre-training, it might be, you know, like, you know, unsupervised
learning, next token protection, train on the entire internet. You actually get a lot of
juice out of that already. That one's very quick to communicate. Then there's like,
there's a lot of details that matter. And you were talking about this earlier, right? It's like,
probably the way that thing people are going to figure out is going to be like somewhat
obvious, or there's going to be some kind of like clear, you know, not that complicated thing,
that'll work. But there's going to be a lot of details to getting that right.
But if that's true, then again, why are we even, why do we think that getting state-level security
in these stars will prevent China from catching up? If it's just like, oh, we know some sort of
self-play RL, we require it to get past the data wall. And if it's as easy as you say,
in some fundamental sense. Well, I don't know if it's that easy. I mean, again, like, yeah.
But it's going to be solved by 2027, you say, like, right? It's like, not that hard.
I just think, you know, the US and the sort of, I mean, all the leading antelabs in the United
States, and they have this huge lead. I mean, by default, you know, China actually has some good
LLMs. You know, why do they have good LLMs? They're just using the sort of open source code, right?
You know, llama or whatever. And so the, the, I think people really underrate the sort of,
both the sort of divergence on algorithmic progress and the lead the US would have by default,
because by the, you know, all this stuff was published until recently, right?
Like Chinchilla scaling laws were published, you know, there's a bunch of MOE papers,
there's, you know, transformers and, you know, all that stuff was published. And so that's why
open source is good. That's why China can make some good models. That stuff is now, I mean,
at least they're not publishing it anymore. And, you know, if we actually kept it secret,
it would be this huge edge. To your point about sort of like some tacit knowledge,
now like Bradford, you know, there's, there's another layer at the bottom that is something
about like, you know, large scale engineering work to make these big training ones work.
I think that is a little bit more tacit knowledge. So I think that, but I think China will be able
to figure that out. That's like sort of engineering stuff. They're going to figure out how to
figure that out, but not how to get the RL thing working.
I mean, look, I don't know, Germany during World War II, you know, they went down the wrong path,
they did heavy water, and that was wrong. And there's actually, there's an amazing anecdote in
the making of the atomic bomb on this, right? So, so secrecy is actually one of the most
contentious issues, you know, early on as well. And, you know, part of it was sort of,
you know, zillard or whatever really thought, you know, the sort of nuclear chain reaction was
possible. And so an atomic bomb was possible when you went around and it was like, this is going to
be of enormous strategic importance, military importance. And a lot of people didn't believe
it or they're kind of like, well, maybe this is possible, but you know, I'm going to act as
it's not possible. And, you know, science should be open and all these things. And anyway, and so
these early days, so there had been some sort of incorrect measurements made on graphite as a
moderator and that Germany had. And so they thought, you know, graphite was not going to work, we
have to do heavy water. But then Fermi made some new measurements on graphite. And they indicated
that graphite would work, you know, this is really important. And then, you know, zillard kind of
assaulted Fermi with the kind of another secrecy appeal. And Fermi was just kind of, he was pissed
off, you know, at a temper tantrum, you know, he was like, he thought it was absurd, you know,
like, come on, this is crazy. But, you know, you know, zillard persisted, I think they
roped in another guy, Pegram, and then Fermi didn't publish it. And, you know, that was just in time,
because Fermi not publishing it meant that the Nazis didn't figure out graphite would work,
they went down this path of heavy water. And that was the wrong path. That was one of the sort,
you know, this is a key reason why the sort of German project didn't work out. They were kind
of way behind. And, you know, I think we face a similar situation on are we are we just going to
instantly leak the sort of how do we get past the data wall? What's the next paradigm? Or are we not?
So and the reason this would matter is if there's like a being one year ahead would be a huge
advantage in the world where it's like you deploy AI over time, and then just like, God,
they're going to catch up anyway. I mean, I interviewed Richard Rhodes, the guy who wrote
the making an atomic bomb. Yeah. And one of the anecdotes he had was when, so they'd realized
America had the bomb, obviously we dropped it in Japan. And Beria goes, the guy who ran the NKBD,
just a famously ruthless guy, just evil. And he goes to, I forgot the name of the guy, the Soviet
scientist was running their version of the Mandan project. He says, comrade, you will get us
the American bomb. Yeah. And the guy says, well, listen, their implosion device actually is not
optimal. We should make it a different way. And Beria says, no, you will get us the American bomb
or your family will be camped us. But the thing that's relevant about that anecdote is actually
the Soviets would have had a better bomb if they hadn't copied the American design, at least
initially. And which suggests that often in history, this is something that's not just for the
Manhattan project, but there's this pattern of parallel invention where, because the tech tree
implies that the certain thing is next, in this case, self play, RL, whatever.
Then people are just like working on that. And like people are going to figure out around the same
time. There's not, there's not going to be that much gap in who gets it first. It wasn't like
famously the bunch of people were invented something like the light bulb around the same time and so
for it. So, but is it just that like, yeah, that might be true, but it'll be the one year or the
six months or whatever. Two years makes all the difference. I don't know if it'll be two years
though. I mean, I actually, I mean, I actually think if we locked down the labs, we have, we have
much better scientists, we're way ahead, it would be two years. But even, I think, even, I think,
I think whether you, I think, yeah, I think even six months a year would make a huge difference.
And this gets back to the sort of intelligence explosion. It's like a year might be the difference
between, you know, a system that's sort of like human level and a system that is like vastly super
human, right? It might be like five, five ooms, you know, even on the current pace, right? We went
from, you know, I think on the math benchmark recently, right? Like, you know, three years ago
on the math benchmark, we, you know, that that was, you know, this is a sort of really difficult
high school competition math problems. You know, we were at, you know, a few percent couldn't solve
anything. Now it's solved. And that was sort of at the normal pace of AI progress. You didn't have
sort of a billion super intelligent resources, researchers. So like a year is a huge difference.
And then particularly after super intelligence, right? Once this is applied to sort of lots of
elements of R&D, once you get the sort of like industrial explosion with the robots and so on,
you know, I think a year, you know, a couple years might be kind of like decades worth of
technological progress and might, you know, again, it's like go for one, right? 20, 30 years of
technological lead, totally decisive. You know, I think it really matters. The other reason it
really matters is, you know, suppose, suppose they steal the weight, suppose they steal the
algorithms and, you know, they're close on our tails. Suppose we still pull out ahead, right?
We just kind of, we were a little bit faster, you know, we're three months ahead. I think the
sort of like world in which we're really neck and neck, you know, you only have a three-month lead
are incredibly dangerous, right? And we're in this like feverish struggle where like if they get ahead,
they get to dominate, you know, sort of maybe they'd get a decisive advantage. They're about in
clusters like crazy. They're willing to throw all caution to the wind. We have to keep up. There's
some crazy new WMDs popping up. And then we're going to be in the situation where it's like,
you know, crazy new military technology, crazy new WMDs, you know, like deterrence,
mutually-disturbed interaction, like keeps changing, you know, every few weeks. And it's like,
you know, completely unstable volatile situation. That is incredibly dangerous. So it's, I think,
I think, you know, both, both from just the technologies are dangerous from the alignment
point of view. You know, I think it might be really important during the intelligence explosion to
have the sort of six-month, you know, wiggle room to be like, look, we're going to like
dedicate more compute to alignment during this period because we have to get it right. We're
feeling uneasy about how it's going. And so I think in some sense that like one of the most
important inputs, so whether we will kind of destroy ourselves or whether we will get through
this just incredibly crazy period is whether we have that buffer.
Why, so before we go further object level in this, I think it's very much worth noting that
almost nobody, at least nobody I talk to, thinks about the geopolitical implications of AI. And I
think I have some object level disagreements that we'll get into, but or at least things I want
to iron out. I may not disagree in the end. But the basic premise that obviously if you
keep scaling and obviously if people realize that this is where intelligence is headed,
it's not just going to be like the same world where like what model are we deploying tomorrow
and what is the latest like people on Twitter like, oh, there are the GPT-4O is going to
shake your expectations or whatever. You know, COVID is really interesting because
before a year or something, when March 2020 hit, it became clear to the world like president,
CEO, media, average person, there's other things happening in the world right now. But the main
thing we as a world are dealing with right now is COVID. Soon on AGI. Yeah. Okay. And then so this
is the quiet period. You know, if you want to go on vacation, you know, you want to like, you want
maybe like now is the last time you can have some kids. You know, my girlfriend sometimes
complains that, you know, when I'm like, you know, off doing work or whatever, she's like,
I'm not spending time with her. She's like, you know, she threatens to replace me with like,
you know, GPT-6 or whatever. And I'm like, you know, GPT-6 will also be too busy doing AI research.
Okay. Anyway, so what's the answer to the question of why, why aren't other people talking
about being national security? I made this mistake with COVID, right? So I, you know,
February of 2020, and I, you know, I thought just it was going to sweep the world and all the hospitals
would collapse and it would be crazy. And then, and then, you know, and then it'd be over. And you
know, a lot of people thought this kind of the beginning of COVID, they shut down their offices
a month or whatever. I think the thing I just really didn't price in was the sidal reaction,
right? And, and within weeks, you know, Congress spent over 10% of GDP on like COVID measures,
right? The entire country was shut down. It was crazy. And so I don't know, I didn't price it in
with COVID sufficiently. I don't know, why do people underrate it? I mean, I think there's,
there's a, there's a sort of way in which being kind of in the trenches actually kind of, I think
gives you a less clear picture of the trend lines. You actually have to zoom out that much
only like a few years, right? But you know, you're in the trenches, you're like trying to get the
next model to work, you know, there's always something that's hard, you know, for example,
you might underrate algorithmic progress because you're like, ah, things are hard right now or,
you know, data wall or whatever. But, you know, you zoom out just a few years and you actually
try to like count up how much algorithmic progress made in the last, you know, last few years. And
it's, it's enormous. But I also just don't think people think about this stuff. Like I think smart
people really underrate espionage, right? And, you know, I think part of the security issue is I
think people don't realize like how intense state level espionage can be, right? Like, you know,
you know, this is really company had had software that could just zero click hack any
iPhone, right? They just put in your number and then it's just like straight download of
everything, right? Like the United States infiltrated an air gap, atomic weapons program,
right? Wild, you know, like, yeah, you know, the, you know, you know, intelligence agencies have
just stockpiles of zero days, you know, when things get really hot, you know, I don't know,
maybe we'll send special forces, right? To like, you know, get go to the data center or something
that's, you know, or, you know, I mean, China does this, they threaten people's families, right?
And they're like, look, if you don't cooperate, if you don't give us the Intel,
there's a there's a good book, you know, along the lines of the gulag develop, you know, the
inside the aquarium, which is by a Soviet GRU de facto, GRU was like military intelligence,
Ilya recommended this book to me. And, you know, I think reading that is just kind of like shocked
at how intense sort of state level espionage is the whole book was about like, they go to these
European countries, and they try to like get all the technology and recruit all these people to get
the technology. I mean, yeah, maybe one anecdote, you know, so when so the spot, you know, this
eventual defector, you know, so he's being trained, he goes to the kind of GRU spy academy. And so
then to graduate from the spy academy, sort of before you're sent abroad, you kind of had to
pass a test to show that you can do this. And the test was, you know, you had to in Moscow recruit
a Soviet scientist and recruit them to give you information sort of like you would do in the
foreign country. But of course, for whomever you recruited, the penalty for giving away sort of
secret information was death. And so to graduate from the Soviet spy, the GRU spy academy, you had
to condemn a country man to death. States do this stuff. I started reading the book on
because I saw it in the series. Yeah. And I was actually wondering the fact that you use this
anecdote. Yeah. And then you're like enough of a book recommended by Ilya. Is this some sort of
is this some sort of Easter egg? We'll leave that for an exercise for the reader.
Okay, so the beatings will continue until them are all improved.
So suppose that we live in the world in which these secrets are locked down,
but China still realizes that this progress is happening in America.
In that world, especially if they realize, and I guess it's a very interesting open question,
it probably won't be locked down. Okay, but we're probably gonna live in the bad world.
Yeah, it's gonna be really bad. Why are you so confident that they won't be locked down? I mean,
I'm not confident that won't be locked down, but I think it's just it's not happening.
And so tomorrow, the lab leaders get the message. How hard like, what do they have to do?
They get the more security guards, they like air gap the, what do they do?
So again, I think basically it's, I think people, there's kind of like two two reactions there,
which is like, it's, we're already secure, not. And there's, fatalism, it's impossible.
I think the thing you need to do is you kind of got to stay ahead of the curve of basically
how EGI pillows the CCP, right? So like right now, you've got to be resistant to kind of like
normal economic espionage. They're not, right? I mean, I probably wouldn't be talking about the
stuff that the labs were, right? Because I wouldn't want to wake them up more, the CCP,
but they're not, you know, this is like, this stuff is like really trivial for them to do right
now. I mean, it's also anyway, so they're not resistant to that. I think it would be possible
for private company to be resistant to it, right? So, you know, both of us have, you know, friends
in the kind of like quantitative trading world, right? And, you know, I think actually those
secrets are shaped kind of similarly where it's like, you know, you know, they've said, you know,
yeah, if I got on a call for an hour or with somebody from a competitive firm, I could,
most of our alpha would be gone. And that's sort of like, that's the like list of details of like
really how to, how to make, you're gonna have to worry about that pretty soon. You're gonna have to
worry about that pretty soon. Yeah. Well, anyway, and so, so all alpha could be gone. But in fact,
their alpha persists, right? And, you know, often, often for many years and decades. And so this
doesn't seem to happen. And so I think there's like, you know, I think there's a lot you could go
if you went from kind of current startup security, you know, you just got to look through the window
and you can look at the slides. You know, it's kind of like, you know, you know, good private
sector security hedge funds, you know, the way Google treats, you know, customer data or whatever.
That'd be good right now. The issue is, you know, basically the CCP will also get more AI
filled. And at some point, we're going to face kind of the full force of, you know, the Ministry
of State Security. And again, you're talking about smart people underrating espionage and
sort of insane capabilities of states. I mean, this stuff is wild, right? You know, they can get
like, you know, there's papers about, you know, you can find out the location of like where you
are on a video game map, just from sounds, right? Like states can do a lot with like
electromagnetic emanations, you know, like, you know, at some point, like you got to be working
from a sketch, like your cluster needs to be air gapped and basically be a military base. It's
like, you know, you need to have, you know, intense kind of security clearance procedures
for employees, you know, they have to be like, you know, all their shit is monitored, you know,
they're, you know, they basically have security guards, you know, it's, you know, you can't use
any kind of like, you know, other dependencies, it's all got to be like intensely vetted, you know,
all your hardware has to be intensely vetted. And, you know, I think basically, if they actually
really face the full force of state level espionage, I don't really think this is the thing private
companies can do both. I mean, empirically, right, like, you know, Microsoft recently had
executives emails hacked by Russian hackers, and, you know, government emails, they've hosted
hacked by government actors. But also, you know, it's basically there's just a lot of stuff that
only kind of, you know, the people behind the security curtains know and only they deal with.
And so, you know, I think it's actually kind of resist the sort of full force of espionage,
you're going to need the government. Anyway, so I think basically we could, we could do it by
always being ahead of the curve. I think we're just going to always be behind the curve. And I
think, you know, maybe unless we get the sort of government project. Okay, so going back to the
naive perspective of we're very much coming at this from there's going to be a race in the CCP,
we must win. And listen, I understand like bad people are in charge of the Chinese government,
like the CCP and everything. But just stepping back in a sort of galactic perspective, humanity
is developing AGI. And do we want to come at this from the perspective of we need to feed China to
this, our super intelligent Jupiter brain descendants will know who China like China will
be something like distant memory that they have America to. So shouldn't it be a more the initial
approach just come to them like, listen, we this is super intelligence. This is something like
we come from a cooperative perspective. Why why immediately sort of rush into it from a hawkish
competitive perspective. I mean, look, I mean, one thing I want to say is like a lot of the
stuff I talk about in the series is, you know, is sort of primarily, you know, descriptive,
right. And so I think that on the China stuff, it's like, you know, yeah, and some ideal world,
you know, we, we, you know, it's just all, you know, merry go around and cooperation. But again,
it's sort of, I think, I think people wake up to AGI. I think the the issue particular on sort of
like, can we make a deal? Can we make an international treaty? I think it really relates to sort of
what is the stability of sort of international arms control dreamers, right. And so we did very
successful arms control on nuclear weapons in the 80s, right. And the reason it was successful
is because the sort of new equilibrium was stable, right. So you take go down from, you know,
whatever, 60,000 nukes to 10,000 nukes. You know, when you have 10,000 nukes, you know,
basically breakout, breakout doesn't matter that much, right? Suppose the other guy now try to
make 20,000 nukes. Well, it's like, who cares, right? You know, like, it's still mutually
assured destruction. Suppose a rogue state kind of went from zero nukes to one nukes. It's like,
who cares, we still have way more nukes than you. I mean, it's still not ideal for destabilization,
but it's, you know, it'd be very different if the arms control agreement had been zero nukes,
right? Because if it had been zero nukes, then it's just like one rogue state makes one nuk.
The whole thing is destabilized, breakout is very easy. You know, your adversary state
starts making nukes. And so basically, when, when you're going to sort of like very low levels of
arms, or when you're going to kind of in your sort of very dynamic technological situation,
arms control is really tough because, because breakout is easy, you know, there's, there's,
I mean, there's some other sort of stories about this in sort of like 1920s, 1930s, you know, it's
like, you know, all the European states had done disarmament and Germany was, was kind of did this
like crash program to build the Luftwaffe. And that was able to like massively destabilize things,
because not that, you know, they were the first, they were able to like pretty easily build kind
of a modern, you know, Air Force, because the others didn't really have one. And that, you know,
that really destabilized things. And so I think the issue with EGI and super intelligence is the
explosiveness of it, right? So if you have an intelligence explosion, if you're able to go from
kind of EGI to super intelligence, if that super intelligence is decisive, like either, you know,
like a year after, because you've developed some crazy WMD, or because you have some like,
you know, super hacking ability that lets you, you kind of, you know, completely deactivate the
sort of enemy arsenal. That means like, suppose, suppose you're trying to like put in a break,
you know, like we both, we're both going to like cooperate, and we're going to go slower, you know,
on the cusp of EGI or whatever, you know, it's going to be such an enormous incentive
to kind of race ahead to break out. And we're just going to do an intelligence explosion. If we
can get three months ahead, we win. I think that makes it basically, I think any sort of arms
control agreement that comes as a situation where it's close, very unstable.
That's really interesting. This is very analogous to kind of a debate I had with Rose on the podcast
where he argued for nuclear disarmament. But if some country tries to break out and starts
developing nuclear weapons, the six months or whatever that you would get is enough to get
international consensus and invade the country and prevent them from getting nukes. And I thought
that was sort of, that's not a stable clue. But on this, right? So like maybe it's a bit easier
because you have EGI and so like you can monitor the other person's cluster or something like
data centers, you can see them from space actually, you can see the energy draw they're
getting. There's a lot of things as you were saying, there's a lot of ways to get information
from an environment if you're really dedicated. And also because unlike a nukes, the data centers are
nukes, you have obviously the submarines, planes, you have bunkers, mountains, whatever, you have
them in so many different places. A data center that you're 100 gigawatt data center, we can blow
that shit up if you're like we're concerned, right? Like just some cruise missile or something.
It's like very vulnerable to sabotage.
I mean, that gets to the sort of, I mean, that gets to the sort of insane vulnerability of this
period post superintelligence, right? Because basically, I think so you have the intelligence
explosion, you have these like vastly superhuman things on your cluster, but you're like, you
haven't done the industrial explosion yet, you don't have your robots yet, you haven't kind of,
you haven't covered the desert in like robot factories yet. And that is the sort of crazy
moment where, you know, say the United States is ahead, the CCP is somewhat behind. There's
actually an enormous incentive for first strike, right? Because if they can take out your data
center, they know you're about to have just this command and decisive lead, they know if we can
just take out this data center, you know, then we can stop it and they might get desperate.
And, you know, so I think basically we're going to get into a position, it's actually, I think it's
going to be pretty hard to defend early on. I think we're basically going to be in a position
where protecting data centers with like the threat of nuclear retaliation. It's like, maybe
sounds kind of crazy though, you know, and this is the inverse of the LAZR. We got to
the data centers. Nuclear deterrence for data centers. I mean, this is a, you know, Berlin,
you know, in the like late fifties, early sixties, both Eisenhower and Kennedy multiple times kind
of made the threat of full on nuclear war against the Soviets, if they tried to encroach on West
Berlin, sort of insane. It's kind of insane that that went well. But basically, I think that's
going to be the only option for the data centers. It's a terrible option. This whole scheme is
terrible, right? Like being, being, being in this like neck and neck race, sort of at this
point is terrible. And, you know, it's also, you know, I think I have some uncertainty basically
on how easy that decisive advantage will be. I'm pretty confident that if you have super
intelligence, you have two years, you have the robots, you're able to get that 30 year lead.
Look, then you're in this like go for one situation. You have your like, you know,
millions or billions of like mosquito size drones that can just take it out. I think there's even
a possibility you can kind of get a decisive advantage earlier. So, you know, there's these
stores, you know, about these as well about, you know, like colonization and like the sort of
1500s where it was, you know, these like a few hundred kind of spanyards were able to like topple
the Aztec empire, you know, a couple, I think a couple other empires as well, you know, each of
these had a few million people. And it was not like God like technological advantage. It was some
technological advantage. It was, I mean, it was some amount of disease. And then it was kind of
like cunning strategic play. And so I think there's a, there's a possibility that even sort of early
on, you know, it's you haven't gone through the full industrial explosion yet, we have super
intelligence, but you know, you're able to kind of like manipulate the imposing generals, claim
your ally with them, then you have, you have some, you know, you have sort of like some crazy new
bioweapons, maybe, maybe there's even some way to like pretty easily get a paradigm that like
deactivates enemy nukes. Anyway, so I think this stuff could get pretty wild. Here's what I think
we should do. I really don't want this volatile period. And so a deal with China would be nice.
It's going to be really tough if you're in this unstable equilibrium.
I think basically we want to get in a position where it is clear that the United States, that a
sort of coalition of democratic allies will win. It's clear the United States would be clear to
China, you know, that will require having locked down the secrets that will require having built
the 100 gigawatt cluster in the United States and having done the natural gas and doing what's
necessary. And then when it is clear that the democratic coalition is well ahead, then you go
to China and then you offer them a deal. And you know, China will know they're going to win. This
is going to be, they're very scared of what's going to happen. We're going to know we're going to
win, but we're also very scared of what's going to happen because we really want to avoid this
kind of like breakneck race right at the end and where things could really go awry. And,
you know, and then, and so then we offer them a deal. I think there's an incentive to come to
the table. I think there's a sort of more stable arrangement you can do. It's a sort of an Adams
for peace arrangement. And we're like, look, we're going to respect you. We're not, we're not going
to like, we're not going to use super intelligence against you. You can do what you want. You're
going to get your like, you're going to get your slice of the galaxy. We're going to like,
we're going to benefit share with you. We're going to have some like computer agreement where
it's like, there's some ratio of compute that you're allowed to have. And that's like enforced
with your like composing AI's or whatever. And we're just not going to do, we're just not going
to do this kind of like volatile sort of WMD arms race to the death. We're good. And sort of it's
like a new world order that's US led, that sort of democratic led, but that respects China. Let's
then do what they want. Okay. There's so much to, there's so much there. First on the galaxies
thing, I think it's just a funny anecdote. So I want to kind of want to tell it. And this,
we were at an event and I'm respecting Chad, I'm house rules here. I'm not revealing anything
about it, but we're talking to somebody or a Leopold was talking to somebody influential.
Afterwards, that person asked the group, Leopold told me that he wants, he's not going to spend
any money on consumption until he's ready to buy galaxies. And he goes, the guy goes,
I honestly don't know if you meant galaxies, like the brand of private plane galaxy or the physical
galaxies. And there was an actual debate. Like he went away to the restroom and there was an
actual debate among people who are very influential about, oh, they can't amend galaxies. And the
other people who knew you better be like, no, he means galaxies. I mean the galaxy. I mean the
galaxies. I mean, I think it'd be interesting. I mean, I think there's, I mean, there's two
ways to buy the galaxies. One is like at some point, you know, it's like post-superintelligence,
you know, they're so crazy. But by the way, I love, okay, so what happens is he's on the ground,
I'm laughing my ass off. I'm not even saying I think people were like, having this debate.
And then Leopold comes back and the guy, somebody's like, oh, Leopold, we're having this debate
about whether you meant you want to buy the galaxy or you want to buy the other thing.
And Leopold assumes they must mean not the Friday play in the galaxy versus the actual galaxy.
But do you want to buy the property rights with the galaxy or do you just send out the probes right
now? Oh my god. All right. Back to China. There's a whole bunch of things that I could ask about
that plan about whether you're going to get credible, promised. You will get some part of
galaxies, whether they care about that. I mean, you have AIs to help you enforce stuff.
Okay, sure. We'll leave that aside. That's a different rabbit hole. The thing I want to ask is,
but it has to be the thing we need. The only way this is possible is if we lock it down.
I see. If we don't lock it down, we are in this fever struggle.
Greatest peril mankind will have ever seen. So, but given the fact that in during this period,
instead of just taking their chances and they don't really understand how this AI governance scheme
is going to work, whether they're going to check, whether we had to actually get the galaxies,
the data centers, they can't be built underground. They have to be built above ground.
Taiwan is right off the coast of us. They need the chips from there. Why aren't we just going to
invade? Listen, we don't want like worst case scenario is they win the super intelligence,
which they're on track to do anyways. Wouldn't this instigate them to either invade Taiwan or blow
up the data center in Arizona or something like that? Yeah. I mean, look, I mean, talked about
the data center one and then you probably have to like threaten nuclear retaliation to protect
that. They might also just blow it up. There's also maybe ways they can do it without sort of
attribution, right? Like you. Stuxnet. Stuxnet. Stuxnet. Yeah. I mean, this is part of, we'll
talk about this later, but you know, I think, look, I think we need to be working on the Stuxnet
for the Chinese project, but the. But by the way, for the audience. I mean, Taiwan, the Taiwan
thing, the, you know, I talk about, you know, AGI about, you know, 27 or whatever. Do you know
about the like terrible 20s? No. Okay. Well, I mean, sort of in this sort of Taiwan watcher circles,
people often talk about like the late 2020s as like maximum period of risk for Taiwan,
because it's sort of like, you know, military modernization cycles and basically extreme
fiscal tightening on the military budget in the United States over the last decade or two
has meant that sort of we're in this kind of like, you know, trough in, in, in the late 20s of like,
you know, basically overall naval capacity. And, you know, that's sort of when China is saying
they want to be ready. So it's already kind of like, it's kind of pitching, you know,
there's some sort of like, you know, parallel timeline there. Yeah. Look, it looks appealing
to invade Taiwan. I mean, maybe not because they, you know, basically remote cutoff of
the chips. And so then it doesn't mean they get the chips, but it just means they, they,
you know, it's just, it's, you know, the machines are deactivated. But look, I mean, imagine if
during the Cold War, you know, all of the world's uranium deposits had been in Berlin,
you know, and Berlin was already, I mean, almost multiple times it was caused a nuclear war.
So God help us all. Well, the Groves had a plan after the after the war, that the plan was that
America would go around the world and getting the rights to every single uranium deposit,
because they didn't realize how much uranium there was in the world. And they thought this
was the thing that was feasible. Not realizing, of course, that there's like huge deposits in
the Soviet Union itself. Right. Okay. East Germany too. There's a, there's always,
there's a lot of East German workers who kind of got screwed and got cancer.
Okay. So the framing we've been talking about that we've been assuming, and I'm not sure I buy
yet, is that the United States, this is our leverage, this is our data center,
the China is the competitor. Right now, obviously, that's not the way things are progressing.
Private companies control these AIs. They're deploying them. It's a market-based thing.
Why will it be the case that it's like the United States, it has this leverage,
or is doing this thing versus China is doing this thing?
Yeah. I mean, look, look on the, on the project, you know, I mean, there's sort of descriptive
and prescriptive claims or sort of normative positive claims. I think the main thing I'm trying
to say is, you know, you know, look, we're at, we're at these SF parties or whatever.
And I think people talk about AGI and they're always just talking about the private AI labs.
And I think I just really want to challenge that assumption. It just seems like,
seems pretty likely to me, you know, as we've talked about, for reasons we've talked about,
that look like the national security state is going to get involved.
And, you know, I think there's a lot of ways this could look like, right? Is it,
is it like nationalization? Is it a public-private partnership? Is it a kind of defense
contra-elect or like a relationship? Is it a sort of government project that soaks up all the people?
And so there's a spectrum there. But I think people are just vastly underrating the chances of
this more or less looking like a government project. And look, I mean, look, if, if,
you know, it's sort of like, you know, do you think, do you think like we all have literal,
like, you know, when we have like literal superintelligence on our cluster, right? And it's
like, you know, you have 100 billion, they're like, sorry, you have a billion like superintelligence
scientists that they can like hack everything. They can like stuxnet the Chinese data centers,
you know, they're starting to build the robo armies, you know, you like, you really think
they'll be like a private company and the government would be like, oh my God, what is going on? You
know, like, yeah. Suppose there's no China. Suppose there's people like Iran, North Korea,
who theoretically at some point will be able to do superintelligence, but they're not on our heels
and don't have the ability to be on our heels. In that world, are you advocating for the national
project or do you prefer the private path forward? Yeah. So I mean, two responses to this. One is,
I mean, you still have like Russia, you still have these other countries, you know, you've got to have
Russia proof security, right? It's like, you can't, you can't just have Russia steal all your stuff.
And like, maybe their clusters aren't going to be as big, but like, they're still going to be able
to make the crazy bio weapons and the, you know, the mosquito-sized drones, you know, and so on.
And so, I mean, I think, I think, I think the security component is just actually a pretty
large component of the project in the sense of like, I currently do not see another way
where we don't kind of like instantly proliferate this to everybody. And so, yeah. So I think it's
sort of like, you still have to deal with Russia, you know, Iran, North Korea, and you know, like,
you know, Saudi and Iran are going to be trying to get it because they want to screw each other,
and you know, Pakistan and India, because they want to screw each other. There's like this enormous
destabilization still. That said, look, I agree with you. If, if, you know, if, you know, by some,
somehow things are shaking out differently, and like, you know, AGI would have been in 2005,
you know, sort of like unparalleled, you know, American hegemony. I think there would have
been more scope for less government involvement. But again, you know, as we're talking about
earlier, I think that would have been sort of this like very unique moment in history. And I
think basically, you know, almost all other moments in history, there would have been the
sort of great power competitor. So, okay, so let's get into this debate. So I, my position here
is if you look at the people who are involved in the Manhattan Project itself, many of them
regretted their participation, as you said. Now we can infer from that that we should sort of
start off with a cautious approach to the nationalized ASI project. Then you might say, well,
listen, obviously they're super. Did they regret their participation because of the project or
because of the technology itself? I think people will regret it. But I think it's, it's, it's about
the nature of the technology, and it's not about project. I think they also probably had a sense
that different decisions would have been made if it wasn't some concerted effort that everybody
had agreed to participate in. That if it wasn't in the context of this, we need to race to beat
Germany and Japan, you might not develop, so that's a technology part, but also like you wouldn't
actually like hit them. It's like the sort of, the destructive potential, the sort of,
you know, military potential, it's not, it's not because of the project, it is because of the
technology. And that will unfold regardless. You know, I think this underrates the power of
Imagine you go through like the 20th century in like, you know, a decade. You know, it's just
the sort of, the sort of, yes, great technological progress. Let's just actually run to that example.
So suppose you actually, there was some reason that the 20th century would be run through in one
decade. Do you think the cause of that should have been, should have been like the technologies
that happened through the 20th century shouldn't have been privatized? That it should have been a
more sort of concerted government led project. You know, look, there is a history of just dual
use technologies, right? And so I think AI in some sense is going to be dual use in the same way.
And so there's going to be lots of civilian uses of it, right? Like nuclear energy, it's like
itself, right? It was like, you know, there's the government project developed the military
angle of it. And then, you know, it was like, you know, then the government worked with private
companies, there's a sort of like real like flourishing of nuclear energy until you know,
the environmentalists stopped it. You know, planes, right? Like Boeing, right? Actually,
you know, the Manhattan project wasn't the biggest defense R&D project during World War II. It was
the B-29 bomber, right? Because they needed the bomber that had long enough range to reach Japan
to destroy their cities. And then, you know, Boeing made some Boeing made that,
B Boeing made the B-47, made the B-52, you know, the plane the US military uses today.
And then they use that technology later on to, you know, build the 707 and the sort of the
later on mean this context because in the other, like I get what it means after a war to privatize,
but if you have the government has ASI, maybe just let me back up and explain my concern.
So you have the only institution in our society, which has a monopoly on violence.
And then we're going to give the, give it some, in a way that's not broadly deployed,
access to the ASI, the counterfactual, and this may be sound silly, but listen,
we're going to go through higher and higher levels of intelligence. Private companies will
be required by regulation to increase their security, but they'll still be private companies
and they're deployed this and they're going to release the AGI, now McDonald's and JP
Morgan and some random startup are now more effective organizations because they have a bunch
of AGI workers. And it'll be sort of like the industrial revolution in the sense that the
benefits were widely diffused. If you don't end up in a situation like that, then the,
I mean, even backing up, like, what is it we're trying to, why do we want to win against China?
We want to win against China because we don't want a top down authoritarian system to win.
Now, if the way to beat that is that the most important technology that humanity will have
has to be controlled by a top down government, like, what was the point? Like, maybe, so let's
like run our cards with privatization. That's the way we get to the classic liberal
market based system we want for the ESIs. Yeah. All right. So a lot of talk about here. Yeah.
I think, yeah, maybe I'll start a bit about like actually looking at what the private world would
look like. And I think this is part of where the sort of there's no alternative comes from.
And then let's look like, look at like what the government project looks like, what checks and
balances look like and so on. All right. Private world. And first of all, okay, so right, like a
lot of people right now talk about open source. And I think there's this sort of misconception
that like AGI development is going to be like, Oh, it's going to be some like beautiful decentralized
thing. And you know, like, you know, some giddy community of coders who gets to like, you know,
collaborate on it. That's not how it's going to look like, right? You know, it's, you know,
$100 billion trillion dollar cluster. It's not going to be that many people that have it. The
algorithms, you know, it's like right now, open source is kind of good, because people just use
the stuff that was published. And so they basically, you know, the algorithms were published, or, you
know, as Mistral, they just kind of like leave deep mind and take all the secrets with them. And
they just kind of replicate it. That's not going to continue being the case. And so, you know,
the sort of like open source, I mean, also people say stuff like, you know, 1026 flops,
it will be in my phone, you know, it's no, it won't, you know, it's like Moore's Law is really
slow. I mean, AI chips are getting better. But like, you know, the $100 billion computer will
not cost, you know, like $1,000, you know, within your lifetime or whatever, aside from me. So anyway,
so it's going to be, it's going to be like two or three, you know, big players on the private world.
And so look, a few things. So first of all, you know, you talk about the sort of like, you know,
enormous power that sort of superintelligence will have and the government will have.
I think it's pretty plausible that the alternative world is that like one AI company has that power,
right? And specifically, if we're talking about lead, you know, it's like, what, I don't know,
open AI has a six month lead. And then, you know, so then you're not talking, you're talking about
basically, you know, the most powerful weapon ever. And it's, you know, you're kind of making this
like radical bet on like a private company CEO is the benevolent dictator. No, no, this is not
necessarily like any other thing that's privatized, we don't account on them being benevolent. We
just look to think of, for example, somebody who manufactures industrial fertilizer, right?
This is the person with this factory, if they went back to an ancient civilization, they could
like blow up Rome, they could probably blow up Washington DC. And I think in their series,
you talk about Tyler Cowan's phrase of muddling through. And I think even with privatization,
people sort of underrate that there are actually a lot of private actors who have the ability to
there's a lot of people who control the water supply or whatever. And we can count on cooperation
and market based incentives to basically keep a balance of power. I get that things are proceeding
really fast. But we have a lot of historical evidence that this is the thing that works best.
So look, I mean, what do we do with nukes, right? The way we keep the sort of nukes in check is not
like, you know, a sort of beefed up second amendment where like each state has their own
like little nuclear arsenal and like, you know, Dario and Sam have their own little nuclear arsenal.
No, no, it's like, it's institutions, it's constitutions, it's laws, it's courts. And so I
don't actually, I'm not sure that this, you know, I'm not sure that the sort of balance of power
analogy holds. In fact, you know, sort of the government having the biggest guns was sort of
like an enormous civilizational achievement, right? Like Landfrieden in the sort of Holy Roman
Empire, right? You know, if somebody from the town over kind of committed a crime on you,
you know, you didn't kind of start a sort of a, you know, a big battle between the two towns.
No, you take it to a court of the Holy Roman Empire and they would decide. And it's a big
achievement. Now, the thing about, you know, the industrial fertilizer, I think the key difference
is kind of speed and often Stephen's balance issues, right? So it's like 20th century and,
you know, 10 years in a few years. That is an incredibly scary period. And it is incredibly
scary, you know, because it's, you know, you're going through just this sort of enormous array of
destructive technology and the sort of like enormous amount of like, you know, basically
military event. I mean, you would have gone from, you know, kind of like, you know, you know,
bayonets and horses to kind of like tank armies and fighter jets in like a couple years and then
from, you know, like, you know, and then to like, you know, nukes and, you know, ICBMs and stuff,
you know, it's just like in a matter of years. And so it is sort of that speed that creates,
I think basically the way I think about it is there's going to be this initial just incredibly
volatile and incredibly dangerous period. And somehow we have to make it through that. That's
going to be incredibly challenging. That's where you need the kind of government project.
If you can make it through that, then you kind of go to like, now we can, now, you know, the
situation has been stabilized, you know, we don't face this imminent national security threat.
You know, it's like, yes, there were kind of WMDs that came along the way, but either we've managed
to kind of like have a sort of stable offense, defense balance, right? Like I think bioweapons
initially are a huge issue, right? Like an attacker can just create like a thousand different
static, you know, viruses and spread them. And it's like going to be really hard for you to kind
of like make a defense against each, but maybe at some point you figure out the kind of like,
you know, universal defense against every possible virus. And then you're in a stable
situation and on the offense, defense balance, or you do the thing, you know, you do with planes
where it's there's like, you know, there's certain capabilities that the private sector
isn't allowed to have. And you've like figured out what's going on, restrict those. And then you
can kind of like let, let, you know, you let this sort of civilian, civilian uses.
So I'm skeptical of this because well, there's sorry, I mean, the other important thing is,
so I talked about the sort of, you know, maybe it's like, it's, it's a, you know,
it's, you know, it's one company with all this power. And I think it's like, I think it is
unprecedented because it's like the industrial fertilizer guy cannot overthrow the US government.
I think it's quite plausible that like the AI company with super intelligence can overthrow
the multiple companies, right? And I buy that one of them could be ahead.
So it's not obvious that it'll be multiple. I think it's again, if there's like a six monthly,
maybe, maybe there's two or three, but if there's two or three, then what you have is just like
the crazy race between these two or three companies, you know, it's like, you know, whatever,
Demis and Sam, they're just like, I don't want to let the other one win.
And, and they're both developing their nuclear arsenals in the road. It's just like, also like,
come on, the government is not going to let these people, you know, are they going to let,
like, you know, is Dario going to be the one developing the kind of like, you know,
you know, super hacking Stuxnet and like deploying against the Chinese data center.
The other issue though, is it won't just, if it's two or three, it won't just be two or three.
There'll be two or three and it'll be China and Russia and North Korea because the private
and the private lab world, there's no way they'll have security that is good enough.
I think we're also assuming that somehow if you nationalize it, like the security just,
especially in the world, where it did this stuff is priced in by the CCP,
that now you've like got it nailed down. And I'm not sure why we would expect that to be the case.
But on this, government's the only one who does this stuff.
So if it's not Sam or Dario, who's, we don't want to trust them to be benevolent,
dictator or whatever. So by here, we're counting on, if it's, because you can
cause a coup, the same capabilities are going to be true of the government project, right?
And so the modal president in 2020, 2025, but Donald Trump will be the person that you don't
trust Sam or Dario to have these capabilities. And why, okay, I agree that like I'm worried
if the Sam or Dario have a one year lead on ASI in that, in that world, then I'm like concerned
about this being privatized. But in that exact same world, I'm very concerned about Donald
Trump having the capability. And potentially if we're living in a world where the takeoff
is slower than you anticipate, in that world, I'm like very much I want the private companies.
So like in no part of this matrix, is it obviously true that the government
led project is better than the private project? Let's talk about the government
project a little bit and checks and balances. In some sense, I think my argument is a sort
of brookian argument, which is like American checks and balances have held for over 200 years
and through crazy technological revolutions. The US military could kill like every civilian
in the United States. But you're going to make that argument, the private public
balance of power itself for hundreds of years. But yeah, why has it held? Because the government
has the biggest guns and has never before has a single CEO or a random nonprofit board
had the ability to launch nukes. And so again, it's like, you know, what is the track record
of the government checks and balances versus the track record of the private company checks
and balances? Well, the iLab, you know, like first stress test, you know, went really badly,
you know, that didn't really work, you know? I mean, even worse in the sort of private
company world. So it's both like, it is like the two private companies and the CCP and they just
like instantly have all the shit. And then it's, you know, they probably won't have good enough
internal control. So it's like, not just like the random CEO, but it's like, you know, rogue
employees that can kind of like use these super intelligences to do whatever they want.
And this won't be true of the government? Like the rogue employees won't exist on the project?
Well, the government actually like, you know, has decades of experience and like actually
really cares about the stuff. I mean, it's like they deal, they deal with nukes, they deal with
really powerful technology. And it's, you know, this is like, this is the stuff that the national
security state cares about. You know, again, to the go, let's talk about the government checks
and balances a little bit. So, you know, what are checks and balances in the government world?
First of all, I think it's actually quite important that you have some amount of
international coalition. And I talked about these sort of two tiers before. Basically,
I think the inner tier is a sort of modeled on the cool record agreement, right? This was like
Churchill and Roosevelt, they kind of agreed secretly. We're going to like pull our efforts
on nukes, but we're not going to use them against each other. And we're not going to use them
against anyone else with their consent. And I think basically look, bring in, bring in the UK,
they have deep mind bringing in the kind of like Southeast Asian states who have the chip supply
chain, bring in some more of kind of like NATO close democratic allies for, you know, talent and
industrial resources. And you have the sort of like, you know, so you have, you have those checks
and balances in terms of like more international countries at the table. Sorry, somewhat separately,
but then you have the sort of second tier of coalitions, which is the sort of Adams for peace
thing, where you go to a bunch of countries, including like the UAE, and you're like, look,
we're going to basically like, you know, there's a deal similar to like the NPT stuff where it's
you're not allowed to like do the crazy military stuff, but we're going to share the civilian
applications. We're in fact going to help you and share the benefits and, you know, sort of kind
of like this new sort of post superintelligence world order. All right, US checks and balances,
right? So obviously, Congress is going to have to be involved, right? Appropriate in
trillions of dollars. I think probably ideally you have Congress needs to kind of like confirm
whoever's running this. So you have Congress, you have like different factions of the government,
you have the courts, I expect the First Amendment to continue being really important. And maybe that,
I think that sounds kind of crazy to people, but I actually think, again, I think these are
institutions that have held this test of time in a really sort of powerful way.
You know, eventually, you know, this is why honestly, alignment is important is like,
you know, the AIs, you program the AIs to follow the Constitution. And it's like, you know,
why does the military work? It's like generals, you know, are not allowed to follow unlawful
orders or not allowed to follow unconstitutional orders. You have the same thing for the AIs.
So what's wrong with this argument? When you say, listen, maybe you have a point in the world
where we have extremely fast takeoff. It's like one year from AGI to ASI.
Yeah. And then you have the like, years after ASI, where you have this like,
extraordinary explosion. Maybe you have a point. We don't know, you have these arguments,
we'll like get into the weeds on them about why that's a more likely world, but like maybe
that's not the world we live in. And in the other world, I'm like, very on the side of making sure
that these things are privately held. Now, when you nationalize, that's a one way function,
you can't go back. Why not wait until we have more evidence on which of those worlds we live in?
And I think like rushing on the nationalization might be a bad idea while we're not sure.
And okay, I'll just respond to that first. I mean, I don't, I don't expect us to nationalize
tomorrow. If anything, I expected to be kind of with COVID where it's like kind of too late,
like ideally you nationalize it early enough to like actually lock stuff down,
it'll probably be kind of chaotic and like, you know, you're going to be trying to like do this
crash program to lock stuff down and it'll be kind of late and it'll be kind of clear what's
happening. We're not going to nationalize when it's not clear what's happening. I think the whole
historically these institutions have held up well. First of all, they've actually
almost broken a bunch of times. It's like, this is the argument that some people who are saying
that we shouldn't be that concerned about nuclear war say, where it's like, listen,
we have the nuke for 80 years and like we've been fine so far, so the risk must be low.
And then the answer to that is no, actually, it is a really high risk. And the reason we've avoided
it is like people have gone through a lot of effort to make sure that this thing doesn't happen.
I don't think that giving government ASI without knowing what that implies is going through the
lot of effort. And I think the base rate, like you can talk about America, I think America is
very exceptional, not just in terms of dictatorship, but in terms of every other country in history
has had a complete drawdown of wealth because of war, revolution, something. America is very
unique in not having that. And the historical base rate, we're talking about Greek power
competition. I think that has a really big, that's something we haven't been thinking about
the last 80 years, but it's really big. Dictatorship is also something that is just
DD, false state of mankind. And I think relying on institutions, which in an ASI world,
it's fundamentally right now, if the government tried to overthrow, it's much harder if you
don't have the ASI, right? Like there's people who have AR-15s and there's like things that
had to make it harder. If government could crush the AR-15s. No, I think it'd actually be pretty
hard. The reason it was Vietnam and Afghanistan were pretty hard. They're just a new whole country.
Yeah, yeah, I agree, but like I'm... They could. I mean similar with ASI.
Yeah, I think it's just like easier if you have what you're talking about. But there are institutions,
there are constitutions, there are legal restraints, there are courts, there are checks and balances.
The crazy bet is the bet which are like private company CEOs. The same thing, by the way,
isn't the same thing true of nukes where we have these institutional agreements about
non-polar aspiration and whatever. And we're still very concerned about that being broken
and somebody getting nukes and like you should stay up that night worrying about that.
It's a precarious situation, but ASI is going to be a really precarious situation as well. And like
given how precarious nukes are, we've done pretty well.
And so what does privatization in this world even mean?
I mean, I think the other thing is...
Like what happened after?
I mean, the other thing, you know, because we're talking about like whether the government
project is good or not. And it's like, I have very mixed feelings about this as well.
Again, I think my primary argument is like,
you know, if you're at the point where this thing has like
vastly superhuman hacking capabilities, if you're at the point where this thing can develop,
you know, bio weapons, you know, like in crazy bio weapons, ones that are like targeted,
you know, can kill everybody but the hand Chinese or, you know, that, you know,
would wipe out, you know, entire countries, where you're talking about like building Robo
Armors, you're talking about kind of like drone swarms that are, you know, again,
the mosquito sized drones that could take it out, you know,
the United States national security state is going to be intimately involved with this.
And this will, you know, the labs, whether, you know, and I think, again, the government,
a lot of what I think is the government project looks like, it is basically a joint venture
between like, you know, the cloud providers between some of the labs and the government.
And so I think there is no world in which the government isn't intimately involved in this
like crazy period. The very least, basically, you know, like the intelligence agencies need
to be running security for these labs. So they're already kind of like, they're controlling
everything, they're controlling access to everything. Then they're going to be like,
probably again, if we're in this like really volatile international situation, like a lot
of the initial applications, it'll, it'll suck. It's not what I want to use ASI for,
will be like trying to somehow stabilize this crazy situation. Somehow we need to prevent
like proliferation of like some crazy new WMDs and like the undermining of mutually assured
destruction to kind of like, you know, North Korea and Russia and China. And so I think,
you know, I basically think your world, you know, I think there's much more spectrum than
you're acknowledging here. And I think basically the world in which it's private labs is like
extremely heavy government involvement. And really what we're debating is like, you know,
what form of government project, but it is going to look much more like, you know,
the national security state than anything it does look like, like a startup as it is right now.
And I think the, yeah.
Look, I think something like that makes sense. I would be, if it's like the Manhattan Project,
then I'm very worried where it's like, this is part of the U.S. military.
Where I've hit some more like, listen, you got to talk to Jake Sullivan before you
like run the next training one.
It's like Lockheed Martin, Skunkward's part of the U.S. military. It's like, they call the shops.
Yeah, I don't think that's great. I think that's, I think that's bad. I think it would be bad if
that happened with ASI. And like, what is it? What is the scenario?
What is the alternative?
Okay. So it's closer to my end of the spectrum where,
yeah, you do have to talk to Jake Sullivan before you can launch the next training cluster.
But there's many companies who are still going for it.
And the government will be intimately involved in the security.
But the like, three different companies are trying to-
Is Dario launching the Stuxnet attack?
Yeah. What are you, what are you, launching, launching. Okay.
So Dario's activating the Chinese data centers.
I think this is similar to the story you could tell about, there's a lot of,
like literally the big tech right now. I think Satya, if you wanted to, he probably
like could get his engineers like, what are the zero days in Windows?
And like, well, how do we get infiltrate the president's computer so that like-
Maybe shut down.
No, no, no. Like right now I'm saying Satya could do that, right?
Because he knows-
Maybe shut down.
What do you mean?
Government wouldn't let them do that.
Yeah. I think there's a story you could tell where like they could pull off a coup,
whatever. But like, I think there's like-
Maybe not pull off a coup.
Okay.
Maybe not pull off, come on.
Okay. Fine, fine, fine. I agree. I'm just saying like something closer to,
so what's wrong with the scenario where you, the government is, there's like multiple
companies going for it, but the AI is still broadly deployed and alignment works in the
sense that you can make sure that it's not, the system level prompt is like,
you can't help people make bio weapons or something, but these are still broadly deployed.
So that-
I mean, I expect the AIs to be broadly deployed. I mean, first of all-
Even if it's a government project?
Yeah. I mean, look, I think first of all, like, I think the matters of the world,
you know, open sourcing their eyes, you know, that are two years behind or whatever.
Yeah. Super valuable role. They're gonna like, you know, and so there's gonna be some question
of like, either the offense, defense balance is fine. And so like, even if they open sourced
two year old AIs, it's fine. Or it's like, there's some restrictions on the most extreme dual use
capabilities, like, you know, you don't let private companies sell kind of crazy weapons.
And that's great. And that will help with the diffusion. And, you know, after the government
project, you know, there's gonna be this initial tense period, hopefully that's stabilized.
And then look, yeah, like Boeing, they're gonna go out and they're gonna like make,
do all the flourishing civilian applications and, you know, like nuclear energy, you know,
it'll like all the civilian applications will have their day. I think part of my argument here is that-
And how does that proceed, right? Because in the other world, there's existing stocks of capital
that are worth a lot. Yeah, the clusters, they'll be still be Google clusters.
And so Google, because they got the contract from the government, they'll be the ones that control
the ASI. But like, why are they trading with anybody else? Why is there a random start up again?
It'll be the same. It'll be the same companies that would be doing it anyway. But in this,
in this world, they're just contracting with the government or like their DPA for all their compute
goes to the government. And, but in the world, it's very natural. It's like sort of how
after you get the ASI and we're building the robot armies and building fusion reactors or whatever,
that the, that's- Only the government will get to build robot armies.
Yeah, that one worried. Or like the fusion reactors and stuff.
That's what we do with this, because- It's the same situation we have today.
Because if you already have the robot armies and everything, like the existing society doesn't
have some leverage where it makes sense to the government to- But they don't have that today.
Yeah, they get in the sense that there's like a lot of capital that the government wants and
there's other things like, why was Boeing privatized after?
Government has the biggest guns. And the way we regulate is institutions,
constitutions, legal restraints.
Oh, because tell me what privatization should look like in the ASI world afterwards.
Afterwards. Like the Boeing example, right? It's like, you have this government-
Who gets it? Like Google, Microsoft, and last year-
And who are they selling it to? Like they already have the robot factory.
And then look at- Why are they selling it to us? Like they already have the,
they don't need like our, this is chum change in the ASI world.
Because we didn't get like the ASI broadly deployed throughout this takeoff.
So we don't have the robot. We don't have like the fusion reactors and whatever advanced,
decades of advanced science that you were talking about.
So like it just, what are they trading with us for?
Trading with whom for?
Everybody who was not part of the project.
They've got that technology that's decades ahead.
Yeah. I mean, look, that's a whole nother issue of like,
how does like economic distribution work or whatever? I don't know. That'll be rough.
Yeah. I think-
I'm just saying, I don't, I don't, basically I'm kind of like,
I don't see the alternative. The alternative is,
you like overturn a 500 year civilizational achievement of land fleeting.
You basically instantly leak the stuff to the CCP.
And either you like barely scrape out ahead and, but you're in this fever struggle,
you're like proliferating crazy WMDs.
It's just like enormously dangerous situation,
enormously dangerous on alignment,
because you're in this kind of like crazy race at the end.
And you don't have the ability to like take six months to get alignment.
Right. The alternative is, you know,
alternative is like you aren't actually bundling your efforts to kind of like win
the race against the authoritarian powers.
You know, yeah. And so,
you know, I don't like it. You know, I wish,
I wish the thing we use the ASI for is to like,
you know, cure the diseases and do all the good in the world.
But it is my prediction that sort of like by the, in the end game,
what will be at stake will not just be kind of cool products,
but what will be at stake is like whether liberal democracy survives,
like whether the CCP survives, like what the world order for the next century will be.
And when that is at stake,
forces will be activated that are sort of way beyond what we're talking about now.
And like, you know, in the sort of like crazy race at the end,
like the sort of national security implications will be the most important,
you know, sort of like, you know, World War II, it's like, yeah, you know,
nuclear energy, how did it stay?
But in the initial kind of period, when, you know,
when this technology was first discovered,
you had to stabilize the situation, you had to get nukes,
you had to do it right.
And then, and then the civilian applications out there.
I think of closer analogy to what this is, because nuclear,
I agree that nuclear energy is the thing that happens in Iran,
and it's like dual use in that way.
But it's, it's something that happened like literally a decade after nuclear weapons were
developed, whereas with AI, like the immediately all the applications are unlocked.
And it's closer to literally, I mean, this is analogy people are supposed to make in
the context of AGI is like, assume your society had 100 million more John Wayne Neumanns.
And I don't think like, if that was literally what happened,
if tomorrow you just have 100 million more of them, the approach should have been,
well, some of them will convert to ISIS.
And we need to like be really careful about that.
And then like, oh, you know, like what if a bunch of them are born in China?
And then we like, if we got to nationalize the John Wayne Neumanns,
I'm like, no, I think it'll be generally a good thing.
And I'd be concerned about one power had getting like all the John Wayne Neumanns.
I mean, I think the issue is the sort of like bottling up in the sort of intensely short
period of time, like this enormous sort of like, you know,
unfolding of technological progress of an industrial explosion.
And I think we do worry about the 100 million John Wayne Neumanns.
It's like rise of China.
Why are we worried about the rise of China?
Because it's like 100 billion people and they're able to do a lot of industry
and do a lot of technology.
And but it's just like, you know, the rise of China times like, you know, 100,
because it's not just 101 billion people.
It's like a billion super intelligent, crazy, you know, crazy things.
And in like, you know, a very short period.
Let's start practically, because if the goal is we need to beat China,
part of that is protecting.
I mean, that's one of the goals, right?
Yeah, I agree.
I agree.
One of the goals is to beat China.
And also manage this incredibly crazy, scary period.
Yeah.
Right.
So part of that is making sure we're not leaking algorithmic secrets to them.
Yep.
Part of that is a cluster.
I mean, building the trillion dollar cluster.
That's right.
Right.
Yeah.
But like your whole point, the Microsoft can release corporate bonds that are.
I think Microsoft can do the like hundreds of billions.
Yeah.
I think I think the trillion dollar cluster is closer to a national effort.
I thought that your earlier point was that American capital markets are deep.
They're good.
They're pretty good.
I mean, I think the trillion, I think it's possible it's private.
It's possible.
But it's going to be like, you know, by the way, at this point, we have a AGI that's
rapidly accelerating productivity.
I think the trillion dollar cluster is going to be planned before before the AGI.
I think it's sort of like you get the AGI on the like 10 gigawatt cluster, like intelligent.
Maybe you have like one more year where you're kind of doing some final on hobbling to fully
unlock it.
Then you have the intelligence explosion.
And meanwhile, the like trillion dollar cluster is almost finished.
And then you like, and then you do your super intelligence on your trillion dollar cluster,
or you run it on your trillion dollar cluster.
And by the way, you have not just your trillion dollar cluster, but like, you know,
hundreds of millions of GPUs on inference clusters everywhere.
And this isn't result, like, I think private, in this world, I think private companies have
the capital and can raise capital to do it.
I think you will need the government force to do it fast.
Well, I was just about to ask, like, wouldn't it be the, like, we know company companies are
on track to be able to do this and China, if they're unhindered by climate pledges or whatever.
Well, that's part of what I'm saying.
So if that's the case, if it really matters that we beat China, there's all kinds of
practical difficulties of like,
will the AI researchers actually join the AI effort?
If they do, there's going to be three different teams at least who are currently doing
private pre-training on different, different companies.
Now who decides, at some point, you're going to have the, you're like YOLO, the hyperparameters
of the trillion dollar cluster, who decides that?
Just like merging extremely complicated research and development processes
across very different organizations.
This is how it's supposed to speed up America against the Chinese.
Like, why don't we just let...
Brain and deep mind merge.
And it was like a little messy, but it was fine.
It was pretty messy.
And it was also the same company and also much earlier on in the process.
I mean, pretty similar, right?
Same code, different code bases and like lots of different infrastructure and different teams.
And it was like, you know, it wasn't like, it wasn't the smoothest of all processes,
but, you know, deep mind is doing, I think, very well.
I mean, look, you give the example of COVID and the COVID example is like, listen,
we woke up to it, maybe it was late, but then we deployed all this money.
And COVID response to government was a clusterfuck over.
And like the only part of it that was worked is I agree Warp Speed was like enabled by the
government.
It was literally just giving the permission that you can actually do.
Well, it was also taking, making like the big
commitments or whatever.
But I agree.
But it was like fundamentally it was like a private sector led effort.
Yeah.
That was the only part of COVID that worked.
I mean, I think, I think, again, I think the project will look closer to operation
Warp Speed.
And it's not even, I mean, I think, I think you'll have all the companies involved
in the government project.
I'm not that sold that merging is that difficult.
You know, you have one, okay, you select one code base and you know, you run free
training on like GPUs with, you know, one code base.
And then you do the sort of second RL step on the, you know, the other code base with
TPU is that I think it's fine.
I mean, to the topic of like, will people sign up for it?
It wouldn't sign up for it today.
I think this would be kind of crazy to people.
But also, you know, I mean, this is part of the like secrets thing, you know, people
gather parties or whatever, you know, you know this, you know, I don't think anyone
has really gotten up in front of these people and been like, look, you know, the thing you're
building is the most important thing for like the national security of the United States
for like weather, you know, like, you know, the free world will have another century ahead
of it.
Like this is the thing you're doing is really important, like for your country, for democracy.
And, you know, don't talk about the secrets.
And it's not just about, you know, deep mind or whatever, it's about, it's about, you know,
these really important things.
And so, you know, I don't know, like, again, we're talking about the Manhattan project,
right?
This stuff was really contentious initially.
But, you know, at some point, it was like clear that this stuff was coming.
It was clear that there was like sort of a real sort of like exigency on the military
national security front.
And, you know, I think a lot of people come around on the like weather will be competent.
I agree.
I mean, this is again, where it's like a lot of the stuff is more like predictive in the
sense, I think this is like reasonably likely.
And I think not enough people are thinking about it.
You know, like a lot of people think about like AI lab politics or whatever.
But like nobody has a plan for the project, you know, it's like, you know,
they think you're pessimistic about it.
And like, well, you don't have a plan for it.
We need to do it very soon because AGI is upon us.
Then fuck, the only capable competent technical institutions capable of making AI right now
are private companies.
And they're going to play that leading role.
It'll be a sort of a partnership basically.
But the other thing is like, you know, again, we talked about World War II and, you know,
American unpreparedness, the veneer of World War II is complete, you know, complete shambles,
right?
And so there is a sort of like very company.
I think America has a very deep bench of just like incredibly competent managerial talent.
You know, I think that, you know, there's a lot of really dedicated people.
And, you know, I think basically a sort of operational warp speed, public-private partnership,
something like that, you know, is sort of what I imagine it would look like.
Yeah.
I mean, the recruiting the talent is an interesting question because the same sort of thing where
initially for the Manhattan Project, you had to convince people,
we've got to beat the Nazis and you got to get on board.
I think a lot of them maybe regretted how much they accelerated the bomb.
And I want, I think this is generally a thing of the war where...
I mean, I think they're also wrong to regret it, but...
Yeah, I mean, why?
What's the reason for regretting it?
I think there's a world in which you don't have, the way in which nuclear weapons were
developed after the war was pretty explosive because there was a precedent that you actually
can use nuclear weapons.
Then because of the race that was set up, you immediately go to the H bomb.
I mean, I think my view is, again, this is related to the view on AI and maybe some of
our disagreement is like, that was inevitable.
Like, of course, there was this world war and then obviously there was the cold war right after.
Of course, the military and technology angle of this would be pursued with ferocious intensity.
And I don't really think there's a world in which that doesn't happen,
where it's like, ah, we're all not going to build nukes.
And also just like nukes went really well.
I think that could have gone terribly, right?
Again, I think this is not physically possible with nukes, this pocket nukes for everybody,
but I think WMDs that are proliferated and democratized and all the countries have it.
The US leading on nukes and then building this new world order that was US-led,
or at least a few great powers, and a non-proliferation regime for nukes,
a partnership and a deal that's like, look, no military application of nuclear technology,
but we're going to help you with the civilian technology.
We're going to enforce safety norms on the rest of the world.
That worked. It worked. And it could have gone so much worse.
So we're zooming on.
I don't know if you're talking about Nagasaki.
You know, I mean, this is, I mean, I say this a bit in the piece,
but it's like actually the A-bomb, you know, like the A-bomb on Hiroshima and Nagasaki was just like,
you know, the sort of firebombing.
I think the thing that really changed the game was like the super, you know, the H-bombs and ICBMs.
And then I think that's really when it took it to like a whole new level.
I think part of me thinks when you say, we'll tell the people that for the free world to survive,
we need to pursue this project.
It sounds similar to World War II is,
so World War II is a sad story, obviously in this fact that it happened,
but also like the victory is sad in the sense that
Britain goes in to protect Poland.
And at the end, the USSR, which is, you know, as your family knows,
is incredibly brutal, ends up occupying half of Europe.
And part of protecting the free world, that's why I got to rush the AI.
And like, if we end up with the American AI Leviathan,
I think there's a world where we look back on this,
where it has the same sort of twisted irony that Britain going into World War II had about trying to protect Poland.
Look, I mean, I think there's going to be a lot of unfortunate things that happen.
I'm just hoping we make it through.
I mean, to the point of it's like, I really don't think the pitch will only be the sort of like,
you know, the race, I think the race will be sort of a backdrop to it.
I think the sort of general like, look, it's important that democracy shape this technology.
We can't just like leak this stuff to, you know, North Korea is going to be important.
I think also for the just safety, including alignment,
including the sort of like creation of new WMDs, I'm not currently sold.
There's another path, right?
So it's like, if you just have the breakneck grace, both internationally,
because you're just instantly leaking all the stuff, including the weights,
and just, you know, the commercial race, you know, Demis and Dario and Sam, you know,
just kind of like, they all want to be first.
And then it's incredibly rough for safety.
And then you say, okay, safety regulation.
But, you know, it's sort of like, you know, the safety regulation that people talk about,
it's like, oh, well, NIST, and they take years and they figure out what the expert consensus is,
and then they write what's going to happen to the project as well.
But I think, I mean, I think the sort of alignment angle during the intelligence explosion,
it's going to, you know, it's not a process of like years of bureaucracy,
and then you can kind of write some standards.
I think it looks much more like basically a war and like you have a fog of war.
It's like, look, it's like, is it safe to do the next oom?
You know, and it's like, ah, you know, like, you know, we're like three ooms into the
intelligence explosion.
We don't really understand what's going on anymore.
You know, the, you know, like a bunch of our like generalization scaling curves are like,
kind of looking not great.
You know, some of our like automated AI researchers that are doing alignment are
saying it's fine, but we don't quite trust them.
In this test, you know, the like, the eyes started doing naughty things and,
ah, but then we like hammered it out and then it was fine.
And like, ah, should we, should we go ahead?
Should we take, you know, another six months?
Also, by the way, you know, like China just stole the weights.
Are we, you know, they're about to like deploy the rumor army.
Like what do we do?
I think it's this, I think it is this crazy situation.
And, um, you know, basically you, you were lying much more on kind of like a sane chain
of command than you are on sort of some like, you know, the Libertive Regulatory Scheme.
I wish you had, you were able to do the Libertive Regulatory Scheme.
And this is the thing about the private companies too.
I don't think, you know, they all claim they're going to do safety, but
I think it's really rough when you're in the commercial race and they're startups,
you know, and startups, startups or startups, you know,
I think they're not fit to handle WMDs.
Yeah, I'm coming closer to your position.
But part of me also, so with the responsible scaling policies,
I was told that people who are advancing that, that the way to think about this,
because they know I'm like a libertarian type of person.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And the way they approached me about it was that fundamentally this is a way to protect
market-based development of AGI in the sense that if you didn't have this at all,
then you would have the sort of misuse and then you would have to be nationalized.
And the RSPs are a way to make sure that through this deployment,
you can still have a market-based order.
But then there's these safeguards that make sure that things don't go off the rails.
And I wonder if it seems like your story seems self-consistent,
but it does feel, I know this was never your position, so I'm not looping you into this,
but sort of modern Bailey almost in the sense of...
Well, look, here's what I think about RSP-type stuff
or sort of safety regulation that's happening now.
I think they're important for helping us figure out what world we're in
and like flashing the warning signs when we're close, right?
And so the story we've been telling is sort of what I think the modal version of this decade is,
but it's like, I think there's lots of ways it could be wrong.
I really... We should talk about the data a while more.
I think there's like, again, I think there's a world where the stuff stagnates, right?
There's a world where we don't have AGI.
And so basically the RSP thing is preserving the optionality,
let's see how this stuff goes, but we need to be prepared.
Like if the red lights start flashing, if we're getting the automated eye researcher,
then it's like, and it's crunch time, and then it's time to go.
I think, okay, I can be on the same page on that, that we should have a very,
very strong prior on a proceeding in a market-based way,
unless you're right about what the explosion looks like, the intelligence explosion.
And so like, I don't move yet, but in that world where like really does seem like
Alec Radford can be automated, and that is the only bottleneck to getting TSI.
Okay, I think we can leave it at that.
I can, yeah, I am somewhat of the way there.
Okay, okay. I hope it goes well.
It's gonna be, ah, very stressful.
And again, right now is the chill time.
Enjoy your vacation a lot less.
It's funny to look out over, just like, this is San Francisco.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Open the eyes right there, you know, anthropics there.
I mean, again, this is kind of like, you know, it's like,
you guys have this enormous power over how it's gonna go for the next couple of years,
and that power is depreciating.
Who's you guys?
Like, you know, people at labs.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But it is a sort of crazy world.
And you're talking about like, you know, I feel like you talk about like,
oh, maybe they'll nationalize too soon.
It's like, you know, almost nobody like really like feels it, sees what's happening.
And it's, I think this is the thing that I find stressful about all the stuff is like,
look, maybe I'm wrong.
Like if I'm right, we're in this crazy situation where there's like, you know,
like a few hundred guys that are like paying attention.
And it's daunting.
I went to Washington a few months ago.
And I was talking to some people who are doing AI policy stuff there.
And I was asking them how likely they think nationalization is.
And they said, oh, you know, like, it's really hard to nationalize stuff.
It's been a long time since we've done it.
There's these very specific procedural constraints on what kinds of things can be nationalized.
And then I was asked, well, like ASI, so that means because there's,
there's constraints at a defense production act or whatever that won't be nationalized.
The Supreme Court would overturn that.
And they're like, yeah, I guess that would be nationalized.
That's the short summary of my post or my view on the project.
Okay. So before we go further on the ASF, let's just back off.
We began the conversation.
I think people will be confused.
You graduated valedictorian of Columbia when you were 19.
So you got to college when you were 15.
And you were in Germany, then you got to college at 15.
How the fuck did that happen?
I really wanted out of Germany.
I went to kind of a German public school.
It was not a good environment for me.
In what sense?
There's just like no peers.
Yeah, look, I mean, it was, yeah, it was, you know,
there's, I mean, there's also just a sense in which sort of like,
there's this particular sort of German cultural sense.
I think in the US, you know, there's all these like amazing high schools
and like sort of an appreciation of excellence.
And in Germany, there's really this sort of like Paul Poppy syndrome of us, right?
Where it's, you know, you're the curious kid in class and you want to learn more
instead of the teacher being like, ah, that's great.
They're like, they kind of resent you for it.
And they're like trying to crush you.
I mean, there's also like, there's no kind of like elite universities
for undergraduate, which is kind of crazy.
So, you know, the sort of, you know, there's sort of like,
basically like the meritocracy was kind of crushed in Germany at some point.
Also, I mean, there's a sort of incredible sense of complacency,
you know, across the board.
I mean, one of the things that always puzzles me is like, you know,
even just going to a US college was just kind of like radical act.
And like, you know, it doesn't seem radical to anyone here because it's like,
ah, this is obviously the thing you do and you can go to Columbia, you go to Columbia.
But it's, you know, it is very unusual.
And it's, it's, it's wild to me because it's like, you know,
this is where stuff is happening.
You can get so much of a better education.
And, you know, like America is where, you know, it's where, where, where,
where all the stuff is and people don't do it.
And, and so, um, yeah, anyway, so I, you know, I know I skipped a few grades and,
and, you know, I think, um, at the time it seemed very normal to me to kind of like
go to college and come to America.
I think, um, you know, now one of my sisters is now like turning 15, you know.
And so then I, you know, and I look at her and I'm like,
now I understand how my mother.
And as you get to college, you're like presumably the only 15 year old.
Yeah, yeah.
As it was just like normal for you to be a 15 year old.
Like, what was the initial years?
It felt so normal at the time.
You know, I didn't, yeah.
So yeah, it's like, now I understand why my mother's worried.
And, you know, I think, you know, I worked, I worked on my parents for a while.
You know, eventually I was, you know, I persuaded them.
No, but yeah, it felt, felt very normal at the time.
And it was great.
It was also great because I, you know, I actually really like college, right?
And in some sense it sort of came at the right time for me.
Where, you know, I, I mean, I, you know, for example, I really appreciate the sort of like
liberal arts education and, you know, like the core curriculum and reading sort of
core works of political philosophy and, and literature.
And you did what you can.
And I mean, my majors were math and statistics and economics.
But, you know, Columbia has a sort of pretty heavy core curriculum and liberal arts education.
And honestly, like, you know, I shouldn't have done all the majors.
I should have just, I mean, the best courses were sort of the courses where it's like,
there's some amazing professor and it's some history class.
And it's, I mean, that's, that's honestly the thing I would recommend people spend their time
on in college.
Was there one professor or class that stood out that way?
I mean, if you, there's like a class by Richard Betz on war, peace and strategy.
Adam too is obviously fantastic.
And, you know, has written very riveting books.
Yeah.
You should have them on the podcast, by the way.
I've tried.
Okay.
Try it.
I think you try it for me.
Yeah, you gotta give it on the pod.
Yeah.
Oh, it'd be so good.
Okay.
So then in a couple of years, we were talking to Tyler Cowan recently and he said that when,
the way we, he first encountered you was you wrote this paper on economic growth and existential
risk and he said, I, when I found, read it, I couldn't believe that a 17 year old had written
it.
I thought if this was a MIT dissertation, I'd be impressed.
So you were like, how did you go from your, I guess we were the junior of them,
you're writing, you're writing, you know, pretty novel economic papers.
Why did you get interested in this, this kind of thing?
And what was the process to get in that?
I don't know.
I just, you know, I get interested in things in some sense.
It's sort of like, it feels very natural to me.
It's like, I get excited about a thing.
I read about it.
I immerse myself.
I think I can, you know, I can learn information very quickly and understand it.
The, I mean, I think to the paper, I mean, I think one actual, at least for the way I work,
I feel like sort of moments of peak productivity matter much more than sort of average productivity.
I think there's some jobs, you know, like CUO or something, you know, like average
productivity really matters.
But I think there's sort of a, I often feel like I have periods of like, you know,
there's some, there's a couple months where there's sort of nephrolessence and I'm like,
you know, and the other times I'm sort of computing stuff in the background.
And at some point, you know, like writing the series, this is also kind of similar.
And it's just like you, you write it and, and it's, it's like, it's really flowing.
And that's sort of what ends up mattering.
I think even for CEOs, it might be the case that the peak productivity is very important.
There's one of our following chat-off-house rules, one of our friends in a group chat
has pointed out how many famous CEOs and founders have been bipolar manic,
which is very much the peak, like the call option on your productivity is the most
important thing and you get it by just increasing the volatility through bipolar.
Okay. So that's interesting.
And so you get interested in economics first.
First of all, why economics?
Like you could read about anything at this move.
Like you, if you wanted, you know, you kind of got a slow start on them.
You reached it all these years on the econ, there's an alternative world where you're
like on the super alignment team at 17 instead of 21 or whatever it was.
I mean, in some sense, I'm still doing economics, right?
You know, what is, what is straight lines on a graph?
I'm looking at the log-log thoughts and like figuring out what the trends are
and like thinking about the feedback loops and equilibrium arms control dynamics.
And, you know, it's, I think it is a sort of a way of thinking that I find very useful.
And, you know, like what, you know, Dario and Ilya seeing scaling early in some sense,
that is a sort of very economic way.
And also the sort of physics, kind of like empirical physics, you know,
a lot of them are physicists.
I think the economists usually can't code well enough and that's their issue.
But I think it's that sort of way of thinking.
I mean, the other thing is, you know, I thought they were sort of, you know, I thought of a lot
of the sort of like core ideas of economics.
I thought we're just beautiful.
And, you know, in some sense, I feel like I was a little duped, you know,
where it's like actually econ academia is kind of decadent now.
You know, I think that, you know, for example, the paper I wrote, you know,
it's sort of, I think the takeaway, you know, it's a long paper,
it's 100 pages of math or whatever.
I think the core takeaway I can, you know, kind of give the core intuition for in like,
you know, 30 seconds and it makes sense.
And it's, and it's like, you don't actually need the math.
I think that's the sort of the best pieces of economics are like that where you do the work,
but you do the work to kind of uncover insights that weren't obvious to you before.
Once, once you've done the work, it's like some sort of like mechanism falls out of it
that like makes a lot of crisp intuitive sense that like explains some facts about the world
that you can then use in arguments.
And I think, you know, I think, you know, like a lot of econ one-on-one like this,
and it's great.
A lot of econ in the, you know, the 50s and the 60s, you know, was like this.
And, you know, Chad Jones papers are often like this.
I really like Chad Jones papers for this.
You know, I think, you know, why did I ultimately not pursue econ academia was number of reasons.
One of them was Tyler Cowan.
You know, he kind of took me aside and he was kind of like, look, I think you're one of the
like top young economists I've ever met, but also you should probably not go to grad school.
Oh, interesting.
Yeah, I didn't realize that.
Well, yeah.
And it was, it was, it was good because he kind of introduced me to the, you know,
I don't know, like the Twitter weirdos or just like, you know, and I think the takeaway from that
was kind of, you know, got to move out last one more time.
Wait, Tyler introduced you to the Twitter weirdos?
A little bit.
Yeah.
Or just kind of like the sort of brought, you know,
Like the 60 year old, the old economist in GCT that Twitter.
Yeah.
Well, you know, I had been, I had, so I went from Germany, you know, completely, you know,
on the periphery to kind of like, you know, in the U.S. elite institution and sort of got some
vibe of like sort of, you know, meritocratic elite, you know, U.S. society.
And then sort of, yeah, basically this sort of like, there was a sort of directory then to
being like, look, I, you know, find the true American spirit.
I got to come out here.
The other reason I didn't become an economist was because, or at least econ academia,
was because I think sort of econ academia has become a bit decadent.
And maybe it's just ideas getting harder to find and maybe it's sort of things, you know,
and the sort of beautiful, simple things have been discovered.
But you know, like what are econ papers these days?
You know, it's like, you know, it's like 200 pages of like empirical analyses on what happened
when, you know, like Wisconsin bought, you know, 100,000 more textbooks on like educational
outcomes.
And I'm really happy that work happened.
I think it's important work, but I think it is not in government and covering these
sort of like fundamental insights and sort of mechanisms in society.
Or, you know, it's like, even the theory work is kind of like, here's a really complicated
model and the model spits out, you know, if the Fed does X, you know, then Y happens,
you have no idea what that hat, why that happened?
Because it's like gazillion parameters and they're all calibrated in some way.
And it's some computer simulation.
You have no idea about the validity, you know, yeah.
So I think, I think the sort of, you know, the most important insights are the ones where
you have to do a lot of work to get them.
But then there's this crisp intuition.
Yeah.
The P versus NP of, that's really interesting.
So just going back to your time in college, you say that peak productivity kind of explains
the, this paper and things, but the valedictorian, that's getting straight A's or whatever is very
much average productivity phenomenon.
Right.
So there's one award for the highest GPA, which I won, but the valedictorian is like among the
people which have the highest GPA and then like selected by faculty.
Okay.
Yeah.
So it's just not, but it's not just peak productivity.
It's just, it's just, I generally just love this stuff.
You know, I just, I was curious and I thought it was really interesting and I love learning
about it and, and I love kind of like, it made sense to me and, you know, it was very natural.
And so, you know, I think I'm, you know, I'm not, you know, I think one of my faults is
I'm not that good at eating glass or whatever.
I think there's some people who are very good at it.
I think the sort of like, the sort of moments of peak productivity come when I, you know,
I'm just really excited and engaged and, and, and, and love it.
And, you know, I, I, you know, if you take like courses, you know, that's what you got in college.
And it's, it's, it's, it's the Bruce Banner code and Avengers.
You know, I'm always angry.
I'm always excited.
I'm always curious.
That's why I'm always the equitability.
So it's interesting, by the way, when you were in college, I was also in college.
I think you were, despite being a year younger than me, I think you're ahead in college than
me or at least two years, maybe two years ahead.
And we met around this time.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
We also met, I think through the Tyler Cowan universe.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And it's very insane how small the world is.
I think I, did I reach out to you?
I must have.
Yeah.
About when I had a couple of videos and they had a couple hundred views or something.
Yeah.
It's a small world.
I mean, this is the crazy thing about the eye world, right?
It's kind of like, it's the same few people at the kind of SF parties and they're the ones,
running the models at DeepMind and OpenAI and Anthropic.
And I mean, I think some other friends of ours have mentioned this,
who are now later in their career and very successful, that they actually met all the
people who are also kind of very successful in Silicon Valley now.
Like when they're in their 20s or when they're really 20.
I mean, look, I actually think, why is it a small world?
I mean, I think one of the things is some amount of some sort of agency.
And I think in a funny way, this is a thing I sort of took away from the sort of Germany
experience where it was, I mean, look, I, I, it was crushing.
I really didn't like it.
And it was like, it was such an unusual move to kind of skip grades and such an unusual move to
come to the United States.
And, you know, a lot of these things I did were kind of unusual moves.
And, you know, there's some amount where like, just like, just trying to do it.
And then it was fine.
And it worked.
That kind of reinforced, like, you know, you don't, you don't just have to kind of conform
to what the opportune window is.
You can just kind of like try to do the thing, the thing that seems right to you.
And like, you know, most people can be wrong and I know things like that.
And I think that was kind of a, you know, valuable kind of like early experience,
those sort of formative.
Okay.
So after college, what did you do?
I did econ research for a little bit, you know, Oxford and stuff.
And then, then I worked at Future Fund.
Yeah.
Okay.
So, and so tell me about it.
Future Fund was, you know, it was a foundation that was, you know, funded by
San Bank and Freed.
I mean, we were our own thing, you know, we were based in the Bay.
You know, at the time, this was in sort of early 22.
It was, it was this just like incredibly exciting opportunity, right?
It was basically like a startup, you know, foundation, which is like, you know, it doesn't
come along that, that often that, you know, we thought we'd be able to give away billions
of dollars, you know, thought we'd be able to kind of like, you know, remake how philanthropy
is done, you know, from first principles, thought we'd be able to have, you know,
this like great impact, you know, we, the causes we focused on were, you know,
biosecurity, you know, AI, you know, finding exceptional talent and putting them to work
on hard problems.
And, you know, like a lot of the stuff we did, I was, I was really excited about,
you know, like academics who would, you know, usually take six months would send us emails
like, ah, you know, this is great.
This is so quick and, you know, and straightforward, you know, in general,
I feel like I've often find that with like, you know, a little bit of encouragement, a little
bit of sort of empowerment, kind of like removing excuses, making the process easy,
you know, you can kind of like get people to do great things.
I think on the future front, the thing is context for people who might not realize,
not only were you guys planning on deploying billions of dollars, but it was a team of four
people.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So you at 18 are on a team of four people that is in charge of deploying billions of dollars.
Yeah.
I mean, just, I mean, yeah, I'm a future fund, you know, the,
yeah, I mean, the, you know, so that was, that was sort of the heyday, right?
And then obviously, you know, when, when in sort of, you know, November of 22,
you know, it was kind of revealed that Sam was this, you know, giant fraud.
And from one day to the next, you know, the whole thing collapsed.
That was just really tough.
I mean, you know, obviously it was devastating.
It was devastating, obviously for the people at their money on FTX,
you know, closer to home, you know, all the, you know, all these grantees, you know,
we'd wanted to help them and we thought they were doing amazing projects.
And so, but instead of helping them, we ended up saddling them with like a giant problem.
You know, personally, it was, you know, it was a startup, right?
And so I, you know, I'd worked 70 hour weeks every week for, you know,
basically a year on this to kind of build this up, you know, we're a tiny team.
And then from one day to the next, it was all gone and not just gone.
It was associated with this giant fraud.
And so, you know, that was incredibly tough.
Yeah.
And then were there any signs early on that
SPF was?
Yeah.
And like, obviously I didn't know he was a fraud and the whole, you know,
I would have never worked there, you know.
And, you know, we weren't, you know, we were a separate thing.
We weren't working with the business.
I mean, I think, I do think there were some takeaways for me.
I think one takeaway was, you know, I think there's a, I had this tendency,
I think people in general have this tendency to kind of like, you know,
give successful CEOs a pass on their behavior.
Because, you know, there's successful CEOs and that's how they are.
And that's just the successful CEO things.
And, you know, I didn't know Sandbank Manfredo was a fraud, but I knew SPF.
And I knew he was extremely risk-taking, right?
I knew he, he was narcissistic.
He didn't tolerate this agreement well, you know, sort of by the end,
he and I just like didn't get along well.
And sort of, I think the reason for that was like, there's some biosecurity grants
he really liked because they're kind of cool and flashy.
And at some point I'd kind of run the numbers and it didn't really seem
that cost effective.
And I pointed that out and he was pretty unhappy about that.
And so I knew his character.
And I think, you know, I feel like one takeaway for me was,
was, you know, like, I think it's really worth paying attention to people's character,
including like people you work for and successful CEOs.
And, you know, that can save you a lot of pain down the line.
Okay, so after that, I picked some clothes and you're out.
And then you got into, you went to OpenAI, the Super Alignment team had just started.
I think you were like part of the initial team.
And so what was the original idea?
What was compelling about that for you to join?
Yeah, totally.
So, I mean, what was the goal of the Super Alignment team?
You know, the Alignment team at OpenAI, you know, at other labs, sort of like several years ago,
kind of had done sort of basic research and they developed RLHF,
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback.
And that was sort of a, you know, ended up being really successful technique
for controlling sort of current generation of AI models.
What we were trying to do was basically kind of be the basic research
bet to figure out what is the successor to RLHF.
And the reason that we needed that is, you know, basically, you know,
RLHF probably won't scale to superhuman systems.
RLHF relies on sort of human raiders who kind of thumbs up, thumbs down, you know,
like the model said something, it looks fine, it looks good to me.
At some point, you know, the superhuman models, the superintelligence,
it's going to write, you know, a million lines of, you know, crazy complex code,
you don't know at all what's going on anymore.
And so how do you kind of steer and control these systems?
How do you hide side constraints?
You know, the reason I joined was I thought this was an important problem
and I thought it was just a really solvable problem, right?
I thought this was basically, you know, there's, I think there's a, I still do.
I mean, even more so do I think there's a lot of just really promising sort of ML research
on alignment on sort of aligning superhuman systems.
And maybe we should talk about that a bit more later, but so, and then it was so solvable,
you solved it in a year.
Anyway, so look, opening, I wanted to do this like really ambitious effort on alignment and,
you know, Elliot was backing it and, you know, I liked a lot of the people there.
And so I was, you know, I was really excited and I was kind of like, you know,
I think there was a lot of people sort of on alignment.
There's always a lot of people kind of making hay about it.
And, you know, I appreciate people highlighting the importance of the problem.
And I was just really into like, let's just try to solve it.
And let's do the ambitious effort, you know, let's do the, you know,
operation warp speed for solving alignment.
And it seemed like an amazing opportunity to do so.
Okay. And now basically the team doesn't exist.
I think the head of it has left.
Both heads of it have left, Jan and Ilya.
That's the news of last week.
What happened? Why did the thing break down?
I think OpenAI sort of decided to take things in a somewhat different direction.
Meaning what?
I mean, that super alignment isn't the best way to frame the...
No, I mean, look, obviously, sort of after the November board events,
you know, there were personnel changes.
I think Ilya leaving was just incredibly tragic for OpenAI.
And, you know, I think some amount of repartilization,
I think some amount of, you know, I mean,
there's been some reporting on the Superalignment Compute Commitment.
You know, there's this 20% compute commitment as part of,
you know, how a lot of people were recruited.
You know, it's like, we're going to do this ambitious effort on alignment.
And, you know, some amount of, you know,
not keeping that and deciding to go in a different direction.
Okay, so now Jan has left, Ilya has left.
So this team itself has dissolved,
but you were the sort of first person who left or was forced to leave.
You were the information reported that you were fired for leaking.
But what happened? Was this accurate?
Yeah. Look, why don't I tell you what they claim I leaked
and you can tell me what you think.
Yeah. So OpenAI did claim to employees that I was fired for leaking.
And, you know, I and others have sort of pushed them to say what the leak is.
And so here's their response in full.
You know, sometime last year, I had written a sort of brainstorming document on preparedness
on safety and security measures we need in the future on the Path to AGI.
And I shared that with three external researchers for feedback.
So that's it. That's the leak.
You know, I think for context,
it was totally normal at OpenAI at the time to share sort of safety ideas
with external researchers for feedback.
You know, it happened all the time.
You know, the doc was sort of my idea is, you know, before I shared it,
I reviewed it for anything sensitive.
The internal version had a reference to a future cluster,
but I redacted that for the external copy.
You know, there's a link in there to some slides of mine, internal slides.
You know, that was a dead link to the external people I shared it with.
You know, the slides weren't shared with them.
And so, obviously, I pressed them to sort of tell me,
what is the confidential information in this document?
And what they came back with was a line in the doc about planning for AGI by 2728,
and not setting timelines for preparedness.
You know, I wrote this doc, you know, a couple months after the super alignment
announcement, we had put out, you know, this sort of four-year planning horizon.
I didn't think that planning horizon was sensitive.
You know, it's the sort of thing Sam says publicly all the time.
Hey, I think sort of John said it on the podcast a couple weeks ago.
Anyway, so that's it.
That's it?
So that seems pretty thin for, if the cause was leaking, that seems pretty thin.
Was there anything else to it?
Yeah, I mean, so that was the leaking claim.
I mean, you can say a bit more about sort of what happened in the final.
Yeah.
So one thing was last year, I had written a memo,
internal memo, about opening iSecurity.
I thought it was, you know, egregiously insufficient.
You know, I thought it wasn't sufficient to protect, you know,
the theft of model weights or key algorithmic secrets from foreign actors.
So I wrote this memo.
I shared it with a few colleagues, a couple members of leadership,
who sort of mostly said it was helpful.
But then, you know, a couple weeks later, a sort of major security incident occurred.
And that prompted me to share the memo with a couple members of the board.
And so after I did that, you know, days later, it was made very clear to me that leadership
was very unhappy with me having shared this memo with the board.
You know, apparently the board had hassled leadership about security.
And then I got sort of an official HR warning for this memo,
you know, for sharing it with the board.
The HR person told me it was racist to worry about CCPS view.
And they said it was sort of unconstructive.
And, you know, look, I think I probably wasn't that my most diplomatic,
you know, I definitely could have been more politically savvy.
But, you know, I thought it was a really, really important issue.
And, you know, the security incident had been really worried.
Anyway, and so I guess the reason I bring this up is when I was fired,
it was sort of made very explicit that the security memo is a major reason for my being fired.
You know, I think it was something like, you know,
the reason that this is a firing and not a warning is because of the security memo.
But you were sharing it with the board?
The warning I'd gotten for the security memo.
Hmm. Anyway, and I mean, some other, you know, what might also be helpful context
is the sort of questions they asked me when they fired me.
So, you know, this was a bit over a month ago, I was pulled aside for a chat with a lawyer,
you know, that quickly turned very adversarial.
And, you know, the questions were all about my views on AI progress on AGI on the level
security appropriate for AGI on, you know, whether government should be involved in AGI on
whether I and super alignment were loyal to the company on, you know, what I was up to
during the opening of board events, you know, things like that.
And, you know, then they, you know, chatted to a couple of my colleagues,
and then they came back and told me I was fired.
And, you know, they'd gone through all of my digital artifacts from the time at my,
you know, time at opening messages docs.
And that's when they found, you know, the leak.
Yeah. And so anyway, so the main claim they made was a leaking allegation.
You know, that's what they told employees.
They, you know, the security memo.
There's a couple of other allegations they threw in.
One thing they said was that I was unforthcoming during the investigation,
because I didn't initially remember who I'd shared the doc with,
the sort of preparedness brainstorming doc, only that I had sort of spoken to some external
researchers about these ideas.
And, you know, look, the doc was over six months old.
You know, I spent the day on it.
You know, as a Google doc, I shared with my opening email.
It wasn't a, you know, screenshot or anything I was trying to hide.
It simply didn't stick because it was such a non-issue.
And then they also claim that I was engaging on policy in a way that they didn't like.
And so what they cited there was that I had spoken to a couple of external researchers,
you know, somebody got a think tank about my view that AGI would become a government project,
you know, as we discussed.
You know, in fact, I was speaking to lots of sort of people in the field about that at the time.
I thought it was a really important thing to think about.
Anyway, and so they found, you know, they found a DM that I'd written to like a friendly colleague,
you know, five or six months ago, where I relayed this and, you know, they cited that.
And, you know, I had thought it was well within open-eyed norms to kind of talk about
high-level issues on the future of AGI with the external people in the field.
So anyway, so that's what they alleged.
That's what happened.
You know, I've spoken to kind of a few dozen former colleagues about this, you know,
since I think the sort of universal reaction is kind of like, you know, that's insane.
I was sort of surprised as well.
You know, I had been promoted just a few months before.
I think, you know, I think Ilya's comment for the promotion case at the time was something like,
you know, Leopold's amazing.
We're lucky to have him.
But look, I mean, I think the thing I understand, and I think in some sense is reasonable,
is like, you know, I think I ruffled some feathers.
And, you know, I think I was probably kind of annoying at times.
You know, it's like, I security stuff, and I kind of like repeatedly raised that,
and maybe not always in the most diplomatic way.
You know, I didn't sign the employee letter during the board events, you know, despite
pressure to do so.
And you were one of like eight people or something.
Not that many people.
I guess the, I think the sort of two senior most people didn't sign were Andrey,
and yeah, I mean, on the letter, by the way, I, by the time on sort of Monday morning,
when that letter was going around, I think probably it was appropriate for the board
to resign.
I think they'd kind of like lost too much credibility and trust with the employees.
But I thought the letter had a bunch of issues.
I mean, I think one of them was it just didn't call for an independent board.
I think it's sort of like basics of corporate governance to have an independent board.
Anyway, you know, it's other things, you know, I am in sort of other discussions,
I press leadership for sort of opening eye to abide by its public commitments.
You know, I raised a bunch of tough questions about whether it was consistent with the
opening I mission and consistent with the national interests to sort of partner with
authoritarian dictatorships to build the core infrastructure for AGI.
So, you know, look, you know, it's a free country, right?
That's what I love about this country.
You know, we talked about it.
And so they have no obligation to keep me on staff.
And, you know, I think in some sense, I think it would have been perfectly reasonable
for them to come to me and say, look, you know, we're taking the company in a different direction.
You know, we disagree with your point of view.
You know, we don't trust you enough to sort of tow the company line anymore.
And, you know, thank you so much for your work at Open AI, but I think it's time to part ways.
I think that would have made sense.
I think, you know, we did start sort of materially diverging on sort of views on important issues.
I'd come in very excited and aligned with Open AI, but that sort of changed over time.
And look, I think there would have been a very amicable way to part ways.
And I think it's a bit of a shame that it sort of this is the way it went down.
You know, all that being said, I think, you know, I really want to emphasize
there's just a lot of really incredible people at Open AI.
And it was an incredible privilege to work with them.
And, you know, overall, I'm just extremely grateful for my time there.
When you left, now that there's now there's been reporting about
an NDA that former employees have to sign in order to have access to their vested equity.
Did you sign some such NDA?
No. My situation is a little different.
And that is sort of basically right before my cliff.
But then, you know, they still offered me the equity.
But I didn't want to sign a nondisparagement, you know, freedom is priceless.
And how much was how much was the equity?
It's like close to a million dollars.
So it was definitely a thing you were you and others aware of that this is like
a choice that Open AI is explicitly offering you.
Yeah.
And presumably the person on Open AI staff knew that we're offering them equity,
but they had to sign this NDA that has these conditions that you can't,
for example, give the kind of statements about your thoughts on AGI and Open AI that
you're giving on this podcast right now.
Like, I don't know what the whole situation is.
I certainly think sort of vested equity is pretty rough if you're conditioning that on NDA.
It might be a somewhat different situation if it's a sort of separate agreement.
Right.
But an Open AI employee who had signed it presumably could not give the podcast that you're giving today.
Quite plausibly not.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I don't know.
Okay.
So analyzing the situation here, I guess if you were to, yeah, the board thing is really tough
because if you were trying to defend them, you would say, well, listen,
you were just kind of going outside the regular chain of command.
And maybe there's a point there, although the way in which the person from HR thinks
that you have an adversarial relationship with or you're supposed to have an adversarial
relationship with the board where to give the board some information, which is relevant to
whether Open AI is fulfilling its mission and whether it can do that in a better way
is part of the leak as if the board is that is supposed to ensure that Open AI is following
its mission as some sort of external actor.
That seems pretty...
I mean, I think, I mean, to be clear, the leak allegation was just that sort of document
I changed the feedback.
This is just sort of a separate thing that they cited and they said,
I wouldn't have been fired if not for the security memo.
They said you wouldn't have been fired.
They said the reason this is a firing and not a warning is because of the warning you had
gotten for the security memo.
Oh, before you left, the incidents with the board happened, were Sam was fired and then
Rihard, a CEO, and now he's on the board.
Now, Ilya and Yan, who are the heads of the super lineman team and Ilya, who is a co-founder of
Open AI, obviously the most significant in terms of stash or a member of Open AI for
a research perspective, they've left.
It seems like, especially with regards to super lineman stuff and just generally the
Open AI, a lot of the sort of personnel drama has happened over the last few months.
What's going on?
Yeah, there's a lot of drama.
Yeah, so why is there so much drama?
You know, I think there would be a lot less drama all Open AI claim to be with sort of
building chat, GPT or building business software.
I think where a lot of the drama comes from is, you know, Open AI really believes they're
building AGI, right?
And it's not just, you know, a claim they make for marketing purposes, you know, whatever,
you know, there's this report that Sam is raising, you know, $7 trillion for chips and
it's like, that stuff only makes sense if you really believe in AGI.
And so I think what gets people sometimes is sort of the cognitive dissonance between
sort of really believing in AGI, but then sort of not taking some of the other implications
seriously, you know, it's, this is going to be incredible.
This is going to be incredibly powerful technology, both for good and for bad.
And that implicates really important issues like the national security issues we spoke
about, like, you know, are you protecting the secrets from the CCP?
Like, you know, does America control the core AGI infrastructure or does it, you know, a
Middle Eastern dictator control the core AGI infrastructure?
And then I mean, I think the thing that, you know, really gets people is the sort of tendency
to kind of then make commitments and sort of like, you know, they say they take these
issues really seriously, they make big commitments on them, but then sort of frequently don't
follow through, right? So, you know, again, as mentioned, there was this commitment around
super alignment compute, you know, sort of 20% of compute for this long term safety research
effort. And I think, you know, you and I could have a totally reasonable debate about what is
the appropriate level of compute for super alignment. But that's not really the issue.
The issue is that this commitment was made and it was used to recruit people and, you know,
it was, it was very public. And it was made because, you know, there's a recognition that
there would always be something more urgent than a long term safety research effort, you know,
like some new product or whatever. And then in fact, they just, you know, really didn't keep the
commitment. And so, you know, there was always something more urgent than long term safety
research. I mean, I think, I think another example of this is, you know, when I raised these issues
about security, you know, they would, they would tell me, you know, securities are number one priority.
But then, you know, invariably, when, when it came time to sort of invest serious resources,
when it came time to make trade offs, to sort of take some pretty basic measures,
security would not be prioritized. And so, yeah, I think it's the cognitive dissonance,
and I think it's the sort of unreliability that causes a bunch of the drama.
So let's zoom out, talk about the part, a big part of the story, and also a big motivation
of the way in which it must proceed with regards to geopolitics and everything,
is that once you have the AGI, pretty soon after you proceed to ASI, because superintelligence,
because you have these AGI's, which can function as researchers into further AI progress. And with
a matter of years, maybe less, you go to something that is like superintelligence. And at the high,
and then from there, then you can do up in according to your story, do all this research
and development and robotics and pocket nukes and whatever other crazy shit.
But at a high level, it's not clear to me this input-output model of research is how things
actually happen in research. We can look at economy-wide, right? Patrick Hollis and others
have made this point that from compared to 100 years ago, we have 100x more researchers in the
world. It's not like progress is happening 100x faster. So it's clearly not the case that you
can just pump in more population into research and you get higher research on the other end.
I don't know why it would be different for the AI researchers themselves.
Okay, great. So this is getting into some good stuff. I have a classic disagreement
I have with Patrick and others. So obviously, inputs matter. So it's like United States
produces a lot more scientific and technological progress than Liechtenstein or Switzerland.
And even if I made Patrick Hollis and dictator of Liechtenstein or Switzerland,
and Patrick Hollis was able to implement his Utopia of Ideal Institutions,
keeping the talent pool fixed. He's not able to do some crazy high school immigration thing or
whatever, some crazy genetic breeding scheme or whatever he wants to do.
Keeping the talent pool fixed, but amazing institutions. I claim that still,
even if you made Patrick Hollis and dictator of Switzerland, maybe you get some factor,
but Switzerland is not going to be able to outcompete the United States in scientific
and technological parts. Obviously, magnitudes matter. Okay. No, I actually, I'm not sure I
agree with this. There's been many examples in history where you have small groups of people
who are part of like Bell Labs or Skunkworks or something. There's a couple hundred researchers
open AI, right? Couple hundred researchers, they do highly selected though, right? You know,
it's like, it's like saying, you know, that's part of Patrick Hollis and his dictator is going
to do a good job of this. Well, yes, if you can highly select all the best AI researchers in
the world, you might only need a few hundred, but if you, you know, that's, that's the talent
pool. It's like you have the, you know, 300 best AI researchers in the world.
But, but there's, there has been, it's not a case that from a hundred years to now, there haven't
been, the population has increased massively. A lot of the, in fact, you would expect the density
of talent to have increased in the sense that malnutrition and other kinds of debilitation,
poverty, whatever, that have debilitated past talent at the same sort of level is no longer
debilitated in the same way. To the 100X point, right? So I don't know if it's 100X. I think it's
easy to inflate these things, probably at least 10X. And so people are sometimes like, ah, you
know, like, you know, come on, ideas haven't gotten them much harder to find, you know, why would
you have needed this 10X increase in research effort? Whereas to me, I think this is an extremely
natural story. And why is it a natural story? It's a straight line on a log log plot. This is sort
of a, you know, deep learning researchers dream, right? What is this log log plot on the X axis?
You have log cumulative research effort on the Y axis. You have some log GDP or ooms of algorithmic
progress, or, you know, log transistors per square inch, or, you know, in the sort of
experience curve for solar, kind of like, you know, whatever the log of, you know, the price for a
gigawatt of solar. And it's extremely natural for that to be a straight line. You know, this is
sort of a class, yeah, it's a classic. And, you know, it's basically the first thing is very easy,
then basically, you know, you have to have log increments of cumulative research effort to
find the next thing. And so, you know, in some sense, I think this is a natural story. Now,
one objection kind of people then make is like, oh, you know, isn't it suspicious, right? That
like ideas, you know, well, we increased research effort 10x, and ideas also just got 10x harder
defined. And so it perfectly, you know, equilibrates. And to there, I say, you know, it's just, it's an
equilibrium. It's an dodges equilibrium, right? So it's like, you know, isn't it a coincidence that
supply equals demand, you know, on the market clears, right? And that's, and the same thing here,
right? So it's, you know, ideas getting, how much ideas have gotten harder to find as a function
of how much progress you've made. And then, you know, what the overall growth rate has been is a
function of how much ideas have gotten harder to find in ratio to how much you've been able to,
like, increase research effort, what is the sort of growth, the log cumulative research effort.
So in some sense, I think the story is sort of like, fairly natural. And you see this, you see
this not just economy wide, you see it in kind of experience curve for all sorts of individual
technologies. So I think there's some process like this. And it's totally plausible that, you know,
institutions have gotten worse by some factor. Obviously, there's some sort of exponent of
diminishing returns on more people, right? So like serial time is better than just paralyzing.
But still, I think it's like, clearly inputs matter.
Yeah, I agree. But if the coefficient of how fast they diminish as you grow, the input
is high enough, then the, and the abstract, the fact that inputs matter isn't that relevant.
Okay, so I mean, we're talking at a very high level, but just like take it down to the actual
concrete thing here. Open AI has a staff of at most low hundreds who are directly involved
in the algorithmic progress in future models. If it was really the case that you could just
arbitrarily scale this number, and you can have much faster algorithmic progress, and that would
result in much higher, much better AI store open AI basically, then it's not clear why open AI
doesn't just go out and hire every single person with 150 IQ, of which there are hundreds of
thousands in the world. And my, my story there is there's transaction costs to managing all these
people that don't just go away if you have a bunch of AI's that there, these tasks aren't easy to
parallelize. And I think you, I'm not sure how you would explain the fact of like, why does an
open AI go on a recruiting binge of every single genius in the world?
All right, great. So let's talk about the open AI example, and let's talk about the automated
AI researchers. So I mean, in the open AI case, I mean, just, you know, just kind of like look
at the inflation of like AI researcher salaries over the last year. I mean, I think like, I don't
know, I don't know what it is, you know, 4x, 5x is kind of crazy. So they're clearly really trying
to recruit the best AI researchers in the world. And, you know, I don't know, it's,
they do find the best AI researchers in the world. I think my response to your thing is like, you know,
almost all of these 150 IQ people, you know, if you just hire them tomorrow, they wouldn't be
good AI researchers, they wouldn't be an Alec Radford. But they're willing to make investments
that take years to pan out of the four. The data centers they're buying right now will come
online in 2026 or something. Why wouldn't they be able to make every 150 IQ person? Some of them
won't work out. Some of them won't have the traits we like. But some of them by 2026 will be amazing
AI researchers. Why aren't they making that bet? Yeah. And so sometimes this happens, right? Like,
smart physicists have been really good at AI research, you know, it's like all the anthropocopies
co-found. But like, if you talk to, I've had Daria in the podcast, they have this very careful
policy of like, we're not going to just hire arbitrarily, we're going to be extremely selective.
Training is not as easily scalable, right? So training is very hard. You know, if you just
hired, you know, 100,000 people, it's like, you, I mean, you couldn't train them all. If you're
really hard to train them all, you know, you wouldn't be doing any AI research. Like, you know,
there's, there's huge costs to bringing on a new person training them. This is very different
with the AIs, right? And I think this is, it's really important to talk about the sort of like
advantages the AIs will have. So it's like, you know, training, right? It's like, what does it take
to be an Alec Radford? You know, we need to be in a really good engineer, right? The AIs,
they're going to be an amazing engineer. They're going to be amazing at coding. You can just train
them to do that. They need to have, you know, not just be a good engineer, but have really good
research intuitions and like really understand deep learning. And this is stuff that, you know,
Alec Radford, or, you know, somebody like him has acquired over years of research over just like
being deeply immersed in deep learning, having tried lots of things himself and failed. The AIs,
you know, they're going to be able to read every research paper I've written, every experiment
ever run at the lab, you know, like gain the intuitions from all of this, they're going to be
able to learn in parallel from all of each other's experiment, you know, experiences.
You know, I don't know what else, you know, it's like, what does it take to be an Alec
Radford? Well, there's a, there's a sort of cultural acclimation aspect of it, right? You know,
if you hire somebody new, there's like politicking, maybe they don't fit in. Well, in the AI case,
you just make replicas, right? There's a like motivation aspect for it, right? So it's like,
you know, Alec, you know, they could just like duplicate Alec Radford. And before I run every
experiment, I haven't spent like, you know, a decade's worth of human time, like double checking
the code and thinking really careful, be careful about it. I mean, first of all,
on how that many Alec Radfords, and you know, he wouldn't care. And he would not be motivated.
But you know, the AI is it can just be like, look, I have a hundred million of you guys,
I'm just going to put you on just like really making sure this code is correct. There are no
bugs. This experiment is thought through every hyperparameter is correct. Final thing I'll say
is, you know, the 100 million human equivalent AI researchers, that is just a way to visualize it.
So that doesn't mean you're going to have literally 100 million copies. You know,
so there's tradeoffs you can make between serial speed and in parallel. So you might make the
tradeoff is look, we're going to run them at, you know, 10x 100x serial speed. It's going to
result in fewer tokens overall, because it's sort of inherent tradeoffs. But you know, then we have,
I don't know what the numbers would be, but then we have, you know, 100,000 of them running at 100x
human speed and thinking and you know, and there's other things you can do on coordination, you
know, they can kind of like share latent space, attend to each other's context. There's basically
this huge range of possibilities of things you can do. The 100 million thing is more, I mean,
another illustration of this is, you know, if you kind of, I run the math in my series,
and it's basically, you know, 27, 28, you have this automated AI researcher,
you're going to be able to generate an entire internet's worth of tokens every single day.
So it's clearly sort of a huge amount of like intellectual work they can do.
I think the analogous thing there is today we generate more patents in a year than during the
actual physics revolution in the early 20th century, they were generating across like half a
century or something. And are you making more physics progress in a year today than you made?
So yeah, you're going to generate all these tokens. Are you generating as much
codified knowledge as humanity has been able to generate in the initial creation of the internet?
Internet tokens are usually final output, right? A lot of these tokens, if we talk, we talked about
the unhobbling, right? And I think of a kind of like, you know, a GPDN token is sort of like one
token of my internal monologue, right? And so that's how I do this math on human equivalents,
you know, it's like 100 tokens a minute, and then, you know, humans working for X hours and,
you know, what is the equivalent there? I think this goes back to something we were talking about
earlier where, well, I haven't seen the huge revenues from people often ask this question,
that if you took GPD for back 10 years and you show people this and they think this is going to
automate, this is already automated, half the jobs. And so there's a sort of a modus ponens,
modus tolens here where part of the explanation is like, oh, it's like just on the verge,
you need to do these unhobblings. And part of that is probably true. But there is another lesson
to learn there, which is that just looking at face value outside of abilities, there's probably more
sort of hobblings that you don't realize that are hidden behind the scenes. I think the same will
be true of the AGI that you have running as AI researchers. I think a lot of things basically
agree, right? I think my story here is like, you know, I talk about, I think there's going to be
some long tail, right? And so part, you know, maybe it's like, you know, 26, 27, you know,
like the proto-automated engineer, and it's really good at engineering. It doesn't have the
research intuition yet. You don't quite know how to put them to work. But, you know, the sort of
even the underlying pace of AI progress is already so fast, right? In three years from not being able
to do any kind of like math at all to now crushing, crushing these math competitions. And so you have
the initial thing in like 26, 27, maybe the sort of automated, it's an automated research engineer,
speeds you up by 2x, you go through a lot more progress in that year. By the end of the year,
you figured out like the remaining kind of unhobblings, you've like got a smarter model,
and you know, maybe then that thing, or maybe it's two years, you know, and that thing, just like
that thing really can do automate 100%. And again, you know, they don't need to be doing
everything. They don't need to be making coffee, you know, they don't need to like, you know,
maybe there's a bunch of, you know, tacit knowledge and a bunch of other fields. But you know,
AI researchers at AI labs really know the job of an AI researcher. And it's in some sense,
it's a sort of, there's lots of clear metrics, it's all virtual, there's code, it's things you
can kind of develop and train for. So I mean, another thing is how do you actually manage a
million AI researchers? Humans, the sort of comparative ability we have that we've been
especially trained for is like working in teams. And despite this fact, we have, for thousands of
years, we've been learning about how we work together in groups. And despite this, management
is a clusterfock, right? It's like most companies are badly managed. It's really hard to do this
stuff. For AIs, the sort of like, we talk about AGI, but it'll be some bespoke set of abilities,
some of which will be higher than humans, some of which will be at human level. And so it'll be
some bundle and we'll need to figure out how to put these bundles together with their human
overseers, with the equipment and everything. And the idea that as soon as you get the bundle,
you'll figure out how to get, like just shove millions of them together and manage them.
I'm just very skeptical of like any other revolution, technological revolution in history
has been very piecemeal, much more piecemeal than you would expect on paper. If you just thought
about what is the industrial revolution? Well, we dig up coal that powers the steam engines,
you use the steam engines to run these railroads, that helps us get more coal out. And there's
sort of like factorial store, you can tell, where in like a six hours, you can be pumping
thousands of times more coal. But in real life, it takes centuries often, right? In fact, the
electrification, there's this famous study about how to initially to electrify factories.
It was decades after electricity to change from the pull, pulleys and water wheel based
system that we had for steam engines to one that's works with more spread out electrical
motors and everything. I think this will be the same kind of thing. It might take like decades
to actually get millions of AI researchers to work together. Okay, great. This is great.
Okay, so a few responses to that. First of all, I mean, I totally agree with the kind of like
real world bottlenecks type of thing. I think this is sort of, you know, I think it's easy to under
rate, you know, basically what we're doing is we're removing the labor constraint, we automate
labor and we like kind of exploit technology. But you know, there's still lots of other bottlenecks
in the world. And so I think it's part of why the story is it kind of like starts pretty narrow at
the thing where you don't have these bottlenecks. And then only over time as we let it kind of
expand to sort of broader areas. AI, this is part of why I think it's like initially this sort of
AI research explosion, right? It's like AI research doesn't run into these real world bottlenecks.
It doesn't require, you know, like plow a field or dig up coal. It's just you're just doing AI
research. The other thing, you know, the other thing about like in your model, AI research,
it's not complicated like about flipping a burger, it's just AI research.
I mean, this is because people make these arguments like, oh, you know, AGI won't do anything
because it can't flip a burger. I'm like, yeah, it won't be able to flip a burger, but it's going
to be able to do algorithmic progress, you know, and then, and then, and then when it does algorithmic
progress, it'll figure out how to flip a burger. You know, look, the, the, the, sorry, the other
thing is about, you know, again, these are the sort of quantities are lower bound, right? So
it's like, this is just like, we can definitely run 100 million of these. Probably what will happen
is one of the first things we're going to try to figure out is how to like, again, run like,
you know, translate quantity into quality, right? And so it's like, even at the baseline rate of
progress, you're like quickly getting smarter and smarter systems, right? If we said it was like,
you know, four years between the preschooler and the high schooler, right? So I think, you know,
pretty quickly, you know, there's probably some like simple algorithmic changes you find, you know,
if instead of one Alec Radford, you have 100, you know, you don't even need 100 million. And then,
and then you get even smarter systems. And now these systems are, you know, they're capable of
sort of creative, complicated behavior, you don't understand. Maybe there's some way to like use
all this test time compute in a more unified way rather than all these parallel copies.
And, you know, so there won't just be quantitatively superhuman, they'll pretty quickly become
qualitatively superhuman. You know, it's sort of like, it looked like, you know, you're a high
school student, you're like trying to wrap yourself, wrap your mind around kind of standard physics.
And then there's some like super smart professor who is like, quantum physics, it all makes sense
to him. And you're just like, what is going on? And sort of, I think pretty quickly, you kind of
enter that regime, just given even the underlying pace of AI progress, but even more quickly than
that, because you have the sort of accelerated force of now this automated AI research.
I agree that over time, you would, I'm not denying that ASI is, I think that's possible.
Because the time is just not that much, you know?
I'm just like, you know, how is this happening in a year? Like you've, okay, first of all.
So I think the story is sort of like, basically, I think it's a little bit more continuous,
you know, right? Like, I think already, you know, like I talked about, you know, 25, 26,
you're basically going to have models as good as a college graduate. And I, you know,
I don't, I don't know where the unhobbling is going to be. But I think it's plausible that even
then you have kind of the proto-automated engineer. So there's, I think there is a bit of like a smear,
kind of an AGI smear or whatever, where it's like, there's sort of unhobblings that you're
missing. There's kind of like ways of connecting them you're missing. There's like some level
intelligence you're missing. But then at some point, you are going to get the thing that is like
an 100% automated Alec Radford. And once you have that, you know, things really take off, I think.
Yeah. Okay. So let's go back to the unhobblings. Is there, we're going to get a bunch of models
by the end of the year. Is there something, let's suppose we didn't get some capacity by the end of
the year. Is there some such capacity, which lacking would suggest that AI progress is going to take
longer than you are projecting? Yeah. I mean, I think there's, there's two kind of key things.
There's the unhobbling and there's the data wall, right? I think we should talk about the data wall
for a moment. I think the data wall is, you know, even though kind of like all this stuff has been
about, you know, crazy AI progress, I think the data wall is actually sort of underrated. I think
there's like a real scenario where we're just stagnating. You know, because we've been running
this tailwind of just like, it's really easy to bootstrap and you just do unsupervised learning
next token prediction that learns these amazing world models, like bam, you know, great model,
and you just got to buy some more compute, you know, do some simple efficiency changes,
you know, and, and again, like so much of deep learning, all these like big gains on
efficiency have been like pretty dumb things, right? Like, you know, you add a normalization layer,
you know, you know, you fix the scaling laws, you know, and these already have been huge things,
let alone kind of like obvious ways in which these models aren't good yet. Anyway, so data
wall big deal, you know, I don't know, some like put some numbers on this, you know,
some like you do common crawl, you know, online is like, you know, 30 trillion tokens,
llama three trained on 15 trillion tokens. So you're basically already using all the data.
And then, you know, you can get somewhat further by repeating it. So there's an academic paper by,
you know, Boaz Barak and some others that does scaling laws for this. And they're basically
like, yeah, you can repeat it sometime. After 16 times of reputation, just like returns basically
go to zero, you're just completely screwed. And so I don't know, say you can get another 10x on
data from, say like llama three, and GP four, you know, llama three is already kind of like
at the limit of all the data, you know, maybe you can get 10x more by repeating data.
You know, I don't know, maybe that's like at most 100x better model than GP for, which is like,
you know, 100x effective compute from GP four is, you know, not that much, you know, if you do half
in order magnitude a year of compute half in order magnitude a year of algorithmic progress,
you know, that's kind of like two years from GP four. So, you know, GP four finished pretreading
in 22, you know, 24. So I think one thing that really matters, I think we won't quite know by
end of the year, but you know, 25, 26, are we cracking the data wall?
Okay, so suppose we had three orders of magnitude less data in common crawl on the internet than
we just happen to have now. And for decades, the internet, other things, we've been rapidly
increasing the stock of data that humanity has. Is it your view that for contingent reasons,
we just happen to have enough data to train models that are just powerful enough at 4.5 level,
where they can kick off the self play RL loop? Or is it just that we, you know, if it had been
three rooms higher, then it would progress would have been slightly faster. In that world, we
would have been looking back at like, oh, how hard it would have been to like kick off the RL
explosion with just 4.5, but we would have figured it out. And then so in this world, we would have
gotten to GP three and then we'd have to kick us on sort of RL explosion. But we would have still
figured it out. The sort of the we didn't just like luck out on the amount of data we happen to
have in the world. I mean, three rooms is pretty rough, right? Like three rooms, if less data means
like six rooms smaller, six rooms, less compute model and scale scaling laws, you know, that's
it's basically like capping out at like GP two, but I think that would be really rough. I think
you do make an interesting point about the contingency. You know, I guess earlier, we were
talking about the sort of like when in the sort of human trajectory, are you able to learn from
yourself? And so, you know, if we go with that analogy, again, like if you'd only gotten the
preschooler model, it can't learn from itself. You know, if you only got in the elementary
school or model, can't learn from itself. And you know, maybe GP for, you know, smart high
school is really where it starts. Ideally, you have a somewhat better model than it really is
able to kind of like learn from itself or learn by itself. So yeah, I think there's an interesting,
I mean, I think maybe one room less data, I would be like more iffy, but maybe still doable.
Yeah, I think it would feel chiller if we had, you know, like one or two.
It would be an interesting exercise to get probably distributions of HEI contingent on
across like data. Yeah, okay. I think the thing that makes me skeptical of this story
is that the things it totally makes sense for free training works so well. Yeah. These other
things, their stories of in principle, why they ought to work like a humans can learn this way
and so on. Yes. And maybe they're true, but I worry that a lot of this case is based on
sort of first principles with evaluation of how learning happens that fundamentally,
we don't understand how humans learn and maybe there's some key thing we're missing.
Yeah. On the sort of sample efficiency, yeah, humans actually, maybe there's,
you say, well, the fact that these things are way of a less sample efficient in terms of learning
than humans are suggests that there's a lot of room for improvement. Yeah. Another perspective
is that we are just on the wrong path altogether, right? That's why there's a sample inefficient
when it comes to pre-training. Yeah. So, yeah, I mean, I'm just like, there's a lot of like
first principles arguments stack on top of each other where you get these unhoplings and then
you get to HEI. Yeah. Then you, because of these reasons why you can stack all these things on
top of each other, you get to ASI. Yeah. And I'm worried that there's too many steps of this.
Yeah. Sort of first principles thinking. I mean, we'll see, right? I mean, on the sort
of sample efficiency thing, again, sort of first principles, but I think, again, there's this
clear sort of missing middle. And so, you know, and sort of like, you know, people hadn't been
trying. Now people are really trying, you know, and so it's sort of, you know, I think often again
in deep learning, something like the obvious thing works. And there's a lot of details to get
right. So it might take some time, but it's now people are really trying. So I think we get a
lot of signal in the next couple of years. You know, on a hobbling, I mean, what is the signal
on hobbling that I think would be interesting? I think, I think the question is basically like,
are you making progress on this test time compute thing, right? Like is this thing able to think
longer horizon than just a couple hundred tokens, right? That was unlocked by chain of thought.
And on that point in particular, the many people who have longer timelines have come on the podcast
have made the point that the way to train this long horizon RL, it's not, I mean, earlier talking
about like, well, they can think for five minutes, but not for longer. But it's not because they
can't physically output an hours or the tokens. It's just really, at least from what I understand
what they say, right? Like even like Gemini has like a million in context and the million of context
is actually great for consumption. And it solves one important on hobbling, which is the sort of
onboarding problem, right? Which is, you know, a new coworker, you know, in your first five minutes,
like a new smart high school intern first five minutes, not useful at all, a month in, you know,
much more useful, right? Because they've like looked at the mono repo and understand how the
code works. And they've read your internal docs. And so being able to put that in context, great,
solve this onboarding problem. Yeah, but they're not good at sort of the production of a million
tokens yet. Yeah, right. But on the production of a million tokens, there's no public evidence that
there's some easy loss function where you can GP for has gotten a lot better since it's actually
so the GP for gains since launch, I think are a huge indicator that there's like, you know, so
you talked about this with John on the podcast, John said this was mostly post training gains.
Right. You know, if you look at the sort of LMS scores, you know, it's like 100 ELO or something,
it's like a bigger gap than between Claude III, Opus and Claude III, Haiku. And the price difference
between those is 60X. But it's not more agentic. It's like better in the same channel. Right? Like,
you know, it went from like, you know, 40% to 70% math. The crux is like whether or like be able to
like, but I think I think it indicates that clearly there's stuff to be done on hobbling.
I think yeah, I think I think the interesting question is like this time of year from now,
you know, is there a model that is able to think for like, you know, a few thousand tokens
coherently, cohesively, agentically. And I think probably there's, you know,
again, this is what I'd feel better if we had an humor to more data, because it's like the scaling
just gives you this sort of like tailwind, right? We're like, for example, tools, right tools, I
think, you know, talking to people who try to make things work with tools, you know, actually
sort of GP for is really when tools start to work. And it's like, you can kind of make them work with
GP 3.5, but it's just really tough. And so it's just like having GP for you can kind of help it
learn tools in a much easier way. And so just a bit more tailwind from scaling. And then and then
yeah, and does does I don't know if it'll work, but it's a key question. Okay, I think it's a good
place to sort of close that part where we know what the crux is and what the progress, what
what evidence that would look like on the AGI to super intelligence. Maybe it's a case that the
games are really easier right now, and you can just sort of let loose and Alec Ratt for giving
a compute budget, and he comes out the other end with something that is an additive,
like change as part of the code, this is compute multiplier changes to the part.
What other parts of the world? Maybe there here's an interesting way to ask this. Yeah, how many
other domains in the world are like this, where you think you could get the equivalent of in one
year, you just throw enough intelligence across multiple instances, and you just come out the
other end with something that is remarkably decades centuries ahead. Yeah, like you start off with
no flight and then the right brother is a million instances of GPT six, and you come out the other
end with starlink. Yeah. Like is that your model of how things work? I think I think you're exaggerating
the timelines a little bit, but but you know, I think you know, a decade's worth of progress in
a year or something. I think that's a reasonable prompt. So I think this is where, you know,
basically the sort of automated AI researcher comes in because it gives you this enormous tail
headwind on all the other stuff, right? So it's like, you know, you automate AI research with
your sort of automated Alec Radford's, you come out the other end, you've done another five booms,
you have a thing that is like vastly smarter, not only is it vastly smarter, you like, you know,
you've been able to make it good at everything else, right? You're like, you're solving robotics,
the robots are important, right? Because like, for a lot of other things, you do actually need to
like try things in the physical world. I mean, I don't know, maybe you can do a lot in simulation,
those are the really quick worlds. I don't know if you saw the like last Nvidia GTC, you know,
it was all about the like digital twins and just like having all your manufacturing processes and
simulation, like, I don't know, like, again, if you have these like, you know, super intelligent,
like cognitive workers, like, can they just like make simulations of everything, you know,
kind of off the float style, and then, and then, you know, make a lot of progress and simulation
possible. But I also just think you're going to get the robots. Again, I agree about like,
there are a lot of real world bottlenecks, right? And so, you know, I don't know, it's quite possible
that we're going to have, you know, crazy drone forms, but also, you know, like lawyers and
doctors still need to be humans because of like, you know, regulation. But, you know, I think,
you know, you kind of start narrowly, you broaden, and then the world's in which you kind of let them
loose, which again, because of I think these competitive pressures, we will have to let them
loose in some degree on, you know, various national security applications. I think like,
quite rapid progress is possible. The other thing, though, is it's sort of, you know,
basically in the sort of an explosion after there's kind of two components, there's the A,
right in the production function, like growth of technology, and that's massively accelerated
by, you know, you have a billion super intelligent scientists and engineers and technicians,
you know, superbly competent and everything. You also just automated labor, right? And so,
it's like, even without the whole technological explosion thing, you have this industrial explosion,
at least if you let them let them loose, which is like, now you can just build, you know,
you can cover Nevada and like, you know, you start with one robot factory is producing more robots,
and basically this like just the cumulative process because you've taken labor out of the equation.
Yeah. That's super interesting. Yeah. Although when you increase the
K or the L without increasing the A, you can look at the Soviet Union or China where they
rapidly increase inputs. Yeah. And that does have the effect of being geopolitically game changing,
where you, it is remarkable, like you go to Shanghai over a set of these crazy cities in
a decade. Right. Right. I mean, the closest thing to like, people talk about 30% growth
rates or whatever. Yeah. 10%. It's totally possible. Yeah. But without productivity gains,
it's not like the industrial revolution, where like, you're from the perspective of
you're looking at a system from the outside, your goods have gotten cheaper, or they can
manufacture more things. But, you know, it's not like the next century is coming at you.
Yeah. It's both. It's both. So it's, you know, both that are important. The other thing I'll say
is like, all this stuff, I think the magnitudes are really, really important, right? So,
you know, we talked about a 10x of research effort, or maybe 10, 30x over a decade,
you know, even without any kind of like self-improvement type loop, you know, we talk,
the sort of, even in the sort of Jeep before the AGI story, we're talking about an order of magnitude
of effective compute increase a year, right? Half an order of magnitude of compute, half an order
of magnitude of algorithmic progress that sort of translates into effective compute. And so,
you're doing a 10x a year, right? Basically on your labor force, right? So it's like,
it's a radically different world if you're doing a 10x or 30x in a century versus a
10x a year on your labor force. So the magnitudes really matter. They also really matter on the
sort of intelligence explosion, right? So like just the automated AI research part. So, you know,
one story you could tell there is like, well, ideas get harder to find, right? Algorithmic
progress is going to get harder. Yeah, right now you have the easy wins, but in like four or five
years, there'll be fewer easy wins. And so the sort of automated AI researchers are just going
to be what's necessary to just keep it going, right? Because it's gotten harder. But that's
sort of, it's like a really weird knife edge assumption economics where you assume it's just
enough. But isn't that the equilibrium story you were just telling with why the economy as a whole
has 2% economic growth? Because you just pursued on the equal, I guess you're saying by the time
you get to the equilibrium here is it's like way faster, at least, you know, and it's at least,
and it depends on the sort of exponents, but it's basically it's the increase that like,
suppose you need to like 10x effective research effort in AI research in the last,
you know, four or five years to keep the pace of progress, we're not just getting a 10x, you're
getting, you know, a million x or a hundred thousand x, there's just the magnitudes really
matter. And the magnitude is just basically, you know, one, one way to think about this is that
you have kind of two exponentials, you have your sort of like normal economy that's growing at,
you know, 2% a year, and you have a really AI economy, and that's going at like 10x a year.
And it's starting out really small, but sort of eventually it's going to, it's just, it's, it's,
it's way faster and eventually it's going to overtake, right? And even if you have, you can
almost sort of just do the simple revenue extrapolation, right? If you think your AI economy,
you know, that has some growth rate, I mean, it's very simplistic way and so on. But there's,
there's this sort of 10x a year process and that will eventually kind of like,
you're going to transition the sort of whole economy from, as it broadens from the sort of,
you know, 2% a year to the sort of much faster growing process. And I don't know, I think that's
very like consistent with historical change, you know, stories, right? There's this sort of like,
you know, there's this sort of long run hyperbolic trend, you know, manifested in the sort of like,
sort of change in growth mode and the austral, you know, revolution, but there's just this
long run hyperbolic trend. And, you know, now you have this sort of, now you have that another
sort of change in growth mode. Yeah, yeah. I mean, that was one of the questions I asked Tyler,
when I had him on the podcast, is that you do go from the fact that after 1776, you go from a regime
of negligible economic growth, 2% is really interesting. It shows that, I mean, from the
perspective of somebody in the Middle Ages or before, 2% is equivalent to the sort of 10%.
I guess you're projecting even higher for the AI economy, but
yeah, I mean, I think again, and it's all this stuff, you know, I have a lot of uncertainty,
right? So a lot of the time I'm trying to kind of tell the modal story. I think it's important
to be kind of concrete and visceral. And I, you know, I have, I have a lot of uncertainty
basically over how the 2030s play out. And basically, the thing I know is it's going to be
fucking crazy. But, but, you know, exactly what, you know, where the bottlenecks are and so on,
I think that will be kind of like. So let's talk through the numbers here. You hundreds of millions
of AI researchers. So right now, GPT-40 turbo is like 15 bucks for a million tokens outputted.
And a human thinks 150 tokens a minute or something. And if you do the math on that,
I think it's for an hour's worth of human output. You, it's like 10 cents or something.
Now, cheaper than a human worker. Cheaper than a human worker. But it can't do the job yet.
That's right. That's right. But by the time you're talking about models that are trained on the 10
gigawatt cluster, then you have something that is four orders of magnitude more expensive via
inference, three orders of magnitude, something like that. So that's like $100 an hour of labor.
And now you're having hundreds of millions of such laborers. Is there enough compute to do
with the model that is a thousand times bigger, this kind of labor?
Great. Okay. Great question. So I actually don't think inference costs for sort of frontier
models are necessarily going to go up that much. So I mean, one historical data point.
But isn't the test time sort of thing that it will go up even higher?
I mean, we're just doing per token, right? And then I'm just saying, you know, if,
suppose each model token was the same as sort of a human token thing at 100 tokens a minute.
So it's like, yeah, it'll use more. But the sort of, if you just, the token calculations
is already pricing that in the, the question is like per token pricing, right? And so like GPT-3
went at launch was like actually more expensive than GPT-4 now. And so over just like, you know,
fast increases in capability gains, inference costs has remained constant.
That's sort of wild. And I think it's worth appreciating. And I think it gestures that
sort of an underlying pace of algorithmic progress. I think there's a sort of like more
theoretically grounded way to why, why inference costs would stay constant. And it's the fourth
following story, right? So on Chichilly scaling laws, right, you, you know,
half of the additional compute you allocate to bigger models and half of it you allocate to more
data, right? But also if we go with the sort of basic story of half an order a year more
compute and half an order of magnitude a year of algorithmic progress, you're also kind of like
you're saving half an order of magnitude a year. And so that kind of would exactly compensate for
making the model bigger. The caveat on that is, you know, obviously not all training efficiencies
are also inference efficiencies, you know, bunch of the time they are separately, you can find
inference efficiencies. So I don't know, given this historical trend, given the sort of like,
you know, baseline sort of theoretical reason, you know, I don't know, I, I think it's not crazy
baseline assumption that actually these models, frontier models are not necessarily going to get
more expensive per token. Oh, really? Yeah. Like, okay, that's, that's wild. We'll see, we'll see.
I mean, the other thing, you know, maybe they get, you know, even if they get like 10x more
expensive than, you know, you have 10 million instead of 100 million, you know, so it's like,
it's not really, you know, like, but okay, so part of the internal explosion is that each of them has
to run experiments that are gb4 size and the result of, so that takes up a bunch of compute.
Then you're going to consolidate the results of the experiments and what is the synthesized
weight. I mean, you have a much bigger influence street anyway than your training.
Sure. Okay. But I think the experiment compute is a constraint.
Yeah. Okay. I'm going back to maybe a sort of bigger fundamental thing we're talking about here.
We're projecting, in a series, you say we should denominate the probability of getting to AGI in
terms of orders of magnitude of affected compute effective here, accounting for the fact that
there's a compute quote unquote compute multiplier if you have better algorithms.
And I'm not sure that it makes sense to be confident that this is a sensible way to project
progress. It might be, but I'm just like, I have a lot of uncertainty about it. It seems similar to
somebody trying to project when we're going to get to the moon and they're like looking at the
Apollo program in the four fifties or something and they're like, we have some amount of effective
jet fuel. And if we get more efficient engines, then we have more effective jet fuel. And so
we're going to like probability of getting to the moon based on the amount of effective jet fuel we
have. And I don't deny that jet fuel is important to launch rockets, but that seems like an odd
way to denominate when you're going to get to the moon. Yeah. Yeah. So I mean, I think these cases
are pretty different. I don't know. I didn't, I don't think there was a sort of clear, I don't
know how rocket science works, but I didn't, I didn't get the impression that there's some
clear scaling behavior with like, you know, the amount of jet fuel. I think the, I think in AI,
you know, I mean, first of all, the scaling laws, you know, they've just helped, right? And so if
you, a friend of mine pointed this out, and I think it's a great point, if you kind of concatenate
both the sort of original Kaplan scaling laws paper that I think went from 10 to the negative
nine to 10 petaflop days, and then, you know, concatenate additional compute to from there to
kind of GP four, you assume some algorithmic progress, you know, it's like the scaling laws
have held, you know, like probably over 15 ooms, you know, I know it was rough, probably maybe
even more held for a lot of ooms. They held for the specific loss function, which they're training
on, which is training max token. Whereas the, the, the progress you are forecasting will be
required for further progress in capabilities. Yeah. It was specifically, we know that scaling
can't work because of the data wall. And so there's some new thing that has to happen. And I'm not
sure whether the, you can extrapolate that same scaling curve to tell us whether these
hobblings will also, like it's, is this not on the same graph? The hobblings are just a separate
thing. Yeah, exactly. So this is, this is sort of like, you know, it's, yeah. So I mean, a few,
a few things here, right? Okay. So the, on the, on the effective compute scaling, the, you know,
in some sense, I think it's like people center the scaling laws because they're easy to explain
and the sort of like, why, why is scaling matter? The scaling laws like came way after people, at
least, you know, like Dario, Ilya realized that scaling mattered. And I think, you know, I think
that almost more important than the sort of loss curve is just like, just in general, make, you
know, there's this great quote from Dario on your, on your, on your, on your podcasts, it's just like,
you know, Ilya was like, the models, they just want to learn, you know, you make them bigger,
they learn more. And, and that just applied just across domains, generally, you know, all the
capabilities. And so, um, and you can look at this in benchmarks. Again, like you say,
headwind data wall, I'm sort of bracketing that and talking about that separately.
The other thing is on hobblings, right? If you just put them on the effective compute graph,
these on hobblings would be kind of huge, right? So like, I think,
What does it even mean? Like, what is it? What is on the y axis here?
Like, say MLPR on this benchmark or whatever, right? And so, you know, like, you know, we mentioned
the sort of, you know, the LMSYS differences, you know, RLHF, you know, again, as good as 100x
small chain of thought, right? You know, just going from this prompting change, a simple argument
change can be like 10x effective increase, compute increases on like math benchmarks.
I think this is like, you know, I think this is useful to illustrate that on hobblings are
large. Um, but I think they're like, I kind of think of them as like slightly separate things.
And the kind of the way I think about is that like, at a per token level, I think GP four is
not that far away from like a token of my internal monologue, right? Even like 3.5 to four took us
kind of from like the bottom of the human range, the top of the human range on like a lot of,
you know, on a lot of, uh, you know, kind of like high school tests. And so it's like a few more
3.5 to four jumps per token basis, like per token intelligence. And then you've got to unlock the
test time, you've got to solve the onboarding problem, make it use a computer. Um, and then
you're getting real close. Um, I'm reminded of, again, the story might be wrong, but I think it
is strikingly plausible. I agree. And so I think actually, I mean, the other thing I'll say is
like, you know, I say this 2027 timeline, I think it's unlikely, but I do think there's worlds
that are like AGI next year. And that's basically if the test time compute overhang is really easy
to crack. If it's really easy to crack, then you do like four rooms of test and compute, you know,
from a few hundred tokens to a few million tokens, you know, quickly. And then, you know, again,
maybe it's maybe only takes one or two 3.5 to four jumps per token, like one or two of those
jumps for token plus uses test time compute. And you basically have the proto automated engineer.
Um, so I'm reminded of, uh, uh, Stephen Pinker releases his book on, um, what is it? The Better
Angels of Our Nature. And it's like a couple of years ago or something. And he says the secular
decline in violence and war and everything. And you can just like plot the line from the end of
World War Two. And in fact, before World War Two, then these are just aberrations, whatever.
And basically, as soon as it happens, Ukraine, Gaza, the, everything is like, so
I think this is a sort of thing that happens in history where you see history align and you're
like, oh my gosh. And then just like, as soon as you make that prediction, who was that famous
author? So yeah, this, you know, again, people are predicting deep learning will hold a wall
every year. Maybe one year, they're right. But it's like gone a long way and hasn't hit a wall.
And I don't have that much more to go. And, and you know, so yeah, I guess I think this is a sort
of plausible story. And let's just run with it and see what it implies. Yeah. So we were talk
in your series, you talk about a lineman from the perspective of this is not about
some doomer scheme to get the point zero and personal probability distribution,
where things don't go off the rails. It's more about just controlling the systems,
making sure they do what we intend them to do. If that's the case, and we're going to be in the
sort of geopolitical conflict with China, and part of that will involve and what we're worried
about is them making the CCP bots that go out and take the red flag of Mao across the galaxies
or something. Then shouldn't we be worried about alignment as something that if in the wrong hands,
this is the thing that enables brainwashing, sort of dictatorial control. This seems like a
worrying thing. This should be part of this sort of algorithmic secrets we keep hidden, right?
The how to align these models, because that's also something the CCP can use to control their
models. I mean, I think in the world where you get the Democratic coalition, yeah, I mean,
also just alignment is often dual use, right? Like RLHF, it's like alignment team developed,
it was great, it was a big win for alignment, but it's also obviously makes these models useful.
But yeah, so yeah, alignment enables the CCP bots. Alignment also is what you need to get the
sort of whatever USAIs, follow the Constitution and disobey unlawful orders and respect separation
of powers and checks and balances. So yeah, you need alignment for whatever you want to do. It's
the sort of underlying technique. Tell me what you make of this take. I'm going to stream with
this a little bit. Okay. So fundamentally, there's many different ways the future could go. Yeah.
There's one path in which the LA's are type crazy AI's with nanobots take the future and
determine everything to gray goo or paper clips. And the more you solve alignment, the more that
path of the decision tree is circumscribed. And then so the more you solve alignment,
the more it is just different humans and divisions they have. And of course,
we know from history that things don't turn out the way you expect. So it's not like you can decide
the future, but it will appear. It's part of the beauty of it, right? You want these mechanisms,
the error correction, pluralism. But from the perspective of anybody who's looking at the system,
it will be like, I can control where this thing is going to end up. And so the more you solve
alignment and the more you circumscribe the different futures that are the results of AI will,
the more that accentuates the conflict between humans and their visions of the future. And so
in the world where alignment is solved and the world in which alignment is solved is the one,
is the world in which you have the most sort of human conflict over where to take AI.
Yeah. I mean, by removing the worlds in which the AI's take over, then like, you know,
the remaining worlds are the ones where it's like the humans decide what happens. And then
as we talked about, there's a whole lot of, yeah, a whole lot of worlds and how that could go.
And I worry. So when you think about alignment, and this is just controlling these things,
just think a little forward. And there's worlds in which hopefully, you know, human
descendants or some version of things in the future merge with super intelligences and they
have the rules of their own, but they're in some sort of law and market based order. I worry about
if you have things that are conscious and should be treated with rights. If you read about what
alignment schemes actually are, and then you read these books about what actually happened
during the Cultural Revolution, what happened when Stalin took over Russia, and you have
very strong monitoring from different instances where one, everybody's tasked with watching
each other. You have brainwashing, you have red teaming, where you have the spice stuff
you were talking about, where you try to convince somebody you're on like a defector and you see
if they defect with you. And if they do, then you realize they're an enemy. And listen, maybe
I'm stretching the analogy too far, but the way, like the ease of these alignment techniques
actually map on to something you could have read about during like mouse culture revolution
is a little bit troubling. Yeah, I mean, look, I think sentient AI is a whole other topic. I
don't know if we want to talk about it. I agree that like it's going to be very important how we
treat them. You know, in terms of like what you're actually programming these systems to do, again,
it's like alignment is just, it's a technical, it's a technical problem, a technical solution,
enables the CCP bots. I mean, in some sense, I think the, you know, I almost feel like the
sort of model and also about talking about checks and balances is sort of, you know, like the Federal
Reserve or Supreme Court justices. And there's a funny way in which they're kind of this like
very dedicated order, you know, Supreme Court justices, and it's amazing, they're actually
quite high quality, right? And they like really smart people, they really believe in the Constitution,
they love the Constitution, they believe in their principles, they have, you know, these, these,
these wonderful, you know, back, you know, and yeah, they have different persuasions, but they
have sort of, I think very sincere kind of debates about what is the meaning of the Constitution,
you know, what is the best actuation of these principles? You know, I guess, you know, by the
way, recommendation sort of skittish or arguments is like the best podcast, you know, when I run
out of high quality content on the Internet. I mean, I think there's going to be a process of
like figuring out what the Constitution should be. I think, you know, this Constitution has like
worked for a long time, you start with that, maybe eventually things change enough that you want
added to that. But anyway, you want them to like, you know, for example, for the checks and balances,
they like, they really love the Constitution, and they believe in it, and they take it really
seriously. And like, look, at some point, yeah, you are going to have like AI police and AI military,
but I think sort of like, you know, being able to ensure that they like, you know, believe in it
in the way that like a Supreme Court justice does, or like in the way that like a federal reserve
job, you know, official takes their job really seriously. Yeah. And I guess a big open question
is whether if you do the project or something like the project, the other important thing is
like a bunch of different factions need their own AIs, right? And so it's, it's really important
that like each political party gets to like, have their own, you know, and like, whatever
creeds it, you might totally disagree with their values, but it's like, it's really important
that they get to like, have their own kind of like super intelligence. And, and again, I think
it's that these sort of like classical liberal processes play out, including like, different
people of different persuasions and so on. And I don't know, maybe the advisors might not make
them, you know, wise, they might not follow the advice or whatever, but I think it's important.
Okay. So speaking of alignment, you seem pretty optimistic. So let's run, run through
the source of the optimism. Yeah. I think there you laid out different worlds in which we could
get AI. Yeah. There's one that you think is low probability of next year, where a GPT-4 plus
scaffolding plus unhoplings gets you to AGI. Not GPT-4, you know, like, oh, sorry, sorry. It's
a GP-5. Yeah. Yeah. And there's ones where it takes much longer. There's ones where it's
something that's a couple years. Yeah. In a modal world. Yeah. So GPT-4 seems pretty aligned in
the sense that I don't expect it to go off the rails. Yeah. Maybe with scaffolding things might
change. Looks pretty good. Yeah. Exactly. So the, and maybe you will keep turning at, there's cranks
to keep going up and one of the cranks gets you to ASI. Yeah. Is there any point at which the
sharp left turn happens? Is it when you start, is it the case that you think plausibly when they
act more like agents, this is the thing to worry about? Yeah. Is there anything qualitatively
that you expect to change with regards to the enlightenment perspective at these cranks?
Yeah. So I don't know if I believe in this concept of sharp left turn, but I do think there's
basically, I think there's important qualitative changes that happen between now and kind of like
somewhat super human systems, kind of like early on the intelligence explosion. And then important
qualitative changes that happen from like early in intelligence explosion to kind of like true
super intelligence and all its power and might. And let's talk about both of those.
And so, okay. So the first part of the problem is one, we're going to have to solve ourselves,
right? We have to kind of have to align the like initial AI and the intelligence explosion,
you know, the sort of automated out of Bradford. I think there's kind of like, I mean, two important
things that change from GBD4, right? So one of them is, if you believe the story on like,
you know, synthetic data or L or self play to get past the data wall, and if you believe this on
hobbling story, you know, at the end, you're going to have things, you know, they're agents,
right? Including they do long term plans, right? They have long, long, you know, they're somehow
they're able to act over long horizons, right? But you need that, right? That's the sort of
prerequisite to be able to do the sort of automated AI research. And so, you know, I think
there's basically, you know, I basically think sort of pre training is sort of alignment neutral
in the sense of like, it has all these representations that has good representations
that you know, as representations of doing bad things, you know, but but there's, there's,
it's not like, you know, scheming against you or whatever. I think the sort of misalignment can
arise once you're doing more kind of long horizon training, right? And so you're training, you know,
again, two simplified example, but to kind of illustrate, you know, you're training an AI to
make money. And, you know, if you're just doing that with reinforcement learning, you know, it's,
you know, it might learn to commit fraud or lie or to see you for seek power, simply because those
are successful strategies in the real world, right? So maybe, you know, RL is basically it
explores, maybe it figures out like, oh, it tries to like hack, and then it gets some money and that
made more money, you know, and then if that's successful, if that gets reward, that's just
reinforced. So basically, I think there's sort of more serious misalignments, kind of like
misaligned long term goals that could arise between now and or that sort of necessarily
have to be able to arise if you're able to get long horizon system, that's one.
What you want to do in that situation is you want to add side constraints, right? So you want to add,
you know, don't lie, don't deceive, don't commit fraud. And so how do you add those side constraints,
right? The sort of basic idea you might have is like RLHF, right? You're kind of like, yeah,
it has this goal of like, you know, make money or whatever, but you're watching what it's doing,
it starts trying to like, you know, lie or deceive or fraud or whatever,
break the law, you're just kind of like, thumbs down, don't do that, you anti reinforce that.
The sort of critical issue that comes in is that these eye systems are getting superhuman,
right? And they're going to be able to do things that are too complex for humans to evaluate,
right? So again, even early on, you know, in the intelligence explosion, the automated AI
researchers and engineers, you know, they might write millions, you know, billions,
trillions of lines of complicated code, you know, they might be doing all sorts of stuff,
you just like, don't understand anymore. And so, you know, in the million lines of code,
you know, is it somewhere kind of like, you know, hacking, hacking, or like exultating itself,
or like, you know, trying to go for the nukes or whatever, you know, like, you don't know anymore,
right? And so this sort of like, thumbs up, thumbs down, pure RLHF doesn't fully work anymore.
Second part of the picture, and maybe talk more about this first part of the picture,
I think it's going to be like, there's a hard technical problem of what do you do,
sort of post RLHF, but I think it's a solvable problem. And it's like, you know,
there's various things in bullish on, I think there's like ways in which deep learning has
shaped out favorably. The second part of the problem is you're going from your like initial
systems and intelligence explosion to like super intelligence, and you know, it's like,
many ooms, it ends up being like, by the end of it, you have a thing that's vastly smarter than humans.
I think the intelligence explosion is really scary from an alignment point of view,
because basically, if you have this rapid intelligence explosion, you know, less than a
year or two years or whatever, you're going say in the period of a year from systems where like,
you know, failure would be bad, but it's not kind of strapped back to like, you know, saying a bad
word, it's like, you know, it's, it's something goes awry to like, you know, failure is like,
you know, it extra traded itself, it starts hacking the military can do really bad things.
You're going less than a year from sort of a world in which like, you know,
it's some descendant of current systems, and you kind of understand it, and it's like, you know,
it has good properties. There's something that potentially has a very sort of alien and different
architecture, right? After having gone through another decade of imal advances. I think one
example there that's very salient to me is legible and faithful chain of thought, right? So a lot
of the time when we're talking about these things, we're talking about, you know, it has tokens of
thinking, and then it uses many tokens of thinking. And, you know, maybe we bootstrap ourselves by,
you know, it's pre-trained, it learns to think in English, and we do something else on top,
so it can do the sort of longer chains of thought. And so, you know, it's very plausible to me that
like, for the initial automated alignment researchers, you know, we don't need to do any
complicated mechanistic interpretability, and just like literally you read what they're thinking,
which is great. You know, it's like huge advantage, right? However, I'm very likely not the most
efficient way to do it, right? There's like probably some way to have a recurrent architecture.
It's all internal states. There's a much more efficient way to do it. That's what you get
by the end of the year. You know, you're going this year from like RLHF plus plus some extension
works to like, it's vastly superhuman. It's like, you know, it's to us like, you know, an expert
in the field might be to like an elementary school or middle schooler. And so, you know,
I think it's this sort of incredibly sort of like, hairy period for alignment.
Thing you do have is you have the automated AI researchers, right? And so, you can use the
automated AI researchers to also do alignment. And so, in this world, why are we optimistic
that the project is being run by people who are thinking, I think, so here's something to think
about. The open AI starts off with people who are very explicitly thinking about exactly these
kinds of things, right? But are they still there? No, no, but you're still here. Here's the thing.
No, no, even the people who are there, even like the current leadership is like exactly these things
that can find them in interviews in their blog posts talking about. And what happens is when,
as you were talking about, when some sort of trivial, and Yon talked about it, this is not just
you, Yon talked about in his tweet thread, when there is some trade off that has to be made with
we need to do this flashy release this week and not next week, because whatever Google
IO is the next week, so we're going to get it. And then the trade off is made in favor of
the less the more careless decision. When we have the government or the national security advisor,
the military or whatever, which is much less familiar with this kind of discourse is a
naturally thinking in this way about how I'm worried the chain of thought isn't faithful and
how do we think about the features that are represented here? Why should it be optimistic
that a project run by people like that will be thoughtful about these kinds of considerations?
I mean, they might not be. I agree. I think a few thoughts, right? First of all, I think the private
world, even if they sort of nominally care is extremely tough for alignment, a couple of reasons.
One, you just have the race between the sort of commercial labs, right? And it's like, you don't
have any headroom there to like be like, actually, we're going to hold back for three months, like
get this right. And we're going to dedicate 90% of our compute to automated alignment research
instead of just like pushing the next zoom. The other thing, though, is like in the private world,
you know, China has stolen your age, China has your secrets, they're right on your tails,
you're in this fever struggle, no room at all for maneuver. They're like the way it's like
absolutely essential to get alignment right and you get it during this intelligence explosion,
you get it right, because you need to have that room to maneuver and you need to have that clear
lead. And, you know, again, maybe you've made the deal or whatever, but I think you're an incredibly
tough space, tough spot if you don't have this clearly. So I think the sort of private world
is kind of rough there on like whether people will take it seriously, you know, I don't know,
I have some faith in sort of sort of normal mechanisms of a liberal society, sort of if
alignment is an issue, which, you know, we don't fully know yet, but sort of the science will
develop, we're going to get better measurements of alignment, you know, and the case will be
clear and obvious. I worry that there's, you know, I worry about worlds where evidence is
ambiguous. And I think a lot of a lot of the most scary kind of intelligence explosion scenarios are
worlds in which evidence is ambiguous. But again, it's sort of like, I, if evidence is ambiguous,
then that's the world in which you really want the safety margins. And that's also the world in
which kind of like running the intelligence explosion is sort of like, you know, running a war,
right? It's like, the evidence is ambiguous, we have to make these really tough trade offs.
And you like, you better have a really good chain of command for that. And it's not just like, you
know, you're going at, well, let's go, you know, it's cool. Yeah. Let's talk a little bit about
Germany. We're making the analogy to World War Two. And you made a really interesting point,
many hours ago. The fact that throughout history, World War Two is not unique, at least when you
think in proportion to the size of the population. But these other sorts of catastrophes where
some significant portion of the population has been killed off. After that, the nation recovers
and they get back to their heights. And so what's interesting after World War Two
is that Germany especially, and maybe Europe as a whole, obviously they experienced
fast economic growth in the direct aftermath because of catch-up growth. But subsequently,
we just don't think of Germany as, we're not talking about Germany potentially launching an
intelligence explosion and they're going to get into the AI table. We were talking about
Iran and North Korea and Russia. We didn't talk about Germany, right?
Well, because they're allies.
Yeah. But so what happened? I mean, World War Two and now it didn't like come back
over the seven years war or something, right?
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, look, I'm generally very bearish on Germany. I think in this context,
I'm kind of like, you know, it's a little bit, you know, I think you're underrating a little bit.
I think it's probably still one of the, you know, top five most important countries in the world.
You know, I mean, Europe overall, you know, it still has, I mean, it's a GDP that's like
close to the United States the size of the GDP, you know, and there's things actually that Germany
is kind of good at, right? Like state capacity, right? Like, you know, the, you know, the roads
are good and they're clean and they're well maintained and, you know, in some sense, the sort
of, a lot of this is the sort of flip side of things that I think are bad about Germany, right?
So in the US, it's a little bit like there's a bit more of a sort of Wild West feeling to the
United States, right? And it includes the kind of like crazy bursts of creativity. It includes like,
you know, political candidates that are sort of, you know, there's a much broader spectrum and,
you know, much, you know, like both in Obama and Trump as somebody you just wouldn't see in the sort
of much more confined kind of German political debate. You know, I wrote this blog post at some
point, Europe's political stupor about this. But anyway, and so there's this sort of punctilious
sort of rule following that is like good in terms of like, you know, keeping your kind of state
capacity functioning. But that is also, you know, I think I kind of think there's a sort of very
constrained view of the world in some sense. You know, and that includes kind of, you know,
I think after World War Two, there's a real backlash against anything like elite, you know,
and, you know, again, no, you know, no elite high schools or elite colleges and sort of
what my is that the law?
excellence isn't cherished, you know, there's a yeah.
Why is that the logical intellectual thing to rebel against if what if you're trying to
overcorrect from the Nazis? Yeah, was it because the Nazis were very much into elitism?
I don't understand why that's a logical sort of counter reaction.
I know, maybe it was sort of a counter reaction against the sort of like whole like Aryan race
and sort of that sort of thing. I mean, I also just think there was a certain amount in what
amount certain, I mean, look at sort of World War One, end of World War One versus end of World
War Two for Germany, right? And sort of, you know, a common narrative is that the piece of Versailles,
you know, was too strict on Germany. You know, the piece imposed after World War Two was like
much more strict, right? It was a complete, you know, the whole country was destroyed,
you know, it was, you know, and all the main, most of the major cities, you know, over half of
the housing stock had been destroyed, right? Like, you know, in some birth cohorts, you know,
like 40% of the men had died. Half the population displaced. Oh, yeah. I mean,
almost 20 million people are displaced, huge, crazy, right? You know, like,
and the borders are way smaller than the Versailles borders. Yeah, exactly. And sort of
complete imposition of a new political system and, and, you know, on both sides, you know, and
yeah, so it was, but in some sense that worked out better than the post-World War One piece,
where then there was this kind of resurgence of German nationalism and, you know, in some sense,
the thing that has been a pattern. So it's sort of like, it's unclear if you want to wake the
sleeping beast. I do think that at this point, you know, it's gotten a bit too sleepy. Yeah.
I do think it's an interesting point about we underrate the American political system. Yeah.
I've been making the same correction myself. Yeah. There's, there was this book about
burdened by a Chinese economist called China's World View. And overall, I wasn't a big fan,
but they made a really interesting point in there, which was the way in which candidates rise up
through the Chinese hierarchy for politics, for administration, in some sense, that selects for
you're not going to get some Marjorie Taylor Greene or somebody running some.
Don't get that in Germany either. Right. Yeah. But you're, he explicitly made the point in the
book that that also means we're never going to get a Henry Kissinger or Barack Obama. Right.
In China. We're going to get like, by the time they end up in charge of the, the Politburo,
the Politburo, there'll be like some 60 year old Democrat who's never like ruffled any feathers.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I think, I think there's something really important about the sort of
like very raucous political debate. And I mean, yeah, in general, kind of like, you know, there's
the sense in which in America, you know, lots of people live in their kind of like own world.
I mean, like we live in this kind of bizarre little like bubble in San Francisco and people,
you know, and, and, but I think that's important for the sort of evolution of ideas,
error correction and that sort of thing. You know, there's other ways in which the
German system is more functional. Yeah. But it's interesting that there's major mistakes,
right? Like the sort of defense spending, right? And you know, then, you know, Russia
made Ukraine and, and you're like, wow, what did we do? Right? No, that's a really good point,
right? The main issues, there's everybody agrees, but exactly. Yeah. So consensus blob kind of thing.
Right. And on the China point, you know, just having this experience of like reading German
newspapers, and I think how much, you know, how much more poorly I would understand the sort of
German debate and sort of the sort of state of mind from just kind of afar. I worry a lot about,
you know, or I think it is interesting just how kind of impenetrable China is to me.
It's a billion people, right? And like, you know, almost everything else is really globalized.
You have a globalized internet and I kind of, I kind of a sense what's happening in the UK.
You know, I probably, even if I didn't read German newspapers, just sort of would have a
sense of what's happening in Germany. But I really don't feel like I have a sense of what like,
you know, what is the state of mind or what are the state of political debate, you know,
of a sort of average Chinese person or like an average Chinese leader. And yeah, I think that,
that I find that distance kind of worrying. And I, you know, and there's, you know, there's
some people who do this and they do really great work where they kind of go through the like party
documents and the party speeches. And it seems to require a kind of a lot of interpretive ability
where there's like very specific words and mentoring that like mean we'll have one connotation,
not the other connotation. But yeah, I think it's sort of interesting given how globalized
everything is. And like, I mean, now we have basically perfect translation machines and it's
still so impenetrable. That's really interesting. I've been, I should, I'm sort of ashamed almost
that I haven't done this yet. I think many months ago, when Alexi interviewed me on his
YouTube channel, I said, I'm meaning to go to China to actually see for myself what's going on.
And actually I'm, I should, so by the way, if anybody listening has a lot of context on China,
if I went to China, who could introduce me to people, please email me.
You got to do some pods and you got to find some of the Chinese AI researchers, man.
I know. I was thinking at some point, again, this is the fact that I'm...
Can I speak freely, but you know, I don't know if they can speak freely, but...
I was thinking of there's, so they had these papers and on the paper, they'll say who's a
co-author. It's funny because, well, I was thinking of just emailing, cold emailing everybody,
like, here's my calendar. Let's just talk. I just want to see what is the vibe. Even
they don't tell me anything. I'm just like, what kind of person is this? How westernized are they?
But as I was saying this, I just remembered that in fact, by Dan's, according to mutual
friends we have at Google, they cold emailed every single person on the Gemini paper and said,
if you come work for By Dan's, we'll make you an allied engineer, you'll report directly to the CTO,
and in fact, this actually... That's how the secrets go over, right?
Right. No, I meant to ask this earlier, but suppose they hired what...
If there's only a hundred or so people, or maybe less, we're working on the key algorithmic secrets.
If they hired one such person, is all the alpha gone that these labs have?
If this person was intentional about it, they could get a lot. I mean, they couldn't get the sort
of like... I mean, actually, you could probably just also exfiltrate the code. They could get a
lot of the key ideas. Again, up until recently stuff was published, but they could get a lot
of the key ideas if they tried. I think there's a lot of people who don't actually look around
to see what the other teams are doing, but I think you can. But yeah, I mean, they could. It's scary.
Right. I think the project makes more sense there where you can't just recruit a Manhattan
project engineer and then just get... I mean, these are secrets that can be used for like
probably every training around the future that'll be like, maybe are the key to the data wall that
are like, they can't go on or they can't go on that are like, they're going to be worth giving
sort of like the multipliers on compute, hundreds of billions, trillions of dollars,
and all it takes is China to offer a hundred million dollars to somebody and be like,
yeah, come work for us. And then... I mean, yeah, I'm really uncertain on how
sort of seriously China is taking AGI right now. One anecdote that was relate to me on
the topic of the anecdotes, by another sort of like kind of researcher in the field was
at some point they were at a conference with somebody, Chinese AI researcher,
and he was talking to him and he was like, I think it's really good that you're here and like,
we got to have the international coordination stuff. And apparently this guy said that I'm the
kind of most senior most person that they're going to let leave the country to come to things like
this. Wait, what's the takeaway? As in they're not letting really senior
AI researchers leave the country. Interesting. Kind of classic, you know, Eastern Block move.
Yeah. I don't know if this is true, but it's what I heard. It's interesting. So I thought the point
you made earlier about being exposed to German newspapers and also to, because earlier you
were interested in economics and law and national security, you have the variety in intellectual
diet there has exposed you to thinking about the geopolitical question here and why is others
talking about AI. I mean, this is the first episode I've done about this where we've talked
about things like this, which is now that I think about it weird to give that this is an obvious
thing in retrospect, I should have been thinking about. Anyways, so that's one thing we've been
missing. What are you missing? And national security you're thinking about so you can't say
national security. What like perspective are you probably underexposed to as a result?
And China, I guess you mentioned. Yeah. So I think the China one is an important one.
I mean, I think another one would be a sort of very Tyler Cowan-esque take, which is like,
you're not exposed to how, like, how will a normal person in America, like, you know,
both like use AI, you know, probably not, you know, and that being kind of like bottlenecks
to the fusion of these things. I'm overrating the revenue because I'm kind of like, ah, you know,
everyone has to stop adopting it, but you know, kind of like, you know, Joe Schmo engineer at a
company, you know, like, ah, will they, will they be able to integrate it? And also the reaction
to it, right? You know, I mean, I think this was a question again, hours ago, where it was
about like, you know, won't people kind of rebel against this? Yeah. And they won't want to do the
project. I don't know, maybe they will. Yeah. Here's a political reaction that I didn't anticipate.
Yeah. So Tucker Carlson was recently on the Joe Rogan episode. I already told you about this
part. I'm just gonna tell the story again. So Tucker Carlson is on Joe Rogan. Yeah. And they
start talking about World War II and Tucker says, well, listen, I'm going to say something that my
fellow conservatives won't like, but I think nuclear weapons are immoral. I think it was obviously
immoral that we use them on Nagasaki and Hiroshima. And then he says, in fact, nuclear weapons are
always immoral, except when we would use them on data centers. In fact, it would be immoral not to
use them on data centers because look, we're, DC people in Silicon Valley, these fucking nerds
are making super intelligent. And they say that it could enslave humanity. We made machines to
serve humanity, not to enslave humanity. And they're just going on and making these machines.
And so we should of course be nuking the data centers. And that is definitely not a political
reaction in 2024. I was expecting. I mean, who knows? It's gonna be crazy. It's gonna be crazy.
The thing we learned with COVID is that also the left, right reactions that you would anticipate
just based on hunches, it completely flipped. Initially, like kind of the right is like, you
know, it's like so contingent. And then, and then, and then, and the right left was like, this is
racist. And then it flipped, you know, the left was really into the code. Yeah. And the whole
thing also is just like so blunt and crude. And so, yeah, I think, I think probably in general,
you know, I think people are really under, you know, people like to make sort of complicated
technocratic AI policy proposals. And I think, especially if things go kind of fairly rapidly
on the last AGI, you know, there might not actually be that much space for kind of like
complicated kind of like, you know, clever proposals that might just be kind of much
cruder reactions. Yeah. Look, and then also when you mentioned the spies and national security
getting involved and everything, and you can talk about that in the abstract, but now that we're
living in San Francisco and we know many of the people who are doing the top AI research
is also a little scary to think about people I personally know and friends with.
It's not unfeasible if they have secrets in their head that are worth $100 billion or something,
kidnapping, assassination, sabotage. It's scary. Oh, they're family, or yeah, it's really bad.
Yeah, yeah. I mean, this is to the point on security, you know, like right now, it's just
really foreign. But, you know, at some point, as it becomes like really serious, it's, you know,
you're going to want the security cards. Yeah. Yeah. So presumably you have thought about the
fact that people in China will be listening to this and will be reading your series. Yeah.
And somehow you made the trade off that it's better to let the whole world know. Yeah. And
also including China and make them up to AGI, which is part of the thing you're worried about
is China making up to AGI than to stay silent. Yeah. I'm just curious, walk me through how you've
thought about that trade off. Yeah, I actually, look, I think this is a tough trade off. I thought
about this a bunch, you know, I think, you know, I think people on the PRC will read this.
I think, you know, I think there's some extent to which sort of cat is out of the bag, you know,
this is like not, you know, AGI being a thing people are thinking about very seriously is not
new anymore. There's sort of, you know, a lot of these takes are kind of old or, you know, I've had,
I had, you know, similar views a year ago, might not have written it up a year ago, in part because
I think this cat wasn't out of the bag enough. You know, I think the other thing is
I think to be able to manage this challenge, you know, I think much broader swaths in society
will need to wake up, right? And if we're going to get the project, you know, we actually need
sort of like, you know, abroad by partisan understanding, the challenges facing us. And
so, you know, I think it's a tough trade off, but I think the sort of need to wake up people in the
United States in the sort of Western world and the Democratic coalition is ultimately imperative.
And, you know, I think my hope is more people here will read it than the PRC.
You know, and I think people sometimes underrate the importance of just kind of like writing it
laying out the strategic picture. And, you know, I think you've done actually a great service to
sort of mankind in some sense by, you know, with your podcast. And, you know, I think it's overall
been good. Okay, so by the way, you know, on the topic of, you know, Germany, you know, we were
talking at some point about kind of immigration story, right? Like you have a kind of interesting
story you haven't told. And I think you should tell. So a couple of years ago, I was in college and
I was 20. Yeah, I was about to turn 21. Yeah, I think it was, yeah, you came from India when you
were really right. Yeah. So I was eight or eight or nine. I lived in India and then we moved around
all over the place. But because of the backlog for Indians, the green card backlog, yeah, it's
we were we've been in the queue for like decades, even though you came at eight, you're still on
the H1B. Yeah. And when you're 21, you get kicked off the queue and you had to restart the process.
So I'm on my dad's, my dad's a doctor and I'm on his H1B as it depended. But when you're 21,
you get kicked off. Yeah. And so I'm 20 and I just like kind of dawns on me that this is my situation.
Yeah. And you're completely screwed. Right. And so I also had experience that my dad,
yeah, we've like moved all around the country. They have to prove that him as a doctor is like,
you can't get native talent. Yeah. And you can't start up. Yeah. So where can you not get like
even getting the H1B for you would have been like 20% lottery. So if you're lucky, you're in this
time. And they had to prove that they can't get native talent, which means like for him,
I'm like, we lived in North Dakota for three years, West Virginia for three years, Maryland,
West Texas. Yeah. And so kind of dawn on me, this is my situation. Is that turn 21, I'll be like
on this lottery, even if I get the lottery, I'll be a fucking code monkey for the rest of my life
because this thing isn't going to let up. Yeah. Can't do a startup. Exactly. And so at the same time,
I had been reading for the last year, I've been super obsessed with Paul Graham essays.
My plan at the time was to make a startup or something. I was super excited about that.
And it just occurred to me that I couldn't do this. Yeah. That like, this is just not in the
cars for me. Yeah. And so I was kind of depressed about it. I remember I kind of just, I was in
a daze through finals, because I had like, it just occurred to me and I was really like
anxious about it. Yeah. And I remember thinking to myself at the time that if somehow I end up
getting my green card before I turn 21, there's no fucking way I'm turning, becoming a code monkey
because the thing that I've, like this feeling of dread that I have is this realization that
I'm just going to have to be a code monkey. And I realize that's my default path. Yeah. If I,
if I hadn't sort of made a proactive effort not to do that, I would have graduated college as a
computer science student and I would have just done that. And that's the thing I was super scared
about. Yeah. So that was an important sort of realization for me. Anyway, so COVID happened
because of that, since there weren't foreigners coming, the backlog cleared fast. And by the skin
of my teeth, like a few months before I turned 21, extremely contingent reasons, I ended up getting
a green card because I got a green card. I could, you know, the whole podcast, right? Exactly.
I graduated college and I was like bumming around and I got, it was like, I graduated
just a semester early. I'm going to like do this podcast, see what happens. And it was,
it hadn't, it didn't have a green card. And it only existed because, yeah, it's actually,
because I think it's hard. It's probably, it's, you know, what is the impact of like immigration
reform? Like what is the impact of clearing, you know, like whatever 50,000 green cards in
the backlog? And you're such like an amazing example of like, you know, all of this is only
possible. And it's, yeah, it's, I mean, it's just incredibly tragic that this is so dysfunctional.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. No, it's insane. I'm glad you did it. I'm glad you kind of like, you know,
tried the, you know, the, the, the unusual path. Well, yeah, but I could only do it.
Obviously, I was extremely fortunate that I got the green card. I was like,
I had a little bit of saved up money and I got a small grant out of college. Thanks to the
future fund to like do this for basically the equivalent of six months.
And so it turned out really well. And then at each time when I was like, oh, okay, podcast,
come on, like, I wasted a few months on this, let's now go do something real. Something big would
happen. I would, Jeff Bezos would, huh? You kept with it. Yeah. Yeah. But there would always be
just like the moment I'm about to quit the podcast, something like Jeff Bezos will say
there's something nice about me on Twitter. The daily episodes gets like half a million views,
you know, and then now this is my career, but it was a sort of very,
looking back on it, incredibly contingent that things worked out the right way.
Yeah. I mean, look, if, if the AGI stuff goes down, you know, it'll be,
it'll be the most important kind of like, you know, source of, it'll be how,
maybe most of the people who kind of end up feeling the AGI are sure about it.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Also very much, you're very linked with the story in many ways. First,
the, I got like a $20,000 grant from a future fund right out of college. Yeah.
And that sustained me for six months or however long it was. Yeah. And without that,
I wouldn't, it was kind of crazy. Yeah. 10 grand or what was it?
It was, no, it just, it's tiny, but you know, it goes to show kind of how small grants can go.
Yeah. It's sort of the immersion ventures too. Yeah. Exactly. The immersion ventures and the,
well, the last year I've been in San Francisco, we've just been
in close contact the entire time and just bouncing ideas back and forth.
We're just basically the alpha I have, I think people would be surprised by how much I got from
you, Sholto, Trent and a couple others. I mean, it's been, it's been an absolute pleasure.
Yeah. Likewise. Likewise. It's been super fun. Yeah.
Okay. So some random questions for you. Yeah. If you could convert to Mormonism.
Yeah. And you could really believe it. Yeah. Would you do it? Would you push the button?
Yeah. Well, okay. Okay. Before I answer that question, one sort of observation about the
Mormons. So there's actually, there's an article that actually made a big impact on me.
Yeah. I think it was by McKick Hop and at some point, you know, in the Atlantic or whatever
about the Mormons. And I think the thing he kind of, you know, and I think he even was like
interviewed Romney and so on. And I think the thing I thought was really interesting in this
article was he kind of talked about how the experience of kind of growing up different,
you know, growing up very unusual, especially if you grow up Mormon outside of Utah, you know,
like the only person who doesn't drink caffeine, you don't drink alcohol, you're kind of weird.
How that kind of got people prepared for being willing to be kind of outside of the norm later
on. And like, you know, Romney, you know, was willing to kind of take stands alone, you know,
in his party, because he believed, you know, what he believed is true. And I don't, I mean,
probably not to the same way, but I feel a little bit like this from kind of having grown up in
Germany, you know, and really not having like this sort of German system and having been kind
of an outsider or something. I think there's a certain amount in which kind of, yeah, growing
up in an outsider gives you kind of unusual strength later on to be kind of like willing to
say what you think. And so that is one thing I really appreciate about the Mormons, at least the
ones that grew up outside of Utah. I think, you know, the fertility rates, they're good, they're
important. They're going down as well, right? This is the thing that really clinched the kind of
fertility decline story for you. Even the Mormons. Yeah, even the Mormons, right? You're like, oh,
this is like a good sort of good story. The Mormons will replace everybody. Well, no, I don't know
if it's good, but it's like, at least, you know, at least come on, you know, like at least some
people will maintain high, you know, but it's no, no, you know, even the Mormons and sort of
basically, once these religious subgroups have high fertility rates, once they kind of grow big
enough, they become, they're too close in contact with sort of normal society and become normalized,
Mormon fertility rates drop from, I don't remember the exact numbers, maybe like four to two in the
course of 10, 20 years. Anyway, so it's like, you know, now people point to the Amish or whatever,
but I'm just like, it's probably just not scalable. And if you grow big enough, then there's just like,
you know, the sort of like, you know, the sort of like overwhelming force of modernity kind of gets
you. Yeah. No, if I could convert to Mormonism, look, I think there's something, I don't believe
it, right? If I believed it, I obviously would convert to Mormonism, right? Because it's, you
gotta, you gotta, but you can choose a world in which you do believe it.
I think there's something really valuable and kind of believing in something greater than
yourself and believing and having a certain amount of faith. You do, right? And you know,
you know, there's a, you know, feeling some sort of duty to the thing greater than yourself.
Yeah. And you know, maybe my version of this is somewhat different. You know, I think I feel
some sort of duty to like, I feel like there's some sort of historical weight on like how this
might play out. And I feel some sort of duty to like make that go well. I feel some sort of duty
to, you know, our country, to the national security of the United States. And, you know,
I think, I think that, I think it can be a force for a lot of good.
I, the, going back to the opening, I think just,
the thing that's especially impressive about that is, look, there's people who, at the company,
who have through years and decades of building up savings from working in tech have probably
10 civilians, liquid, more than that in terms of their equity. And the person, very many people
were concerned about the clusters and the Middle East and the secrets leaking to China and all
these things. But the person who actually made a hassle about it, and I think hassling people is
so underrated, I think that one person who made a hassle about it is the 22 year old who has less
than a year at the company who doesn't have savings built up. Who isn't like a solidified member of the,
I think that's a sort of like, maybe, maybe it's me being naive and, you know, not knowing how big
companies work. And, you know, but like, there's a, you know, I think sometimes a bit of a speech
deontologist, you know, I kind of believe in saying what you think. Sometimes friends tell me I
should be more of a speech consequentialist. No, I think I really think the amount of people who
when they have the opportunity to talk to the person will just bring up the thing. I've been
with you in multiple contexts, and I guess I shouldn't reveal who the person is or what the
context was, but I've just been like very impressed that the dinner begins and by the end, somebody
who has a major voice in how things go is seriously thinking about a worldview they would have found
incredibly alien before the dinner or something. And I've been impressed that like, just like,
give them the spiel and hassle them. I mean, look, I just, I think, I think I feel this stuff
pretty viscerally now. You know, I think there's a time, you know, there's a time when I thought
about the stuff a lot, but it was kind of like econ models and like, you know, kind of like these
sort of theoretical abstractions and, you know, you talk about human brain size or whatever.
Right. And I think, you know, since, I think since at least last year, you know, I feel like,
you know, I feel like I can see it, you know, and I just, I feel it. And I think I can like,
you know, I can sort of see the cluster that I can see the kind of rough combination of algorithms
and the people that be involved and how this is going to play out. And, you know, I think,
look, we'll see how it plays out. There's many ways this could be wrong. There's many ways it
could go. But I think this could get very real. Yeah. Should we talk about what you're up to next?
Sure. Yeah. Okay. So you're starting an investment firm anchor investments from
Nat Friedman, Daniel Gross, Patrick Lawson, John Collison.
First of all, why is this thing to do? You believe the AGI is coming in a few years?
Why the investment firm? A good question, fair question. Wait, so I mean, a couple things. One
is just, you know, I think we talked about this earlier, but it's like the screen doesn't go blank,
you know, when sort of AGI is different intelligence happens, I think people really
underrate the sort of basically the sort of decade after it, you have the intelligence
explosion, that's maybe the most sort of wild period. But I think the decade after is also
going to be wild. And you know, this combination of human institutions, but super intelligence,
you have crazy kind of geopolitical things going on, you have the sort of broadening of
this explosive growth. And basically, yeah, I think it's going to be a really important period.
I think capital will really matter, you know, eventually, you know, like, you know, going to
go to the stars, you know, going to go to the galaxies. So anyway, so part of the answer is
just like, look, I think done, done, right, there's a lot of money to be made, you know,
I think if AGI were priced in tomorrow, you could maybe make 100x, probably you can make
even way more than that because of the sequencing. And, and, and, you know, capital matters.
I think the other reason is just, you know, some amount of freedom and independence. And I think,
you know, you know, I think there's some people who are very smart about this AGI stuff and who
are kind of like see it coming. But I think almost all of them, you know, are kind of,
you know, constrained in various ways right there in the labs, you know, they're in some,
you know, some other position where they can't really talk about the stuff. And, you know,
in some sense, I've really admired sort of the thing you've done, which is I think it's really
important that there's sort of voices of reason on this stuff publicly, or people who are in
positions to kind of advise important actors and so on. And so I think there's a, you know,
basically the thing this investment firm will be, will be kind of like, you know, a brain trust
on AI, it's going to be all about situational awareness. We're going to have the best situational
awareness in the business, you know, we're going to have way more situational business than any of
the people who manage money in New York. We're definitely going to, you know, we're going to do
great on investing. But it's the same sort of situational awareness that I think is going to
be important for understanding what's happening, being a voice of reason publicly and, and, and
sort of being able to be in a position to advise. Yeah. I, there was the book about Peter Thiel.
Yeah. They had an interesting quote about his hedge fund. I think it got terrible return. So
this isn't the example. Right, right. That's the, that's the sort of
bare case, right? It's like two theoretical and sure. Yeah. But they had an interesting quote
that it's, it's, that it's like basically a think tank inside of a hedge fund.
Yeah. So we're trying to build. Right. Yeah. So presumably you've thought about the ways in which
these kinds of things can blow. There's a very, there's a lot of interesting business history
books about people who got the pieces right, but timed it wrong. Yeah. Where they, they buy that
internet's going to be a big deal. Yeah. They sell at the wrong time and buy the wrong time
in the dotcom boom. And so they miss out on the gains, even though they're right about the,
anyways, yeah. What, what is that trick to preventing that kind of thing?
Yeah. I mean, look, obviously you can't, you know, not blowing up as sort of like, you know,
task number one and two or whatever. I mean, you know, I think this investment firm, it is going
to just be betting on AGI, you know, betting on AGI and super intelligence before the decade
is out, taking that seriously, making the bets you would make, you know, if you took that seriously.
So, you know, I think if that's wrong, you know, firm is not going to do that well. The thing you
have to be resistant to is like, you have to be able to resist and get, you know, one or a couple
or a few kind of individual calls, right? You know, it's like AI stagnates for a year because of the
data wall or like, you know, you got, you got the call wrong on like when revenue would go up. And
so anyway, that's pretty critical. You have to get timing right. I do think in general that the
sort of sequence of bets on the way to AGI is actually pretty critical. And I think a thing
people underrate. So, all right. I mean, yeah. So like, where does the story start, right? So like,
obviously, the sort of only bet over the last year was NVIDIA. And, you know, it's obvious now,
very few people did it. This is sort of also, you know, a classic debate I and a friend had with
another colleague of ours, where this colleague was really into TSM, you know, TSMC. And he was
just kind of like, well, you know, like, these tabs are going to be so valuable. And also like,
NVIDIA, there's just a lot of videos in credit risk, right? It's like, maybe somebody else makes
better GPUs. That was basically right. But sort of only NVIDIA had the AI beta, right? Because
only NVIDIA was kind of like a large fraction AI. The next few doublings would just like
meaningfully explode their revenue. Whereas TSMC was, you know, a couple percent AI. So,
you know, even though there's going to be a few doublings of AI, not going to make that big of
an impact. All right. So it's sort of like, the only place to find the AI beta basically was NVIDIA
for a while. You know, now it's broadening, right? So now TSM is like, you know, 20 percent AI by
like 27 or something is what they're saying. One more doubling, it'll be kind of like a large
fraction of what they're doing. And, you know, there's a whole, you know, whole stack, you know,
there's like, you know, there's people making memory and COAS and, you know, power, you know,
utility companies are starting to get excited about AI. And they're like, oh, it'll, you know,
power production in the United States will grow, you know, not 2.5 percent, 5 percent of the next
five years. And I'm like, no, it'll grow more. You know, at some point, you know, you know,
like a Google or something becomes interesting, you know, people are excited about them with AI
because it's like, oh, you know, AI revenue will be, you know, 10 billion or tens of billions.
And I'm kind of like, ah, I don't really care about them before then. I care about it, you know,
once it, you know, once you get the AI beta, right? And so at some point, you know, Google
will get, you know, $100 billion of revenue from AI. Probably their stock will explode,
you know, they're going to become, you know, 5 trillion, 10 trillion dollar company.
Anyway, so the timing there is very important. You have to get the timing right. You have to
get the sequence right. You know, at some point, actually, I think like, you know, there's going
to be real tailwind to equities from real interest rates, right? So basically in these sort of
explosive growths worlds, you would expect real interest rates to go up a lot, both on the sort
of like, you know, a basic both sides of the equation, right? On the supply side or on the
sort of demand for money side, because, you know, people are going to be making these crazy investments,
you know, initially in clusters and then in the robo factories or whatever, right? And so they're
going to be borrowing like crazy. They want all this capital, higher AI. And then on the sort of
like consumer saving side, right, to like, you know, to give up all this capital, you know,
this sort of like Euler equation, standard sort of intratemporal transfer, you know,
trade off of consumption. So standard.
Some of our friends have a paper on this, you know, basically, if you expect, you know,
if consumers expect real growth rates to be higher, you know, interest rates are going to be
higher because they're less willing to give up consumption, you know, consumption in the
less willing to give up consumption day for consumption in the future.
Anyway, so at some point, real interest rates will go up if sort of ADA is greater than one,
that actually means equities, you know, higher growth rate expectations mean equities go down
because the sort of interest rate effect outweighs the growth rate effect.
And so, you know, at some point, there's like big, the big bond short, you got to get that right,
you got to get it right, that, you know, nationalization, you know, like, you got, you know,
anyway, so there's this whole sequence of things, you got to get that right.
And the unknown unknowns, unknown unknowns. Yeah. And so you've, look, you've got to be
really, really careful about your like overall like this positioning, right? And because, you
know, you know, if you expect these kind of crazy events to play out, there's going to be crazy
things you didn't see. You know, you do also want to make the sort of kind of bets that are tailored
to your scenarios in the sense of like, you know, you want to find bets that are bets on the tails,
right? You know, I don't think anyone is expecting, you know, interest rates to go above,
you know, 10% like real interest rates. But, you know, I think there's at least a serious chance
of that, you know, before the decade is out. And so, you know, maybe there's some like cheap
insurance you can buy on that, you know, very silly question. In these worlds,
are financial markets where you make these kinds of bets going to be respected? And
like, you know, like, is my fidelity account going to mean anything when we have their 50%
economic growth? Like, who's, who's like, we got to respect his property rights?
That's pretty deep into it. The bond short, the sort of 50 and 52nd hour growth, that's pretty
deep into it. I mean, again, there's this whole sequence of things. But yeah, no, I think property
rights will be instructed again, in the sort of modal world, the project. Yeah. At some point,
at some point, there's going to be figuring out the property rights for the galaxies, you know,
and that'll be interesting. So there's an interesting question about
going back to your strategy about, well, the 30s will really matter a lot about how the rest of
the future goes. And you want to be in a position of influence by that point, because of capital.
It's worth considering, as far as I know, there's probably a whole bunch of literature on this,
I'm just riffing. But the, the landed gentry during the, before the beginning of the industrial
revolution, I'm not sure if they were able to leverage their position in a sort of georgist
or pickety type sense in order to accrue the returns that were realized through the industrial
revolution. And I don't know what happened. At some point, they were just wearing the
landed gentry. But I'd be concerned that even if you make great investment calls,
you'll be like the guy who owned a lot of land, farmland before the industrial revolution,
and like the guy who's actually going to make a bunch of money is the one with the C mentioned,
even if he doesn't make that much money, most of the benefits are sort of widely diffused and so
forth. I mean, I think that the analog is like you sell your land, you put it all and sort of
that, you know, that the people who are building the new industry. I think the, I mean, I think
the sort of like real depreciating asset, you know, for me is human capital, right? Yeah, no,
look, I'm serious, right? It's like, you know, there's something about like, you know, I don't
know, it was like valedictorian of Columbia, you know, the thing that made you special is
you're smart, right? But actually, like, you know, that might not matter in like four years,
you know, because it's actually automatable. Right. And so anyway, a friend joke that the
sort of investment firm is perfectly hedged for me. It's like, you know, either like AGI this
decade, and yeah, your human capital is depreciated, but you've turned that into financial capital,
or you know, like no AGI this decade, in which case, maybe the firm doesn't do that well,
but you know, you're still in your 20s and you're still smart.
Excellent. And what's your story for why AGI hasn't been priced in the story?
Financial markets are supposed to be very efficient to say very hard to get an edge here.
Naively, you just say, well, I've looked at these scaling curves and they imply that we're
going to be buying much more computed energy than the analysts realize.
Shouldn't those analysts be broke by now? What's going on?
Yeah. I mean, I used to be a true EMH guy. I was an economist, you know. I think the thing I,
you know, changed my mind on is that I think there can be kind of groups of people, smart people,
you know, who are, you know, say they're in San Francisco, who do just have
off over the rest of society and kind of seeing the future. And so like COVID, right? Like,
I think there's just honestly kind of similar group of people who just saw that and called it
completely correctly. And, you know, they showed at the market they did really well.
You know, a bunch of other sort of things like that. So, you know, why is AGI not priced in?
You know, it's sort of, you know, why hasn't the government nationalized the labs yet, right?
It's like, you know, this, you know, society hasn't priced it in yet and sort of it hasn't
completely diffused. And, you know, again, it might be wrong, right? But I just think sort of,
you know, not that many people take these ideas seriously yet. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. A couple of other sort of ideas that I was playing around with with regards to
reading it a chance to talk about, but the systems competition, there's a very interesting,
one of my favorite books about World War II is the Victor Davis Hansen
summary of everything. And he explains why the Allies made better decisions than the Axis.
Why did they? And so obviously, there were some decisions that the Axis made that were pretty
like Blitzkrieg, whatever. That was sort of by accident, though.
In what sense? That they just had the infrastructure left over?
Well, no, I mean, the sort of, I think, I mean, I don't, I mean, I think sort of my read of it is
Blitzkrieg wasn't kind of some like a genius strategy. It was just kind of, it was like more
like their hand was forced. I mean, this is sort of the very Adam Tuzi and story of World War II,
right? But it was, you know, there's sort of this long war versus short war. I think it's
actually kind of an important concept. I think sort of Germany realized that if they were in a
long war, including the United States, you know, they would not be able to compete industrially.
So their only path to victory was like make it a short war, right? And that, that sort of worked
much more spectacularly than they thought, right? And sort of take over France and take over much
of Europe. And so then, you know, the decision to invade the Soviet Union, it was, you know,
it was, it was, um, look, if it was, it was about the Western front in some sense, because it was
like, we've got to get the resources. You know, we don't, we're actually, we don't actually have a
bunch of the stuff we need, like, you know, oil and so on. You know, Auschwitz was actually just
this giant chemical plant to make kind of like synthetic oil and a bunch of these things was
the largest industrial project in Nazi Germany. And so, you know, and sort of they thought, well,
you know, we completely crushed them in World War I, you know, it'll be easy, we'll invade them,
we'll get the resources, and then we can fight on the Western front. And even during the sort of
whole invasion of the Soviet Union, even though kind of like a large amount of the sort of,
you know, the sort of deaths happened there, you know, like a large fraction of German industrial
production was actually, you know, like planes and naval, you know, and so on, those directed,
you know, towards the Western front and towards the, you know, the Western allies.
Well, and then so the point that Hansen was making was,
by the way, I think this concept of like long war and short war is kind of interesting and with
respect to thinking about the China competition, which is like, you know, I worry a lot about kind
of, you know, the decline of sort of American, like late in American industrial capacity, you know,
like, I think China builds like 200 times more ships than we do right now. You know, some crazy
way. And so it's like, maybe we have this superiority, say in the non AI worlds, we have
the superiority in military material, kind of like win a short war, at least, you know,
kind of defend Taiwan in some sense. But like if it actually goes on, you know, it's like maybe
China is much better able to mobilize, mobilize industrial resources in a way that like we just
don't have that same ability anymore. I think this is also relevant to the AI thing in the sense of
like, if it comes down to sort of a game about building, right, including like, maybe AGI takes
the trillion dollar cluster, not the hundred billion dollar cluster, maybe, or even maybe AGI
takes the, you know, is on the hundred billion dollar cluster. But, you know, it really matters
if you can run, you know, 10x, you can do one more order of magnitude of compute for your super
intelligence or whatever. That, you know, maybe right now they're behind, but they just have this
sort of like raw, late in industrial capacity to help build us. And that matters both in the
run up to AGI and after, right, where it's like, you have this super intelligence on your cluster,
now it's time to kind of like expand the explosive growth. And, you know, like, will we let the
ROA factories run wild? Like, maybe not. But like, maybe China will. Or like, you know, will we,
will, yeah, will we produce the, how many, how many of the drones will we produce?
And I think, yeah, so there's some sort of like outbuilding in the industrial explosion that I
worked on. You've got to be one of the few people in the world who is both concerned about alignment,
but also wants to make sure that we'll let the ROA factories proceed once we get the ASI to beat
out China. Like, it's all, it's all part of the picture. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And by the way, speaking of the ASIs and the robot factories, one of the interesting things,
RoboArmy's too. Yeah, one of the interesting things, there's this question of what you do
with industrial scale intelligence. And obviously, it's not chatbots, but it's a, I think it's very
hard to predict. Yeah, yeah. But the history of oil is very interesting. We're in the, I think it's
in the 1860s that we figure out how to refine oil, some geologist. And so then standard oil
got started, there's this huge boom. It changes American politics, entire legislators are getting
bought out by oil interest and presidents are getting elected based on the divisions about
oil and breaking them up and everything. And all of this has happened. The world has never
revolutionized before the car has been invented. And so when the light bulb was invented, I think
it was like 50 years after oil refining had been discovered, majority of standard oil's history
is before the car is invented. Carousel lamps. Exactly. So it's just used for lighting.
Then they thought oil would just no longer be relevant. Yeah, yeah. So there was a concern
that standard oil would go to brain corrupt when the light bulb was invented. But then
there's sort of, you realize that there's immense amount of compressed energy here.
You're going to have billions of gallons of this stuff a year. And it's hard to
sort of predict in advance what you can do with that. And then later on, it turns out transportation
cars with, that's what it's used for. Anyways, with intelligence, maybe one answer is the
intelligence explosion. But even after that, so you have all these ASIs and you have enough
compute, especially the compute they'll build to run hundreds of millions of GPUs will hum.
Yeah. But what are we doing with that? And it's very hard to predict in advance. I think it would
be very interesting to figure out what the Jupiter brains will be doing. So look, there's
situational awareness of where things stand now. And we've gotten a good dose of that.
Obviously, a lot of the things we're talking about now, you couldn't have
prejudged many years back in the past. And part of your role implies that things will accelerate
because of AI getting the process. But many other things that are unpredictable fundamentally,
basically how people will react, how the political system will react, how foreign adversaries will
react. Those things will become evident over time. So the situational awareness is not just
knowing where the picture stands now, but being in a position to react appropriately to new information,
to change your worldview as a result, to change your recommendations as a result.
What is the appropriate way to think about situational awareness as a continuous process
rather than as a one-time thing you realized? Yep. No, I think this is great. Look, I think
there's a sort of mental flexibility and willing to change your mind. That's really important.
I actually think this is sort of like how a lot of brains have been broken in the AGI debate,
the tumors who actually, I think we're really prescient on AGI thinking about the stuff a decade
ago, but they haven't actually updated on the empirical realities of deep learning. They're
sort of like, the proposals are really kind of even unworkable. This doesn't really make sense.
There's people who come in with sort of a predefined ideology. They're just kind of like,
the EX a little bit. They like to shitpost about technology, but they're not actually thinking
through. I mean, either the sort of stagnationists who think this stuff is only going to be a
chatbot, and so of course it isn't risky, or they're just not thinking through the kind of like
actually immense national security implications and how that's going to go. I actually think
there's kind of a risk in kind of like having written this stuff down and put it online.
I think this sometimes happens to people as a sort of calcification of the worldview,
because now they've publicly articulated this position. Maybe there's some evidence against
it, but they're clinging to it. I actually want to give the big disclaimer on like,
I think it's really valuable to paint this sort of very concrete and visceral picture.
I think this is currently my best guess on how this decade will go. I think if it goes
anywhere like this, it will be wild, but given the rapid pace of progress, we're going to keep
getting a lot more information. I think it's important to sort of keep your head on straight
about that. I feel like the most important thing here is that, and this relates to some of the
stuff we've talked about and the world being surprisingly small and so on. I feel like I
used to have this worldview of like, look, there's important things happening in the world, but there's
like people who are taking care of it, and there's like the people in government, and there's again,
even like AI labs have idealized, and people are on it. Surely there must be on it, right?
And I think just some of this personal experience, even seeing how kind of COVID went,
people aren't necessarily, there's not some, not that somebody else is just kind of on it and
making sure this goes well, however it goes. You know, the thing that I think will really
matter is that there are sort of good people who take this stuff as seriously as it deserves,
and who are willing to kind of take the implication seriously, who are willing to, you know,
who have situational awareness, are willing to change their minds, are willing to sort of
stare the picture in the face, and you know, I'm counting on those good people.
All right, that's a great place to close Leopold.
Thanks so much, Tarkash. This is the absolute joy.
Hey everybody, I hope you enjoyed that episode with Leopold. There's actually one more riff
about German history that he had after a break, and it was pretty interesting, so I didn't want
to cut it out, so I've just included it after this outro. You can advertise on the show now,
so if you're interested, you can reach out at the forum in the description below.
Other than that, the most helpful thing you can do is to share the episode if you enjoyed it.
Send it to group chats, Twitter, wherever else you think people who might like this episode
might congregate, and other than that, I guess here's this riff on Frederick the Great. See you
on the next one. I mean, I think the actual funny thing is, you know, a lot of the sort of German
history stuff we've talked about is sort of like not actually stuff I learned in Germany,
it's sort of like stuff that I learned after, and there's actually, you know,
a funny thing where I kind of would go back to Germany over Christmas or whatever. Suddenly
I understand the street names, you know, it's like, you know, Gneisenau and Scharnhorst,
and they're all these like Prussian military reformers, and you're like finally understood,
you know, Sansa C, and you're like, Frederick, you know, Frederick the Great is this really
interesting figure, where, so he's this sort of, in some sense, kind of like gay lover of arts,
right, where he, you know, he hates speaking German, he only wants to speak French, you know,
he like plays the flute, he composes, he has all the sort of great, you know, artists of his day,
you know, over at Sansa C, and he actually had this sort of like really tough upbringing, where
his father was this sort of like really stern sort of Prussian military man, and he had had a,
Frederick the Great as sort of a 17-year-old or whatever, he basically had a male lover,
and what his father did was imprison his son, and then I think hang his male lover in front of him,
and again, his father was this kind of very stern Prussian guy, he was this kind of gay,
you know, lover of arts, but then later on Frederick the Great turns out to be this like,
you know, one of the most kind of like, you know, successful kind of Prussian conquerors,
right, like he gets Silesia, he wins the Seven Years War, you know, also, you know,
amazing military strategists, you know, amazing military strategy at the time consisted of like,
he was able to like flank the army, and that was crazy, you know, and that was brilliant,
and then they like almost lose the Seven Years War, and at the very end, you know, the sort of,
the Russian Tsar changes, and he's like, ah, I'm actually kind of a Prussian stan, you know,
I think I'm like, I'm into this stuff, and then he lets, you know, let's Frederick the Great lose,
and he had, let's their army be okay, and anyway, sort of like, yeah, kind of bizarre,
interesting figure in German history.
