I challenge the claim that next token prediction cannot
surpass human performance. It looks like on the surface, it
cannot. It looks on the surface, if you just learn to
imitate, to predict what people do, it means that you can only
copy people. But there here is a counter argument for why it
might not be quite so if your neural net is, if your base
neural net is smart enough, you just ask it like, what would
what would a person with like great insight and wisdom and
capability do? Maybe such a person doesn't exist. But there's
a pretty good chance that the neural net will be able to
extrapolate how such a person would behave. Do you see what I
mean?
Yes, although where would it get the sort of insight about
what that's a person would do, if not from from the data of
regular people? Because like, if you think about it, what does
it mean to predict the next token well enough? What does it
mean? Actually, it's actually it's a much it's a deeper
question than it seems. Predicting the next token well
means that you understand the underlying reality that led to
the creation of that token. It's not statistics like it is
statistics, but what is statistics? In order to on to
understand those statistics to compress them, you need to
understand what is it about the world that creates this those
statistics. And so then you say, Okay, well, I have all those
people. What is it about people that creates their behaviors?
Well, they have, you know, they have thoughts and they have
feelings and they have ideas and they do things in certain
ways. All of those would be deduced from next token
prediction. And I'd argue that this should make it possible,
not indefinitely, but to a to a pretty decent degree to say
well, can you guess what you what you do if you took a person
with like this characteristic and that characteristic, like
such a person doesn't exist. But because you're so good at
predicting the next token, you should still be able to guess
what that person would do this hypothetical imaginary person
means far greater mental ability than the rest of us.
