Here are two pieces from two very different musical traditions, and I want you to think
about this. What makes them different?
That was Vivaldi, that was Vivaldi's spring from 1723. Here's a piece from a very different
musical tradition.
What makes these pieces so very different? How can we quickly distinguish western music
from Chinese music? That was a piece called Lady Meng Zheng. Why is it that mathematics
plays a role in this difference? There are, of course, many differences between music
from different cultures, instruments, notation, things like that, but one of the key differences
is that they use different musical scales. They make different choices about notes.
What is a scale? A scale is a collection of notes, increasing or decreasing in pitch,
and for us, we're thinking about them covering a range of one octave, from one frequency
to its double, say from an A at 440 Hz to 880 Hz. Remember, an octave is from one
key on a piano to a next of the same name, 12 half steps. You need to know that the names
here, the scale notes, are numbered as well as named. The keys on a piano have names,
they're A, B, C sharp, those are the keys on the piano, but when we talk about scales,
we also give them numbers. We talk about the bottom one, the fundamental, and then the
second, the third, the fourth, the fifth, on and up, through the seventh, and finally
the octave. Now, some of those are major, some of those are minor, sometimes we call
the fourth and the fifth perfect, but they're numbered. We also have the system called the
solfege system, which is do, re, mi, fa, so, la, ti, do. You, of course, know that from
the sound of music. Now, the number of notes on a scale is key. We talk about the number
of notes on a scale as being the number of notes before you get to the next octave. When
you play a scale, you usually start on the bottom and get to the next octave, but if
we have a seven note scale, what we'll call a heptatonic scale, there'll actually be eight
notes when you play it because you also include the eighth note on the top end. Now, here's
a really important fact about the names on a scale. The piano keys are fixed. There's
sort of a fixed reference point. You never change the names of the piano keys. However,
the numbers that we talk about, the fundamental, the second, the third, fourth, those are a
sort of measurement that keep changing. When you're key in the key of C, C is where you
measure from, and when you're in the key of G, G is where you measure from. Solfege works
the same way. The do changes. It's always called do, but note name, if we're on a piano,
the name of the note do might stand for an A if we're in the key of A, and then do, re,
mi, fa, so, from there, or maybe if we're in the key of D flat, then the do is D flat,
and the re is higher than that, on and on. When we talk about the key of the scale, we're
not talking about a piano key. We're talking about the lowest note of the scale, usually
first. When we get to compositions, when we talk about the key of some piece, that's
the note that's most important, and pieces usually tend to start and end on that particular
note. Now, an interval is the distant in pitch between one note and another. It's certainly
related to scales, and in numbers, it's the following relation. The fifth, the interval
of a fifth, is the distance between the fundamental and the fifth note on the major scale, when
starting on that fundamental. So let me play you an example of a scale. Here's a seven note,
a heptatonic E major scale. I'm going to play it starting on my open E.
That's the basis for Vivaldi's spring, and here's a different scale. Here's a five note
pentatonic G major scale. That scales the basis for Lady Meng Zhang, the Chinese piece
that I played at the beginning. Now, major versus minor, that's a matter of mood, and
we're going to hear the difference between those in a minute. First, I want to make the
mathematical connection between these. Remember, the overall goal, the central question in
this entire course is how does mathematics inform the musical experience? The main point
of this lecture and the next is the following. How do the harmonic series, how does the harmonic
series inform our choice of scales? How we tune these scales and the implications of
those choices? Of which notes we put in and how exactly we tune those. These next two
lectures, this and the next, are each in three parts. Today's lecture, we're going to start
by answering the question, why doesn't the obvious solution work for constructing a scale?
And the key idea here is that octaves and intervals are multiplicative, whereas overtones
are additive. Then we're going to look at two methods of constructing scales that do
work in different ways. The first method is going to be to choose scale notes based on
the fundamental. So whatever that fundamental note is, we're going to choose scale notes
based on that. The second method is to choose one scale note based on the previous, and
then to use that to choose the next one, and to use that to choose the next one. This is
some sort of bootstrapping idea. And when we choose how many notes and which ones in
different ways, those actually give rises to different moods, and those are adopted
by different cultures. A bonus today is we're going to find out why pianos are never in
tune. Now, if you're like me, you might know somebody who has the title piano tuner, and
you might think that this is going to be really depressing when you tell that person. Now,
piano tuners know all this very well, and in fact, they're very good at avoiding the
problems that we're going to talk about today and in later lectures. In the following lecture,
we're going to talk more about scales, and that's also going to be in three parts. First,
we're going to talk about how exactly to tune a scale. So for instance, where exactly should
I put my fingers on the string to get a beautiful sounding E major scale like the one I just
played. Secondly, we're going to talk about the mathematical reasons why 12 is a really
good number of keys to put in an octave. On the piano, we have 12 different half steps
before we get to the next octave, and there's a mathematical reason why 12 is chosen. And
the third thing we're going to talk about next time is how changes in tuning mirror
changes in composition, how math made modern music mad, or at least irrational. So let's
play examples of a bunch of different scales, and I just want you to listen to these six
different scales. I'm going to play them both up and back down. Now, these are all based
on the harmonic overtones, and I'm going to play all of these in A. Here's an A major
scale, a standard Western scale, sometimes called a diatonic scale. It's major, it's
bright and happy. And here's an A minor scale, also heptatonic, seven notes before you get
to the octave. And this has a mood that's more dark, a little bit sadder. Here's an
A major pentatonic scale. Chinese music might be based on something like this. And here's
an A minor pentatonic scale. If we add a single note to that, we get something like
a blues scale, where the note we're adding is the augmented fourth that you've heard
in Maria and the Simpsons theme. And here's an Arabian scale, we heard this at the end
of last lecture when I played a piece of Tchaikovsky for you. Now, all of those scales have sort
of a different feel, a different mood to them. But one of the things they all have in common
is they all have the fifth and the octave. Now remember, those are the second and third
harmonics that we hear when we're vibrating just a single note or a single column of air.
The fifth and the octave are almost universal. Nearly every single musical tradition we
have on earth contains both the fifth and the octave. But I did want to talk about one
musical tradition that doesn't have those. In Indonesia, they use an instrument called
a gamelan. And they play scales that are not based on the harmonic overtones that we're
used to. Here's an example of a scale on a gamelan played by Mike Simpson, the director
of InspireWorks. One of the things you might notice about it is if you compare it to one
of the scales we heard before, there's no perfect fifth in the gamelan scale. And there's
no perfect fifths used in Indonesian music. There's actually a mathematical reason for
this cultural fact. You see, when you look at vibrations of bars, they don't vibrate
in the same modes that strings and tubes of air do. They have a different overtone
series, sort of like the timpani had a different series. And when you look at that series,
since the music of Indonesia is based on the gamelan, their scales are based on the overtones
of the gamelan. And so because the bars do not vibrate with a fifth, Indonesian scales
don't have a fifth in them. Let's go back to Western scales and review what we need
in order to construct these scales. We know that objects vibrate in different modes,
overtones. And we know that the most common, the wavelengths of those overtones are in
a ratio of one to one-half, one-third, one-fourth, the harmonic sequence. And the frequencies
are just multiples. One, two, three, four. Those are arithmetic sequence. What we learned
from the overtone series is that to go up and octave, you're multiplying frequencies
by two. And to go down and octave, you're dividing frequencies by two. Also, we learned
about a fifth. Seven half steps on a piano is a fifth. And to go up a fifth, you're
multiplying the frequencies by three halves. To go back down, you're dividing by three
halves. Let's look at a numerical example just to make sure we understand this. If I
play an A, a 440 A, what is it to go up an octave? We have to multiply by two and we
get 880 Hertz. If we start back at the A and want to go up a fifth, seven keys on a piano,
going up the fifth, that would be the fifth note on the A major scale. And going up a
fifth gets us to the note E, E5. And to figure out what the frequency of that is, we take
440 Hertz and we multiply by three halves and we get 660 Hertz. If instead we wanted to
go down from an A4, a 440 Hertz A, to go down seven keys, we're asking A4 is the fifth
note on what major scale. The answer to that would be it's the fifth on a D scale, a D4.
And to figure out the frequency of that, we take 440 Hertz of our A and we divide by three
halves, which is the same thing as multiplying by two thirds, and we get 293 and a third
Hertz. The octaves and the fifths are the key ingredients we need in order to construct
our scales. Now different cultures have different music and I think you've heard the different
moods that they create, and they have those in part because they choose different scales,
they choose different notes, and those choices are at least partly mathematical. And so today
one of the questions we're asking is how might we choose the notes on a scale? First we're
going to talk about why the obvious solution to that fails, and then we're going to look
at two different methods that actually succeed. So let's think about building a scale starting
with a 100 Hertz note, roughly a G2. Now the next octave is 200 Hertz, a G3. So we could
ask ourselves if we're trying to build, say, a five note scale, why not equally space those
notes between 100 and 200? What you get is a five note scale, and those weak frequencies,
if you want to evenly space them, it should be 100 and then 120, 140, 160, 180, and finally
200, and that would be a five note scale. Again, it has six notes because we're including
the octave. Let's listen to that scale. That sounded a little non-standard, but let's keep
going with this. Let's take this pattern up an octave and go from 200 Hertz to 400 Hertz.
Every time, again, our pattern was that we're going up 20 Hertz at a time. Now between 200
Hertz and 400 Hertz, that's between a G3 and a G4. That's more of a tenor voice, not so
much a bass voice. If we go up 20 Hertz at a time, we go 200, 220, 240, 260, all the way
to 380 and finally 400, and there are actually ten notes in there, not five. Let's listen
to that part. Those notes are sounding a lot closer together in pitch, but let's keep going.
If we go from 400 to 800, we've now moved on to female voices. When we've moved on to those
female voices, we're going from a G4 to a G5. This is maybe a mezzo-soprano voice. If we
continue doing up 20 Hertz at a time, well, we're going 400, 420, 440, 460, 480. We have
to go a long time before we finally get to 780 and 800. There are actually 20 notes in
the octave between 400 and 800 if we do things this way, not five or ten. Now this would
be very strange. Higher voices would have more notes available to them in their octaves.
It really should be the same number of notes. It would be very weird if you wrote a song
for a soprano, but then tenors couldn't sing it because some of the notes weren't included
in the scale that we were using. Think about trying to sing a song like Happy Birthday
with everybody together. You couldn't do it because some of the notes for the sopranos
might not exist for the tenors or from the basses. The key problem is this. These intervals
and octaves have a multiplicative structure that we've talked about before. You shouldn't
be adding the same number each time. You should be multiplying by the same number each time.
If we go back to 100 Hertz, roughly a bass voice, if you put a 150 Hertz note on the
scale, think about that. That's exactly halfway between 100 and 200, at least additively.
But if you put a note there, then you see that 150 Hertz, we shouldn't think of it as
50 Hertz more than 100. We should think of it multiplicatively. 150 is three halves times
100. It's a multiplicative structure. Where should we put the corresponding note for tenors
in between the 200 and the 400? Well, we could use the same multiplicative structure. If the
note we added was three halves of the fundamental, let's take three halves times the new fundamental,
which is at 200. So for tenors, let's take 200 times three halves, and we get 300 Hertz
for the note in the tenor octave. Now we note that this is going to work really well. See,
the note we gave to the basses was at 150 Hertz, and the new note that we have for the
tenors is at 300 Hertz. That's a doubling. And so those are exactly in octaves again.
Where would the corresponding note go for a female voice between 400 and 800 Hertz? Let's
do the same thing again. Let's take 400 and multiply by three halves. That gets us to
600 Hertz. Again, the notes we've added now, we added 150 Hertz note for the basses. We
added a 300 Hertz note for the tenors, and now we have a 600 Hertz note. Those are all
in octaves. It's a doubling to get from one to the next. Sticking to this multiplicative
system works. It puts corresponding notes in each octave, and it actually does something
that mathematicians love to do. It reduces the problem to looking at a single octave.
If we can figure out where the notes go in a single octave, we can use the multiplicative
structure to get those same notes in octaves higher for sopranos or in octaves lower for
the bass and the male voices. This is a very mathematical trick to do. Instead of solving
one problem, you reduce it to a simpler problem and then you solve that. With our reduced problem,
we're trying to determine the scale notes for a single octave, and then we're going
to use the multiple structure, the multiplicative structure, multiplying by two and dividing
by two to get the rest of the notes. Remember that the fundamental underlying problem here
is that all of these intervals have to be multiplicative, even though the overtones
that we saw earlier were additive. In terms of intervals, we want to use the multiplicative
structure. Remember that a piano is actually a logarithmic scale, equal spacing on a piano.
Those are ratios, not differences. So how should we go about choosing the scale notes
for a single octave? Our first idea, and the first way we're going to go about this, is
to use the overtone series of the bottom note to determine the higher notes, and this is
something called just tuning. Things are justified in some sense by the lowest note. Let's find
the notes on an A major scale. If we play an A4 at 440 hertz, we know we can figure out
what the overtones are and which notes those are. We worked on that last time. The problem
is most of these notes are in the wrong octave. We have the A4 and then we have the A5, that's
the second harmonic, and then an E6, an A6, a C sharp 7, an E7, this mysterious seventh
note, which is close to an F sharp 7, an A7, and finally a B7. Most of those notes are
not in the octave we want, which is between A4 and A5. Now instead of working with 440
hertz, let's talk about relative frequency, and so let's just treat the A4 as 1. If we
do that, we're looking to get relative frequencies between 1 and 2. To do this, we're going to
make use of going down an octave, which is dividing by 2 in frequency. One of the notes
we have on the overtone series of the A is an E6. An E6 isn't the note we want, we actually
want an E5, that's in the correct octave, but to get from an E6 to an E5, we're just
going to go down an octave, which is dividing by 2. An E6 is the third harmonic above A,
and so it has a frequency three times the A, so we're going to divide that in half and
we get our E5 of three halves. Again, that's the three, because it's the third harmonic
of A, that's in the wrong octave, we divide by two to get three halves. We can do the
same thing with a C sharp. C sharp is the fifth harmonic, so it's five times the frequency
of A, but it's two octaves too high. We divide by two twice, and we get five divided by four,
five fourths for our C sharp. For our B, we have to go way out to the very end of the
notes that I've talked about. The ninth harmonic is a B, and we have to bring that down three
full octaves, and so we take nine divided by two three times, and you get nine eighths.
You can do this as many times as you want, and you can take as many of the overtones
of A and bring them down into an octave, and you get what's called a just scale.
So let's look at a just tuned pentatonic scale. To get five notes, we have to do just
the notes we talked about in the last section. We have to take, let's see, an A, that's the
fundamental, but then the second one is also an A, we already have that. The third one
is an E, that's a new note. The fourth is an A again. The fifth is a C sharp. The sixth
is an E again. The seventh is an F sharp sort of, at least that's the closest note on our
scale. Finally, the ninth note, the B, is the fifth note that we have, and so to get
a pentatonic just scale, we have to take harmonics one through nine because of the dupling,
because of the duplication of those, we need all of those first nine to get just five notes
in a just pentatonic scale, and we're going to get those in the right octave by dividing
by two. Now in this chart, you can see both the frequencies and the wavelengths, and we
put the wavelengths up here because you can actually do a little detective work with the
wavelengths. Given the relative wavelengths, you can tell exactly where each note is coming
from. Let's look at B on this chart, it's eight-ninths, so the wavelength of a B is
eight-ninths compared to the wavelength of the A. From the denominator, you can tell it
was the ninth harmonic that was one ninth, and the numerator is eight, which is multiplying
by two three times, and so that tells you we took the ninth harmonic and moved it down
three octaves. So let's look at the just pentatonic scale. What's wrong with this just pentatonic
scale? Well, let's play it for you. Here again is A, B, C sharp, E, and then something like
an F sharp and A. If you have a musical ear, you'll notice that the F sharp is very sharp
compared with the standard western scale. That's because it's not one of the notes on
our piano, and that's why we had to put the piano hammers in a particular place. Now the
nice thing about this just pentatonic scale is everything is perfectly in tune with the
A. The downside of this is that these notes are not necessarily in tune with each other.
Let's look at what this means. In particular, let's look at the B versus the F sharp. Now
remember that the B that we've arrived at, in terms of frequency, we've arrived at a
495 Hertz B. That B has its own overtone series, and so when we play the B at 495 Hertz, we
also hear its first overtone, its second harmonic, at 990, and its second overtone, its third
harmonic, at 1485. Now roughly those are a B, and then the octave, the fundamental is
a B, the octave is a B5, and then the next overtone is an F sharp 6. But the F sharp
that we've decided on for our scale, the F sharp 5, has its own overtone series. Now
we've decided on the fundamental frequency for that F sharp of 770 Hertz, its first overtone
is going to be 1540, and its first overtone should be an octave above, it should be an
F sharp 6. Now we have a real problem, because one of the overtones of the B is an F sharp
6 at 1485 Hertz, and one of the overtones of the F sharp is an F sharp 6 at 1540 Hertz.
Those are very different, those two notes would sound bad together, we're going to talk
about this later, they would produce what's called dissonance, we're going to talk about
that in lecture 6. The overtones of the F sharp 6 should match up, but they don't. Let's
say this a different way, this B to F sharp problem. You see, the F sharp should be the
fifth note above B, it should be a fifth above B, it should be exactly seven half steps above
B. The F sharp should have a frequency therefore, which is three halves times the frequency of
B, that's what it means to go up a fifth. We know what the frequency of B is, we've pegged
it at 495, we can multiply by three halves and we get 742 and a half Hertz, that's very
different from 770 Hertz. This tells you that there's a real problem with tuning in general.
The B and the F sharp, you can tune them to be perfectly in tune with A, but you can't
tune them to be perfectly in tune with each other. Now this just tuned pentatonic scale
that we've created, it's great if you're only playing each note with the fundamental,
because those are perfectly in tune, it's a very bad scale if you want to play notes
with each other. Let's move up and add a couple of notes and move up to a seven note scale.
If we go from a five note pentatonic scale to a seven note teptatonic scale, again the
philosophy here is we're building on the overtones of this fixed reference point of the A, and
then we're bringing those back into the correct octave by dividing by two. We get here an
A major just teptatonic scale, and you see the frequencies have these nice fractions.
Now the Pythagoreans thought that sounds sounded really nice when the ratio of their frequencies
was a fraction with a nice small denominator, and you can see that most of the fractions
in this just teptatonic scale are nice fractions with small denominators. These are pleasing
sounds. We're going to talk more about the Pythagoreans next time. The two notes that
I added to this, however, when we went from the pentatonic to a heptatonic scale, are
actually not quite right. I'm not telling the full story, and in fact the numbers are
giving away that I'm not telling the full story. You see mathematically we can look
at the D and the F-sharp, and they can't have come from this process. Just think about
the relative frequencies here. When you look at the harmonics of an A you're multiplying
by N, right? We're repeatedly adding, and that's multiplying by N. And then the octaves
below that, we're taking one of those and dividing by two. That tells us that every
note we get through this process has to have the form N divided by two to the k. There's
no way of getting four thirds or five thirds from this process, because four thirds and
five thirds are not of the form N divided by two to the k. The trick that's used here
to get a heptatonic just scale is the fact that D does not appear on the overtone series
of the A, but on the overtone series of a D there are other As, and so we can tune the
D so that the overtones of the D match up with the A. There's actually great music built
on this philosophy of just tuning. It's not what we use standardly on pianos. We'll talk
about that later, but it is really good for wonderful music, and so I want you to hear
some of that. The key question in order to figure out if your musical tradition should
use just tuning or not is whether or not you should transpose, whether or not you should
modulate, and this is switching keys. And I want to demonstrate that by playing probably
the first piece that I ever played. Now, when I was four years old, I learned how to play
twinkle, and here's twinkle played on an A. We could modulate that up to the key of
C. What we're doing is we're just shifting up, and instead of starting out with an A,
we're going to start out with a C. Now, that's easily recognizable as the same melody. It's
just starting on a different note. Switching keys, remember that the key is the bottom note
of the scale, and it's the note that a melody keeps coming back to. It's usually the first
and the last note of a melody, so switching keys is just saying, oh, instead of starting
on this note, I want to start on this other note. If you're not going to do any transposing
and if you're not going to play multiple notes at once, just notes played with the fundamental,
then just tuning is really wonderful. On the other hand, if you want to modulate, if you
want to be able to switch keys, or if you want to play chords where you're going to
play two notes that are not the fundamental together, then just tuning is not the way to
go. It leads to awful problems like the B and the F-sharp that we were talking about a minute ago.
But there are cultures where they have used just tuning, and one of them
is the bagpipe in Scottish culture. The bagpipe always stays in one key. It has a drone. It plays
this fundamental, and possibly the fifth, and that fundamental, that drone goes on and on. It just
keeps going, and you always hear that under a bagpipe. It's the chanter. It's the recorder-like
part that gives you the higher notes, the one note at a time. There's no problem with this. There's
no problem like the B and the F-sharp that we had a minute ago, because the chanter is simply
playing one note at a time, and it's never playing two of those notes. Therefore, a bagpipe is
properly tuned as just tuned, where the notes, the higher notes are exactly tuned to the overtones
of a drone. So in theory, all bagpipe notes are perfectly in tune with the drone. Now, if you're
like me, I've always thought that when I hear it bagpipes, I feel like they're never quite in tune
with it themselves. It's a little bit strange, but in theory, they are always perfectly in tune.
There's a problem if you're a modern bagpipe player, and that's the electronic tuners you use
to tune instruments. Those don't use just tuning. They use an equal-tempered system. We're going
to talk about what that system is later. So let's hear an example of a bagpipe tone, and I want you
to listen to the low drone notes that never change, and how the higher melody is tuned to those overtones
exactly, the overtones of the drone.
Those are the Scottish bagpipes. I want to talk about another musical tradition where just tuning
is exactly the right thing to do. In Indian music, they play with instruments like the
sitar and the tabla, and Indian music always stays in one key, and it also has a drone that's playing
a low note, and it's playing that note throughout the entire piece. The melody is then played on top,
one note at a time, above the drone, and each scale they're using, they call them ragas, each scale
has its own particular tuning. Each scale is matched to different overtones of the fundamental,
and they have different sets of overtones to choose depending on which raga they're using.
If you're interested in this, one of the recommended readings by Forrester has an
in-depth section on Indian tunings. So depending on the mood you're going for in a particular Indian
piece, you may have a sunrise raga, and you might tune the particular notes to some of the overtones,
or you might play a spring raga, which might tune to different overtones, but always tuning to the
overtones of the fundamental, overtones of the drone, or if you played a winter raga, you might
make a different choice. But in all of these cases, just tuning is used. You're always tuning the
higher notes exactly to the overtone of the bottom note. It's a different mood depending on which
ones you choose. So let's hear an example of Indian music, and I want you to notice that all of the
notes being played appear in the overtone series of the drone, or they're octaves below notes that
appear in that series. These notes might not be in tune with each other, but that's okay because
they're never played at the same time. The piece stays in the same key the entire time, and that
key is established by the drone. So let's listen to a Satara and Tabla piece from the Indian tradition.
And again, in Indian music, it's always staying in one key with one fundamental and no modulation.
You're not changing keys. You're always using just tuning, where each note appears in the
overtone series of the fundamental, and you're dividing by two to get it in the correct octave.
So that's one way to choose notes on a scale. Let's talk about a second way, and that's
bootstrapping to go from one to the next. Again, we're going to use the overtone series,
one, one, half, one, third, one, fourth. In frequencies, that's of course one, two, three,
four, five. The old philosophy was just to take A as a fixed reference point and build on the
overtones of A. The second philosophy is going to be to take the A and use that to get a note,
and then to take that as the new reference point and get another note, and take that as a new
reference point to get another note, bootstrapping from one note to the next. The idea is that the
overtones of each note should be included in the scale, and it's not possible to include all of them,
but we're going to try for the most audible. So remember that the most audible intervals that
you hear are the octave and the fifth. The second harmonic is the octave, and the third harmonic
gives you the fifth. So if we want to use this philosophy, we're going to have to include the
octave and the fifth. So let's start with A and try to apply this new philosophy, adding overtone
notes. Now we start with A, and the third harmonic of an A is an E. We're going from A to E. E is
the fifth note on an A major scale. Here's an A, here's an E, and you note it's the fifth note
on a major scale. Okay, now we've added a note. Now here's our scale so far.
You can't make really interesting music with just those notes. So let's add another one.
Let's look at the E and look at its third harmonic. If we look at the second harmonic,
that's just another E, an octave above, but if we look at the third harmonic,
the third harmonic above an E is a B. And so that, once we bring that into the correct octave,
that gives us another note. Still not enough for interesting music, so let's keep going.
Now let's look at the B bootstrapping along. The fifth note above E, a fifth above B is an F sharp.
Let's put that into our scale.
There's still a gap in there, and so let's add one more note.
For music folks, if you know this, we're just walking around the circle of fifths. We're going
to talk more about that next time. So the third harmonic of the F sharp is a C sharp,
and now I think we might have enough notes to play interesting music. What do we have?
We have a pentatonic scale. Let's hear the pentatonic scale.
That's a nice pentatonic scale. We heard some Chinese music based on a pentatonic scale like
that earlier. In the Western tradition, some composers really like the pentatonic scale. Carl
Orff, who composed Carmina Berana in 1937, he thought it was a really wonderful scale for children,
in part because it's a very simple scale, and you can improvise an pentatonic scale,
and everything sounds quite good. It's simpler. There are fewer choices to make,
and fewer of those choices sound bad. The nice thing about this scale, about a pentatonic scale,
is the notes sound consonant. You've matched overtones from one to the next. One of the problems
is that while we've gone from one to the next, we've ended with a C sharp. The second overtone
above a C sharp is a G sharp, and that's not on our pentatonic scale. But still, a pentatonic
scale is good enough for producing interesting music, so let's look at some of that music.
Chinese music uses a pentatonic scale, and the piece I played at the beginning
is exactly an example of that. The piece is called Lady Meng Zhang in Mandarin. It's called
Meng Zhang Yu, and it's a folk tale about the Great Wall. Lady Meng Zhang was a woman whose
husband was sent off to help build the Great Wall, and he died while he was doing that.
And when she found out about it, she went to the Great Wall, and she cried, and her crying brought
down a whole section of the Great Wall. That's the story behind Lady Meng Zhang.
Now at the beginning, we heard it on violin. I played it for you. Now I want you to hear it on
the traditional instrument it would be played on in China, which is called an arhu. It's a two-stringed
Chinese instrument, and the timbre is very different from a violin. The box on an arhu
is very much smaller, and it's different from the wooden box on my violin. And because of that,
those two things have different resonances, and it gives it different timbres. But the key here
is a G major pentatonic scale, and that's the scale that's used in Lady Meng Zhang.
Now as you listen to this, I want you to think about a few things. I want you to think about
the philosophy that led to this particular pentatonic scale, how the overtones of each note
gave you the next note, and we bootstrapped our way until we had five notes. It's such a beautiful
piece, played on its original instrument, the arhu, and I also want you to think about that,
how the distinctive timbre of the arhu is something that you can hear because your ears
are doing a 48 transform. So let's listen to Lady Meng Zhang.
Pentatonic scales aren't just used in Chinese music or other cultures. They're actually used
in Western music as well, and I wanted you to have a chance to listen to an example of that.
So let's look at Dvorak's ninth symphony. Now this is called the New World Symphony. Dvorak
composed this after he'd spent some time in Iowa, and he was drawing on Native American and African
American musical traditions, some of which included pentatonic scales. I want to listen
to the second movement. It's a lush, beautiful, it's a very famous movement in classical music,
and what I want you to hear is that this melody is based on the D-flat major pentatonic scale.
I want you to ponder the choices in choosing the next note based on the previous one,
leading to a pentatonic scale and the mood set by those choices.
So let's hear the main melody from Dvorak's New World Symphony, the second movement.
Oh, it's such a wonderful, beautiful melody. Dvorak chooses a different timbre rather than
the violin to play this. It's a different pattern of overtones. Think about the spectrum. The
instrument he chooses in order to play this melody is actually the English horn. Now the English
horn is probably the instrument in the orchestra whose spectrum is closest to a human voice,
and he chooses the English horn for the statement of this theme, giving it this really soulful,
melancholy sound to it. It's maybe one of the most beautiful melodies in all of classical music.
So let's listen to that. Let's listen to the English horn playing this melody from Dvorak's
Ninth Symphony.
Oh, that's such wonderful music. So that concludes our discussion of these pentatonic scales.
I want to last talk about why pianos are never in tune, and why this bootstrapping idea,
getting from one fifth to the next, actually proves that. Let's think about a piano. We
have a piano right here, and let's think about trying to tune it. So we're going to start in
the bottom note. The bottom note on a piano is here. It's A0, and the idea is we're going to
bootstrap up a fifth every time, tuning the fifths exactly. Remember to go up a fifth,
we're multiplying the frequency by three halves. Every time we go up a fifth, we're going up seven
keys on our piano. You need to take the frequency of the previous note and multiply by three halves.
And so we have an A down here on the bottom, and then the fifth above that is an E, and then a B,
and then an F sharp. And we can talk about, we can calculate the frequencies these should be at.
The A0 should be at 27.5 Hertz. The E1 should be at three halves times that. You get 41.25 Hertz.
The B1 should be at three halves times that. You get 61.875. At some point you realize we
should be a little bit smarter about this and use the tools of mathematics and use exponential
notation. So let's call the F2, the F sharp 2 here, should be 27.5 times three halves to the
third power, and you get 92.8125 Hertz. The C sharp 3, that's the next one, should be 27.5 times
three halves to the fourth power, and the next one is a G sharp, and that's 27.5 times three
halves to the fifth power, all the way on until you get up here to an A7. And the A7, according to
our calculations, should be 27.5 Hertz times three halves to the 12th power. But again, like any good
math students, we should check our work. So let's see. See, we started down here at an A0, and we
ended up here at an A7. That's seven octaves above the A0, and we know how to go up an octave. To go
up an octave, we should be multiplying frequencies times two. And so we have 27.5 Hertz, that's for
A0. A1 should then be 27.5 Hertz times two. A2 should be multiplied that times two again, 27.5
times two squared, all the way on until we get to A7, which would be 27.5 Hertz times two to the
seventh power. And now, we've checked our work. Except the answers we got, the fifths were 27.5
times three halves to the 12th, and the octaves were 27.5 times two to the seventh. The problem
is that those are not the same numbers. That's the problem when we try to do this.
If you think about it in terms of number theory, the left side of this equation, three halves to
the 12th, has powers of three over powers of two. There's no cancelling in that fraction, whereas the
right side is an integer, two to the seventh. When we pull out a calculator and get numbers,
three halves to the 12th is 129.74, about two to the seventh is 128. Those are simply different
frequencies. The question is, how should you tune this top A7? Should you in tune it, make it in
tune with all the other fifths, or should you put it in tune with the octaves? The important point
here is you can't do both. You either tune your fifths in tune or your octaves in tune, but you
can't have both of them perfectly in tune. No piano is ever in tune, and we're going to talk about
that more next time. Now, this is a really well-studied problem, and the history of mathematics
includes parts where people are dealing with exactly this problem. Marin Marcin, a French
mathematician in the 1600s, wrote about this problem. Hermann von Helmholtz wrote a large
tome in German in the 1800s about this, and both of them are essentially saying, we can't have
everything in tune, so what are we going to do to get close? That's what we're going to talk
about next time. How exactly do we tune the notes on our scale? To close, I want to return to
Dvorak, because it's such a beautiful piece, and let's listen to Dvorak's Ninth Symphony again.
This is later in the piece where the orchestra is reduced to a string quartet and eventually just
to three instruments, a single violin, a viola, and a cello on a stage with many other instruments
who are quiet at that point. This is one of my favorite pieces to play in an orchestra. I want
you to think about how every musical tradition chooses their scales differently for their particular
music, and how those choices are very mathematical in nature. Here again is Dvorak's Ninth Symphony,
the second movement.
Thanks for joining us.
