Welcome to this, the culminating lecture on math and music.
We've talked through all of the components of music.
We've talked through notes, scales, chords, rhythms, transformations,
and now we're ready to put them all together in a performance.
So I thought I'd dress up for the occasion.
So in the spirit of performance, let's listen to some music.
That's a delightful tune. What did you notice about it?
You know, before watching these math and music lectures,
you might have already known lots of things.
You might have been able to say things about this piece.
It is a beautiful little melody, and most would agree that it is beautiful.
It's written in the classical style, composers like Haydn.
It's after the Baroque style of Bach and Handel,
and before the Romantics, Brahms, Rachmaninoff, Tchaikovsky.
If you really knew your music well, you might recognize it as the work of a child prodigy.
This tune was written by five-year-old Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart in 1761.
What you might not have realized is that all three of these aspects,
beauty, style, and prodigies, help us to relate mathematics to music.
Today, we look at these types of relations and how they relate to human thinking.
Today, we look at math, music, and the mind.
Now, you might remember, at the very beginning of this lecture series,
we were looking at the central question, how can mathematics help us understand music?
Now, so far, these first eleven lectures have given us a lot of evidence
for connections between math and music, vibrations, scales, compositional techniques.
Today, instead of those details,
we're looking at big picture connections between these two areas of math and music.
If this were a trial, then the first eleven lectures would have been
like the detailed forensic evidence, the DNA, the fingerprints, the expert witnesses,
the photographs of the crime scene, strings, drum heads vibrating in particular modes,
and the modes of the gamelan leading to very different scales and different music.
Today, we're going to give you the closing arguments, the big picture.
In this final lecture, we're going to look at deep connections between mathematics and music.
We're going to refer back to everything we've learned, all of those details,
but all to make a larger point.
The connections we make between mathematics and music, they really are here in our minds.
So, before we get to our argument,
let's let the other side have a little bit of time before the court.
Let's talk about the limits of this connection between math and music,
because math and music are simply not the same thing.
In what ways are math and music different?
What aspects of music are completely non-mathematical?
There are many.
Can mathematics compose a melody, an elegant simple one like the one Mozart composed at age five?
I think that composing a melody is simply not mathematical.
What if it were?
What if we let mathematics compose melodies?
I'll play you a little piece here.
This was computed. It wasn't composed.
It was computed using mathematical algorithms.
And I think you'll notice that there's no theme, there's no coherence,
there's no musical point being made here.
That's pure mathematics.
That was computed.
That wasn't composed by the mathematician Dr. Marcus Pendergrath.
It's not what we traditionally think of as music.
It's even more disjointed than that piece that I composed with the help of dice.
There are a lot of more dissimilarities between mathematics and music.
If you remember back in lecture two, we talked about the Fourier transform.
Now, the Fourier transform can explain how the overtones of an oboe are different from those of a clarinet.
Remember, the oboe has a conical bore and the clarinet's a cylindrical.
But what tells a composer which instrument to give the melody to?
The act of orchestrating, choosing which instrument should play which part?
Orchestrating a melody is a very non-mathematical art.
There are lots more differences.
Mathematics can guide us in tuning a piano.
It can help us understand the beats we get from two notes that are really close to each other.
It can predict the sound that will come out when we hit a key.
It can tell us where we should put the hammers in order to eliminate the seventh harmonic.
But when a penis is playing a Chopin etude, math can't tell her how hard to strike each note
or how the tempo should ebb and then flow in some places.
On the other hand, there are things that math does that music simply can't.
Virtually all scientific advances rely on some form of mathematics and music can't make that claim at all.
Music can and should be seen as the pinnacle of civilization's creative works along with other arts,
but it doesn't turn out to be useful in the same way that mathematics so frequently does.
And the last difference I want to talk about today is the difference of accessibility.
You see, everybody likes music, some form of music.
I've been at plenty of parties to indicate that when I have conversations with people,
that's simply not true of mathematics.
Not everybody loves mathematics.
A lot of people had some pretty bad experiences in middle school.
Millions of people appreciate music without understanding it or being able to play it themselves.
Math?
You don't see crowds of fans lining up to buy tickets to, you know,
Mathapalooza filling up football stadiums in the summer.
Only mathematicians really, truly appreciate the beauty of math in that way.
There's an accomplished jazz pianist who's also a mathematician named Rob Schneiderman.
What he says is math is like music that only musicians can hear.
And so we have this difference between utility and accessibility.
In mathematics, math is so vital to so many fields, it has a high level of utility.
But yet, few people understand it.
It's not particularly accessible.
And this is sometimes a real problem for mathematicians,
especially when we're trying to get funding in the National Science Foundation.
For music, it goes the other way.
It's universally accessible.
At least some forms of music on some level are loved and appreciated by many, many people.
But the utility is not immediately apparent.
And that's a real problem for musicians when they're trying to get extra funding for the arts.
Now, with that disclaimer about the ways in which math and music are dissimilar,
let's go back to this closing argument of this trial.
Back to math, music and the mind.
And when we use the word mind, we must remember the distinction between the mind and the brain.
The brain is the physical organ, the nervous tissue, all of the neurons that fire,
all of the things inside of our skull.
The mind is consciousness, thought, reason.
Now, we're going to see similarities between math and music on both levels, the brain and the mind,
the structures in our brains that are put in place somehow to understand both subjects,
as well as the thinking that our minds do when we experience mathematics and music.
So in this final lecture, let's explore the connections among math, music and the mind.
And as we'll see, we can draw connections among these three subjects in many different ways,
from the way our brains develop to the thinking done by the best mathematical minds and the best musical minds out there.
Music
That, of course, was the Brahms lullaby.
It's something you might play to a baby.
It's something I play to my own baby, Ellie, sometimes.
Let's talk about babies and development of children,
and what that tells us about the connections between mathematics and music.
What do small children, infants, know about math and music?
It turns out that practically from birth, babies start thinking both mathematically and musically.
Humans come hardwired for both math and music.
You might wonder how we know something like this after all infants can't talk.
We infer it, in part, from how long infants look at something.
You see, if infants see the same thing over and over again, they tend to look away quicker as they see it over and over again.
That's called habituation.
If they see something unexpected and something changes, they look longer, and that's called fixation.
When babies are just three or four days old, they can distinguish three dots from two dots.
The way researchers do this is they show babies two dots repeatedly.
Two, two, two.
And the babies get habituated, and they stop looking very long at the two dots when they're shown,
and then all of a sudden they switch to three.
And the babies are fixated.
They look longer when they switch to three than if they had just shown two.
This is evidence of something that mathematics educators have a word for.
It's called subitizing.
Instantly counting without counting out the individual things.
Subitizing would be looking and saying, that's three apples.
Not counting, which would be, that's one, two, three apples.
Subito, subitizing, comes from subito.
It's Latin, and it's actually a musical term that musicians know.
Subito forte means to play suddenly loud.
Now adults subitize three, four, even five items.
I can look out in the classroom, you can do this if you practice, and count out groups of five,
and you can count people very quickly like that.
And if you try to do this with three, four, or five, you have virtually no errors,
an incredibly fast reaction time.
But if you try to do this with more than five,
most adults have a lot more errors and a much longer reaction time.
Infants are subitizing at three or four days old.
They have some innate numerical ability.
Okay, they can sort of count in some sense, or subitize, but can they add?
Can they combine groups and count them?
You'd think that would be much harder.
But by five months, infants can tell that one plus one is two.
They can do basic addition.
This comes from the work of Karen Wynn.
She's a psychologist at the Infant Cognition Center at Yale.
The test she does involves the violation of expectation.
Again, the babies will look longer at unexpected images.
The setup looks something like this.
There are dolls going behind a screen, and the screen can rise and fall.
And you can model something like one plus one equals two in the following way.
You have one doll showing, and then the screen goes up and hides that doll,
and then you see a second doll entering the scene,
and the second doll goes behind the screen, and then the screen comes down.
And of course, you would think that two dolls should now be revealed.
But what if there was only one doll there?
That would be unexpected.
And by five months, babies are looking longer at these unexpected results.
If you're skeptical, you might ask,
how do we know it's really about the numbers and not just sort of some innate counting of dolls,
something like that?
They actually have done some really interesting tests to eliminate that possibility.
They switched objects, and with five months old, if you have one doll plus one doll,
and then drop the screen and show the baby two blocks instead of dolls,
they don't look very long.
There's a shorter gaze.
On the other hand, if you have one doll plus one doll, and then drop the screen,
and there's one block, there's a longer gaze.
That's unexpected to them.
These young babies, they don't know the difference between a doll and a block,
but they somehow know that one plus one is two.
Older babies look longer at both.
Older babies, by about a year, know that a doll and a block are different,
and so they know that one doll plus one doll should not equal two blocks.
The sort of addition, these babies, these infants are doing that at five months old.
Addition is nearly innate.
What about music?
Are there musically innate structures in the brain?
We don't really have a good idea about this.
I guess you could raise somebody without hearing any music
and ask, would they develop their own sense of music?
But we do know that there are early preferences about music,
and babies like fast, loud, and familiar music.
In order to understand this,
they've developed what's called a conditioned head turning experiment.
This is work in the early 2000s of Alexander Lamont in the UK.
A baby's head controls the music.
Look left, and the baby hears one song.
Look right, and the baby hears a different song.
And babies about one year old quickly learn how to control the system,
how turning their heads tells them what music they're going to hear.
And when they can control the music, they prefer upbeat, loud, and familiar music.
It sounds like they're sort of like teenagers.
The upbeat and the loud, you can imagine babies figuring this out fairly quickly,
and it's interesting that babies can distinguish these very musical traits so early.
But what about familiar? That seems very different.
To test for that, they had mothers play music in utero.
It was maybe Mozart or maybe Reggae, like UB40,
for the last three months of their pregnancies.
And then the babies didn't hear that music again for a full year.
And at one year, they put these babies in this head turning experiment,
and the babies preferred the music that they'd heard in the womb
over similar style and similar tempoed music,
other classical music or other Reggae music.
Babies in utero were storing musical memories.
Now, this research got taken way out of control,
and we heard about the Mozart effect,
which was not entirely well reported in the media.
But this research is saying that infants have musical structures in their brains
that they can make use of and they can store these musical memories.
So what's the big picture take home message from all of this?
It points to a connection between math and music.
Infant brains are structured in ways that allow them to process these early,
these fundamentally important aspects of both math and music.
Before language, before walking, these infant brains have abilities in both math and music.
The brain somehow comes wired to process, to remember,
and maybe even to understand both math and music.
How does this melody finish?
If you recognize it, you might know from memory exactly how it finishes.
If you don't know it, you can still make a pretty good guess,
because our brains are marvelous pattern matchers and pattern predictors.
And this pattern matching is the core of both mathematics and music.
Now, one place we see the importance of pattern matching is with prodigies.
These are children who perform at an adult level in any particular field.
So think for a second, which field has prodigies?
Who are the prodigies?
When I've asked, the most common answer I hear is Mozart.
But what about others?
Well, the answers that I've heard almost always come from three different fields,
and those are music, math, and chess.
Music, we have prodigies like Mozart.
Cessons was also a prodigy.
More modern examples include the cellist Yo-Yo Ma
and the violinist Hillary Han and Sarah Chang.
In math, we have the Indian, Ramanujan, who grew up in very poor conditions in India
and eventually moved to England to work with the most renowned mathematicians in the world.
He rediscovered Euler's equation on his own.
John von Neumann, a famous mathematician, was also a great prodigy.
The teaching company's own Art Benjamin was something of a child prodigy as well.
In chess, we have the most famous child prodigy, Bobby Fisher.
But others, other children have come along to become grandmasters at even younger ages than Bobby.
You don't see prodigies in biochemistry, psychology, electrical engineering.
What is it that math, music, and chess have in common?
I think it's patterns.
What are musical patterns?
When you're listening to music, your mind is continuously predicting what's next.
And it's doing that based on what you've just heard in that piece,
what you've heard before of pieces in that same style, things like that.
Maybe you didn't recognize the opening music to the section as Mozart's 40th symphony.
You might still be able to correctly predict how he finishes this phrase based on patterns.
Here's the opening of the music, and this time I'll finish it.
Those are musical patterns.
What about mathematical patterns?
Mathematical patterns are usually more explicit.
Some of them we know well, one, two, three, four, five.
We know what comes next.
One, two, four, eight, sixteen.
Here we're doubling.
That was the pattern we needed in order to understand octaves.
One, one, two, three, four, five, eight, thirteen.
The Fibonacci sequence.
We saw this in the lecture on rhythm, on Indian poetry.
How about two, three, five, seven, eleven, thirteen, seventeen?
These are the primes in order.
The numbers which have only one in themselves as divisors.
Sometimes simple patterns lead to very difficult mathematics.
If we take an even number that's bigger than two, say six,
we could write that as three plus three.
That's the sum of two primes.
Ten is seven plus three.
If we take twelve, that's five plus seven.
Fourteen is three plus eleven.
Every even number we take, we can write as the sum of two primes.
Can we always do that?
Nobody knows.
It's a famous conjecture in mathematics.
That's a gold box conjecture.
And nobody has been able to prove that we can always do it.
We can check with computers up to extremely large numbers,
but we don't know that it will always happen.
What if we combine musical and mathematical patterns?
Then we're doing something sort of like what David Kope has done.
He's at the boundary between music and artificial intelligence.
He's programmed many different computer programs
that will predict, that will write music based on music that's already been written.
They'll take a composer and try to compose melodies in that style.
He programmed one thing called the melody predictor.
If you feed it a short portion of a melody,
the melody predictor will finish it
with fairly simple rules about continuing these patterns.
How well does it do in emulating Mozart?
It actually gets between 64 and 71% of the notes correct.
Let's look more closely at an example of that.
So here's an example.
It's from a Mozart piano sonata, but I'll play it on violin.
And Kope fed the computer just the first five notes
and then the rhythm for the entire five measures.
And the computer chose the pitches for all but those first five notes.
So I'll play the original. This is Mozart.
And this is Kope's melody predictor,
predicting what Mozart would write
from just the first five notes and from the rhythm.
Not far off.
What does this tell us?
It tells us that when we predict the end of a musical phrase,
we are doing mathematical thinking.
Kope's work shows that it's a mathematical style algorithm
that can do this prediction of patterns.
If you've ever had to sight read music very fast,
you know that you become a very good pattern predictor.
When you're reading a long run of notes in a Bach piece,
you don't see each individual note.
You're already aware of which key you're in.
That limits you to a particular scale.
You're aware that it's a Baroque piece.
That gives you certain patterns.
You know it's Bach and that limits to particular patterns.
You probably see what note the run starts on
and what note it ends on.
And your brain just sort of fills in the rest.
It predicts the pattern.
If you try to sight read 20th century music,
or at least when I do, it's much harder for me to sight read.
The patterns are, you know, sometimes by design,
much less predictable.
Now, what's the big picture in terms of patterns?
In both math and in music, patterns are key.
We see that infants are practically born
with abilities in both mathematics and music.
And now we see that those with extraordinary
pattern matching skills, the prodigies,
they excel in a couple of different subjects,
math, music and chess, all of which patterns are key in.
Patterns in mathematics and music are probably connected
in here, in your brain, in how the brain processes,
how the brain interprets, how it understands,
and predicts patterns.
Oh, I have vivid memories of learning to play this section
of the Mendelssohn Violin Concerto.
Slurs, where you play consecutive notes
when your bow is all traveling in one direction,
they're normally smooth like this.
But in this section, they're supposed to be separate.
They're supposed to be bouncing.
And getting your bow to bounce while you go
from one string to the next, it took me months of practice.
I remember doing this section again and again and again
for hours at a time, all so that I could do something like this.
That exhibits one of the qualities that's similar
between math and music, practice.
Practice is so important for musicians that it's the punchline
of the most well-known musical joke out there.
How do you get to Carnegie Hall?
Practice.
Parents spend endless hours getting their young musicians
to practice.
In mathematics, we don't usually call it practice.
We have other names, exercises, problems, homework.
These are all forms of practice.
People have studied practice.
And recently, the psychologist K. Anders Erickson
at Florida State, his work has become more widely known
about experts in the field, in different fields,
academic fields, artistic fields, sports.
There's a substantial body of academic work
on the traits of experts.
And Erickson has encapsulated that all
in what's now an oversimplified phrase.
In any endeavor, it takes 10,000 hours of practice
to become an expert.
Now, it's just referred to as the 10,000 hours theory.
If you're wondering, if you want to do the math,
it's about three hours a day for 10 years
before you get to 10,000 hours.
You may have heard of Erickson's work.
His theories date back to his work in the 1990s,
but it's more recently gained attention
in Malcolm Gladwell's book, Outliers.
And in Jeff Colvin's book, talent is overrated.
One of the keys to Erickson's theory
is that it's not just practice,
not just mindless repetition,
but the concept of deliberate practice.
Time spent breaking down, assessing,
refining whatever one's craft is.
So let's think back to math and music.
When I talk with musicians and mathematicians,
this is one thing almost everyone has in common.
They all spent extensive time,
maybe 10,000 hours, maybe more, maybe less,
but they all spent time practicing.
I think it's much easier for most people
to imagine what this looks like for musicians.
You play pieces again and again.
You work on particular passages at very slow temples,
and then you start speeding them up.
You concentrate on skills, like bouncing your bow
in the slurred passage of the Mendelssohn.
You know, even musical practice is more accessible
than mathematical practice.
What would deliberate practice in math look like?
I think for most mathematicians,
practice isn't the exercises that you find
at the back of the section in the book.
For most mathematicians, practice was pondering puzzles
and mathematical ideas,
playing games that required strategic thinking
or geometrical reasoning,
mulling over a concept around in their heads,
talking with teachers about their favorite questions.
That's really brilliantly described for the non-expert
in Stephen Strogatz's memoir,
The Calculus of Friendship.
Practicing math isn't so constrained
as other types of practice.
You know, I've actually solved a lot of mathematical problems
I was working on while outrunning with my dogs through the woods.
I don't think I've made it to 10,000 hours of running practice yet.
Now, there are limits to this argument.
Nobody really argues that even with deliberate practice,
10,000 hours will make you an expert in any field.
You know, a million hours of practice
wouldn't gotten me into the NBA.
If you don't believe me, do the math about a million hours.
Still, practice plays a key role in developing expertise,
and that's true in both mathematics and in music.
Don't recognize that tune?
I bet you don't.
Because I just made it up.
I just created that.
What is creativity?
Now, there are lots of different kinds of creativity.
You could have architectural creativity,
diplomatic creativity.
We've all heard about creative accounting,
but both mathematics and music have elements of creativity.
And I think the creativity in math
and the creativity in music are very similar.
Let me explain what I mean.
It's about the ultimate in creative moments in math and music.
In music, it might be a jazz musician
or maybe in Baroque times a violinist
improvising while other musicians around him played in the background.
You think of Miles Davis in that opening solo in So What.
Bum, bum, bum, bum, bum, bum, bum.
That's such a great solo.
You know, on the math side of creativity,
think about a mathematician sitting down
and attacking an open question,
nobody knows, nobody understands,
and attacking it in some new way.
That is a creative act.
In both the musical case and the mathematical case,
they're working within a structured system that has patterns.
On the musical side, those are things like scales, keys, tempos.
On the mathematical side, those are definitions, logic.
They're both trying to construct something new and original.
And if they succeed, if what they create is really good,
others will study and emulate it.
Think of how Thelonious Monk's percussive piano
with all that dissonance changed jazz music
and other people have worked to encapsulate that
and to push that further.
And on the math side, think about Kurt Gertl's incompleteness theorem
and how that opened up entire vistas of new mathematics,
new places for mathematicians to go.
Now, one of the implications of creativity
is that we're never going to run out of math
and we're never going to run out of music.
We can actually use mathematics to quantify
the fact that we're never going to run out of music.
Suppose we have 12 notes, A, A sharp,
all the way through G and G sharp,
and let's just take three note lengths,
eighth notes, quarter notes, half notes.
Now, how many ten note melodies are there?
We can do a quick calculation.
For each note, there's 12 different pitches we could choose
and three different note lengths.
That gives us 36 choices for each note.
And now there are 10 notes,
and so we have to multiply 36 times itself 10 times.
We get 36 to the 10th different melodies.
If you do a quick computation,
it would take a million songwriters
writing 1,000 melodies a day,
over 10,000 years to write out all of those melodies.
We will never run out of melodies.
So, math and music, which one's more creative?
Most people would say music,
but an old friend of mine, my friend Jeff,
recently reminded me that when I chose to pursue mathematics
over music back when I was about 17 years old,
part of my reasoning was that math allowed
for more creativity than playing classical music.
No matter where you stand on this argument,
when you play in a string quartet
and you feel like the four of you are a single instrument
and you're together interpreting the music,
or when you're sitting down
and you attack a math problem from a new direction
that you hadn't thought of before,
that maybe nobody had thought of before,
that sense of creativity is just exhilarating.
What did Tchaikovsky mean with this opening?
This is his violin concerto.
What is this melody referring to?
I think this illustrates something shared by math and music,
and that is abstractness.
In addition to patterns and creativity,
math and music share this curious trait.
Both math and music can be expressed intrinsically.
There's no necessary reference to the natural world.
They're both abstract.
Now, that's not always true.
There is a lot of mathematics and some music
that refers directly to the natural world.
The differential equations we looked at
back in Lectures 1 and 2,
those models vibrating strings,
those are a physical thing.
Think about Vivaldi's Four Seasons.
That was direct reference to the natural world.
But much of both mathematics and music are abstract.
They're living in some platonic plane
that's separate from the one that we live in.
Rob Schneiderman, this jazz pianist and mathematician
I mentioned earlier, he makes this point
in an article that math and music
can both be expressed intrinsically.
What do we mean by abstractness?
Well, in mathematics, if you think about V
being a prime number,
it has just factors one in itself,
V being prime is independent
of any part of our physical reality.
If humans were walking around with three heads
and we lived underwater and we made plankton,
V would still be prime.
On the music side, Beethoven's fifth exists.
It just does.
And it exists independent of any physical reality.
If all copies of Beethoven's fifth,
all printed copies,
all of the copies that could be played on a Victrola,
all of the ones online, if it were all destroyed,
Beethoven's fifth would still exist
because it's in our minds.
Math and music even both show up as abstract
in extraterrestrial communication.
And it's because of their abstractness that comes up.
In Carl Sagan's contact,
aliens communicate using a sequence of prime numbers.
It's used as a universal language
that exists independent of our or their context.
When we sent the Voyager up,
the Voyager record was included.
It was launched in 1977,
and it prominently features music
of many different traditions.
One of the challenges on the Voyager record
was to provide instructions on how to play the record,
and the instructions look surprisingly
like the Victrola we have here.
Let's go back to Schneiderman's point
about the intrinsic nature of math and music.
Now, you might disagree,
but you must admit that there's some negative truth in here.
Math and music are both very abstract.
In some sense, music is the most abstract of the arts,
and math is the most abstract of the sciences.
In other arts, they largely refer to the human experience.
Now, there are some exceptions.
Modern dance may be very abstract modern paintings.
In science, the very objects that they're studying are physical.
Without those, you wouldn't have anything.
Think biology, chemistry, physics.
Mathematics and music, much of both subjects,
are abstract in a very similar way.
There's no reference needed to the natural world.
This adds to what we've seen before.
Both mathematics and music are built around patterns,
and they're built around abstract patterns.
Music
That's Jules Mazenet's meditation from his opera, Taïs.
I think most would describe this melody as beautiful.
I've played it at many weddings.
What makes it beautiful?
What makes anything beautiful?
What makes any piece of music beautiful?
What makes a particular mathematical proof beautiful?
What is beauty?
Well, let's step back from those big philosophical questions.
What is beauty? That's such a large question.
But what is beauty to mathematicians and to musicians?
I think musical beauty is fairly well known.
When you hear a soprano soaring through some aria,
think of Puccini's O mio babino caro.
It evokes a sense of beauty.
Somehow that music just reaches in and touches your soul.
Many people also know that there are different styles of musical beauty,
Renaissance music, Baroque, classical, romantic.
These are all different aesthetic sensibilities.
But what is mathematical beauty?
What does style mean in the mathematical worlds of hard truths
and cold counter examples?
This isn't particularly well known to the general public,
but mathematics has its different styles,
its different aesthetic sensibilities.
Mathematicians who study logic,
these are the foundations of mathematics,
sets and relations and things like that,
they're sort of like the Baroque purists playing with their period intraments,
making sure that the A they use isn't today's 440A,
but the A of that particular period.
The topologists, the mathematicians who study rubber seat geometry,
where donuts are the same things as coffee mugs,
because they both have one hole poke through them,
they give these loose, imprecise proofs,
sort of like the fluid rhythms of Chopin or Debussy.
Abstract algebra, the algebraists,
the people who do group theory.
They write proofs where the precise definitions
set up these surprisingly perfect proofs,
sort of like the way Beethoven uses his melodies
and spins them into these perfect symphonies.
The category theorists, these are the most abstract of mathematicians,
they deal in abstract ways to think about already abstract concepts like functions.
These folks are like Weber and Schoenberg, the atonal composers,
the pantonal composers,
proud to be working as far removed from tradition as possible,
working in their own cerebral worlds.
So what is it about mathematical beauty and musical beauty?
I'm certainly not saying that mathematical beauty and musical beauty are the same thing,
but the beauty in mathematics and music are similar.
They have aesthetic sensibilities,
and those aesthetic sensibilities mirror each other.
Way back in lecture one, I told you a story about the Bach Chacon,
and I mentioned Brahms' take on the Chacon.
Here's something else Brahms said about this masterful piece.
He said,
If I imagined that I could have created, even conceived the piece,
I'm quite certain that the excess of excitement
and earth-shattering experience would have driven me out of my mind.
That was Brahms talking about the Chacon.
Remember, the Chacon is a piece that Richard Stark asked me about
in my job interview at St. Mary's College of Maryland.
Can you play the Bach Chacon?
Well, now I can play the Bach Chacon.
I also have tenure now.
I'm not sure if those are related.
But I wanted to close with the last bit of the Bach Chacon.
How about the last page?
And while you listen, I want you to think about
how math tells us what sounds emanate from a vibrating string.
I want you to think about the chords constructed in part
because of the mathematics behind the tuning systems
that Bach was using at the time.
I want you to think about how scales are constructed
using mathematical principles,
how Bach used ideas akin to group theory
to transform melodies and put them together.
I want you to think about how violin sounds that I'm making here
are encoded on the DVD that you have
or the download that you have using brilliant error-correcting codes
so that all of the errors you hear are my responsibility
because we're not going to use auto-tune here.
And the last thing I want you to listen for
is I want you to listen to how the mathematics
informs the musical experience
because my greatest hope for you
is that you hear the world differently
because of these 12 lectures,
that you continue to listen to beautiful music
and appreciate mathematics,
but you now see more clearly
how these two wonderful subjects are intimately connected.
And so here's the end of the Bach Chacon.
I wanted to thank my family, Sarah, Si, and Ellie,
who never complained when I got home late
after working on these lectures again and again and again.
And I also wanted to thank my fantastic team
at the teaching company, especially Jay, Zach, Chris, and Nancy.
And I'm very proud of them.
I'm proud of them.
I'm proud of them.
I'm proud of them.
I'm proud of them.
Chris and Nancy.
And on behalf of them, I want to thank you
for joining us on this mathematical journey
through the musical experience.
I'm honored to have been given the privilege
of guiding you through this journey.
Thank you.
