Visually we see that one point is far away.
But we are seeing more than this by looking at three points in the picture in particular.
Now notice how far that outlier is from the two red points on the graph.
Notice it is about as far away from either red dot as they are from each other.
So it isn't just that it's far away, but it is far away from the group or cluster of
other objects.
This data has two components or dimensions.
Those account for the horizontal and vertical axes in the picture.
We could end up with data having four, five, or more dimensions.
That isn't as easily visualized.
We can turn to math to find the outlier.
One way to detect such an outlier in an example like this is to use the method of clustering
which will be a topic in a later lecture.
That dense glob of points is a cluster.
The other dot is a cluster of one element called a singleton.
This would quickly be identified.
If we wanted to measure the distance of points, we could measure the distance from points
to the center of the cluster called the centroid.
This would help us see that the singleton is much farther than anything in the dense
group of points.
We will learn that clustering finds a group of points in two, three, or more dimensions.
You don't need to graph it.
Now there are some very specialized statistical tests to calculate what counts as an outlier,
at least for specific types of data.
Clustering is an example from the area of data mining.
We might use machine learning techniques which are an area of artificial intelligence.
Other times you use statistical techniques which calculate, among other things, the probability
of something occurring.
It could say, for instance, how likely is it that I have a 611 male in my class?
There are other techniques from the areas such as information theory and spectral theory.
A lot of methods depends on assumptions about your data that may not be valid.
So you may need to try several methods, especially if you don't know what to expect.
Let's look at some examples and see how anomaly detection is helping us.
The popularity of online games has created its own new industry.
It's an industry well above $1 billion in the U.S. alone.
A lot of money can be gained and companies can springboard or fall off one game.
The key, how much that game makes.
That significant revenue can be lost by players who steal currency used in the game rather
than buying it.
This type of fraudulent gameplay has often been identified and solved on the back end.
IT security personnel play back every transaction.
