analyze previously neglected data in new ways.
Some of the basic advances have been published in scientific journals.
In a 2012 study published in Nature, it's reported that just four data points about
the location and time of mobile phone calls were needed to identify a specific caller
95 percent of the time.
Only four pieces of information about where you are and when you were there become sufficient
to identify who you are.
These debates underscore two very different opinions people have about security, how it
is implemented, and what makes sense.
On one hand, the security of government information can be essential to the defense of the nation.
On the other hand, the security of personal information against unreasonable search can
be an initial value, an essential value of the nation.
Then Obama said, quote, what's really at stake is how we remain true to who we are in a world
that is remaking itself at dizzying speed.
We can expect to see at least three big practical consequences from these disclosures.
First, organizations are rethinking how to effectively encrypt their most sensitive data.
Second, international organizations consider doing less business with U.S. companies, since
the NSA has methods and even agreements to see the data of U.S. companies.
Also, at least until this time, much of the world internet traffic has been routed through
the United States because the infrastructure has been both cheaper and more abundant.
Third, many organizations are more hesitant to put their data on what was the fast-moving
field of cloud computing.
We can also expect further disclosures.
NSA and other organizations can sometimes install and use covert radio wave technology
to spy on computers that are not on the internet.
Companies with wireless technology can be secretly accessed from increasingly remote
distances.
So, be careful if it seems like security is only a national issue or is only related
to how businesses like Netflix or Facebook implement or share their data.
Security is an issue for everyone.
Let's consider passwords.
What online programs or software or websites do you use that require a password?
Twitter and Facebook accounts have passwords, banks and insurance sites have passwords.
You probably enter a password word to log into a computer and access email.
Your password is a place to think security.
It is the gateway to many forms of information about you.
And with data, as we've seen again and again, comes power in possible predictive abilities.
So, how many passwords are there?
Well, let's assume a password must be 7 characters long, is case sensitive and can be any letter
or digit.
Then for each space you have 62 choices, 26 lower case letters, 26 uppercase letters
and 10 digits.
If you assume you must have a letter to begin and then can pick any of the other options,
you have close to 3 trillion options.
That's a lot of options.
