And just under 20 steps, you'll be down to one word.
With Good Night Moon, it takes eight steps.
Note, lay Ms.
Arabla is over 3,000 times longer than Good Night Moon.
But it only takes two and a half times longer to find a word in a much, much bigger problem.
But I haven't quite answered our question yet.
I generated this example by having a human reading.
What if a computer does the searching?
Again, with large data sets, we can still have an issue.
Consider Twitter, where hundreds of millions of updates are posted per minute.
This is easily over a billion words per minute.
If you had to search this, you were going to have to have a good algorithm.
Doing what we did with lay Ms.
Would take 31 steps to sort through just one minute of Twitter data.
Is that still a good algorithm?
Computer scientists, long before the massive data sets of today, have studied how fast
algorithms work.
This is called complexity theory.
It can help you compare algorithms and know if one will work as problems grow.
In fact, it can tell you if what you are doing will work if your company suddenly spikes
in users.
If you go from 150 users to half a million, will things still be done efficiently?
Or like reading straight through lay Ms versus good night moon, do we get answers in days
rather than seconds?
So let's dive into this realm.
Again, it can help us know how big of problems we can analyze.
If we double the problem, is it going to take just a tad longer or twice as long or more?
To aid us in this, let's look at songs.
Let's see if you recognize this one.
I'll speak the words to spare us all from my singing.
So here's the first verse of our song.
In a cavern, in a canyon, excavating for a mine, dwelt a minor 49er in his daughter,
Clementine.
Oh my darling, oh my darling, oh my darling, Clementine, thou art lost and gone forever,
dreadful sorry, Clementine.
That's Clementine.
It has a total of five verses.
Those I can choose how many verses I'll read.
How many words I read depends on the number of verses I'll select.
With verse one, there are 40 words.
If I read two verses, there will be 80 words, 40 from the first verse and another 40 from
the second.
A total of three verses means 120 words.
What about five verses, 200?
