My friends have one, two, and two friends.
Tom's friends have three and two friends.
Pam also has friends with three and two friends.
So now we add this all up and get three plus one plus two plus two plus three
plus two plus three plus two or 18.
That list had eight numbers.
So on average, the list equals 2.25.
That number is the second part of the friendship paradox.
And indeed, 2.25 is greater than two.
What did this, what just happened?
Note in the average that my three friends appear in the list three times.
It's the weighting that pushes that average up.
In fact, this can be written in a different way.
You see only one one since only one person has one friend.
You see three three times due to the three friends.
So we find that the average will equal one times one plus three times three plus two
times two plus two times two.
And that quantity divided by one plus three plus two plus two.
This weighted average is what creates the paradox.
This has implications in social networks like Facebook and Twitter.
On a directed network like Twitter, the people a person follows almost certainly have more
followers than that particular follower has.
But the same is true on a bidirectional network like Facebook.
Either way, the reason for the apparent paradox is there.
People are more likely to be friends with or follow those who are popular than those
who are not.
Let's return to the idea of being a center of a graph.
So pick someone randomly in the graph.
Then friends of that person are likely on average to be a better center of the graph.
Today connections can be found almost everywhere, people, information, events, and places.
This connectivity is all the more evident with the advent of online social media.
In this lecture, we see how we can gain from analyzing such connections.
And there lies a key as you move forward and consider network analysis.
What you need is a connection.
It doesn't need to be between two people, it can, but it isn't necessarily.
This is why network analysis has been applied to such fields as sociology, mathematics, computer
science, economics, and physics.
The World Wide Web is a vast network and how you personally access anything on the internet
travels through a network of routers.
Phone calls take place more efficiently thanks to advances in how networks of landline and
wireless transmitters are understood and managed.
