in people eating ice cream.
It isn't that people taste better to sharks or that people consume more ice cream when
they're worried about increased shark attacks.
Ice cream consumption in shark attacks just happen to be correlated.
But one does not cause the other.
Okay, let's try another example.
A published medical study reported that women who receive hormone replacement therapy were
less likely to have coronary heart disease.
Again, there's a correlation.
But questions remain.
What set of people were sampled?
How many?
Can the results be replicated?
Turns out the answer is no.
Later, a controlled experiment was run with better scientific controls.
Who was receiving the therapy and who was not?
Turns out that more affluent women had access to the hormones.
That same female population had better health habits and better access to all kinds of healthcare,
which was probably a much better indicator of less heart disease.
Much research results can have worldwide effects, seemingly positive at first, but actually
quite harmful.
In 2003, it was reported that two popular high blood pressure drugs were found to be
much better in combination than either alone.
Prescription habits changed around the world.
But then, six and a half years later, a prestigious medical journal retracted the paper due to
quote serious concerns, unquote.
By then, over 100,000 patients had been prescribed the drug combination.
What effect did the combination have?
It left patients more vulnerable to potentially life-threatening side effects.
To make matters worse, news of a big result could quickly spread, but if found wrong,
the impact of such news can be difficult to reverse.
This is most important as the Wall Street Journal reported in 2011 that retractions of
scientific studies were surging.
They found that since 2001, the number of papers published in research journals rose
44 percent, but retractions, they left more than 15 fold.
There were 22 retractions in 2001, 2006, 139, 2010, 339.
Again, this can put patients at risk.
Millions of dollars in private and government funding can go to waste.
Now, some research is retracted due to researchers on ethically fabricating results or for plagiarism.
