Pandora was launched in 2000 by Tim Westergren and a small team of entrepreneurs. They wanted to create a database of musical characteristics for a given song in order to identify other songs with similar characteristics.
They were, at least metaphorically, going down to the DNA level of music. Instead of starting with listener ratings, they built up from data about the music itself.
How do you find songs that have similar attributes?
Now, computer algorithms could do this, and they still can. But the Music Genome Project team believed such identification required a human touch.
So they hired musicians who knew music theory, for instance, to listen to each song. Then they broke the song down by as many as 450 predetermined attributes, giving each a numerical value.
They didn't get much response to license the music recommendation data, so in 2005, Tim Westergren co-founded Pandora.
It uses Music Genome Project data to generate the custom playlist for its users, and yes, it still uses real live people to listen and evaluate music.
This is very different from what happened to the in-house reviewers at Amazon, by the way, who were dropped very early in Amazon's history.
There is another human factor in the process, the user's interaction with the program. You can skip a song to hear a new one, or if you like a selection, click a thumbs up, or if you don't, click thumbs down.
Pandora tracks user interactions, thumbs up, thumbs down, or skipping a song immediately, affect what is played next for you. But they don't all affect it to the same degree.
Skipping a song carries less weight than a thumbs down. Skipping a song doesn't have as clear of a meaning. You might skip a song because you've heard it too much, or simply aren't in the mood at the moment.
But it also depends how often you use a feature. If I rarely skip and have been using Pandora for some time and then do skip, that says a lot more about that interaction.
Yet another mechanism is to use the wisdom of the crowd to filter and evaluate material. This is used by Reddit, which is a social news and entertainment website.
On it, registered users submit content in the form of links or text posts. Users then vote submissions up or down to rank the post and determine its position on the site's pages.
In 2013, there were over 100,000 subscribers.
This type of site uses what is called collaborative filtering. It filters large amounts of information by spreading the process of filtering among a large group of people.
Rather than having one main editor or group of editors like a newspaper or magazine might have, the collaboratively filtered social web has its entire set of subscribers as editors, which also encourages participation.
There are two basic principles involved in collaborative filtering. First, there is the wisdom of the crowds and the law of large numbers.
According to this, as communities grow, they make better decisions. In fact, this same idea is behind YouTube. People submit videos and the wisdom of the crowd enables the best videos to bubble to the top.
The second principle of collaborative filtering depends on the community being large enough with enough data on individual participants and how the individual participants collaborate or correlate with each other.
The second principle suggests that we can make predictions about what these users will like in the future based on their tastes, what their tastes have been in the past.
That is, we can include collaboration when we create recommendations.
So the next time you're shopping around for a movie to watch, in fact doing any kind of shopping, think about how the mathematics of data reduction can make it possible to decompose a recommendation based on thousands of people.
Of course, the recommendations work best if you offer some ratings yourself. Data analytics can then predict not just if you'd like a particular movie or not, but what score you might give it. Even Napoleon Dynamite.
