Think about it.
Unless you knew that target recipient, all you had to go on was name and address.
That was almost impossible, almost silly.
Milgram monitored the progress of the mail with postcards.
Amazingly, the very first folder reached the target in just four days and took only two
intermediate acquaintances.
Overall, Milgram reported that the chains varied in length from two to ten intermediate
acquaintances with a median of five intermediate acquaintances between the original sender
and the destination recipient.
This became Six Degrees of Separation.
It was popularized even more by John Stewart's Daily Show in the mid-1990s when he referenced
a game created by three Albright College students called Six Degrees of Kevin Bacon.
The challenge there was to connect every film actor to Bacon in six cast lists or fewer.
For example, how about Daniel Day-Lewis, the 2012 Academy Award winner for Best Actor?
Daniel Day-Lewis was in the Crucible with Will Lyman.
Will Lyman was in Mystic River with Kevin Bacon.
So it takes two steps.
Daniel Day-Lewis is said to have a Kevin Bacon number of two.
This isn't the only path, but that doesn't change the Kevin Bacon number.
If I wanted to keep track of the number of ways to get a given Kevin Bacon number, we
might add some sort of weight to whichever Kevin Bacon number we come up with.
But let's just stick with checking Degrees of Separation from Kevin Bacon.
Let's try Buster Keaton, the silent film actor.
He appeared in the 1943 film Forever in a Day with June Lockhart.
When she appeared in the 1989 film The Big Picture, and yes, so did Kevin Bacon.
So even Buster Keaton, born 65 years before Kevin Bacon, also has a Kevin Bacon number
of two.
Kevin Bacon himself gave insight on why he's a good person to use.
In a 1994 interview about the film The River Wild with Premier Magazine, Bacon commented
that he had worked with everybody in Hollywood or someone who's worked with them.
While it isn't quite true, we see that there is much truth to his statement.
I've been using feature films to connect people to Kevin Bacon, but you could also use a broader
definition.
If you type Bacon number on Google together with an actor's name, you can see a Kevin
Bacon number that includes other kinds of productions too.
For instance, Google allows for appearing in documentaries.
Under the feature film definition, President Obama isn't connected to Bacon.
So we say he has a Kevin Bacon number of infinity.
But under this expanded definition, Obama is connected to Kevin Bacon through Tom Hanks
since Obama and Hanks appeared together in the documentary The Road We've Traveled.
By broadening the definition, more people are connected within two steps, and it can
