Graphics are a terrific first step to really getting a grip on your data, but it's only
recently that graphical tools have become easy to create.
In the past, graphics were used only at the end of an analysis to summarize what's been
done and sometimes as a tool of persuasion.
To see an example of this, let's look at one of the first great presentations of graphics.
It comes from Florence Nightingale.
Many think of Nightingale as the mother of modern nursing.
She was known as the lady with the lamp, but the light she carried extended beyond immediate
aid to individual soldiers.
In fact, one of her accomplishments in medicine was the data analysis that led to graphics
like this.
We'll learn more about how to read this particular graphic, but the basic point to notice is
that most soldiers, all the ones in blue, were dying from disease, not military causes.
And it was Nightingale's skills as a statistician that enabled her to present the information
clearly enough that it changed public opinion and saved many, many lives.
The war at the time was the Crimean War.
Crimea is a peninsula on the southern tip of the Ukraine that extends into the Black
Sea.
Nightingale went there as a volunteer, and she compiled data on the deaths and disabilities
of soldiers throughout the Crimean War.
That was a war that involved over 500,000 casualties on all sides.
Nightingale was especially concerned with the unsanitary condition of the English hospitals
and their impact on many lives.
So she developed an innovative graph, what we would call now a circular histogram or
a rose diagram.
It looks like a pie chart, but it's much more than that, as we'll see.
Look at June of 1855.
Nightingale was fierce that month, and you see in red lots of military casualties.
But the blue region for that month was still much larger.
Soldiers in the blue region had what Nightingale on the chart called preventable or mitigable
diseases.
She wanted these diseases to be noticed and treated.
We should also mention that Nightingale got to know an innovative statistician named William
Farr from a dinner party in 1856.
Farr had been the first to compile mortality tables, listing causes of death in the general
population.
In fact, Nightingale used his data for the general population to create another important
graphic.
It was just a simple bar chart, but it hammered home that English soldiers stationed at home,
whatever their ages, were twice as likely to die in their barracks as were Englishmen
in the general population.
She was building a case that military sanitation was bad all over.
Florence Nightingale presented her innovative graphics to Queen Victoria and to the members
of parliament and to civil servants.
Those graphics were part of a series of publications she prepared between 1858 and 1860.
The graphs made her argument much easier to understand.
It illustrated the number and different causes of death during the war.
Let's look again.
Florence Nightingale's work clearly shows that far more soldiers were lost to preventable
diseases than because of battle wounds.
The argument was clear and compelling.
In fact, it was a call to action.
As a result, military hospitals improved sanitary conditions.
This greatly reduced the number of deaths.
Nightingale's clear argument led to important action.
Note how a graphic made the argument.
It told a tale.
You can follow it month after month, from July 1854 to March 1855 and from April 1855
to August 1855, with blue casualties due to infectious diseases dominating every single
slice of time.
Preventable diseases in blue are always greater than the combined number of military casualties
in red plus other preventable casualties in black.
The graphic does not display all its information with equal clarity.
In particular, the three colors within a wedge all start from the origin.
It looks like the colors occupy distinct places in each wedge, but in fact, all three colors
occupy the portion nearest the center.
This means that some of the blue soldiers with infectious diseases are covered up by
the other two colors.
But that just means that Nightingale's graph somewhat understates the number of casualties
due to disease.
Anyway, by dividing each circle into 12 equal wedges, the graph does a great job presenting
changes over time during each month of the conflict.
Readers of the time would have remembered critical events from that conflict, for example,
the charge of the light brigade in late 1854.
This graph draws those readers right in.
In this final version, the graph is also accurate.
In fact, you have to be very careful when using areas to visualize numbers, and even
Nightingale had to work through issues here.
Infographics you might see on the web didn't always get this right, but Nightingale did
by using the square root of her numbers for the radius of each slice.
Think about the area of a circle.
Remember?
Pi r squared.
Well, square root of r times square root of r is just r.
So her areas worked out just fine, thanks to those square roots.
Finally, and perhaps most important, notice how big the circle on the right is for the
first year of the war compared to the circle on the left for the second year.
Why split everything into two circles?
And why is one circle so much bigger than the other?
Well, the first year on the right shows that there were far more casualties that first
year.
The smaller second year suggests the effect of having Britain's Sanitation Commission
arrive, right in the middle of the war.
The data for the two years is divided into two circles with the same shape, which is
a great way to show the sudden drop in casualties starting precisely when sanitation measures
began to be introduced on a wide scale.
The graphic is a triumph, allowing her to present her conclusions with an accuracy and
effectiveness that is still impressive.
Now these days, we have many tools that make it much easier to create graphics.
This has led to the realization that graphics can be used throughout an analysis, not just
to present final results.
In 1977, John Tukey published a highly influential book entitled Exploratory Data Analysis.
He recommended graphing your data when you start.
He especially recommended graphing to see five things, the two extreme values, the median,
the one in the middle, and the two quartile values, cutoff points where 25 percent of
the values are above or below.
In sports, we're often interested in who's the best.
So let's see if we can learn by just looking at the maximum in a small data set.
We'll look at American League baseball teams in 1920, and we'll focus on the number of
home runs.
We can look at the numbers and see that Boston had 22, Chicago 37, and so forth.
But let's graph it.
Now we see instantly that the New York Yankees had more than double any other team in the
American League.
The graph quickly enables us to see the difference in magnitude, but we don't see why this happened.
So let's change the data we're looking at.
Now we will graph the number of home runs hit by every player in the American League
in 1920.
That's over 250 baseball players.
You can page through them and look for anything.
Or you can graph it.
Take a look.
Notice that big spike?
Who was that?
That's Babe Ruth, the original home run king.
This graph helps us see the amazing feat of Babe Ruth's record-setting performance in
1920.
There truly was, Babe, and everyone else.
In 1920, Babe Ruth smacked 54 home runs.
That was more than any other team in the American League that season.
These two ways of graphing home runs point to an important general process in data visualization.
You have your data, then you often need to transform the data.
For baseball, we looked at the numbers of home runs for the team, but also the players.
Same data, two different ways of looking at it.
Then you visualize it.
With that, you can analyze and interpret what you see.
Keep in mind that sometimes this leads to wanting to look at the data in a new way.
We move to individual home run totals.
Then you visualize again and analyze your new results.
In this way, you create a cycle that allows you to gain more insight.
William S. Cleveland of Bell Labs in 1993 wrote a book, Visualizing Data, and he declared
that visualization provides a front line of attack, revealing intricate structure and
data that cannot be absorbed in any other way.
Again, data visualization can help explore data, but it only begins the process.
A picture is worth a thousand words, but no picture conveys all the data equally.
Graphics, like good writing, tell a story, and, like any storyteller, they tell the tale
from their point of view.
So, an important part of any graphical process is deciding what design to use.
It isn't always obvious what you would need.
You may not even know that some insight resides in the data that you're looking at.
But graphical displays can help one efficiently and quickly see information.
But carefully at today's information graphics, and you'll often see common graphs like bar
charts or pie charts.
They are artistically done, but it's the same basic graphical techniques.
In fact, we've probably all been stuck looking at a very common bar chart used to give the
status of a download or update.
It doesn't always work accurately, but when it does, it gives some potentially useful
information.
Let's ask another question.
Why do graphics help convey information?
Why can they, when done right, tell a story so quickly?
One of this comes from the ways our brains think.
Pictures, unlike text, are processed all at once.
Approximately 30% of our total gray matter in the brain is responsible for visual activity.
That's why we can communicate with pictures so effectively.
We need only to look at stories from 35,000 years ago, as told with drawings on rocks
and walls, to see that pictures have been working well for a very long time.
On the other hand, the brain processes text linearly as it moves through letters or words.
That takes longer, and most readers skip a lot.
Florence Nightingale didn't expect Queen Victoria would personally read her entire report.
A web usability expert, Jacob Nielsen, found in a small study that the average person will
read only about 20 to 28% of the words on a web page.
So in this era, visual content that communicates quickly and effectively can tell a story that
words cannot, at least if someone never reads those words.
This helps explain why many of today's magazines and online resources use graphics and infographics
to tell their story.
For example, the USA Today has their daily snapshot.
In 1982, the paper departed from text-centric black-and-white newspaper format and moved
to color in graphics to tell part of the story.
The British Sunday Times and Time Magazine have used graphics to simplify and enhance
the understanding of their stories.
The New York Times has invested more effort in producing sophisticated graphics, many
of which are interactive.
Now, let's talk about a potential pitfall of infographics.
It's possible for a graphic to omit the important conclusion you're trying to find.
How?
Let's see this by looking at the production of random numbers in the 1960s.
At the time, IBM mainframe computers used a random number generator named RND or R-A-N-D-U.
It allowed for quick computation on computers of that era.
The goal is to pick numbers randomly that cover the entire interval, thus the random
number generator can be exploited in a field like cryptography.
Suppose we choose 10,000 numbers and create a histogram of those values.
We appear to be choosing the values with equal proportion in the interval.
So all is looking good.
That's what we want.
Let's take it another step and choose three points and take those successive random numbers
as a coordinate in three-dimensional space.
Let's make all the values be random between zero and one.
Then we plot those 10,000 values in space.
This produces a fairly dense cloud.
Again, things look good.
We seem to be choosing values throughout the interval, but let's walk around that cloud
and see if things change.
Does it look any different?
Look what we see if we stand on another side of the picture.
Suddenly, we see that our random number generator isn't entirely random.
For scientific computer simulations that depend on randomness, IBM's SSP random number generator
would not ensure quality in the results.
Graphic applications also require more sophisticated generators.
However, something like a video game on video game consoles would find this a suitable and
effective and efficient generator.
Again we see that data can contain information that can be perceived quickly with a graph,
but we must choose the right graph in the right way.
Ideally, graphics portray data in a quickly consumable and easily understood fashion.
This can and is often done.
We see this in the classic image for Truvian man of Leonardo da Vinci from the late 1400s.
It graphically shows how to understand the proportions of the human body, written by
the Roman writer Vitruvius, 15 centuries earlier.
For example, the head, as measured from the forehead to the chin, is one-tenth of the total
height.
One's outstretched arms are always as wide as the body is tall.
Now this may not be true, Vitruvius might be wrong, but until Leonardo da Vinci, no
one much cared about the data analysis by Vitruvius.
It's the graphic that tells the story in a compelling way.
So what goes into making a good graphic?
Two questions lay at the heart of a graphic.
Who is the graphic for?
What does it need to communicate?
Again, think about a graphic as a story.
You'll tell a story of the company differently to stakeholders than to customers.
They have different needs.
What story are you telling?
Let's look at one of the great classic examples of storytelling in a graphic.
This is drawn in 1869 by Charles Joseph Menard, a French civil engineer.
It tells the tragic tale of death during Napoleon's Russian campaign of 1812.
Edward Tufti, whose 1983 book, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information, is a
definitive resource on visually displaying data for many statisticians.
Tufti calls it the best statistical graphic ever drawn.
Menard's graph shows six types of information.
Geographic coordinates, latitude, in longitude, time, temperature, the course and direction
of the Army's movement, and the number of troops remaining.
The widths of the outward gold path and the returning black path represent the size of
the force, one millimeter to 10,000 men.
Geographic features in major battles are marked and named, and plummeting temperatures on
the return journey are shown along the bottom.
To the left, we see in gold 1812, Napoleon's grand army leaving Poland in 1812 with a force
of 422,000.
To the right, we see only 100,000 reaching Moscow, less than a quarter of the original
force.
For the return, the troops are literally decimated with only 10,000 returning from where they
began.
Toward the middle of the graph, a black line halves, quite suddenly, in fact.
Looking carefully, there is the Berezina River, where soldiers tried to cross under
heavy attack.
The width of the line halves due to 20,000 perishing in the fight.
It's a sad and jarring image of the human cost of the campaign.
Like a robust story, it contains layers of information, the tale of Napoleon's army
in 1812, a variety of factors that included time, geographic location, direction, distance,
temperature, and a vast loss of human life.
As Edward Tufty said, graphics reveal data.
Graphics can be more precise revealing than conventional statistical computations.
That said, we also want to be aware that even a great graphic does not include everything.
For example, what would Florence Nightingale say?
Did Napoleon's army really perish mostly from combat wounds and falling temperatures?
How many died from infectious diseases and the scarcity of good sanitation?
So there is an important key in data visualization.
What data do you visualize?
This can be both an art and a science.
It's not enough to know the general area that an archaeologist will want to dig.
While there may be hundreds of miles to consider, being half a mile off can lead to empty results.
Visualizing the right data can lead to discoveries and new insights.
And for data analytics, valuable data can come from previously unexpected places.
For example, in the 2010 Winter Olympic Games, the gold medal men's hockey game was a rematch
of the men's tournament in ice hockey at the 2002 Winter Olympics held in Salt Lake City.
The game was intense, only being decided when Canada scored the game-winning goal seven
minutes and 40 seconds into overtime.
It is estimated that 80% of Canadians were watching the game.
The interesting graphic comes from the water company.
The graphed water consumption on February 27th, a rather usual Saturday, between noon
and 6 p.m.
Then they graphed water consumption on February 28th, a Sunday, over the same time span which
was when the gold medal match was played.
Look at the graph.
You see the sudden spikes in water consumption, and if one were to look at the game, the spikes
align with the end of the first, second, and third periods, with the largest drop in water
consumption occurring during the overtime up to the Canadian-winning goal.
One can only infer, but it is not surprising that in such a nail-biting game that a country
captured in the final would hydrate or run to the restroom mostly during breaks.
The graph makes such an insight clear.
Notice even more that this data enables one to unfold the story of the game with a graphic
from a rather surprising source.
Finally, let's step beyond the third dimension and graph data in more than 3D.
First let's see how we can graph three dimensions in 2D.
We see this all the time in weather maps.
Think about how weather maps start with 2D spatial data and temperature data on top,
where the temps are represented by color.
Even 4D is possible on a flat map, and again that fourth dimension doesn't have to be
spatial.
Think of those weather maps.
The third dimension was color.
A fourth dimension could be humidity or precipitation or storms.
Circular histograms or rose diagrams are another way to put several dimensions on a single
graph, with each wedge representing one dimension.
Star plots are a cruder version of the same idea, where the result looks like a star instead
of a flower.
One of the more interesting ideas of graphing more than three dimensions is a plot is to
plot data using faces, churnoff faces.
What is a churnoff face?
Really it's more of who is churnoff and what was the face he created.
Herman churnoff invented this graphical technique to display data in the shape of a human face.
A face has eyes, ears, mouth, and nose, of course.
That's four dimensions.
It's almost like a Mr. Potato Head for data visualization, except the data itself determines
what we see.
And it's not just the size of the features.
It can also be the shape, placement, and orientation of the facial features too.
Why bother doing this?
Humans easily recognize faces and notice even small changes without difficulty.
This lets us pack a lot of dimensions into a small graphic that's easy to compare.
Let's try this with some baseball data, looking at managers.
Managers set the line-ups, make calls for hit and runs, and decide which pitching changes
may occur.
Which managers are similar?
Can be hard to say.
But a professor at Swarthmore College decided to see what might be possible, what we might
be able to see in the data.
Mathematician Steve C. Wang decided to use rates of bunting, stealing, pinch-hitting,
and even the number of different line-ups used to determine similarities among managers.
Let's look at the 2008 season, which is when Wang did a bulk of his analysis.
Keep in mind, under this visualization is a lot of data.
It's the face itself that enables us to visualize the data beyond three dimensions.
Here's Tonant LaRusa of the St. Louis Cardinals, who used 150 different batting orders in 162
games.
This resulted in an elongated head with wider eyes.
On the other end of the tinkering spectrum, Philadelphia Phillies, Charlie Manuel, used
far fewer line-ups, which results in a much squatter face, and dots for eyes.
Don't worry about which feature means what.
Just look to see who's similar.
In a sense, you're looking for churn-off faces that could be siblings, who looks a lot alike.
For example, look at the Mets, Willie Randolph, and the Yankees, Joe Torrey.
Interestingly, Torrey was Randolph's managerial mentor when both were with the Yankees.
Looks like they have remained quite similar.
This encompasses a lot of information, and it means more if you already know and care
about the underlying data.
But even here, as always, the graphic cannot portray everything.
For one thing, this particular study categorized managers only by offensive style.
That ignores another important aspect of the game, which is decisions regarding pitching.
When does the manager send in a relief pitcher, and so on.
Another issue is how the graphic itself can push your story in a particular direction.
For instance, with churn-off faces, we perceive some features more than others.
We notice eye size and eyebrow slant a lot, so they tend to carry more weight.
So one needs to be careful.
How one maps the variables to the graphic can affect what we notice.
In general, we should think carefully about which features of a graphic will attract the
most attention.
Such limitations are inherent in any graphic, and simply should be kept in mind when presenting
or interpreting graphic results.
To conclude, when done well, graphics tell a story.
It's a limited story, but graphics can tell it clearly.
Remember, seeing the story can offer new insight.
