Looking carefully, there is the Berezina River, where soldiers tried to cross under
heavy attack.
The width of the line halves due to 20,000 perishing in the fight.
It's a sad and jarring image of the human cost of the campaign.
Like a robust story, it contains layers of information, the tale of Napoleon's army
in 1812, a variety of factors that included time, geographic location, direction, distance,
temperature, and a vast loss of human life.
As Edward Tufty said, graphics reveal data.
Graphics can be more precise revealing than conventional statistical computations.
That said, we also want to be aware that even a great graphic does not include everything.
For example, what would Florence Nightingale say?
Did Napoleon's army really perish mostly from combat wounds and falling temperatures?
How many died from infectious diseases and the scarcity of good sanitation?
So there is an important key in data visualization.
What data do you visualize?
This can be both an art and a science.
It's not enough to know the general area that an archaeologist will want to dig.
While there may be hundreds of miles to consider, being half a mile off can lead to empty results.
Visualizing the right data can lead to discoveries and new insights.
And for data analytics, valuable data can come from previously unexpected places.
For example, in the 2010 Winter Olympic Games, the gold medal men's hockey game was a rematch
of the men's tournament in ice hockey at the 2002 Winter Olympics held in Salt Lake City.
The game was intense, only being decided when Canada scored the game-winning goal seven
minutes and 40 seconds into overtime.
It is estimated that 80% of Canadians were watching the game.
The interesting graphic comes from the water company.
The graphed water consumption on February 27th, a rather usual Saturday, between noon
and 6 p.m.
Then they graphed water consumption on February 28th, a Sunday, over the same time span which
was when the gold medal match was played.
Look at the graph.
You see the sudden spikes in water consumption, and if one were to look at the game, the spikes
align with the end of the first, second, and third periods, with the largest drop in water
consumption occurring during the overtime up to the Canadian-winning goal.
One can only infer, but it is not surprising that in such a nail-biting game that a country
captured in the final would hydrate or run to the restroom mostly during breaks.
