For Facebook, this might be the number of times we've tagged each other in photos or
left comments on each other's pages and such.
In Twitter, interactions would probably be retweeting and mentioning.
The number of interactions can be included as what's called a weight on the edge.
Is there any other information lost?
Can we integrate that into a graph as well?
Each time you switch to a slightly different graph structure, that generally means different
algorithms for analysis.
As such, you can't always answer the same questions on every graph.
So sometimes the issue is not only what graph do you have, but which graphs might reveal
the information you're wondering about.
Is there a way to look at a directed edge as undirected?
Think about what happens if you simply remove the arrows.
Twitter has directed edges, and Facebook doesn't.
If you remove the directed edges from Twitter, you lost the information that I might follow
Bill Gates, but he doesn't follow me.
So does this make sense as a modeling decision?
Maybe, but maybe not.
I deal with this often in my research, which overlaps with the field of graph theory.
The social networks with the degrees of freedom are called small world networks, which is
a very active field of research.
It's also a wonderful field for beginners as it can be quite accessible.
At conferences, I often see undergraduates, even early in their college careers, presenting
new research in graph theory.
So what does a network do for us?
I like the way Mark Newman in his book, Networks, an Introduction, talks about it.
He notes that networks really look for the pattern of connections between components.
That pattern of connections or structure of the network can have a big effect on the behavior
of the system as a whole.
It can affect how quickly news spreads and can influence how we form opinions or even
how often we might see someone that we know.
So let's look at a network.
We'll use the oracle of baseball to look at the connections between baseball players.
For example, how do we get from Babe Ruth to Barry Vons?
A connection exists between two players when they played together on a team.
So here's a path with four intermediate steps.
Babe Ruth played with Waite Hoyt for the 1919 Boston Red Sox.
Waite Hoyt played with Burt Haas on the 1937 Brooklyn Dodgers.
Burt Haas played with Minnie Minoso for the 1951 Chicago White Sox.
Minoso played with Jim Morrison for the 1980 Chicago White Sox.
And Jim Morrison played with Barry Vons for the 1986 Pittsburgh Pirates.
