does in the past helps indicate how they will do in the future, especially when one sees a trend.
Interestingly, membership in certain organizations like the American Association
for Public Opinion Research and the National Council on Public Polls are also positive
predictors of accuracy in polling. So this can be a piece of a pollster's rating. Further,
the type of poll, internet, live questions via telephone or automated questions via telephone
play into this as well. With this in place, we have the weights and are ready to combine
the three factors. Step three, folds the factors together. This is one of the parts that Silver
doesn't detail. Essentially, he has a formula in which he combines these factors. The goal is for
the weight to be proportional to its anticipated predictive power in upcoming elections. Keep
in mind we have three weights, so a very old poll from a strong pollster may not be as significant
as a very recent poll from a mediocre pollster. Similarly, sample size matters, but it can easily
be trumped by recency and or quality. Some polls are dropped from consideration entirely. For example,
a poll coming from an internet survey completed by people who already use a particular website
we won't know anything about the people in the sample and we may not even know anything about
how consistent it is from poll to poll. The sample of people surveyed isn't derived randomly,
so it's like the literary digest problem of non-representative sampling or even worse. We may
have no idea which way the sample is biased, so we may have no way to create an adjustment factor.
So, such a result may simply be dropped. Step 4. Now, three additional types of adjustments are
also made. There is a trend line adjustment for an estimate of the overall momentum in a
national political environment. A major event such as a debate can shift the momentum of an
election toward one candidate and away from another. So, we look at the size of change in
the most recent polls and use that to change how much we weight the given recency. Second,
there is house effects and a house effect adjustment. Some pollsters may tend to favor
one political party. This step adjusts for that effect. Finally, there is the likely voter adjustment.
Polls vary in whether they are voting or polling all American adults, only registered voters,
and or what we often call likely voters. There can be predictable differences between these groups.
For example, in 2010, polls of likely voters were about four points more favorable to the
