These are the Bacon number one actors and actresses, and then you'll see the rings
at distance two and three and so forth.
It looks like there are some blue dots at distance six from the center, but not many.
The red lines are simply links in the graph.
They bunch so closely together that they look like a solid region in places.
With the graph, you can visually go six degrees of separation from Kevin Bacon, but the farther
you go out, the fewer you find.
So is Kevin Bacon the center of the graph of Hollywood actors or is there someone better?
Let's compute this average Bacon number with the average Connery number for Sean Connery.
The breakdown is as follows as of April 28, 2013.
So the average Connery number is about 2.937.
This makes Sean Connery a better center than the 2.994 of Bacon.
Kevin Bacon shouldn't feel bad.
If we run all the actors in the database, he's still the 370th best center out of 2.6
million people.
So he's a better center than 99% of the people who have ever appeared in a feature film.
At the other extreme, the least connected single actor in the entire movie database
at one point had an eccentricity of 10.105.
All the numbers change slightly every time a new movie comes out.
Anyway, most actors are much more connected.
In fact, Sean Connery is only the 136th best, who at least in April 2013 was best.
Harvey Keitel with a Keitel number of 2.8486.
So that was the lowest eccentricity for the internet movie database.
After him came Dennis Hopper and then Robert De Niro.
Karen Black and Susan Sarandon were among the women better connected than Kevin Bacon.
Now let's consider connections we all have, not just actors and movies.
Let's return to that claim that a gondolier in Venice could connect to you or me in six
steps.
So are you only six introductions away from any person on the planet?
In 2008, Microsoft, after studying billions of electronic messages, computed that any
two strangers are on average 6.6 degrees of separation.
How they do that?
Numbers at Microsoft mined through 30 billion electronic conversations among 180 million
people in various countries.
The Washington Post observed that this was the first time a planetary scale social network
had been available.
The database covered the entire Microsoft Messenger instant messaging network in June
2006.
That was roughly half the world's instant messaging traffic at the time.
Two people were acquaintances if they had sent one another a message.
The average distance between people was 6.6.
