Isaac Newton himself said that he stood on the shoulders of giants.
This is very important.
You don't have to necessarily create something entirely new, but sometimes adapt an existing idea.
We'll see this again with equations and formulas of data analytics.
Returning to sport view, the technology was designed to track objects.
In sports, we can know with relative certainty which NBA player has the fastest top speed.
We can know who dribbles the most in a game and who dribbles the most compared to the number of shots taken.
This is all coming from cameras far above the court and the sports analysts and coaches have the information almost instantly on their computers or iPads.
Let's see the difference between a traditional box score and some sport view data.
On Christmas Day 2010, Oklahoma City played Denver.
The Thunder won 114 to 106.
Kevin Durant's box score line showed his all-star performance with 44 points, 7 rebounds, and 4 assists.
What about sport view?
Durant held the ball for 2 minutes and 51 seconds out of 48 minutes.
Each time he touched the ball, he averaged .6 points, slightly higher than his season mark of .5.
He ran 2.8 miles in the game, but the information can be much more insightful.
In this game, Durant dribbled 96 times or 1.3 dribbles each time he touched the ball.
And the more he dribbled, the worse he shot.
He shot 55% if he didn't dribble and 3% if he dribbled 6 or more times.
Take a moment and think about this.
First, one would want to have more analysis over multiple games.
You could look at film to see what is usually happening when Durant dribbles 6 or more times.
Exactly. You suddenly know something you might have otherwise not known to look for.
If this is a trend and you're an opposing team, you surely wouldn't want to publicize it, especially in a great courses lecture.
You'd keep it secret and then coach defenders to force such a player to dribble a lot.
On the other hand, if this is a trend in your part of Durant's team, then you work on this to help an age your player overcome the problem associated with dribbling.
This level of data analysis in the sport could revolutionize the game, just like it did in baseball.
Sam Hinke, executive of the Houston Rockets said, the number of questions you can answer will be limited only by your imagination.
So let's return to the land of peanuts and crackerjack and talk about the math behind the 2011 film Moneyball and the 2003 book by the same name.
First, let's set the stage for the role of analytics in the story.
The drama comes from the tension between two factors, winning and money.
Billy Bean became general manager of the Oakland A's baseball team in 1997, but he had one of the smallest budgets in Major League Baseball.
