Readers of the time would have remembered critical events from that conflict, for example,
the charge of the light brigade in late 1854.
This graph draws those readers right in.
In this final version, the graph is also accurate.
In fact, you have to be very careful when using areas to visualize numbers, and even
Nightingale had to work through issues here.
Infographics you might see on the web didn't always get this right, but Nightingale did
by using the square root of her numbers for the radius of each slice.
Think about the area of a circle.
Remember?
Pi r squared.
Well, square root of r times square root of r is just r.
So her areas worked out just fine, thanks to those square roots.
Finally, and perhaps most important, notice how big the circle on the right is for the
first year of the war compared to the circle on the left for the second year.
Why split everything into two circles?
And why is one circle so much bigger than the other?
Well, the first year on the right shows that there were far more casualties that first
year.
The smaller second year suggests the effect of having Britain's Sanitation Commission
arrive, right in the middle of the war.
The data for the two years is divided into two circles with the same shape, which is
a great way to show the sudden drop in casualties starting precisely when sanitation measures
began to be introduced on a wide scale.
The graphic is a triumph, allowing her to present her conclusions with an accuracy and
effectiveness that is still impressive.
Now these days, we have many tools that make it much easier to create graphics.
This has led to the realization that graphics can be used throughout an analysis, not just
to present final results.
In 1977, John Tukey published a highly influential book entitled Exploratory Data Analysis.
He recommended graphing your data when you start.
He especially recommended graphing to see five things, the two extreme values, the median,
the one in the middle, and the two quartile values, cutoff points where 25 percent of
the values are above or below.
In sports, we're often interested in who's the best.
So let's see if we can learn by just looking at the maximum in a small data set.
