Sunday night as football fans tweeted about the victory.
And how much textual content is contained in 9,400 tweets?
This brings up an important point in data analysis.
You can derive a number, but then you must interpret it.
Well, a tweet cannot exceed 140 characters in length.
More important, the average tweet is about 82 characters.
So in one second, around 770,000 characters were zooming through Twitter after the Broncos
win.
Then take this another step.
A word in English averages 5.1 characters in length.
So around 150,000 words were tweeted in one second after Tebow's Haas.
It's about double the first Harry Potter book, which contained just under 77,000 words.
In just two seconds, more words were tweeted than all the words in the first three Harry
Potter books combined.
The second book was about 85,000 words and the third about 107,000 words.
So we can look at the volume of posts, which can be huge.
But what about the words themselves?
Researchers at IBM and elsewhere have programmed computers to automatically generate journalistic
summaries of soccer matches using only Twitter updates.
Spikes in the volume of tweets on a topic help identify key moments in the match.
Now, keep in mind, no reporter was sent to the soccer match.
So the people tweeting were, in a certain sense, the only reporters.
The data analysis synthesized the information.
One can write a program to grab the data straight from Twitter using what is called an API.
API stands for Application Programming Interface.
It defines ways you can retrieve information, in this case, from Twitter.
You define a function that calls for username, number of we tweets, or whatever information
you want, and have appropriate access to.
Some information may require a user password, but often you can do a lot, even without that.
I worked with a Davidson College undergraduate on tracking tweets related to NASCAR races.
We searched Twitter for specific terms and wrote the tweets to a text file for processing.
We weren't producing live results, so it was relatively easy to store everything and
process it later.
There are also websites that offer to download data for you.
For example, Datasift.com offers the ability to enter search terms and download the data
live.
When this was first demonstrated to me, I wrote a tweet with one of the terms the demonstration
was searching, and about a minute later, my tweet appeared on the screen along with
others containing that term, so it's pretty fast.
Social media do more than predict who will win a contest or summarize an event.
In 2009, negative sentiment in tweets appeared to reduce opening week sales of the movie
Bruno, which led Time Magazine to comment, quote, Bruno could be the first movie defeated
