Network analysis is also shedding light on the connections between neurons in the brain.
Predator understanding of this network has led to advances in artificial intelligence.
Biology and ecology have long looked at the networks of living species.
For example, there are predator prey networks that help us understand the food web and that
can help us understand and quantify ecological phenomenon.
Weights for the edges of such networks are moving them from the realm of cartoon drawings
to powerful tools for analysis.
Let me close this discussion of networks by mentioning that there is more than one way
to define the center of a graph.
We already looked at what is called degree centrality.
Who is the smallest number of degrees away from everyone else?
Degree centrality can tell you how quickly you get something, good or bad, such as the
immediate risk that a person will catch whatever is flowing through a network, such as a virus
or possibly some information.
By contrast, betweenness centrality can quantify the control a person has over the communication
between other people in a social network.
How much information flow can I block?
That isn't necessarily the same as how quickly can I get information, which is what we use
for the Kevin Bacon game.
Both can be important.
Networks social or not offer a rich deep dive into the relations among points in your dataset.
Instead of putting data points into clusters for your data, which loses individuality,
use your network metrics to uncover more precise information about each piece of data.
You can and should look at networks social or not whenever you have a relationship between
objects in a system.
That relationship can be information transfer, a route between cities, a relationship between
people or a game between teams in a sport.
Any set of relationships can be modeled as a network.
So look for those connections and begin to think about what questions you might have
that networks can address with the data that you find.
You will need to think whether there is directedness in the data for a successful network analysis.
But what you find looking at concepts such as degrees of separation can give you a much
more complete understanding of your data.
It's both a new way of summarizing the whole dataset and also gives a far richer and more
interesting view of each individual.
Explain six degrees of Kevin Bacon with your dataset.
