close even for a thousand trials, which could sound like a lot, especially if you're doing them by
hand. We did this by running the experiment twice a thousand times apiece. We looked at the values
they hadn't converged, so we ran more experiments. We'll keep our focus on simulation and not go into
the details of Buffon's needle experiment and how it derives pi. If you're interested, hunt around
the internet and you'll find it, it uses some trigonometry and a bit of calculus. For now, let's
see other examples of simulation. How can this help us understand our world? First, it can help
answer questions and probability that can be difficult to answer. This is what Ulam was doing
when he simulated Solitaire. Here's another example. It's called the Monty Hall problem.
It's based on the game show hosted by Monty Hall. Now, you are told that there is a hundred dollar
bill behind one of three doors and that there is nothing behind the other two. You choose one of
the doors. Then, you're told one of the other doors that does not contain the money. For example,
suppose the hundred dollars is behind door number one. If you guessed one, then you're told either
that it is not behind door number two or that it is not behind door number three. If you guessed two,
you are told it is not behind door number three. And if you guessed three, then you're told that
it's not behind door number two. You may now change your guess to the remaining door, the one that
you did not choose the first time and that you were not told did not contain the hundred dollars.
The question is, is it a better strategy to stick with your first choice or switch?
This question appeared in the Ask Maryland column of Parade Magazine in 1990. It caught
wide attention. The problem was stated as having goats and a car behind the doors. In her column,
Marilyn Voss Savant asserted that switching is the best strategy. She got thousands of letters
and 92% of them insisted she was wrong. So, how did she settle the argument? Simulation. She called
upon math classes all across the country to simulate the probabilities using pennies and paper cups.
She was right. And of course, the simulation backed it up.
I did the same thing with my students. We heard a claim that a certain card trick
based in part on chance worked over 70% of the time. We wondered if this was true. It was a bit
complicated to derive the probabilities with pencil and paper. But we are trained in data analysis.
