of forms.
One of these has been getting a sense of a movie review.
Earlier, we saw a matching of documents to search terms by looking at the words in isolation.
Positive words get positive points, negative words get negative points, and then the points
are summed up.
But if the context or the order of words is important, that gets lost.
So a group at Stanford wanted to take a more sophisticated approach.
Their deep learning model builds up representations of whole sentences based on the sentence structure.
Now, rather than looking for positive words, they determine sentiment by how words compose
the meaning of longer phrases.
Their model confirmed that words like funny or witty were positive.
But it was also able to determine that the following was negative.
This movie was actually neither that funny nor super witty.
How is this done?
It uses a neural network, actually what is called a recursive neural network, which was
initially trained on a data set of about 10,000 sentences.
Because it's a neural network, it needs training, so they have it online to get participants
to help.
Remember, that's how the 20Q ball learns so much about 20 questions.
In this case, the group allows you to enter movie review sentences of your choice and
offer corrections if you disagree with the result.
It also asks for help labeling target sentences they think would help the model.
Sentiment analysis is a big deal in data analytics.
It allows companies to hear their customers in unprecedented ways.
They can hear you when you aren't even talking to them.
You aren't calling customer service, but customer service is still listening.
If you post on Twitter, they hear it and might even respond.
Training this type of information can be worth big money.
In December 2013, Apple paid more than $200 million for Topsy Labs, which develops tools
that can help companies capture sentiment from Twitter.
How could Apple use this?
They could, for instance, automatically offer iTunes radio users real-time information about
songs or artists trending on Twitter.
Today, we can find sentiment available on many topics.
You think about getting a new product.
So you look around the web for online reviews posted by people.
What are they saying?
You are, in your own way, sifting through the data and looking for sentiment.
A computer that is programmed can zip through many, many web pages, and if trained in the
right way, the idea and outcome is the same.
This is a rich resource for businesses.
Text analysis can also be used in science, in applied fields of all kinds.
