would give everyone the same answer.
That could be true in a sense if I posted a definitive Tim Chartier bracket that everyone
used.
But even if we all correctly predicted the same result for one year, we might not do
so well the next year.
More likely is that a model might perform better than 90, 95, or even 99 percent of
millions of other brackets.
But that doesn't mean they predicted perfectly.
Data analysis generally cannot do that.
Instead, it might predict better than we usually can without it.
This is very, very important to remember.
So as you will see throughout this course, I teach you the ideas that enable you to see
that there is more than one answer.
Much of life is too random and chaotic to capture everything.
But it's more than that.
Unlike math you may have studied in school, data analytics does not get rid of all the
messiness.
So you create an answer anyway and try to glean what truths and insight it offers.
It's not the only answer.
The style in data analytics is more back of the envelope.
Even though we do have also lots of tools and technology, that is, rather than pages
of detailed proofs, you might gain enough insight from a handful of computations, something
that might fit on the back of an envelope.
This makes it easier to get started, and it also makes it a lot of fun.
Second, data analytics does involve your intuition as a data analyst.
You are not simply crunchy numbers.
If you build a model and create results that go against anything anyone previously has
found, everything, it is likely that your model has an error.
My data group at Davidson experienced this.
We built a model that initially made complete sense to us for sports ranking.
We were proud of the result and excited to see what results it would produce.
But then we ran it.
We didn't recognize any of the top teams.
What happened?
We couldn't just trust the results and leave it there.
Instead, we trusted our intuition and doubted the work.
So we looked carefully, very carefully, trying to see what happened.
Soon, we were able to show that we created a method where it was to your advantage to
lose.
So our method was giving high ranks to very, very weak teams that lost a lot.
So everything fell apart, and it no longer worked.
How did we figure this out?
Our intuition told us that we were seeing results that simply didn't make sense.
