If I like a picture, someone posts.
I again indicate that I like it.
Simple enough.
Whether you use it or not, Instagram gets attention.
By 2013, Instagram had 150 million users.
Over 16 billion photos have been shared.
One billion likes were happening each day.
55 million photos uploaded on average each day.
Being liked can be quite nice.
In the world of business and social networks, being liked can be important, so it becomes
a target for fraud.
Search for techniques to create and then sell false endorsements like likes and followers.
Getting false followers and likes could seem a bit odd, but remember, making an internet
splash can have real effects in business.
The biggest successes on the internet are themselves anomalies.
We turn to July 15th, 2012.
That's the day the song Gangnam Style, recorded by Korean singer Psy, was released outside
Asia.
It was soon a sensation.
That's really putting it mildly.
Within a month, it ranked first on YouTube's most viewed videos monthly chart.
On August 21st, it was number one on the iTunes music video charts.
Celebrities like Katy Perry, Britney Spears, and Tom Cruise were tweeting about it.
On September 14th, Psy appeared on The Today Show on NBC.
The following day, he made a cameo appearance on Saturday Night Live.
Then, on October 23rd, he met the UN Secretary, General Ban Kim Moon, at the United Nations
headquarters.
Ban expressed his desire to work with Psy, remarking on the singer's quote, Unlimited
Global Reach.
Global reach he had by the end of December of that same year, his video, which is just
over four minutes in length, was viewed over one billion times.
That equates to over 8,000 years of viewing time.
Again, these are anomalies, the kind that attract lots of attention.
When something goes viral like this, they often appear on lists that are said to be
trending.
This too is based on anomaly detection.
How do you deduce that something is trending among the many things being searched on Google
or tweeted on Twitter?
Let's take Twitter.
Twitter trends are automatically generated by a computer program looking at the terms
mentioned in tweets.
