This method quantifies the quality of a web page.
The quality of a web page helps determine which is listed earlier in the results from a search engine.
Let's simplify this and consider only two web pages.
If they're equally relevant to a query that you input, the page with the higher quality is listed first.
The ability to quantify quality of web pages is part of what allowed a once struggling internet company, Google,
to overtake their competitors and become the most visited website in the world.
The founders of Google were Sergey Brin and Larry Page.
They were graduate students in computer science at the time they started creating what became Google.
When Google's algorithm was unveiled to the world, there was Google and its new algorithm and everyone else.
The internet before Google was a rather tangled mess.
Millions of web pages existed and the other search engines weren't as helpful.
You could go to a search engine, input your query, and just like today get a list of web pages.
But at that time, the web pages at the top of the list often weren't very useful.
It wasn't uncommon for a much better page to appear farther down the list.
This almost forced you to look at several pages of search results.
In other words, you might find a gem of a web page, but you weren't guaranteed at all that it would be at the top of the list.
How often do you click through pages of search results looking for a good one?
Most people don't offer it don't very often.
The Wall Street Journal reported that 39% of web users look only at the first search result returned from a search engine.
And 29% view only a few results.
That's why a company like Pennies wants to be at the top of that list and other companies were formed to help do that.
The way Google analyzed the worldwide web changed everything.
So, what did Google do that was different?
They looked at the connectedness of the web.
This was part of their billion-dollar idea.
They didn't just look at the content of web pages.
Google also looked at the structure of the web.
Who linked to who?
A fundamental idea in Google's search engine is the concept of endorsement.
Quality pages will tend to link to other quality pages.
To get a sense of how this works, let's consider for a moment endorsement in a job search.
Suppose you get down to your final two applicants.
One person has one recommendation, the other person has three.
Who do you hire?
Be careful, the number of recommendations may not be a determining factor.
Suppose you're creating a computer lab that will run Windows.
One applicant has a sterling recommendation from Bill Gates.
The other applicant has three recommendations from his elementary school children.
Who would you hire now?
What made the difference?
Why did your answer possibly change when I spoke of one versus three recommendations?
The issue was the quality of the recommendation.
The quality of a recommendation from Bill Gates is much different than elementary school children
when it comes to running a computer lab.
Suppose now that a recommendation comes from a former employer.
How do you know the quality of that recommendation?
One way is to get recommendations for that person.
But you may not, in fact, probably won't know their quality.
So you suddenly need recommendations from everyone at the same time.
