For March Madness that system will have about 350 equations and 350 unknowns.
So we'll need a computer to solve it.
We might use a command called something like linear solve on the website Wolfram Alpha
or linalg.solve in Python.
I do this using mathematical software called MATLAB.
You can use Excel though this is a large rather large system.
Sage is a free mathematical software that my students have used.
It is often described as a combination of MATLAB and Mathematica.
I've also coded it in Java but Java doesn't solve linear systems as easily as other languages.
An advantage with Java is that it does allow me to post codes on web pages.
My students often use Python that's also a free programming language.
Python is good at many aspects of data analytics from scraping information off the web to
solving linear systems to computing statistical measures.
The good news is that a computer solves this system very quickly.
So we can take all the data from a complete season of Division 1 men's or women's basketball
and create the ratings.
Once we have the ratings it's easy.
The higher the rating the better the team.
Then we create a bracket by choosing the higher rated team in every matchup.
If we submit this score weighted bracket to the ESPN tournament challenge we find it
scores 850 points and beats over 73% of the over 8 million brackets submitted.
This is a very very stark increase over our winning percentage bracket that only beat
1.8% of the brackets and was competing with coin flipping.
Can we do anything else?
We've added weights based on scores but we haven't yet decided how much to weight each
game.
The key is determining the importance of a game.
Let's think of breaking a season into four parts.
The choice now is how much to count a game in each part.
Now if you and I play ping pong and you win, you might say that you get half a win and
I get half a loss.
By doing this we're saying that this game is less important, possibly less predictive.
Or you could get 1.5 wins and I get 1.5 losses.
Such a game is more important.
There are many many ways to weight the games in a season.
You can weight games higher if the team won the previous game.
This weights a team's ability to win consistently, to sustain a winning streak.
You can weight games that are won on the road, since essentially every game in March Madness
is on the road.
Another option many of my students have used successfully is breaking the season into parts
like we did earlier by using four.
Then we decide how to weight each part.
