being two or more separate people.
Maybe not a big deal by itself, but when merging corrupt or erroneous data into multiple databases,
the problem may be multiplied by the millions.
What's the point in having a comprehensive database if that database is filled with errors
in disputed information?
One way to deal with this is to buy software to clean up the data.
This isn't always all that easy, as can be reflected in the price of such software.
A general tool powerful enough to address your particular issues can cost between $20,000
and $300,000.
What is it fixing?
What could be going wrong?
One issue is duplicate data, like my family being listed twice.
A variety of issues can occur, and how to deal with them isn't always all that obvious.
To ensure this doesn't happen, data analysts generally look at the data to ensure it makes
sense.
To see how easily variation from different data sources can introduce small but serious
inconsistencies, consider a few cases.
We're postal codes recorded using a uniform format.
In the U.S. that means, do the zip codes all use the same five-digit format?
If addresses are encoded with something like bar codes, does the code have enough flexibility
to describe every type of address?
Are all dates the same?
If you have data coming from the U.S. and from Europe, they likely are not.
This is because we write dates as month-day-year.
However, in Europe, dates are often written day-month-year.
And other data sources may put the year first, a day like 12-12-12, can be ripe for confusion.
Is data in the same units?
If you're looking at currency, is the data global, and if so, are they all reporting
in their native currency or in some common currency?
Is everyone reporting values with the same accuracy?
If one source rounded to one decimal place and another to three decimal places, that
can be a problem.
If this data point is in millions of dollars, then the first and second decimal places represent
potentially significant amounts of money.
Is some data missing?
This is not unusual.
The data might not have been collected.
Maybe someone declined to report their age or weight.
It may be that some data isn't applicable.
