Interestingly, the word Hadoop is named after the creator Doug Cutting's child's elephant
toy.
But the technology was initially sponsored by Google, so they could usefully index all
the rich textual and structural information they were collecting.
But here's the key.
They didn't want to just store it.
They wanted to present meaningful and actionable results to users.
Something like that existed, so they created it themselves.
This isn't a project of Google alone.
Yahoo has played a key role in developing Hadoop for enterprise applications.
Hadoop was designed to tackle problems where the data doesn't fit nicely into tables.
Again, this fit what Google was doing when they created it.
They were indexing the web and examining user behavior to improve performance algorithms.
Hadoop runs on a large number of machines that don't share any memory.
So buy a bunch of computers and put them on a rack.
Then be sure to install Hadoop on each one.
Then get your data.
It can be lots of it.
Hadoop will take care of it.
Break it into pieces and spread it across your computers.
Note, if you have a lot of data, those computers themselves may be servers.
That is, each computer is itself a large computer.
Where is a piece of data?
Hadoop knows.
How do you interface all the data since it's distributed across servers?
With Hadoop, a very nice feature is that data is in multiple places.
So if a server goes offline, things can be found elsewhere.
You can deal with big data because Hadoop spreads it out into smaller, manageable pieces.
Then you can ask your complicated computational questions because all of your processors work
in parallel and together.
Let's look at one of the prominent clients using Hadoop, Facebook.
Users share billions of pieces of content every day on Facebook.
That could potentially be a mess.
Facebook has no idea when you are going to log on.
When you do, your newsfeed with updated information on everyone you're connected to is posted.
Someone may have posted a picture or updated their status only moments ago.
And there you are with the results on your friends and their postings on your screen.
Exactly.
Even with so much data, it must be stored and then presented in a quick and relevant
