In addition, the current data we do have is approximate, that is, it is also noisy.
Early, we talked about this as dirty data, so we are at risk of overfitting what we
do have.
So how do we forecast a random event?
Look for other data.
If we look over long geological time scales, it turns out that earthquakes are far from
random.
We can even fit the data well with an underlying function.
Then we can pick any point on the Earth and compute a future earthquake probability.
For example, what's the probability of Fukushima having a 9.1 earthquake, which was the magnitude
of the devastating earthquake?
It isn't zero, at least historically.
Archaeological data suggests tsunamis of the 130-foot height seen in 2011.
While the historical data said it could happen, it hadn't happened in so long that there was
no apparent reason to expect another, and so, or so, they seemed to think.
The Fukushima nuclear reactor was built to withstand an 8.6 earthquake.
This wasn't just a small, short gap.
Remember that the earthquake scale is logarithmic.
A 9.1 earthquake is 5 times larger than an 8.6 earthquake.
As Silver shows, a plot of recent earthquakes doesn't reflect this.
If we plot the magnitude of recent earthquakes versus their annual frequency, this gives
an estimate to the probability of such a magnitude.
But this graph of recent earthquakes stops at 8.0.
There were no earthquakes that large since 1964, so there is a drop-off of earthquakes
between 7.5 and 8.0.
How do we fit the data?
In a sense, what type of regression will we use?
What type of curve will we use to fit the data?
Align another curve?
If one uses a line, which fits a large amount of the data better, there is a 9.0 earthquake
approximately every 300 years.
A line will fit the points prior to a 7.0 magnitude earthquake pretty well.
That dip at the end?
Not so well.
A linear model may not appear to work, so one could choose a curve to better fit that
kink in the curve.
Remember did and found a probability of one about every 13,000 years.
If that were really true, it's really unlikely any of us see this happen again.
But remember, if you fit the data too closely, you are overfitting data.
And overfitting a graph with less than 50 years of earthquake data looks like a real
