might be harder with real actors or not even feasible at all. Animators found that viewers
notice hair that doesn't move. So they animated it. By simulating the movement of hair it may not
be exact and perfect but it is close enough that we as an audience buy into it. Of course
Hollywood is different from science. In science a simulation is used to predict or explain behavior.
In the movies a simulation needs only to produce images that give the appearance of reality.
But simulations in entertainment and science are becoming closer too. We see some amazing
simulations of water in entertainment movies. Look at Pixar in Disney movies with simulated
water. It's amazing how real it looks. CGI simulations for scientific purposes
can make it easier to visualize large data sets in motion further blurring the line between
scientific simulation and entertainment quality CGI. Simulation not only visualizes imaginary
worlds for Hollywood it can help us understand our universe scientifically. The Bolshoi simulation
is a massive incredibly detailed model of the universe's 14 billion year history. The images
it is producing are amazing and being closely studied. This simulation shows how gas is distributed
in the universe's most massive cluster of galaxies. The simulations create frame after frame of video.
They simulate the evolution of the universe. They do this by first examining the data from NASA's
WMAP Explorer which maps out the cosmic microwave background radiation. That radiation is the light
that was left over from the Big Bang. You can think of it as the universe's ancient data.
That data can be used as the starting conditions for the universe and then a supercomputer can
simulate how the universe evolved. How do we trust any of this? While there are reaches of the universe
we have yet to explore there are many regions that we do know. So the supercomputers results are
compared to the parts of the universe we do know and they match up really really well.
A key in the simulation is its integration of dark matter. That's essential because dark matter
accounts for 25 percent of everything in the universe and about 80 percent of all matter.
The simulation covered a massive chunk of the universe. The simulation was also massive in scale.
If you think about it it would have to be to have such good results. It simulated the interactions
of 8.6 billion dark matter particles. It took a lot of computing time over 6 million CPU hours
