The software allows you to move over the matrix and zoom into clusters and move our
crosshairs over elements and see what row and column each element relates to.
Again, when the element is pink, that means the elements are related and you can see who
they are.
So let's move around the matrix.
We find that Nicole Kidman and Amy Adams are in the same cluster with each other.
They're not that far from Elton John but seeing that depends on how zoomed in you are.
In the full matrix which has over 40,000 rows, they really aren't all that far apart.
They could be natural to think about why they aren't all that far away.
While Amy Adams has performed a lot on Broadway, Elton John has composed stage music for such
musicals as Aida, The Lion King and Billy Elliot.
The important thing is to look to be sure things make sense.
In fact, that's what David and I did when we got these results.
We picked Elton John as we both knew his music and thought we'd be probably able to evaluate
the cluster in which he resided.
That let us check for the meaning in the clusters.
If we zoom all the way out, we can see the regions as mathematical genres of artists
like those you see on Amazon or iTunes which group artists together.
This is doing the same thing from the data.
So what about other genres in the matrix?
Let's go to the extremes of the matrix.
If you go to the upper left, you'd find the punk band Boycott, and at the lower right,
you'd find rappers like Dr. Dre in LL Cool J.
So we have a handle on what clustering will do for us.
Now it's time to learn to cluster data ourselves.
The first method we will learn is hierarchical clustering.
For this method, we don't have to decide on the number of clusters until you're done.
This is a big feature of this clustering algorithm, and it's not true of others we see in this
lecture.
To begin, each object is assigned to its own cluster.
Then we find the distance between every pair of clusters.
We merge the two clusters with the shortest distance.
Then with this new group of clusters, we find the distance between every pair of clusters.
No, we already found a lot of them.
We again merge the two closest clusters.
We repeat this process until we end up with one single cluster.
Then we will look at the process visually and make decisions on the final clustering
we may use.
One part of this process is how to measure the distance between clusters.
One way is to measure it as the shortest distance between a pair of points in each cluster.
