lines of code to simulate. Students who have taken probability often comment on how simple the coding
is. My students actually code a dating game and see what the probability is that they could find
that perfect someone among the student's potential dates. We also code lines for a pharmacy and calculate
average overtime for an employee. We do this in a couple weeks and with that the students are ready
to leap into that modeling competition. That's part of the power of simulation. It can model
phenomenon in our world. How good is it? Well we pay to see it in the summer. Summer blockbusters
often contain stunning special effects particularly computer generated images or CGI.
Such images often rely heavily on simulation. This is very true in special effects. To see this
let's turn to the character of Yoda from the Star Wars saga. In the 1980 film The Empire Strikes Back
Yoda was a puppet controlled by Muppeteer Frank Oz. He's the Muppeteer behind Fawzi, The Bear,
Miss Piggy, and Grover. In episode two Attack of the Clones from 2002 Yoda was created using CGI,
computer generated imagery. Frank Oz was still the voice but he no longer controlled the movement
as he did when Yoda was a puppet. In order to operate Yoda in a computer as opposed to the hand
of a puppeteer animators created a digital wireframe of the character. Such a model can
contain over 50,000 vertices connected by lines. The number of vertices are needed to capture the
detail of Yoda as we see when he moves across the screen. To move and animate Yoda animators sometimes
simply decide on specific places for Yoda's arm to be in space and time. Then it is the
computer's job to figure out where that limb is in the intervening frames. Animating his hair is
even more complicated. Unlike the movement of the body the movement of his hair may not be specified
except in the first frame of the scene. Generally it's up for the computer to determine how his
hair would move given the movement of his body. Remember often the computer is also figuring
out the movement of his body too. How do you determine how his hair will move? Simulation.
A model is built. In particular animators model his hair as springs. You can determine how springy
hair is in the model too. Think of a bed where some springs are bouncier than others. Then
you let the computer determine this given the force acting on the hair. Why? This allows animators to
put digital doubles into scenes. Harry Potter can fly his broom in a Quidditch match in ways that
