They produce essentially an if then else type structure.
If this, then ask this, else ask this other question.
Further at each step of the process, we have a probability of someone having heart disease.
What's really important to know is that you can try this.
There are nice but expensive programs, but there are also inexpensive add-ins to spreadsheets
like Excel.
I like to use Jump Software, JMP, which is not cheap, but you can literally click a button
in the data splits.
With only a few clicks of the button, you know the Titanic story, which we just discussed.
You feed the program a table of data where one column is what you are trying to predict
survival or death in the case of the Titanic.
The other columns contain what might be predictive of that outcome.
Then, you click to see what you might find.
Like any technique, it may not work as it is splitting on one variable at a time and
thereby missing something when two variables might happen concurrently.
Still, it can be interesting and is frankly a fun way to explore data.
It is important to note that decision trees are part of the larger field of classification.
We use data to classify.
Examples are many.
Classification methods help detect a spam email message from its header and content.
These can be classified based on their shape as spiral or elliptical and then split further.
Banks can take data to determine if they believe someone should be given a home loan.
In this case, you are predicting if someone might default on a loan.
The resulting probability indicates if someone could be seen as safe or risky for a loan.
Who visits each web page offers another example.
When you visit a web page, a digital trail of sorts is left.
Not a lot of information is available, but there is some.
For instance, a data analyst would be able to see that I use the Chrome browser to connect
with from my Mac with a particular IP address that I am on campus and that I am using an
EDU location.
You can also know if the person clicked the page by clicking a link on another web page
or if for instance they came in via a browser.
If not, they directly inputted the web page for the visit and you can see that as well.
This can be analyzed to determine the total number of visitors for a web page, how many
visitors are from .edu.com and .gov sites.
You can also tell what time they visited and what day of the week that people came.
We can use such a log to determine when we have a person visiting versus when it is a
web robot.
