the electorate. In particular, they are able to better identify who they want to communicate with.
In the 2012 election, the Obama campaign used data analytics to know what demographic to reach
for votes. Then they could study what media markets tend to reach that group. They'd promote their
candidate there rather than buying time on media outlets that reached a large demographic. This
approach was much cheaper and in ways much more valuable. Political campaigns have always tried
to identify and mobilize their voters. And campaigns have been amassing more sophisticated
files on potential voters since the 1990s. Some experts credit this approach to the 1996 Bill
Clinton campaign. They focused on winning swing votes rather than the entire electorate.
George W. Bush narrowed the focus further by concentrating resources on swing voter Republicans.
Makes sense. But to do this right, you needed to figure out who these people were, where they lived,
and what they cared about. Just jump to the 2008 Obama campaign and its well-executed web
campaign. They raised about half a billion dollars online. At the same time, they gathered a lot of
data around 13 million email addresses and 5 million friends across social media platforms.
Email addresses combined with information from voter registration records help the campaign uncover
which potential voters they should reach with rides to polling places or phone calls addressing
specific points raised online. And once campaigns have a digital profile of voters
they'd like to target, they can also develop very customized political advertising.
Campaigns can use online advertising techniques to be sure they present their message to their
desired audience. Online ads also offer quick feedback about how well they're working. Did you
click the ad? How long did someone engage in the pre-roll video before skipping it and getting to
the featured video? In the last weeks of an election this kind of rapid feedback can be
especially valuable, but it also helps a campaign stay more on track throughout an election.
A final observation and comment. What makes the approach we've been discussing especially new
and powerful is the effort to grab and use all relevant data about voters. It's perhaps
worth remembering there had been an entirely different approach to political prediction
over the years that just ignored polling data. A model from that approach might have tried to
predict voting by looking at something else. How is the economy doing? Is there a popular or
