Data plays a sometimes fondly remembered role in sports.
Numbers shape how we watch sporting events.
Numbers affect how players approach the competition.
And numbers are important to how athletic performance is understood and assessed by everyone.
These days, data analytics is playing a huge and growing role in sports.
In this lecture, we'll gain insight into why it's growing,
and we'll learn how to do some sports analytics ourselves.
Keeping track of data has long been part of many sporting events.
Baseball is a prime example.
Many children have memories of tracking balls, strikes, or box scores.
Take Billy Crystal.
On May 30, 1956, an eight-year-old Billy Crystal walked in the Yankee Stadium with his father and his two older brothers.
Over 50 years later, he'd talk about that memory being as fresh in his mind as if it just happened.
He recalls the bond baseball fostered with his father and brothers,
which included reading a box score to recreate a game.
Sports data can offer insight otherwise difficult, if not impossible, to perceive.
Box scores, for example, not only record which team was winning and losing as the game progressed,
box scores also include summary information about the performance of every player in the game.
Beyond individual games, there are statistics summarizing the data for entire seasons and for entire careers.
Let's consider the careers of two legendary hitters of baseball.
First, Ty Cobb, all-time batting average leader with 3-6-6.
Most career batting titles, career record for stealing home base.
He held other records for 50 or more years, including most career hits, most career runs,
most career games played, most at-bats, and most career stolen bases.
Now, Babe Ruth.
Here are just some of the records he held.
Career home run leader with 714.
Career RBI leader with 2,213.
Career leader in getting to base on balls, 2,062.
Did you know Babe Ruth also was a pitcher?
He threw a one-run shutout in the first game of the 1918 World Series.
In that same series, he also won Game 4.
Before he ended his time as a pitcher, Ruth extended his World Series consecutive scoreless inning streak to 29 and 2-3 innings.
This record stood for over 50 years.
Now, think about how I'm presenting the accomplishments of these legendary players.
Data that describes their play.
In particular, this data encapsulates the player, at least at a cursory level, and enables us to evaluate his play.
But do we really need the data, or is it simply quantifying something we could otherwise see?
Wouldn't we simply have noticed that Ty Cobb hit the ball so consistently?
Possibly, but it is very possible we might not.
To get a sense of why I say this, let's round Ty Cobb and Babe Ruth's batting averages down to two decimal places.
So we have 0.36 and 0.34.
We are now talking the difference of two hits in every 100 at bats.
So Ty Cobb got about one more hit every other week than Babe Ruth.
The stat shows us that both were consistent hitters, yet Ty Cobb stood alone and leads all players who've stood at the plate.
Statistics and box scores can unveil aspects of the game, but they simplify the game at the very same time.
Bobby Bragan, who managed the Pittsburgh Pirates said,
Say you were standing with one foot in the oven and one foot in a bucket of ice.
According to the percentage people, you should be perfectly comfortable.
In this case, the mean or average isn't telling you the whole story.
In some cases, a particular stat isn't very instructive.
In other cases, it's a matter of having that plus several other statistics.
But under every summary statistic is the need for data, and it is the data that we're analyzing.
Today, data collection in analysis is an art and a science of its own,
going far beyond young Billy Crystal sitting in the stands updating his box scores with summary statistics.
These days, we can look at all the data, not just stats that summarize the data.
Let's move from the baseball diamond to the hard court of basketball to see today's cutting edge data collection.
In the fall of 2013, the NBA signed a contract so sport view cameras are in every arena.
The cameras are generally perched in the rafters of the arena.
They snap 25 frames per second and the images feed into a computer that produces a treasure trove of data.
Sport view began in 2005 when an Israeli missile defense specialist decided to explore using defense system optical tracking technology to create sports statistics
and capture a lot of the data in the game.
This is an important place to pause.
I often note to my students, notice how many times in mathematics, ideas of the past are adapted to become breakthroughs of the future.
Isaac Newton himself said that he stood on the shoulders of giants.
This is very important.
You don't have to necessarily create something entirely new, but sometimes adapt an existing idea.
We'll see this again with equations and formulas of data analytics.
Returning to sport view, the technology was designed to track objects.
In sports, we can know with relative certainty which NBA player has the fastest top speed.
We can know who dribbles the most in a game and who dribbles the most compared to the number of shots taken.
This is all coming from cameras far above the court and the sports analysts and coaches have the information almost instantly on their computers or iPads.
Let's see the difference between a traditional box score and some sport view data.
On Christmas Day 2010, Oklahoma City played Denver.
The Thunder won 114 to 106.
Kevin Durant's box score line showed his all-star performance with 44 points, 7 rebounds, and 4 assists.
What about sport view?
Durant held the ball for 2 minutes and 51 seconds out of 48 minutes.
Each time he touched the ball, he averaged .6 points, slightly higher than his season mark of .5.
He ran 2.8 miles in the game, but the information can be much more insightful.
In this game, Durant dribbled 96 times or 1.3 dribbles each time he touched the ball.
And the more he dribbled, the worse he shot.
He shot 55% if he didn't dribble and 3% if he dribbled 6 or more times.
Take a moment and think about this.
First, one would want to have more analysis over multiple games.
You could look at film to see what is usually happening when Durant dribbles 6 or more times.
Exactly. You suddenly know something you might have otherwise not known to look for.
If this is a trend and you're an opposing team, you surely wouldn't want to publicize it, especially in a great courses lecture.
You'd keep it secret and then coach defenders to force such a player to dribble a lot.
On the other hand, if this is a trend in your part of Durant's team, then you work on this to help an age your player overcome the problem associated with dribbling.
This level of data analysis in the sport could revolutionize the game, just like it did in baseball.
Sam Hinke, executive of the Houston Rockets said, the number of questions you can answer will be limited only by your imagination.
So let's return to the land of peanuts and crackerjack and talk about the math behind the 2011 film Moneyball and the 2003 book by the same name.
First, let's set the stage for the role of analytics in the story.
The drama comes from the tension between two factors, winning and money.
Billy Bean became general manager of the Oakland A's baseball team in 1997, but he had one of the smallest budgets in Major League Baseball.
Other teams were still building their rosters with the conventional wisdom of the time.
They used their allotted budgets to sign big-name hitters and rocket-armed pitchers.
Even the A's had followed that strategy in the 1980s, winning three consecutive World Series appearances in 1988 through 1990.
But in the 1990s, new ownership wanted to spend less on the team, so the cash-strapped A's needed a new strategy.
So Bean and his staff decided to try something different.
They built their team by being really good at data analysis.
The most expensive players were overvalued at the time, and even the wealthiest teams didn't have unlimited budgets to spend.
So Bean's strategy was to buy up players that had less value as measured by the traditional techniques, which often involved intuition, foresight, and experience.
Bean's method worked.
In 2002, his team became the first in over 100 years of American League Baseball to win 20 consecutive games.
They also made the playoffs, reserved for the top eight teams in baseball.
This all came while having the smallest player payroll of any major league baseball team.
So how did they cobble together such a team for a fraction of the budget available to many other teams?
Well, the A's wanted to make the playoffs.
But how?
Win, of course.
Just win.
But let's see how the A's uncovered a mathematical way to approach this goal.
In the film, Billy Bean's assistant, the character of Peter Brand, states that the team needs to win at least 99 games to guarantee a playoff spot.
Okay, so win, 99 games.
Now what?
What type of team can win 99 games?
The statistic we'll learn now was developed by Bill James, a baseball writer and statistician, who is connected to many of the techniques detailed in Moneyball.
What James discovered was a statistic combining the total number of runs a team scores and the total number it allows.
Here's how it works.
A fraction will estimate the percentage of games a team will win.
The numerator equals the square of the total number of runs scored by the team that season.
So if a team scored, say, 100 runs, the numerator would be 100 squared.
To get the denominator, we just add the numerator, the square of the number of runs scored by the team, to the square of the number of runs allowed by the team.
That's it.
This formula is known as the Pythagorean expectation.
To see this in action, let's look at the 2002 A's.
The team scored 800 runs and allowed 654 runs during the regular season.
So the Pythagorean expectation equals 800 squared divided by the quantity 800 squared plus 654 squared.
Put this into a calculator and you'll find that the A's were expected to win 59.9% of their games.
The team played 162 games in the regular season and 59.9% of 162 is 97.1.
There's some interesting aspects of data analysis here.
First, the Pythagorean expectation didn't quite reach that 99 win threshold.
So how many games did they win?
103.
And as we already mentioned, they made the playoffs.
This is important to remember.
I often note in class that the figure we calculate is a calculated guess.
It's not a crystal ball.
It can be easy as a data analyst to get attached to your computations.
But remember, they give insight, an opinion.
In the case of the A's, they won slightly more games than this Pythagorean expectation calculates.
So the formula wasn't perfect.
Maybe it could be refined.
The important point is that just by using the Pythagorean expectation, the A's got much closer to identifying their own winning formula.
Okay, so now we know that the Pythagorean expectation uncovers a distinctive relationship between wins and runs scored and allowed during a season.
This is something a coach and the players can concentrate on.
But how can we use more data on the players themselves to think about how to reach our target of 99 wins?
In the film, Brand indicates that the team can allow no more than 645 runs, which is nine less than they were allowed that were allowed in the 2002 season.
Taking this number as fixed, how many runs must be scored to reach an expected number of wins greater than or equal to 99?
So let's put these pieces into the Pythagorean expectation formula.
We find 99 over 162 equals x squared divided by the quantity x squared plus 645 squared.
So we get x squared plus 645 squared equals 162 times x squared divided by 99.
Moving the x squared to the same side, we get 63 over 99 times x squared equals 645 squared.
Remember, we're looking for x and we get x equals the square root of 99 over 63 times 645.
That equals 808.55.
This means the team must score more than 808 runs.
So if we know how many runs we need to score and we know the maximum number of runs we can allow, we have a lot of information.
But how do we know who to sign?
For this, we turn to another Bill James statistic called runs created.
This stat quantifies approximately how many runs a player contributes to the team.
Like the Pythagorean expectation, runs created is a fraction.
The numerator equals the quantity hits plus walks times total bases, where a single is worth one base, a double two, and so forth.
The denominator equals the number of plate appearances by that player.
Let's apply this to Scott Hatterberg, who was signed by the Oakland A's due to his high on base percentage.
It's especially interesting that Hatterberg had been a catcher, but was converted to first base.
Why?
The A's had figured out that he was good at catching the ball with players running toward him, but his throwing arm was weak.
They wanted him in a position where he could play a lot.
So let's apply the runs created statistic to Hatterberg using his 2001 record, since this is what the A's would have had when they signed him.
In 2001, Hatterberg had 68 hits, which reached first on balls 33 times and had 278 play appearances.
Working this out, we find 68 plus 33 times total bases, which is 85 divided by 278, which equals 30.85.
That is, Hatterberg contributed 30.85 points with the runs created statistic.
Now, compare this to Jason Giambi.
He played first base for the A's in 2001, and during the off-season was signed by the Yankees.
Giambi's stats correspond to him contributing 162.25 points.
Whoa! That is a huge loss! It was!
Giambi was second in MVP voting for the American League in 2001.
So why sign Hatterberg to replace such a great player?
Exactly! This thinking is easy to have and is precisely what allowed the A's to fill their team with players that other teams undervalued.
Let's look at both players' contributions in another way.
Remember, no team has an infinite budget.
The Yankees signed Giambi as a free agent for $10.5 million.
Suppose under this contract he performed like he did in 2001, then he would have contributed around 160 runs by the runs created statistic.
With his $10.5 million salary, each run created by Giambi would have cost $65,000.
Hatterberg came in with a salary only one-tenth of that of Giambi.
Each run created cost $29,000.
Let's look at it yet another way.
Billy Bean had a $40 million budget to sign his team.
With a $10 million salary, Giambi would have taken a quarter of the total budget.
For the team to reach 800 runs, he would have contributed less than a quarter of the necessary runs required to reach 99 wins under the Pythagorean expectation formula.
They couldn't pay that much for such few number of runs.
Now Hatterberg would contribute about 3.7% of the runs needed, but here's the key.
He cost only 2.25% of the team budget.
By looking at each player's contributions in this way, Bean was able to create a powerful team that competed with the Yankees,
a team with over triple Bean's $40 million budget.
This is a great example of how we can use data analysis to come up with innovative solutions.
In particular, note how we combined ideas to create workable insight.
This is an important element of data analysis.
You create tools, but like building in a shop, you may use many of them to create something.
Of course, this approach to baseball is well known and used by many teams now,
but that doesn't mean all opportunities are gone.
In later seasons, for example, the A's began selecting players more for undervalued skills in defense,
and they also began using data on players who had not even begun to play professionally.
Now let's talk a bit more about the Pythagorean expectation.
This is a powerful statistic based on just runs scored and runs allowed.
Focusing on runs scored gave the A's their initial formula for success,
and when other teams caught on, they gave more attention to reducing runs allowed.
Can we take this approach from the dugout to the court or into the huddle?
It's not quite that easy.
If we merely apply our current formula, it doesn't correlate well to the total wins of a basketball team.
At first, this may seem like a dead end.
However, generally, when one tries to use a technique in data analysis in a new application, things must slightly change.
Professional basketball teams play fewer games, but many more points are scored than in baseball.
So it's plausible we might need a change.
How much?
That's the trick.
You don't know in advance.
But again, sometimes important steps in data analysis come from adapting existing ideas.
So is there a different Pythagorean expectation formula for basketball?
Daryl Mori, a sports executive, was the first to adapt the formula to basketball.
What worked?
The formula is the same, except the exponent changes.
In baseball, we were squaring every team's points, so we had an exponent of 2.
But basketball is a very different sport, and he found an exponent of 13.91 fit the data.
But some other exponent might work even better for basketball.
For example, John Hollinger, a basketball statistician, uses 16.5 as his exponent.
In fact, in baseball, 2 isn't always the exponent for the Pythagorean expectation.
BaseballReference.com, a premier website for baseball stats, uses 1.83.
But in case you wonder, with that particular adjustment, the A's of 2002 would have been predicted to win just 96 games instead of 97 games, almost the same, but not an improvement either.
So while data analysis can be very powerful, I hope you are also seeing why no method is likely to ever have the final word for all time across all domains.
I find it really helps to keep noting this in class.
What works in one setting may still work in another, but not without some modification.
Again, what's difficult is knowing what changes and how much.
Until you know, it may look like it won't work.
It could be that you simply need to change one thing in a very small way, but until you look at that one thing, it can look like the method won't work.
Let's look at some more data, this time using data visualization.
Sometimes the best way to analyze data is to look at it graphically.
For instance, what are the hottest places on the NBA court?
To help answer this question, Kirk Goldsberry, a geography professor at Michigan State, applied his skills to the court.
In particular, he created what is often called a heat map of all NBA field goal attempts from 2006 to 2011.
Red means more points and blue means fewer points were scored.
Overall, we see what we expect.
It's orange, red outside the three-point line and dark red in high percentage key spots.
Still, there is overall information in such a graph.
You can make such graphs.
I do along with Davidson College students interested in analytics.
We track where shots are taken and break the court into regions and find the hot and cold regions.
Here's a plot of how Davidson scored in a game.
Red means we were hot, orange a little less so, and green is cooler.
Just looking at the graph, the coaching staff gets insight.
The students also can gain insight.
Does it tell them where to shoot?
Possibly, but it also tells them where to concentrate their analysis on where we aren't shooting well.
Heat maps of shooting are possibly even more interesting when you look at a particular player.
Consider Stephen Curry of the Golden State Warriors, who set the NBA record for three-point shots during the 2012-2013 season.
You can see him shooting just outside the line that gets him three points per shot.
Between the numbers in the picture, we can also see that Curry is less effective shooting straight away than from the sides.
He's also more effective on the right versus the left side.
However, he is a dangerous shooter to opposing teams simply by being on the court.
This was clearly seen when he lit up the court in the playoffs in 2013, scoring 54 points in Madison Square Garden.
Consider the numbers.
He scored 54 points and shot 11 of 13 on three-point attempts.
He shot 7 for 7 from the free throw line, led the team in rebounds and assists, and scored 23 points in the second quarter alone.
What was so special about Curry's night?
Did we just get caught up in the fervor of the playoffs?
I think it was special, real special.
Why?
First, only seven players in NBA history have scored more at Madison Square Garden.
Listen to the names.
Well, Chamberlain, Elgin Baylor, Kobe Bryant, Bernard King, Rick Berry, Richie Gurren, and Michael Jordan.
The Knicks knew Curry would be the Golden State offense going into the game.
David Lee, the Warriors' second leading scorer, was suspended due to a brawl in a game in Indiana the night before.
The game only made this reality more evident.
Curry's teammates shot 18 of 44.
Steph dropped three-point shots like layups.
He only missed two of 13, which is 85.7%.
Keep in mind, six NBA Hall of Famers have a higher career shooting average than 85.7 from the free throw line.
Clearly, Steph is a great shooter, but perhaps this is simply randomness.
That is, maybe it's just that eventually someone like Steph is going to have a string of threes.
To understand this, Curry's three-point percentage was 45.3% in 2012-2013 season.
He shot about 603 pointers during the regular season in just over 100 in the playoffs.
Now, let's think of flipping an unfair coin that comes up heads 45.3% of the time.
If we flip the coin 700 times, how often will we see a string of 11 heads in 13 consecutive flips?
This will happen about 70% of the time.
True, but another stat indicates it was a rare sight.
Let's assume he was going to take 13 shots with a 45.3% likelihood to make them.
What's the chance that of those 13 shots, 11 of them were made?
This happens only 0.4% of the time.
Did Curry have the hot hand?
Some statisticians would say there is no such thing.
Sports statisticians will sometimes say a streak or hot hand can be understood as something that is statistically unlikely.
It's hard to say, but having a streak of 11 of 13 is indeed rare to see.
And it came during the playoffs, so it understandably became the talk of the NBA.
So, we've used mathematics to analyze a few aspects in sports, from building a team to recognizing an improbable performance.
Math can give us insight.
What else can we analyze?
That's a question that many professional athletes and teams are answering.
With modern technology, there are new answers to that question as new discoveries are made.
Some are made public, others are kept private as they give a competitive advantage.
So, look for new statistics being kept in a sport or new graphics appearing in the news to detail a performance in a sport.
This often reflects advances in sports analytics.
And here lies a key of sports analytics.
It can help us to know when something special is happening.
Keeping box scores enables us to keep track of batting averages and helps us see that just one more hit a week could distinguish the best hitter Ty Cobb from a player having a strong but not the best season.
It can help us recognize who to recruit for the A's and make a play for the World Series without spending the most money.
It can confirm that Stephen Curry had a great game at Madison Square Garden.
It can also help ensure that a team on a losing streak may simply be on the unfortunate side of randomness.
This can improve coaching decisions about a team or player.
This can enable a recruiter to recognize greatness on the field.
If we turn to predictive analytics, it might even indicate an attribute that correlates well with future play.
The key is knowing which analytics are useful and insightful.
No statistic ever tells the whole story, but a good statistic can tell us which part of the story to look at more carefully.
And for coaches and players, better use of data makes it possible to change the story.
Better data analytics is literally game-changing.
