It graphically shows how to understand the proportions of the human body, written by
the Roman writer Vitruvius, 15 centuries earlier.
For example, the head, as measured from the forehead to the chin, is one-tenth of the total
height.
One's outstretched arms are always as wide as the body is tall.
Now this may not be true, Vitruvius might be wrong, but until Leonardo da Vinci, no
one much cared about the data analysis by Vitruvius.
It's the graphic that tells the story in a compelling way.
So what goes into making a good graphic?
Two questions lay at the heart of a graphic.
Who is the graphic for?
What does it need to communicate?
Again, think about a graphic as a story.
You'll tell a story of the company differently to stakeholders than to customers.
They have different needs.
What story are you telling?
Let's look at one of the great classic examples of storytelling in a graphic.
This is drawn in 1869 by Charles Joseph Menard, a French civil engineer.
It tells the tragic tale of death during Napoleon's Russian campaign of 1812.
Edward Tufti, whose 1983 book, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information, is a
definitive resource on visually displaying data for many statisticians.
Tufti calls it the best statistical graphic ever drawn.
Menard's graph shows six types of information.
Geographic coordinates, latitude, in longitude, time, temperature, the course and direction
of the Army's movement, and the number of troops remaining.
The widths of the outward gold path and the returning black path represent the size of
the force, one millimeter to 10,000 men.
Geographic features in major battles are marked and named, and plummeting temperatures on
the return journey are shown along the bottom.
To the left, we see in gold 1812, Napoleon's grand army leaving Poland in 1812 with a force
of 422,000.
To the right, we see only 100,000 reaching Moscow, less than a quarter of the original
force.
For the return, the troops are literally decimated with only 10,000 returning from where they
began.
Toward the middle of the graph, a black line halves, quite suddenly, in fact.
