You
You
Your lecture is dr. Tim chartier
Dr. Chartier is an associate professor of mathematics and computer science at Davidson
College.
He holds a Ph.D. in applied mathematics from the University of Colorado Boulder.
Dr. Chartier chairs the advisory council for the National Museum of Mathematics and was
named the first math ambassador of the Mathematical Association of America.
He is the author of MathBytes, Googlebombs, chocolate-covered pie and other cool bits
in computing, and writes for the Huntington Post Science blog.
He also fields mathematical questions for ESPN's sports science program and has served
as a resource for the CBS Evening News, National Public Radio, The New York Times and other
major news outlets.
Today, right now, the field of data analysis relates to and impacts our world in unprecedented
ways.
Right now, millions, even billions of computers, are collecting data from smartphones and tablets
to laptops to supercomputers.
Data is an ever-present and growing part of our life.
Take the personal camera, put a few hundred of these together, and that's already enough
combined memory to store the contents of every printed book in the Library of Congress.
In the digital world, each picture can be worth a million words or more.
And we are also emailing at an amazing rate.
Who is the world like before email?
Definitely different, at least in terms of data.
Today, the amount of textual content in email in just ten minutes equates to the full text
of printed books again in the Library of Congress.
That's six times the Library of Congress every hour, 144 times the Library of Congress every
day.
By the time you see this, who knows, maybe the rate will have already doubled.
In fact, by some estimates, humanity is already producing a terabyte of new data per person
every year.
A good portion of that is transient data, meaning not stored or not stored yet.
That's things like digital phone calls, but this already amounts to a trillion bytes of
data per person.
So how much data is there in the world?
A 2012 digital universe study from IDC estimated that the global volume of digital data stored
and managed in 2010 was over one trillion gigabytes.
We need a bigger unit.
That was a billion terabytes, so less than one terabyte per person at that point.
A million petabytes, a thousand exabytes, and over one zettabyte.
That was in 2010, and the number was predicted to double every year, reaching 40 trillion
gigabytes by the year 2020.
Now those numbers are for all the data, but no one person or computer has all the data
