What's the chance that of those 13 shots, 11 of them were made?
This happens only 0.4% of the time.
Did Curry have the hot hand?
Some statisticians would say there is no such thing.
Sports statisticians will sometimes say a streak or hot hand can be understood as something that is statistically unlikely.
It's hard to say, but having a streak of 11 of 13 is indeed rare to see.
And it came during the playoffs, so it understandably became the talk of the NBA.
So, we've used mathematics to analyze a few aspects in sports, from building a team to recognizing an improbable performance.
Math can give us insight.
What else can we analyze?
That's a question that many professional athletes and teams are answering.
With modern technology, there are new answers to that question as new discoveries are made.
Some are made public, others are kept private as they give a competitive advantage.
So, look for new statistics being kept in a sport or new graphics appearing in the news to detail a performance in a sport.
This often reflects advances in sports analytics.
And here lies a key of sports analytics.
It can help us to know when something special is happening.
Keeping box scores enables us to keep track of batting averages and helps us see that just one more hit a week could distinguish the best hitter Ty Cobb from a player having a strong but not the best season.
It can help us recognize who to recruit for the A's and make a play for the World Series without spending the most money.
It can confirm that Stephen Curry had a great game at Madison Square Garden.
It can also help ensure that a team on a losing streak may simply be on the unfortunate side of randomness.
This can improve coaching decisions about a team or player.
This can enable a recruiter to recognize greatness on the field.
If we turn to predictive analytics, it might even indicate an attribute that correlates well with future play.
The key is knowing which analytics are useful and insightful.
No statistic ever tells the whole story, but a good statistic can tell us which part of the story to look at more carefully.
And for coaches and players, better use of data makes it possible to change the story.
Better data analytics is literally game-changing.
