That's what K stands for.
This would have been an option with the data about singers we saw earlier.
K-means is a way to do this.
In fact, I have my students do this in class on a data set containing thousands of movies.
We then look for genres.
We look for both what makes sense and then what might surprise us
and also think about what it might be indicating.
The K-means algorithm finds K cluster centers and assigns the object to the nearest cluster center
such that the squared distances from the cluster are minimized.
First, you must choose the number of clusters at the outset.
This is generally associated with the variable K,
which is why the method is called K-means.
Choose K center points or centroids for the clusters you are about to form.
You can pick K points from the set of points you are about to cluster
or even K random points to begin.
Assign each element of the data set to the nearest centroid.
These are the clusters.
Now calculate new centroids.
These are the average or mean of the data points in each cluster.
Again, sign each element of the data set to the nearest centroid.
Once every point is assigned, you have K clusters.
Continue calculating new centroids and then new corresponding clusters
until the clusters don't change.
Let's try this in two dimensions for a very small group of points.
We'll take the points 1, 1, 2, 1, 4, 3, and 5, 4.
Let's take K equal to 2.
Let's take our initial centroids to be for the clusters to be the points 1, 1, and 2, 1.
So 4, 3, and 5, 4 join the cluster with 2, 1 as the centroid
since they are closer to that point than 1, 1.
Now we calculate the center of each cluster.
This is 1, 1 for the cluster 1 since it's the only point in the cluster.
The second cluster has the points 2, 1, 4, 3, and 5, 4.
So the x-coordinate of the centroid is 2 plus 4 plus 5, that quantity divided by 3,
and that equals 11 thirds.
The y-coordinate is 1 plus 3 plus 4, that quantity divided by 3, which equals 8 thirds.
So that gives us our new centroid, which is 11 thirds, 8 thirds.
This time 1, 1, and 2, 1 are in a cluster together since 2, 1 is closer to 1, 1 than 11 thirds and 8 thirds.
And 4, 3, and 5, 4 are in a cluster together because they are closer to the centroid 11 thirds, 8 thirds.
We can again compute the centroids and find which points are closest.
We'll find that the clusters don't change, so that means we have our two clusters.
