Do you want a vacuum that's connected to the internet?
Or are the routines inside a standalone version good enough?
These are design questions that come straight from data analytics.
Neural networks in artificial intelligence underscore how computers can learn from data.
Indeed, they can learn to guess what we're thinking, how to navigate a room,
or to predict phenomenon like the number of potential jurors.
Neural networks have also been used since the early 1990s to predict what stocks might rise or fall.
They were a huge hit in the mid-1990s.
Technical editor John Sweeney said in a 1995 issue of
Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities,
quote, you can skip developing complex rules,
just define the price series and indicators you want to use,
and the neural network does the rest.
This is true when they work, and a key to effective neural networks is training the data,
or having it learn on a rich set of data.
Said another way, a big decision is the choice of variables in data on which to learn.
One early experiment in 1994 was by Yoon and Swales.
They wanted to predict how the stock of a firm would perform on the market.
For the inputs, they had nine variables.
Confidence, economic factors outside the firm's control,
growth, strategic plans, new products, anticipated loss, anticipated gain,
long-term optimism, and short-term optimism.
These values came from studies in Fortune 500 and Business Week's top 1,000 firms.
The output was well-performing firm and poor-performing firm.
The network was able to correctly classify 77.5 percent of test cases.
Since the early 1990s, neural networks have been used extensively for a wide variety of applications
in stocks from selecting or diversifying a portfolio to rating the risk of fixed-income investments.
Early uses included using neural networks to time when to buy and sell stocks.
Banks developed neural networks to predict interest rates.
Companies with international operations developed neural networks to predict exchange rates.
These early predictions worked well to attract interest from other organizations.
As these innovations spread, the expression neural network somewhat fell out of use.
For many users, machine learning was becoming just another routine aspect of what computers do.
Clearly, it is wonderful when neural networks work.
Here also lies an important issue in machine learning.
We can't always open the hood and see the wiring.
