In the end, it performed far better than any previous method.
It roughly doubled the accuracy in recognizing objects from a challenging list of 20,000 distinct items.
In 2012, Google used a machine learning technique called Deep Neural Networks for its voice search.
Its error rate decreased by 20%.
Neural networks helped Microsoft with direct mailing.
Each year, the software giant sends out about 40 million pieces of direct mail to over 8 million registered customers.
The mailings often encourage people to upgrade software or buy other related products.
Everyone in the database generally receives the first mailing.
The key question, to whom should the second mailing be sent?
That is, who is most likely to respond to a second piece of mail?
A key in the neural networks is inputting variables that are important.
So Microsoft took time to eliminate unimportant variables, which were important.
Initially, the neural network trained with about 25 variables.
Let's look at a few.
Recency. The more recently you've bought something, the better the chance you're going to buy again.
The date an individual made their first purchase.
The longer you've been a customer, the better chance is that you're going to buy again.
The number of products bought and registered.
And the number of days between the time the product came out and when it was purchased.
So how did it go?
Before this work, an average mailing would get a response rate of 4.9%.
After the response rate increased to 8.2%.
Keep in mind, they weren't necessarily finding new customers.
They were doing less and more targeted mailing.
So they end up bringing in the same amount of revenue for 35% less cost.
Neural networks are part of the larger field of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
Speaking of artificial intelligence, it is easy to think robots.
So let's move to the larger field of AI and talk about robots.
And see how they can use ideas and methods very similar to those we've discussed.
You have defined inputs, a defined output, and then let the computer learn as it goes.
In particular, let's discuss the robots, which almost look like flying saucers on wheels.
They will vacuum your house.
We'll take the iRobot Roomba, which has sold millions of units.
So what do you do?
Put it in a room, press the clean button, and walk away.
Go see a movie, go to work, and when you return, your room is vacuumed.
