From it, we learn and gain insight.
Some things will be obvious and not very insightful or new, but then we see the unexpected.
For a business that can catapult it in front of its competitors, we'll see how looking
at the web as a network did this for Google.
It's a new world and one that data is continuing to change.
The trick is we don't entirely know how or where.
But data analysis enables us to predict with better accuracy and higher probability many
aspects of the future.
In the end, data analysis is a set of tools, existing and ever-developing, from regression
and partitioning to clustering and ranking.
But data analysis is also a mindset.
It's a way of improving our ability to ask questions and an expectation that data can
make possible new answers.
And much more than in the past when data sets were smaller, the mindset is also fueled by
simple curiosity about seeing the big picture and about being able to zoom in on any of
the details.
This is the world of data analytics, and it's also the world we live in every day.
Numbers surround us from sports scores to checkbooks.
Statistics fill the news from politics to education.
We will learn the tools to understand how data analysis is done, to check and do it yourself,
and we will see firsthand how much of an art and a science this is.
There is no one answer.
So be ready to get the data analytics itch.
Like an artist who keeps tinkering with a painting, you'll learn to see that the world
is your palette.
Analytics lets you sift through data to find information of value and paint a picture that
was always just a mathematical step away, and that's just one picture, only one way
of looking at the data, which can lead you to begin wondering, what can you do next?
Rather than reaching for something like a crossword puzzle in your free time, you may
find yourself reaching for data that you can begin tinkering with yourself.
It's a great way to exercise your mind.
Again, there isn't one answer, so each question is like a puzzle that could be played anew,
each time you look at it a new way.
And as I tell my students, if you find yourself visiting webpages of news sources just to
download their data, you may even end up creating your own news.
Data analytics are transforming our world in ways you can understand and appreciate.
It's like a spectator sport that's looking into all areas of life and inviting you to
participate.
