So watch for tools you've seen in this course to show up in new combinations.
Clustering plus ranking, simulations plus differential equations, decision trees plus regression, and maybe neural networks.
Expect the tools we've discussed to show up in many new ways.
Second, we can predict there will be new data sets.
Every year, new medical research emerges, and with it, often new data to analyze and study.
News media sometimes makes their data available for analysis.
Sports data is often available, and with the advent of new measuring devices, entirely new data is available,
whether play-by-play data or new data about conditioning and training.
In golf, data has been gathered in a system called ShotLink,
with information about every shot ever taken by every player on the PGA Tour for over a decade.
This shot-by-shot data allows tour players, sports media outlets, and researchers to analyze the game.
And as happened earlier in baseball, there is now a rush to determine which statistics can make better use of all that data to provide the most insight.
To stimulate work in the area, a ShotLink intelligence prize was announced starting in 2012.
A professor from the Columbia Business School won the inaugural prize for his work on the best ball striking on iron shots from key distances in the game.
This new area has data analysts looking for money ball-like insights in golf with this very new data set.
And like the Warren Buffett offer of $1 billion for a perfect bracket prediction, these new competitions are potentially open to anyone.
What types of questions can be answered? Time will tell. In each year, we will learn more.
So there will be new methods and new data sets.
Third, new technologies will continue to impact data analysis.
This can be software like sport view technology that led to a massive influx of new data in basketball and soccer.
Yet it can also mean new technologies that create new questions in data analysis.
For example, retina scan technology can track where we move our eyes.
Link to other data research using retinal scans has the potential to transform how we understand everything from reading to movie watching, digital gaming, online education, and even interpersonal communication.
Fourth, data analysis itself can drive new technologies.
Gordon Moore of Intel famously jump-started wider thinking about information technology with a very simple analysis.
He didn't have a lot of data, but just by looking at a very small data set about improvements in Intel microprocessors over time, he was able to make a powerful prediction.
He uncovered a rapid and regular doubling of processing power, and that prediction became the starting point for a technology roadmap that has shaped the entire information technology industry for decades.
New materials may become available, and that is another key source of technological change for new fangled devices.
Take lithium ion batteries. These are part of a family of rechargeable batteries with applications from cars to computers.
However, a general roadmap for such innovations is not yet available.
Creating a new revolutionary material can be a slow, really, really slow process, especially when compared to the rate other new products are conceived and introduced to the market.
