There might be a case where any other player would turn right on the field.
Romberg?
Yeah, he made a full circle turning left, of course.
In football, American style, Jacksonville Jaguar defensive tackle, John Henderson, expects
the team assistant trainer to slap him open handed across the face as hard as the trainer
possibly can.
This strategy seems to have worked.
Henderson made the Pro Bowl multiple times since the trainer started slapping him around.
In basketball, even Michael Jordan, who led the Chicago Bulls to six NBA championships,
had his rituals.
The five-time MVP wore his University of North Carolina shorts under his uniform in every
game.
Every game.
Jordan led UNC to the NCAA championships in 1982.
Really good outcome, so he kept wearing that lucky pair.
These players see a correlation between their success and some activity, so they repeat it.
We all look for connections.
We all look for correlations.
When is a pattern real and when is it merely spurious or imagined?
Here are a few quick ones to consider.
According to Osco Drug, if you buy diapers, you're more likely to buy beer.
Why might that be true?
Do you find yourself thinking of possible reasons?
Here's another research result.
Research from an airline found that vegetarians miss fewer flights.
Are vegetarians more reliable or does pre-ordering a meal signal or even cause someone who is
more committed to making a particular flight?
Here's a third one.
Increased ice cream sales correspond to increased shark attacks.
Well, correlation picks up that two things have a certain pattern of happening together.
More ice cream sales and more shark attacks.
But there is a well-known saying in statistics, correlation does not mean causation.
It could be that the connection is simply a random association in your data.
But if there is a connection, many other things may cause that connection.
The two factors may themselves not be particularly connected, but instead be connected to another
factor.
For example, maybe weather is warmer in a particular area at the time when sharks tend
to migrate to that area.
Maybe the warmer weather causes an increase in the presence of sharks and an increase
