They simply didn't fit.
But the data analysis wouldn't know.
It will create an answer.
It's like an opinion, and our method was creating a very sketchy opinion at best.
Third, there is no single best tool or method.
In fact, many times, part of the art and science of data analysis is figuring out what method
to use.
And sometimes you just don't know.
But we'll learn there are some methods that are important to try before others.
They may or may not work, and sometimes you simply won't know, but you can learn things
about your data in viable paths to a solution by trying those methods.
It can be hard, and sometimes the needle you're looking for in the haystack of data may simply
not be there.
Other times it is there, but you have to have the right method to sift through the hay.
Fourth, you do not always have the data you need in the way you need it.
Just having the data is not enough.
Sometimes you have the data, but it may not be in the form you need to process it.
It may have errors, be incomplete, or be composed of different data sets that have to be merged.
And sometimes just getting data into the right format is a big deal.
I worked on a project once in which a one gigabyte data set was not in the form that
my computer algorithm needed.
It was non-trivial to simply reformat it.
I had student researchers trying to write codes, but they were writing codes and that
just took too much time.
They would take something like two months or more to reformat the data with the codes
that they wrote.
This would mean literally hitting the energy on a computer and not using it for other things
for several months.
Fortunately, I found another code that already existed.
It was designed for a completely different purpose, but if I used it on the data I had,
I could get my data into the form I needed in about 20 minutes.
So I ran that code just to reformat my data with a very, very fast algorithm.
Then I needed yet another program to get the reformatted data exactly ready so that my
final program could solve what we were interested in.
In the end, it took two years to figure out all those steps, but in the end, we produced
a method that could produce new medical imagery software.
The main step was literally getting the data I had into the form I needed.
This isn't uncommon in data analysis, especially on very large data sets.
Fifth, not all data is equally available.
True, some data sets are easy to find.
They already exist on the internet.
You can download them and immediately begin analyzing the data.
You can easily download sports data on players and teams, for example.
