available blogs, forums, online news, and social networks.
In the end, their data analysis unveiled the same result that millions upon millions of
votes would produce on that final American Idol show.
IdolStats created a tool that heard what all those fans were saying without ever really
talking to anyone.
Just by collecting and evaluating the chatter, they heard what was being said, as clearly
as if they were talking to all the people calling in for their favorite singer.
We all have had some experience with text analysis.
At the simple end, think of spelling and grammar checks.
These already contain a level of text analysis.
They tell you how many words you have, and many programs will also auto correct.
When I was growing up, my parents' computer would even tell me the reading level of what
I wrote.
Authorship is a traditional area of text analytics.
Who wrote the works of Shakespeare?
That sort of thing.
For example, in 1996, the anonymous author of the best-selling novel, Primary Colors,
was uncovered by Donald Foster, an English professor at Vassar College.
The professor had analyzed the frequency of words used in the novel, and he compared this
frequency distribution with the writings of 35 likely suspects.
The frequency distributions fingered Joe Klein of Newsweek Magazine, who later admitted to
being the author.
You can also look at the frequency distribution of individual letters, A, B, C, D, and so
on.
I do this with my students at Davidson College, where I have them use a program that identifies
language.
The program looks only at the frequency of letters, and yet it does a great job.
In fact, my students often spend time when they complete the assignment trying to fool
their own program.
Frequency distributions of letters also have an important place in cryptography, where
the distribution of letters can make some ciphers very easy to break.
As for word frequencies, at the end of 2010, Google released an extraordinary tool that
looks at frequency distributions across millions of published books all at once.
You put in a word or phrase and it looks for the frequency across all Google scanned books.
This tool is called Google Books Ngram Viewer.
Here's what it looks like for the word computer.
Not surprisingly, things slowly climbed between 1940 and 1950, with sharper inclines since
the 1970s and an even sharper incline in the mid-1980s.
Here we are looking at the frequency of the word computer, which is called a one gram
or unigram, as it is a single word.
The vertical axis shows how frequently the term you are searching for appears compared
to all other words, or in this case, single words.
