Graphics are a terrific first step to really getting a grip on your data, but it's only
recently that graphical tools have become easy to create.
In the past, graphics were used only at the end of an analysis to summarize what's been
done and sometimes as a tool of persuasion.
To see an example of this, let's look at one of the first great presentations of graphics.
It comes from Florence Nightingale.
Many think of Nightingale as the mother of modern nursing.
She was known as the lady with the lamp, but the light she carried extended beyond immediate
aid to individual soldiers.
In fact, one of her accomplishments in medicine was the data analysis that led to graphics
like this.
We'll learn more about how to read this particular graphic, but the basic point to notice is
that most soldiers, all the ones in blue, were dying from disease, not military causes.
And it was Nightingale's skills as a statistician that enabled her to present the information
clearly enough that it changed public opinion and saved many, many lives.
The war at the time was the Crimean War.
Crimea is a peninsula on the southern tip of the Ukraine that extends into the Black
Sea.
Nightingale went there as a volunteer, and she compiled data on the deaths and disabilities
of soldiers throughout the Crimean War.
That was a war that involved over 500,000 casualties on all sides.
Nightingale was especially concerned with the unsanitary condition of the English hospitals
and their impact on many lives.
So she developed an innovative graph, what we would call now a circular histogram or
a rose diagram.
It looks like a pie chart, but it's much more than that, as we'll see.
Look at June of 1855.
Nightingale was fierce that month, and you see in red lots of military casualties.
But the blue region for that month was still much larger.
Soldiers in the blue region had what Nightingale on the chart called preventable or mitigable
diseases.
She wanted these diseases to be noticed and treated.
We should also mention that Nightingale got to know an innovative statistician named William
Farr from a dinner party in 1856.
Farr had been the first to compile mortality tables, listing causes of death in the general
population.
