Google had crawled through the web a month earlier, so no news about those events was included in its data.
So Google temporarily placed links to news organizations,
indicating that those sites should be visited since the search engine wouldn't work.
From that start, Google News evolved rapidly.
In fact, Google now crawls through news sources much more frequently than it crawls through other sites.
Revised analytics have made search engines much better at predicting the range and timeliness of information that's most likely to be requested.
And there lies part of the key. Where will data analytics go?
In part, it will come from what we are able to dream, as today's innovators emerge around us.
In fact, even the act of typing in a search query now triggers predictive analytics.
In 2010, Google Search began offering auto-completion.
You type two characters and Google already anticipates what you are searching on.
Many websites now attempt to offer this to another achievement of predictive analytics.
In fact, an important feature of data analytics is that the more things change, well, the more things change.
They do not just stay the same.
In fact, Google's very success as a search engine may be creating conditions that make it harder to be successful in the future.
Remember that Google's original page rank posed by Bryn and Page depended on webpages linking to others.
However, due to how well Google works, many webpages may no longer try as hard to include links.
And fewer people may bother to bookmark webpages.
Instead, more people may simply query Google to find the same item again and again whenever they need it.
But wait, if there are fewer links available, then a key feature of the early web that Google depended on for its search may become less available.
Well, no matter where we go in this changing landscape, there are some fundamental principles that are unlikely to change.
So here are four principles that we can keep in mind as we think about predicting the future.
Number one, prediction comes from insight, not just the data.
When new technology comes, we often think it will make things better.
That's not always the case.
The same is true with more data.
It's how we use the data, not simply its presence.
More data, if not properly analyzed, can be a problem.
More data can mean less insight.
Remember how Gallup in his polls rose to prominence?
He had a fraction of the data but made better predictions.
