Internet Movie Database, could help triangulate the identity of an anonymous Netflix customer.
The dates for posting on both sites were often virtually the same.
This made it easy to match identities from one database with the other.
Now, there are ways people propose that the data could have been masked.
The technique called data masking can randomize the data, making it even harder to trace an
identity back to any specific person.
Such additional precautions might have been allowed in that second Netflix challenge to
go forward.
But the fundamental issue remains.
How secure is secure?
And when do you know?
And when does your privacy or security actually change without you knowing?
For that, let's see another example from another Internet giant, Facebook.
Now clearly, it is in Facebook's interest to keep information secure, but it is also
in Facebook's interest for users to share as much information as possible.
In 2007, Facebook released a new feature called Beacon.
It was created to enhance how people share information with their friends about things
they do on the web.
Facebook benefits when users share more information with potential monetary value.
So Facebook was very excited with this new feature.
But problems were discovered.
A security researcher sounded an alarm, indicating that the online ad system went much further
than anyone had imagined in tracking people's web activities outside the popular social
networking site.
Beacon reported back to Facebook on members' activities on third-party sites that participated
in Beacon, even if the users were logged off from Facebook and even if they declined having
their activities broadcast to their Facebook friends.
In fact, users wouldn't even know this was happening or be given the option to block
it.
Beacon tracked certain activities of Facebook users on more than 40 participating websites,
such as Blockbuster and Fandango.
Then that user's Facebook friends were notified.
For instance, you might know I bought something, kind of like my friend seeing me with the
eggs.
But now lots of people could see it on Facebook, not just one person seeing me in a parking
lot, just because he happened to be nearby.
There was much negative buzz about this emerging news.
In an online posting, Mark Zuckerberg, founder of Facebook, wrote later in 2007, quote, about
a month ago we released a new feature called Beacon to try to help people share information
with friends.
Less than two years later, Beacon became defunct.
This time Zuckerberg wrote, quote, we were excited about Beacon because we believe a
lot of information people want to share isn't on Facebook.
And if we found the right balance, Beacon would give people an easy and controlled way
to share more of that information with their friends.
