To rank the teams, as we'll learn in this lecture, we have to convert raw data like
this into a linear system.
But you probably won't do this by hand.
My students and I write computer programs that read the data line by line and accumulate
that information into the linear system.
Here's a shortcut.
On my web page, I periodically post tools that allow you to experiment with versions
of these ideas if you don't program.
Then you need only to download game data in my programs to convert it into the linear
systems and solve them for you.
Okay, so back to ranking.
Let's look at winning percentage.
Even with 5,000 games, we can quickly and easily create a bracket.
How good of a bracket do we create?
To evaluate our bracket, we'll submit it to the ESPN online tournament challenge.
How do we do?
Our bracket scores 320 points in 2013.
A perfect score, which no one has ever gotten, would be 1,920.
So we've only gotten 1 sixth of a perfect score.
And more surprising, we are outscored by over 98% of the brackets submitted.
What happened?
That's horrible.
In fact, if I flipped the coin to the side who won, I happen to produce brackets scoring
320, 320, 220, and 280 points.
My data analytics really isn't that encouraging at the moment.
And remember, even if you've gathered all the data and performed lots of computations,
that doesn't mean you've produced insight.
So what's wrong?
Winning percentage doesn't take into account the strength or quality of two teams playing.
It's not just whether you win or lose, but who you play against.
So can we design mathematical methods that integrate strength of schedule?
Sure, we can add weights to rank each team.
It will help us to learn a method used by Professor Kenneth Massey of Carson Newman
College to rank NCAA college football teams.
How does it work?
Let's see how it works with football since that's where Massey created the method.
Only in the 2012 season, team A beats B by 14 points.
Team B beats C by 3 points.
Can we now predict that team A will beat C by 14 plus 3 or 17 points?
Of course not.
If you could, scores would be what is called transitive.
In fact, given that we're carrying the scores through here, it would even be additively
