Consider that more than 8,000 scientific papers were published every week on Google Scholar,
and top-down classification systems increasingly do not capture every way of looking at published
results that could bring insight.
Also, ironically, research published in academic journals is among the most difficult for ordinary
users or even researchers to access in bulk.
To address this problem, in 2004, the University of Manchester began hosting Britain's National
Center for Text Mining, the world's first publicly supported center for text analysis
in the world, with an initial focus on biomedical information.
Technology is a huge area for textual data analytics.
For example, a project to link locations on the human genome back to specific research
articles about those locations is underway at a project called Text to Genome.
Every scientific field could potentially have this sort of mapping between research conclusions
and the research where those conclusions were proposed and confirmed.
On the lighter side, there is also fun and creative analysis going on with text such
as cookbooks, what you might call recipe analysis.
We did a version of this at Davidson, where we focused on salads, working toward a program
that would use existing recipes to create artificially generated salads.
We may have it in the Student Union in order to have a taste test to see what people think
about the computer science.
IBM's Watson team has gotten into recipes too.
This is the same Watson project that previously did so well in answering questions from Jeopardy.
Their work uses not only the text of recipes, but also other data contributed by expert
chefs.
In fact, ways of combining text analysis with other tools will probably become more
prominent in the future.
We often say, watch your words.
But as data analysts, what we want to do is watch everyone's words.
You can do this anywhere without downloading any data.
Think about what someone says.
When could you know, without hearing the inflection, what someone meant?
You can look at text messages, emails, or articles on the web.
Think about how you could get a feeling for sentiment just by looking at the words.
Start by thinking a bit of it as thumbs up, thumbs down, or thumbs neutral.
Then progress into a score.
And if sentiment is not relevant, just start with a simple possible way to sort the words.
When can you get meaningful results just with individual words?
When would you need to look at combinations of words?
These same type of questions are being asked by those doing cutting edge research in this
field.
It all starts by just looking and watching all those words.
