during the depression. What does this mean? Well, what it means
is that the Digest method analyzed how the wealthy population of the United States would vote.
But this isn't what they thought they were predicting.
They thought they had accurately predicted the election. Now, the story gets even better.
There was another young pollster of the time. He recognized the errors in the Digest data
and made his own poll. He surveyed only 50,000 voters compared to the 10 million voters
surveyed by the Digest. But here's the key. He made his set of voters more representative
of the voting population. And as a result, this new poll predicted FDR's win with only half a percent
of the data used by the Digest. Now, here is what may be the most impressive part.
This new pollster saw the Digest error and was able to compute what their prediction would be
within one percent. The new pollster was named George Gallup. And yes, we're talking about
the beginning of the Gallup poll we see used everywhere today. George Gallup's work in this
election launched his career and gave the Gallup poll its initial credibility.
Okay, now let's spring forward almost a hundred years to today. In the 2008 and 2012 election,
Nate Silver emerged in a way similar to George Gallup as a new force in polling. Silver is a
statistician and writer who initially made his name analyzing in-game baseball activity in the
realm of sabre metrics. Then he turned that statistical toolbox toward elections.
What do baseball and elections have in common? Both have an exceptional amount of data about past
performance that can be used to predict future performance. Professional baseball players,
more in most other professional sports, are expected to play almost every day during the
season. For elections, past performance data comes from polls. And during election season,
for presidential race, there can be a political poll somewhere appearing not only every day,
but almost every hour. That's because these days, there are many ways to gather polling data,
from cell phones to landline phones to email to webpages. As such, there is considerable
technology available to collect data regarding voters' preferences.
Taking advantage of all this, in the 2008 presidential election, Silver established
his website, 538.com. At first, he didn't reveal his identity. Soon after, he did. He began to appear
