So it wasn't as easy as just collecting another set of 10,000 tweets.
So what did we do?
First, we contacted the supplier of the data, and at first we were told it was our coding
causing the problem.
We weren't downloading the data correctly.
Then we began looking at Twitter itself, tracking down individual tweets to see if they matched
the data.
This is possible, but a hassle to do with 10,000 tweets, which is why we use a data
collection service.
We found examples and emailed the data collection service again.
In the end, it was an issue on their end, which they fixed.
We were supplied corrected data.
Note, we were able to identify the problem because we had a reasonable idea about what
distribution to expect in our data.
We don't expect tweets to only be retweeted three, eight, and so forth times.
It was possible, but it was highly, highly unlikely.
The same type of thing is true with the forward on the men's basketball team.
Height tends to be normally distributed.
In a normal distribution, you can know where 68%, 98%, and even 99% of the data points lie.
When a data point comes that lies outside these ranges, you know they are rare.
But keep in mind they are rare according to a normal distribution.
Further, not everything has a normal distribution, and it depends in part on the setting.
When that player is on the court, he's tall because he's a forward, but he doesn't look
disproportionately tall.
But sometimes models are difficult to build.
For example, what if I don't have data in advance?
What if I don't know what it is going to look like?
That basketball player's height is different in relation to others in my class than on
the court.
If I don't know in advance what things are going to look like, then other techniques
may be needed.
Other methods look at other factors, like how close an object is to other objects, or
the density of objects in a region.
For example, is a credit card purchase wildly different from the value or frequency or location
of typical purchases?
Do you have one huge purchase?
Do you have a flurry of smaller purchases?
Sometimes these types of anomalies can be seen in a graph.
Here is a set of data that I graphed in two dimensions.
Here the outlier is easy to see.
It is an outlier due to its distance from the others.
