the understanding of their stories.
The New York Times has invested more effort in producing sophisticated graphics, many
of which are interactive.
Now, let's talk about a potential pitfall of infographics.
It's possible for a graphic to omit the important conclusion you're trying to find.
How?
Let's see this by looking at the production of random numbers in the 1960s.
At the time, IBM mainframe computers used a random number generator named RND or R-A-N-D-U.
It allowed for quick computation on computers of that era.
The goal is to pick numbers randomly that cover the entire interval, thus the random
number generator can be exploited in a field like cryptography.
Suppose we choose 10,000 numbers and create a histogram of those values.
We appear to be choosing the values with equal proportion in the interval.
So all is looking good.
That's what we want.
Let's take it another step and choose three points and take those successive random numbers
as a coordinate in three-dimensional space.
Let's make all the values be random between zero and one.
Then we plot those 10,000 values in space.
This produces a fairly dense cloud.
Again, things look good.
We seem to be choosing values throughout the interval, but let's walk around that cloud
and see if things change.
Does it look any different?
Look what we see if we stand on another side of the picture.
Suddenly, we see that our random number generator isn't entirely random.
For scientific computer simulations that depend on randomness, IBM's SSP random number generator
would not ensure quality in the results.
Graphic applications also require more sophisticated generators.
However, something like a video game on video game consoles would find this a suitable and
effective and efficient generator.
Again we see that data can contain information that can be perceived quickly with a graph,
but we must choose the right graph in the right way.
Ideally, graphics portray data in a quickly consumable and easily understood fashion.
This can and is often done.
We see this in the classic image for Truvian man of Leonardo da Vinci from the late 1400s.
