in a row.
Not often, but it can indeed happen.
This can happen with other anomalies, too.
So the Carnegie Mellon system ran an algorithm to determine how likely some anomaly happened
by chance.
Suppose that normally 8% of cases with patients over 50 involve respiratory problems.
But today is 15%.
This system could figure out that the probability this happened by chance is 20%.
So not as unlikely as you might have expected.
So maybe this incidence of higher activity can be taken less seriously.
Finally, let's take an example from individual medicine.
When you go to the doctor, you may have tests done.
Generally, you don't want unusual test results.
Keep in mind, though, what constitutes an anomaly may depend in part on the age and
sex of the person.
Correctly identifying an anomaly relates to costs, too.
Unneeded tests can cost money.
If a condition isn't noticed, it can be harmful.
Anomalies in a data set can arise for different reasons.
In 2013, the New York Yankees and the New York Mets started their seasons on the same
day and the same hour.
That in itself was unusual as it was the first time ever this happened.
But there was an even bigger anomaly.
The average income per person at those two home-openers was half a million dollars.
Really?
It's true.
How?
Well, New York City's mayor, Michael Bloomberg, attended both games.
His aides estimated the length of each game and driving time.
So he took the number 4 train to Yankee Stadium, then left after the 4th inning and drove
to City Field to see the Mets.
He arrived in the 6th inning and stayed through the final out.
Actually, Bloomberg's attendance all by itself is the key to knowing that the average net
worth of anyone who attended the home opener for either team was so high.
According to Forbes, Bloomberg's net worth is an astounding 27 billion dollars.
Yankee Stadium holds just under 51,000 people.
City Field holds just around 42,000.
So on average, you can take Bloomberg's 27 billion and divide it by the capacity of
the field.
That's half a million.
Bloomberg is an anomaly in terms of net worth.
