The large purple patch shows friends at Davidson College, where I teach.
The green patch towards the top has friends from graduate school.
What I find interesting is the patch of dark blue-purple toward the bottom right.
Those are some of my closest friends.
However, unlike the other groups, they aren't from one part of my life.
Some are from my days in Michigan during college, some from Colorado, some from my days growing
up in Pennsylvania.
Yet, they are grouped together and colored similarly.
I see from the set of 500 friends on Facebook using their connections, my social network
as an image.
And what about those four lone dots at the bottom?
In actuality, they all know someone in other groups, but Facebook doesn't know that.
One is a colleague who had been off Facebook for almost two years.
In a later lecture, we'll learn that grouping like this is part of clustering and looking
at social groups is part of social network analysis.
What about my friends who aren't on Facebook?
Some colleagues in my department aren't there.
I have a good friend from high school who isn't there.
I can easily spot where they'd fall and even know some of their friends.
So the data set I have from Facebook is not complete, but I could make adjustments and
try to fix the omissions.
Exactly, that's the nature of data analysis.
We don't have everything, but we can work with the data we do have to learn and gain
insight.
Imagine seeing your social network in an image.
Imagine a timeline of your life or your family or a group at work.
Here's an example where students learn to do analytics for Davidson College.
In 2013, I began working with students to perform sports analytics for Davidson College
coaches.
We started with Men's Basketball since two of the students working with me were managers
on the team.
Using various data, we kept track of where every shot was taken and whether it was made
or missed.
This enabled us to look at where players were making and missing shots.
To jump ahead to the result, here's the graphic two of the students made.
We gathered this data by marking every place a shot was made and whether it led to a score.
