Google did it.
They had the data, the knowledge of the data analysis to look at it in the right way and
the computing power to crunch through the data.
Let's see what they did.
What would you expect someone to search on?
Well, that's exactly what you need to be careful of in data analysis.
We may not know what pattern to expect and that unexpected pattern might just be the
key to understanding what we're looking for.
Google understood this and so they made a method that didn't know.
It only looked for correlations between frequencies and search queries and the spread of flu over
time and space.
They processed 450 million math models.
Take a moment and process the size of that number.
It underscores the processing power of this Internet giant.
450 million seconds is just over 14 years.
That's the age of Google itself as of 2012.
They evaluated the models on their performance predicting actual flu cases in 2007 and 2008.
Data that was excluded from all prior steps.
Among the millions of models, they had a breakthrough.
A combination of 45 search terms led to a strong predictive ability for the actual cases.
Like the CDC, they could pinpoint where flu was breaking out.
But Google could do it right now without any lag time.
This was published in Nature magazine in 2009 and then the H1N1 crisis hit and Google ended
up being more accurate than the CDC and so much faster.
Armed with their model and their combination of search terms, they could begin to see a
pattern before some search engine users walked into a doctor's office or got the results
of a mouth swab.
Google has since offered the tool online, which has been extended to more than two dozen
other countries.
It is called Google Flu Trends.
It will give you an estimate of current outbreak levels in the U.S.
It will break things down state to state or even try for specific cities.
You can also look at the trends over time.
It works well, but it's not invulnerable.
When a New York Times story disclosed one of the search terms used in the algorithm,
casual searches on that term spiked.
More serious, during the 2012-2013 flu season, Google Flu Trends sharply overestimated the
amount of flu, warning that nearly 11% of the population were infected.
When follow-up information from the CDC found no more than 6% had gotten the flu.
