The answer increasingly is yes, and moreover, it can be done in minutes.
Note, a human could do this, but it would require days or weeks of hard work from human specialists.
Now, high precision results can come in minutes.
This is part of what it means to think like a data analyst.
For instance, I was doing research with our NASCAR racing team, where the speed of the analysis was even greater.
During a pit stop, a professional tire changer can install and tighten a nut on all five bolts of the wheel in less than 1.5 seconds.
This action requires at least 10 distinct movements, and is naturally prone to error.
Detecting whether each nut was correctly tightened is useful for both training and for error detection during competition.
Unfortunately for data analysts, the racing regulations strictly prohibit any instrumentation on the car that can detect a correctly installed wheel or any telemetry systems that could be used to access the data.
All instruments must remain behind the pit wall and in the garage area.
The tire changer uses a pneumatic torque gun. In particular, the team could easily begin recording the time-varying pressure of that torque gun.
When the nut tightens, the pressure in the gun increases.
My colleague, a computer scientist on the team, noticed during races that a member of the team would look over the data and see variations and identify that, for instance, bolt four might be loose.
But this meant he was being pulled away from other tasks during the race.
Given a human could see variations in the data, my colleague wondered if a computer could recognize this variation and collect the data.
In the end, my collaborator and I developed a system with an undergraduate that could correctly identify most loose wheels with a low incidence of false positives.
It was refined and used by the racing team, both for training and competition.
A lot of measurements were being taken from that torque gun, but the key wasn't the amount of data, rather that someone was seeing something with it.
We then automated the data gathering, which allowed members of the team to work on many other important aspects of any given race.
Deciding what to analyze and how is always important.
In addition to getting the data and having a sense of what form it comes in, you need to consider how quickly it comes in.
Is the data going to come in real time?
If so, how quickly will you need to analyze it?
Google looks at billions, possibly trillions of web pages in order to be ready for your search query.
When you type something and hit enter, the search engine has already analyzed the web pages on a recurring basis.
At one time, Google updated its search engine results monthly.
The shifting of web pages in the ranking led to the term Google dance.
Even if you changed your website during the time of Google dance, Google might not see the change as they were not attempting to index everything in real time.
Now, Google releases largely minor updates, often throughout the day.
Some businesses are leveraging the real time input of Twitter.
For example, during a big sporting event, Twitter streams can indicate
