friends, neighbors, and so forth.
Your spouse is much more likely to know those friends, and in the case of Facebook, be connected
to them too.
Why is Facebook so eager to know so much about you?
The more Facebook knows, the more it can produce better, more relevant results for you.
It can show you information about those it deems are most important to you, simply by
knowing who is connected to whom.
Facebook and other companies are likely to know more about you than you intended.
In December 2013, Amazon obtained a patent for anticipatory shipping.
This means Amazon can analyze what you are likely to buy and hold those predicted orders
at a shipping hub or on trucks until you actually place the order.
But incursions by large companies, actual or potential, can seem small or harmless when
compared with the vast and unexpected reach of the U.S. National Security Agency.
Revelations during 2013 by a former technical contractor for the NSA, Edward Snowden, leaked
sensitive documents.
A vast system of government monitoring and archiving from phone lines and online services
was unveiled.
Snowden made it harder for the U.S. government to spy on U.S. citizens and other law-abiding
people.
This led some to say he should be protected like a corporate whistleblower.
To others, he was a villain.
He broke the law.
He made it harder to block cyber attacks from other countries.
He made it harder to catch terrorists.
There are two security issues here.
First, the security of the U.S. government information was breached by those leaked documents.
Second, the revelations showed how readily the security and privacy of information about
individual U.S. citizens could be breached.
Calls by U.S. citizens were revealed to have been recorded and stored in a vast database.
The U.S. government defended the program as court supervised in a powerful tool that
thwarted terrorist attacks in protected citizens.
Let's look at this from a government perspective.
My own experience with the government security has been at Los Alamos National Lab in Lawrence
Livermore National Lab.
I had security clearance to work at those labs.
But my security clearance was at a lower level.
I attended meetings where a portion of the meeting was determined, was spent determining
if I could be in the rest of the meeting.
In high security settings, you can be trusted and at the same time, not trusted.
The same approach applies to allied countries.
Disclosures have revealed how numerous high-profile G20 countries were assisting the U.S. government
in its intelligence-gathering efforts.
At the same time, those same countries also saw that their own leaders and citizens had
fallen under the same surveillance techniques.
Part of what has made the new surveillance techniques so powerful was the ability to
