My overall times to swim a mile had increased by two minutes.
Simple Division helped me see that over the 36 laps it takes to swim a mile, I was slower
by three seconds per lap, or 1.5 seconds, swimming from end to end.
From there came my key insight.
One stroke took about two seconds.
That's why when I counted my strokes and found that I was taking about one more stroke when
I swam from one end of the pool to the other, I mentioned it to a friend who was a swimmer.
He commented that I might not be pulling as hard as I could.
I didn't make any change at first.
It was a busy time in the semester, and I realized that I was much more tired than usual.
But later I did adjust and my time stabilized to their previous times by simply paying attention
periodically to how hard I was pulling in a stroke.
And here lie lessons and data analysis.
Most my times, which are a form of data, gave me insight, in this case that I was slowing
down.
I used an analytic to gain more insight.
I did this by analyzing the overall activity of swimming down to its smallest meaningful
unit, the single stroke.
Then I turned to an expert, in this case a swimmer with far more experience, who helped
me understand this new unit of analysis.
Then I was able to make a change or correction, and then look for any change in the data.
This simple example is a data analysis cycle.
It isn't the only cycle one would follow in data analysis, but it does show the kind
of footholds that often help one climb a mountain of data to gain insight, collecting,
analyzing, questioning, making a change, then back to the data.
I looked carefully at the data and used it to understand what was happening.
This outlook on data will be in all these lectures and you can start with your own life.
Today, there are many digital devices to aid with collecting exercise data.
The devices may keep track of how far you ran, biked, or swam.
They can break down your exercise by the mile or minute, or some also give you some analysis.
A device may log your steps or how many calories you've burned, the amount of time you've
been idle during the day, or sometimes your location, whether you are climbing, heart
rate, and so on.
Then they can connect to applications on your computer or smartphone and give you feedback.
Why bother with all that data?
Again, it can offer insight.
