Those aren't necessarily the same, and which one you want to know depends in part what you're wondering about.
Clustering algorithms generally have a style of problem they work well on.
For example, the Million Songs database allowed us to create a graph of the artist and use spectral clustering.
We might want to do this even if we had a bunch of ratings by users for each artist.
Why?
It could be that the data is very noisy and, quite frankly, makes it hard for a method to cluster.
In the end, you have the data.
You think about how to measure distance or similarity, and then you choose a clustering algorithm.
Clustering often starts by telling you pretty much what you'd expect.
You may not have needed math to tell you much of what you're seeing, but then comes something unexpected.
Why is it there?
And right there, with that unexpected result, can come the insight.
That can be the fruit of your labors.
You look at it carefully.
If possible, you verify the results and look at supporting data to ground your insight.
And those surprising results can be where you learn something about that item, but often about the overall data too.
In the end, clustering can be most useful when it produces something that you in no way expected.
But even incremental insight can be valuable.
Netflix can use this kind of clustering a great deal to learn more about which movies its customers will most want.
Clustering of users in this way allows Netflix to predict its potential audience for new content.
In fact, it was clustered data about users that allowed Netflix to bid so efficiently and successfully for its hit series,
House of Cards, which appeared exclusively on Netflix.
After all, Netflix was the only media provider that did not ask to see a pilot episode before signing a contract.
Netflix was willing to sign the series for two seasons, not just a few episodes,
and then produce and release the entire first season all at once.
Data from clustering can change the entertainment industry and many others.
Clustering is a powerful widespread technique in data analysis.
It can help identify disease.
It can help businesses, segment items or customers, each of which can then be treated differently.
From political science to medicine to sports to economics, clustering can be a tool to find connections and similarities
in large data sets that otherwise can go unnoticed.
