A picture is worth a thousand words, but no picture conveys all the data equally.
Graphics, like good writing, tell a story, and, like any storyteller, they tell the tale
from their point of view.
So, an important part of any graphical process is deciding what design to use.
It isn't always obvious what you would need.
You may not even know that some insight resides in the data that you're looking at.
But graphical displays can help one efficiently and quickly see information.
But carefully at today's information graphics, and you'll often see common graphs like bar
charts or pie charts.
They are artistically done, but it's the same basic graphical techniques.
In fact, we've probably all been stuck looking at a very common bar chart used to give the
status of a download or update.
It doesn't always work accurately, but when it does, it gives some potentially useful
information.
Let's ask another question.
Why do graphics help convey information?
Why can they, when done right, tell a story so quickly?
One of this comes from the ways our brains think.
Pictures, unlike text, are processed all at once.
Approximately 30% of our total gray matter in the brain is responsible for visual activity.
That's why we can communicate with pictures so effectively.
We need only to look at stories from 35,000 years ago, as told with drawings on rocks
and walls, to see that pictures have been working well for a very long time.
On the other hand, the brain processes text linearly as it moves through letters or words.
That takes longer, and most readers skip a lot.
Florence Nightingale didn't expect Queen Victoria would personally read her entire report.
A web usability expert, Jacob Nielsen, found in a small study that the average person will
read only about 20 to 28% of the words on a web page.
So in this era, visual content that communicates quickly and effectively can tell a story that
words cannot, at least if someone never reads those words.
This helps explain why many of today's magazines and online resources use graphics and infographics
to tell their story.
For example, the USA Today has their daily snapshot.
In 1982, the paper departed from text-centric black-and-white newspaper format and moved
to color in graphics to tell part of the story.
The British Sunday Times and Time Magazine have used graphics to simplify and enhance
