Clustering is a powerful family of analytics for sorting data into groups.
What we call clusters.
Which sports players might have similar careers?
What friendships might be made on a college campus?
Or what singers or movies are similar?
There is more than one way to sort data into clusters.
In which clustering method you use depends in part on your data.
In fact, the choice of method can also affect the results you get.
All clustering is not the same.
We saw one type of clustering in the last lecture, when we used decision trees to carve
the data into groups.
Decision trees are great when you have a directed flow of all your data toward a single
target variable.
For example, survive the Titanic or not.
Customers will buy your product or not.
Speaking metaphorically, decision trees have a bunch of leaves in one single root.
But often we want to look for groups where there is no carving of the data based on a
single master variable.
In those cases, clustering techniques are more appropriate.
Let's begin by seeing how clustering can help fight crime.
Fighting crime through predictions can sound like science fiction.
But in fact, the analytics leading to this sort of police work started in the mid-1990s.
The idea began with researchers Lawrence Sherman and David Weisberg, who developed a concept
of clustering known as hot spots.
They defined hot spots as small places in which the occurrence of crime is so frequent
that it is highly predictable, at least over a one-year period.
According to their research, crime is approximately six times more concentrated among places than
it is among individuals.
With this work, it became important to ask not just who done it, but where done it.
For instance, one can find hot spots for robberies in the Bronx, which can help direct police
to that area for that type of crime.
Even better, doubling or tripling the frequency of police patrols in these crime hot spots
was found to reduce street crime rates by two-thirds.
The idea of grouping items has many applications.
In education, clustering can help identify schools or students with similar properties.
In geology, clustering can help evaluate reservoir properties for petroleum.
Market researchers group data from surveys and test panels.
They group customers into market segments.
This can help us find previously unidentified customers, develop new products, and select
test markets.
