All data is not created equal.
There can be errors and ambiguities in data, and we must determine what to include or exclude.
We need what is called data preparation.
In addition, all data does not have or should not have the same purpose.
That's because we often need to peel off part of the data to help us figure out how predictive
or effective our analysis is.
We divide our information into training data, which we use to first build our analysis,
and then test data, which we use afterward to check.
So in this lecture, we talk about these important matters of data preparation and data training.
Which play a fundamental role in the success of our data analysis.
Let's turn to an application that works well thanks to heavy use of data preparation.
The delivery of physical mail, not email, but regular mail.
While we do send a lot of correspondence via email, a great deal of mail is still sent,
especially during the holiday season.
Let's get a sense of the scale.
The United States Postal Service delivers more mail to more destinations than any other service in the world.
In 2012, they delivered over 160 billion pieces of mail to more than 152 million homes, businesses,
and post office boxes in every state, city, town, and borough in the United States.
And children still send letters to the North Pole.
In fact, the Postal Service's Letters to Santa program dates from 1912, when Postmaster General Frank Hitchcock
authorized postal employees and citizens to respond to letters to Santa.
New York City has its own Operation Santa program, where thousands of volunteers work with postal offices
to respond to more than half a million letters from children of all ages each year.
Timely delivery has been a goal of every postal system throughout history.
The U.S. Postal Service's famous motto came from a translation describing the ancient Persian system
of mounted postal carriers from around 500 BCE, as reported by the Greek historian Herodotus.
Neither snow nor rain nor heat nor gloom of night stays these carriers from the swift completion of their appointed rounds.
So now we have modern methods to help with this ancient goal.
An important part of getting the mail delivered is knowing where it goes.
Think about it.
You can write a letter to anywhere, and by putting the appropriate address on it, it's sent.
It's how all those letters are processed, that's the key.
And a main part of this is reading the addresses.
Today, much of the process is automated.
A computer reads the address, in particular the zip code.
How is this done?
Addresses are often handwritten, and there are lots of different typefaces.
So this looks like a hard problem.
So how do we even tackle this?
