This inherent tension is ever present.
This can sound hopeless, but we do have predictive models.
They save lives.
Here's an example where the challenges of underfitting were largely overcome.
In 2012, the National Hurricane Center predicted the approach of Hurricane Sandy toward New
York and New Jersey.
Schools closed, subways shut down, and low-lying coastal areas were evacuated.
The warnings came as early as five days in advance of the storm's arrival.
Their predictions saved lives as well as millions of dollars.
Superstorm Sandy was more complicated than a standard hurricane.
A model subject to underfitting would have been more likely to miss this.
Usually, a hurricane like Sandy would have blown out to sea, but a high-pressure area
over Greenland steered Sandy back toward shore, where she crashed into a cold front.
Even with these unusual circumstances, underfitting was avoided.
Sandy's path was predicted two days ahead of time to within 50 miles.
This included fairly good predictions of the storm's intensity, wind gusts up to 80 miles
per hour, 12 inches of rainfall, and up to 11 feet of inundation from the storm surge.
This aligned closely with the actual storm.
Hurricane forecasting overcomes the problem of underfitting with lots and lots of data.
Please collect information about hurricane's position, wind movement, and the atmosphere's
temperature and moisture levels.
This information is improving all the time.
Aircraft fly into the storm and collect data.
They also drop probes that measure data.
Boys and floats collect data about the ocean and important interactions between the sea
and the atmosphere.
And then there is land-based radar also tracking the storm.
This data is used to calculate temperature, pressure, and humidity changes, usually in
30-second intervals at points on a grid.
The grids generally consist of one million east-west points by one million north-south
points by 100 vertical points.
The vertical points are going up into the air.
So that's a grid of 100 trillion points.
That's a lot of computing.
And that's what makes it possible to predict a path two or more days down the line.
Modern data in computing have dramatically improved modern hurricane prediction.
Underfitting in hurricane predictions is no longer the problem it once was.
In the 1970s, five-day hurricane forecasts were off by an average of 400 miles.
In the 1990s, it was down to about 200 miles.
For 2010 and 2011, five-day forecasts aired by an average of just 100 miles.
