In baseball, we were squaring every team's points, so we had an exponent of 2.
But basketball is a very different sport, and he found an exponent of 13.91 fit the data.
But some other exponent might work even better for basketball.
For example, John Hollinger, a basketball statistician, uses 16.5 as his exponent.
In fact, in baseball, 2 isn't always the exponent for the Pythagorean expectation.
BaseballReference.com, a premier website for baseball stats, uses 1.83.
But in case you wonder, with that particular adjustment, the A's of 2002 would have been predicted to win just 96 games instead of 97 games, almost the same, but not an improvement either.
So while data analysis can be very powerful, I hope you are also seeing why no method is likely to ever have the final word for all time across all domains.
I find it really helps to keep noting this in class.
What works in one setting may still work in another, but not without some modification.
Again, what's difficult is knowing what changes and how much.
Until you know, it may look like it won't work.
It could be that you simply need to change one thing in a very small way, but until you look at that one thing, it can look like the method won't work.
Let's look at some more data, this time using data visualization.
Sometimes the best way to analyze data is to look at it graphically.
For instance, what are the hottest places on the NBA court?
To help answer this question, Kirk Goldsberry, a geography professor at Michigan State, applied his skills to the court.
In particular, he created what is often called a heat map of all NBA field goal attempts from 2006 to 2011.
Red means more points and blue means fewer points were scored.
Overall, we see what we expect.
It's orange, red outside the three-point line and dark red in high percentage key spots.
Still, there is overall information in such a graph.
You can make such graphs.
I do along with Davidson College students interested in analytics.
We track where shots are taken and break the court into regions and find the hot and cold regions.
Here's a plot of how Davidson scored in a game.
Red means we were hot, orange a little less so, and green is cooler.
Just looking at the graph, the coaching staff gets insight.
The students also can gain insight.
Does it tell them where to shoot?
Possibly, but it also tells them where to concentrate their analysis on where we aren't shooting well.
Heat maps of shooting are possibly even more interesting when you look at a particular player.
