well Republicans would do in the race for the United States House.
How can so many specialists dedicated to the science of predicting elections vary and even
struggle? First, just like Roosevelt's second election, a major issue is polling a representative
group. Gallup's polls typically sample the opinions of a thousand national adults with
a margin of error of plus or minus four percentage points. If Gallup's creating a poll to gauge
public opinion about a national issue, how can the opinion of a thousand people represent the
opinion of millions? That's a key issue in the science of polling. Think of a pot of homemade
soup. If the soup is well mixed, then you only need to take a spoonful to know the taste. However,
if the soup isn't well mixed, then it might taste very different at the top than at the bottom.
In polling, just like we saw with the literary digest, you must have a representative group.
Leaning on this analogy of soup, we must have a well-mixed sample of people. Not only should
they be mixed, but in a way the mix of the group should look the same as the large group.
As mentioned early, an issue in this is that you must contact them. This alone creates an issue.
In the 2012 election, some polls were done with live interviews, others with automated telephone
interviewers, and even others via the internet. Of these three modes, automated polls had the
largest average error of five points, having a Republican bias for that selection.
Another issue is whether you call cell phones. Keep in mind that there are legal restrictions
regarding automated calls to cell phones. Yet in 2012, it was reported in July on Business Insider
that Android and iPhone users preferred Obama to Romney, 49% to 31%, of course, according to a poll.
As seen in the time of the 1936 literary digest poll, this can be tricky. How you contact poll
respondents affects who you reach. Now, let's dig a bit deeper into the methodology of Nate Silver.
Many of his most inner workings are essentially trade secrets, but he has presented many ideas
that lay out his overarching approach, which can help us not only in politics, but also many
other areas of data analytics. Remember that Silver adapted his work in baseball to politics.
The underlying problem is how to aggregate data from multiple sources. First, Silver indeed has the
data from multiple sources to bring together. He reported having a database of 4,670 distinct
polls from 264 distinct pollsters covering 869 distinct electoral contests. With the data brought
