There is no limit to the places data analytics can take you.
I got a call once asking me to offer a prediction about the following question.
Would snowboarders in the X games be able to do a triple rotating twist off the ramp
once a new design for that ramp came into use?
Well, I realized right away as so often happens at the start of an analysis that I had no idea.
That type of trick is called a triple quark, but I didn't even know the term.
What I did know was a menu of analytic tools, tools which you know from what we've covered in this course.
So what tool might you try?
At the time, my thought was that simulation would be helpful.
Now the kinds of simulations we did in this course used what is called discrete math to study discrete changes.
But I realized that the physics of a moving snowboarder would probably require a continuous simulation.
In physics, a continuous function is often the job for differential equations.
So I did what is often the case in data analytics.
I got the help of an expert.
With the physics involved in the differential equations, I needed to turn to someone who knew physics better than me.
This was the valedictorian of Davidson College, who was one core shy of being a double major in physics and math.
Together, we quickly built a very simplified simulation.
The snowboarders body was just a cylinder in our model.
At one point, the student turned to me and said, how odd it was to have data analysts saying that an athlete out there somewhere could perform a new trick.
But before long, we did come up with our prediction, which was, yes, the triple cork would be possible.
The very next day, we were proven right when someone actually did what our simulation had said would be possible.
Throughout this course, we have seen that data analysis allows us to predict the future.
The fancier, more recent term for this is predictive analytics.
Nate Silver, like Gallup before him, stepped onto the national stage with accurate election predictions.
Baseball changed with the advent of new statistical measures that gave moneyball managers better predictions about how well players would play.
This is our last lecture together.
So I thought it would be fun to look into the future and in a sense, consider the future of predicting the future.
What can we expect? What might come next?
Sometimes it's easy to predict the future.
For instance, I predict that Seattle, Washington will have at least two consecutive cloudy days over the next year.
Data shows that Seattle averages over 200 cloudy days per year.
