for tomorrow.
Frequently in my research, I find that in a year or two, something that was impossible
becomes possible.
It may be better to postpone ideas rather than write them off entirely.
They may in time be viable if you don't lose track of them.
Returning to an old hunch with fresh tools can be exciting and challenging.
So let's return to that call from the credit card company.
It can be a nuisance, but remember anomaly detection in this setting is looking for criminal
activity and the criminals are sophisticated in order to at least try to run under the
data analytics radar.
Those who aren't sophisticated have most likely been caught already.
In August 2011, Visa began running a new form of data analytics that used a larger and more
varied data set, but could also run calculations faster and cheaper than traditional databases
or analytic engines.
For example, the new analytic engine could study as many as 500 aspects of a transaction
at once.
In 2005, the previous analytic engine could study only 40.
This ability to handle bigger calculations more quickly has paid off.
Visa estimates that it has identified $2 billion in potential annual incremental fraud.
The key potential, by identifying potential fraud, the company can address the issue before
that money is lost.
Fraud detection isn't new for Visa.
Their authorization system went online in the mid-1990s.
Fraud has declined by two-thirds during less than two decades.
Still, six cents out of every $100 in transactions are believed to be fraudulent.
Here is a case where sampling can be costly.
At one time, they analyzed as little as 2% of transaction data.
Now, Visa works to analyze all of it.
Before, Visa created its security assumptions using only average fraud rates for general
categories like grocery stores.
Now, they can narrow it down to individual merchant terminals.
They've identified warning signs for fraud.
For example, in certain merchant categories for transactions of $200 or more, prepaid
cards were used in 85% of the cases involving fraud.
Another warning sign is when the billing and shipping addresses differ.
Keep in mind that fraud comes in many forms.
Fraud can appear on social networks.
I have a Facebook account and enjoy reading the posts from friends, some of which I haven't
seen in years.
When I'm fond of their posting, I press the like button.
There is another social network just for pictures called Instagram.
