We know what we might want to use for our model, but let's learn how to do it.
We want a line so we could simply connect two points.
Let's go with Tom Burke and Carl Lewis times in 1896, the 1988.
We have two points, so we connect them with a line.
Before answering questions, it's important to see how we've done.
That's why I didn't connect a point to Usain Bolt.
If we did, we don't have anything to compare to.
If we take that line that connects Burke and Lewis and extend it to 2012, it projects that
Usain Bolt would have run in 9.38, which would have been amazing, but it is off by 0.25 seconds
or about 8.5 feet.
Part of this is due to the big drop between 1896 and 1900.
That creates a steeper slope that leads to such decreased times.
So we can pick another point.
For example, suppose we work with Archie Hahn's 1900 race of 11 seconds.
Now we do much better and estimate Bolt's time at 9.625 to his 9.63 performance.
It also predicts Bolt's 2008 time at 9.67 to his 9.69 performance.
We've done well, but notice how we're omitting a lot of data.
I also had to choose another point.
I chose the 1900 time.
But what if I also created a steeper slope?
Maybe I could try yet another time.
That's a lot of tinkering, which can bring in my own biases into the computations.
I'd rather, one, use all the data, and two, let the data, without a lot of fiddling on
my part, create the line.
But these points don't lie on a line, so how do I know what line to choose?
Well here, we use the well-used tool of regression, a word that expresses an old idea that we
regress the data back toward whatever model we create.
Before producing the line, let's think about what line to choose.
We are going to approximate the data with a line, so we want to find a line that approximates
or fits the data.
Let's think of only three points that don't lie on a line.
We want the line to be as close to all the points as possible.
When we were connecting the endpoints earlier, we were making the line exact for those points
and not necessarily close for the other points.
Suppose I'm looking for a line that fits four points.
We'll find a line that may not pass through any of the points.
We'll find how far off they are by their vertical distance to the line.
We see this in green in the image.
