Data plays a sometimes fondly remembered role in sports.
Numbers shape how we watch sporting events.
Numbers affect how players approach the competition.
And numbers are important to how athletic performance is understood and assessed by everyone.
These days, data analytics is playing a huge and growing role in sports.
In this lecture, we'll gain insight into why it's growing,
and we'll learn how to do some sports analytics ourselves.
Keeping track of data has long been part of many sporting events.
Baseball is a prime example.
Many children have memories of tracking balls, strikes, or box scores.
Take Billy Crystal.
On May 30, 1956, an eight-year-old Billy Crystal walked in the Yankee Stadium with his father and his two older brothers.
Over 50 years later, he'd talk about that memory being as fresh in his mind as if it just happened.
He recalls the bond baseball fostered with his father and brothers,
which included reading a box score to recreate a game.
Sports data can offer insight otherwise difficult, if not impossible, to perceive.
Box scores, for example, not only record which team was winning and losing as the game progressed,
box scores also include summary information about the performance of every player in the game.
Beyond individual games, there are statistics summarizing the data for entire seasons and for entire careers.
Let's consider the careers of two legendary hitters of baseball.
First, Ty Cobb, all-time batting average leader with 3-6-6.
Most career batting titles, career record for stealing home base.
He held other records for 50 or more years, including most career hits, most career runs,
most career games played, most at-bats, and most career stolen bases.
Now, Babe Ruth.
Here are just some of the records he held.
Career home run leader with 714.
Career RBI leader with 2,213.
Career leader in getting to base on balls, 2,062.
Did you know Babe Ruth also was a pitcher?
He threw a one-run shutout in the first game of the 1918 World Series.
In that same series, he also won Game 4.
