We were using the training set.
There is another set of 10,000 handwritten digits we initially set aside.
That is the test set.
It is very possible to design a method that does great on the training set, but fails
on the test set.
We'll talk about that more in a bit.
At one level, it sounds simple enough to have two sets of data.
But really, is it that simple?
Not always.
And the issue can be quite subtle.
In my own research, I remember my research group struggling for several months over
whether our test set really was suitably testing our method.
What did we decide?
Ironically, we ended up thinking of a more interesting application of our work and moved
in another direction without ever resolving that particular question.
Sometimes, it's that hard.
The issue of really testing an idea can be quite subtle, and it can become quite troublesome
when not done correctly.
In fact, a poor training set can doom data analytics.
There are a number of issues to consider.
First, the training set must cover the full range of values that the problem might present.
Suppose you're creating a method to predict housing prices.
You'd want expensive, inexpensive, big, and small one-story and two-story houses with
and without garages.
The more features that exist, the larger your training set should be.
There isn't, though, an easy way to know how large the set should be.
Do you want dozens, if not hundreds, or thousands of examples of each feature?
So let's return to an example doing really well on the training set, but not well on
the test set.
This is because your method has essentially memorized the training set.
This is like me knowing all the students in two classes at Davidson College, which is
maybe 60 students, and my saying that I then know the names of all students at the college.
Now an issue in training in test sets is that they often come from the same set of data.
You have access to only one set of data.
From it, you want to create a training and a test set.
Ideally, the training set would be representative of the whole set.
In the same way, without being identical, the test set would also be representative.
But you probably don't know in advance what exactly representative means, especially on
really large data sets.
