Back in 2005, one of my colleagues refereed soccer games.
And he'd wear a GPS device that kept track of where he was on the field throughout the match.
Then he'd look at the data after the game to see how well he covered the field.
Did he tend to get stuck in certain places?
For each game, he could look for patterns in his refereeing simply on the map of his running.
And that helped him in officiating.
That was over 10 years ago.
These days, you also have more ways to share your data, giving you and others more opportunities to learn from whatever you gather.
My colleague back on the soccer field had to download his GPS data from refereeing onto his computer by hand before he could see it at all.
Today, many devices can directly display and share the data, not only with your computer, but in social media.
For example, I have another colleague who has his running routes posted straight to Facebook along with his times.
We were at a national meeting together in San Diego and hadn't even seen each other yet.
One morning, he posted on the Facebook that he had a lovely run along the water.
I'd been wanting to walk along the water, so I looked at his route and followed his lead when I left the hotel that day.
Now, if you've never experienced this kind of digital data sharing yourself, you might imagine that we could just wait and talk to each other in person.
Yes, but that's like saying that everyone could do without GPS and just write directions by hand all the time.
Sharing the actual data online was easier, both faster and more detailed.
The volume and velocity of shared data can both be much greater.
And best of all, when we did talk, it was even more interesting.
What do you care about?
If you see a connection to your life, jot it down so you can look at it and then think about how to gather the necessary data.
If you have it great, if not, think about gathering it.
Remember, it doesn't have to be a lot of data. Start somewhere.
Also, look for opportunities to share, which is fun and helps you learn more from your data.
Next, as we learn the tools of data analytics, think about which tools you might apply to the data and address questions that you have.
Keep in mind that you may want to try a few methods so you get different insights on the data.
And remember that visualizing data often helps a lot.
Whether the data is big or small, visualization can help you see when your sleeping patterns changed, for example, or what is happening during a sport or other physical activity.
In very broad strokes, there are three stages of data analysis.
Collect the data, analyze the data, and, if possible, visualize the data.
Become a data collector, not of everything, but in a purposeful way.
After all, no one has the time to gather and analyze all data of potential interest, just as no one has time to read every worthwhile book.
In fact, these days, you have a better chance of being able to analyze every book that interests you than of being able to analyze the quantity and variety of all types of data available today.
In the next lecture, we'll get a much better sense of how to handle the flood of data that's now available.
In the meantime, think about what interests you and some data you'd like to have, and then start collecting.
