For instance if we had four parts, we could count the games in the first quarter of the
season as half a win and loss for the respective teams.
In the second quarter of the season the games could count as .75 a game.
How do we weight the games in the third and fourth pieces of the season?
Is the last part of the season leading into the tournament the most predictive of a team's
success?
If so, you maybe could weight it as one game or even two.
How do we use this when we form the linear system?
It's pretty straightforward.
You simply count the number of weighted games.
If I played three games, I keep track of their weighted value.
I might have played half a game, a full game, and 1.25 games.
So in all, I played .5 plus 1 plus 1.25 or 2.75 games.
In the same way, I keep track of the number of weighted wins and losses.
So once we determine our weighting, we can form a revised linear system.
Once that's formed, a computer can produce the ratings and we are ready to form a bracket.
In years past, my students both in classes and my research team have created brackets
using these ideas.
They've weighted the recency of games using the intervals or even with functions like
a log function.
Others added in weighting away wins and capping the size of a win.
A key is that they created their own bracket with their own mathematical thinking.
Their work has resulted in brackets that have outscored 97% and even 99% of the millions
of brackets submitted to the ESPN challenge.
If you try it, after you create a bracket with weights for scores and for games overall,
you may want to override some of its decisions with additional information.
It's really up to you.
Now, the madness of March basketball is only the most popular application for what we're
doing.
A book called The Enlightened Bracketologist presents 101 whimsical brackets across all
sorts of areas, cheeses, red wines, inventions, investment strategies, on and on.
There's really no limit.
Once you know how to create brackets driven by data and appropriate weighting, you can
do that for any subject and come up with a winner that may surprise you.
So use the ideas of bracketology to alleviate some of the madness of March and then see
what else you can do with it.
Good luck.
