If you've ever seen the children's magazine, Highlights, you may remember a feature where
you are asked to figure out how one picture is different from another almost identical
picture.
Other publications play spot the difference with photographs.
There is an original, then there is a photograph with features that have been digitally added
or removed.
In this lecture we do the same thing with data.
Can we spot a difference in the data?
It's called anomaly detection.
The goal is to find objects that are different from most other objects or behavior described
by the data.
You may have run into this before.
You make a big purchase with your credit card and suddenly get a call from your credit
card company checking in.
Among the many, many purchases happening, how did they see yours and why did they call?
Criminal behavior can be detected with anomaly detection and so can health risks.
The technique for identifying risks to your health are quite similar.
The goal in either case is to find objects that are different from most other objects
or behavior described by the data, but different only in a relevant way.
In Highlights magazine we already know there are relevant differences to look for and sometimes
we know how many, so we can keep searching until we find them all.
In data analysis we often won't know in advance if and when the differences occur, so we don't
know if anomalies are there, but if so we want to find them or at least flag that something
might be happening.
At first this may not seem that hard to do.
Essentially you're looking for an outlier.
Here's one we've already seen.
We're looking once again at the number of home run hits by every player in the American
League in 1920.
Who's the anomaly?
This is like Sesame Street.
One of these bars is not like the other.
The anomaly here was Babe Ruth.
As I've said before, there was truly Babe and everyone else.
Pretty simple.
But it can be much harder to spot all the anomalies.
For one thing as data analysts we need to be careful thinking that anomalies rarely
occur.
In percentage terms that will be true, but just take Babe Ruth.
He is an outlier among about 250 numbers.
Let's say he was an anomaly that happens only once in a thousand times.
