Let's pick 5, since it is the first element in our list.
Now, 3 goes in the first pile, since it is less than 5, as does 4.
So 5, 7, and 6 go in the other pile.
So we now sort the first pile into 3 and 4.
We sort the other pile into 5, 6, 7.
Note, when you combine, the left is sorted, and all the elements are less than those in
the right.
Combining is trivial.
If your list is bigger, then you simply apply that same idea to those two piles that you
created on the first step.
You again divide them into two pieces.
This is called recursion.
Keep using the idea to produce smaller and smaller versions of the same problem until
the problem is small enough, it's easy to do.
When you get down to, say, 10 items, it is quick and easy to sort, so just do it.
Then backtrack up the ladder of recursion and combine those lists.
I used this idea when I was a poll volunteer during a presidential election.
One job was sorting the numbered voting slips that voters placed in front of the voting
booth before exiting.
They weren't sorted and had to be to ensure that we got all of them back.
I have a PhD in math and teach computer science, so I was maybe naturally asked to do the sorting.
I looked at all those slips of paper and just stared at them for a moment.
What could I do?
Then it hit me.
I'd use quicksort, not on a computer, but by hand.
So I went to a big empty table.
The papers were all between 1 and 500, and I knew that, so I picked 250 as my pivot.
I tossed the papers quickly into the two piles.
Then I went to the pile on my left and used 125 as my pivot.
That broke that pile into two piles.
I kept dividing all the piles until I had about 10 slips in a stack, and then I'd order
them.
Toward the end, I literally had about 50 small stacks on the table.
I remember another volunteer came by as I was doing this and went, whoa, what are you doing?
Now I had the order of those 50 stacks in my head, but I was still sorting that last pile
of 10.
So I said, wait, wait, wait, wait, just wait.
I had all those stacks, and then suddenly, boom, boom, boom, boom, I picked them all up,
and I turned with the big stack and said, there, I'm done.
They were sorted.
It was as if I was some kind of genius tracking all those things at once.
Now I did know my path through the 50 stacks, but that was because I had built the path
in little steps that were easy to remember.
And I was able to do the sort because I knew the method was fast, and it would let me get
