Big data is often defined as having three Vs, volume, velocity, and variety.
Let's see a few more examples of the volume of data in today's digital world.
Which would you say is bigger, the complete works of Shakespeare, or an ordinary DVD?
The complete works of Shakespeare fit in a big book of roughly 10 million bytes.
But any DVD or any digital camera, for that matter, will hold upwards of 4 gigabytes, which
is 4 billion bytes.
A DVD is 400 times bigger.
All the printed words in the Library of Congress would be 10 trillion bytes, 10 terabytes.
That's one very large wall full of DVDs.
But it's also about the size of a single high-end personal hard drive.
That is, you might carry all the books in the Library of Congress on a single device
the size of just one book.
In data is not merely being stored.
We access a lot of data over and over.
Google alone returns to the web each day to process another 20 petabytes.
What's that?
It's 20,000 terabytes, 20 million gigabytes, 20 quadrillion bytes.
How big do you want to go?
Google's daily processing gets us to one exabyte every 50 days.
And 250 days of Google processing may be equivalent to all the words ever spoken by humankind
to date, which have been estimated at 5 exabytes.
And nearly 1,000 times bigger is the entire content of the worldwide web, estimated at
upwards of 1 zettabyte, which is 1 trillion gigabytes.
That's 100 million times larger than the Library of Congress.
Of course, there is a great deal more that is not on the web.
But let's turn to the velocity of data.
Let's start a clock to see what this feels like.
Not only is there a lot of data, it's coming at very high rates.
High-speed internet connections offer speeds 1,000 times faster than dial-up modems connected
by ordinary phones.
Here are some things that are happening every minute of the day.
YouTube users upload 72 hours of new video content in the United States alone.
There are 100,000 credit card transactions.
Google receives over 2 million search queries, and 200 million email messages are sent.
Now, it can be hard to wrap one's mind around such numbers.
How much data is being generated?
Let's turn to Facebook.
In only 15 minutes, the amount of photos uploaded to Facebook is greater than the number of
photos stored in the New York Public Photo Archives.
That's every 15 minutes.
Now think about the data over a day, a week, or a month.
Now, finally, there is a variety.
One reason for this can stem from the need to look at historical data.
