Research at Davidson College.
Within an hour, I had a spreadsheet with the published data on 26 National Liberal Arts
schools.
Each row represents a college, and the columns are categories like academic reputation, selectivity
rank, and acceptance rate.
I had the data, so now I could explore the president's claim.
With the data, I wanted to estimate how much to weight each category to compute the final
score.
Suppose I had three categories, then I wanted to find weights, W1, W2, and W3, such that
the final score would equal W1 times Category 1, plus W2 times Category 2, plus W3 times
Category 3.
I want to get the final scores my formula were produced as close as I can to the scores
computed by U.S. News and World Report.
So my inputs are the categories, and my output is the final score.
Earlier for the Olympic data, the input was the year, and the output was the time.
I often mention in class that I look at it this way.
What information will I be given, and what do I hope to know how to compute?
I will be given the U.S. News and World Report data, and I want to know the final score they
compute.
So I have it all in a table, and again I can turn to software to produce the weights.
I used mathematical software called MATLAB this time.
Earlier I used Excel.
What did I find?
Look at the top five weights.
Look at that huge positive weight.
It's more than twice the size of the next highest weight.
It's indeed the category for academic reputation.
So does this settle the matter?
No, but it gives insight.
I often tell my students that now you have an opinion on and from the data.
This certainly supports the President's claim.
This is the power of regression.
Once you have the data in place, a regression can quickly be done.
And even when you have data in more than three dimensions, this shows how quickly a picture
can be obtained that gives insight.
We see the size of that weight instantly.
Regression is used in various fields, with economics being one of the leading areas.
One reason for this is because regression enables us to artificially change one variable
