Other teams were still building their rosters with the conventional wisdom of the time.
They used their allotted budgets to sign big-name hitters and rocket-armed pitchers.
Even the A's had followed that strategy in the 1980s, winning three consecutive World Series appearances in 1988 through 1990.
But in the 1990s, new ownership wanted to spend less on the team, so the cash-strapped A's needed a new strategy.
So Bean and his staff decided to try something different.
They built their team by being really good at data analysis.
The most expensive players were overvalued at the time, and even the wealthiest teams didn't have unlimited budgets to spend.
So Bean's strategy was to buy up players that had less value as measured by the traditional techniques, which often involved intuition, foresight, and experience.
Bean's method worked.
In 2002, his team became the first in over 100 years of American League Baseball to win 20 consecutive games.
They also made the playoffs, reserved for the top eight teams in baseball.
This all came while having the smallest player payroll of any major league baseball team.
So how did they cobble together such a team for a fraction of the budget available to many other teams?
Well, the A's wanted to make the playoffs.
But how?
Win, of course.
Just win.
But let's see how the A's uncovered a mathematical way to approach this goal.
In the film, Billy Bean's assistant, the character of Peter Brand, states that the team needs to win at least 99 games to guarantee a playoff spot.
Okay, so win, 99 games.
Now what?
What type of team can win 99 games?
The statistic we'll learn now was developed by Bill James, a baseball writer and statistician, who is connected to many of the techniques detailed in Moneyball.
What James discovered was a statistic combining the total number of runs a team scores and the total number it allows.
Here's how it works.
A fraction will estimate the percentage of games a team will win.
The numerator equals the square of the total number of runs scored by the team that season.
So if a team scored, say, 100 runs, the numerator would be 100 squared.
To get the denominator, we just add the numerator, the square of the number of runs scored by the team, to the square of the number of runs allowed by the team.
That's it.
This formula is known as the Pythagorean expectation.
To see this in action, let's look at the 2002 A's.
