History has essentially ignored him and overlooked him.
In terms of data, he can be considered an outlier.
So once you know he's there, you can decide for yourself.
He has one data point in only a few dozen.
If he is one out of 45, that's about 2% of your data.
How much data can you omit from a large data set and still be okay for the questions you are investigating?
Moreover, do you lose insight if you omit?
How many people know that Atchison was also the youngest president ever?
Could excluding such data be relevant to issues that interest you, but you simply don't know it yet?
Such challenges are inherent in data analysis, making it both more difficult and more interesting.
In fact, a concern for me with the term big data is that although you can do amazing things with big data sets,
the field is not merely about a few big businesses.
The same lessons can apply to all of us.
Sometimes the data is already available.
The trick is recognizing how much to use and how to use it.
Consider roof contractors, some of which are using modern data to drastically cut costs.
The traditional scenario was for a roofer to get a call, visit the home or building to inspect the roof,
and then decide if it was appropriate for them to do the job.
Every job that wasn't a good fit equated to a loss of time and money.
So some roofing companies are now using readily available data, specifically Google Earth, to help their business.
Now, when they get a call, they input the address into Google Earth and inspect the roof there.
If the job looks appropriate, they can also look to see if other roofs in the area can also be inspected,
possibly allowing a deal to be struck for multiple jobs.
Analyzing data related to local neighborhoods, a problem not remotely comparable to the scope of NASA's questions,
allowed contractors to identify business opportunities.
Sometimes relevant information comes from returning to the same place many times.
Forbes.com gives the example of the Spillers Group, a company owning three restaurants in Dallas.
The three restaurants use data analysis software to share business information among the restaurants more efficiently.
They have such information as point of sale data, labor metrics, and accounting numbers.
Managers pay could be more closely tied to each of these restaurant metrics.
By understanding what was happening during overtime hours, they found ways to cut their labor costs by 10%.
