The data grids might remind you of how the post-off has solved handwriting recognition, but now the images are in 3D and each pixel contains multiple traits.
The same progression toward a data reference map is taking place with the materials genome initiative.
Here, scientists and engineers are seeking a roadmap that will make it easier to tune a new material to the exact properties needed for a particular application, and do it faster and cheaper than ever before.
There are many, many combinations that can be tried and arranged at the atomic level.
A huge number of them could have useful purposes, but most won't, and going one by one simply isn't possible.
So the materials genome initiative is using computers to model known and unknown materials and simulate their behavior.
In the end, they have lots and lots of data to analyze in order to help find areas that deserve a more careful examination.
The materials genome initiative has brought together several successful existing projects.
One example is the Harvard Clean Energy Project. It has created a huge database.
It started as a small proof of concept by examining organic solar cell materials.
The group calculated the properties of about 15 compounds.
With this, they predicted how well these new substances might perform without ever creating the material in a lab.
In the end, they created a new compound with near record breaking electrical properties.
Here, groundbreaking success came from looking at a few chemical compounds and from the work of a single graduate student.
And now, anyone from around the world can download a program that does this work on a PC and reports the results.
The program has calculated millions of potential solar cell compounds.
So in the process of making this new data available, new technologies become possible too.
This is true even in daily life. Here's how your morning commute might change.
The moment you get into your car, it could perform biometric readings and know it is you.
So the seats and mirrors adjust to your specifications.
The radio has your selections or your favorite station on the internet begins feeding through.
The navigation system on the car is automatically running with suggested routes for the drive you are most likely to take at that day and time.
Keep in mind, choosing which way to drive may not involve finding the perfect route.
Remember how UPS solves difficult problems to optimize the delivery of their packages.
It's a good solution, not a perfect solution.
In fact, the car itself may even drive the route for you.
Vehicle manufacturers such as General Motors and Nissan are shooting to release a nearly autonomous vehicle by 2020 with demos already being tested that use cameras and radar to steer the car.
Google Labs has lots of data in this area too.
Often, tomorrow's innovations can sound today like the material of movies.
Take the Hunger Games, for example. In the story, Katniss is injured and a sponsor sends her an antidote via a device.
She is stationed in a tree and suddenly flying to her side comes the medicine.
