What a tangled mess.
Seemingly, but not to bring in page.
This interconnectivity is exactly what they exploit.
First, let's look at a graph of recommendations between people.
The circles, called vertices, represent people.
I've drawn an arrow called an edge when one person recommends another.
As we see, we need to know everyone's quality to determine anyone's quality.
How does this translate into web pages?
An easy way to see it is by representing the web as a graph.
The vertices of the graph represent web pages,
and the edges are drawn from one web page to another
when a link appears on one web page to another.
There is an edge from vertex one to vertex four.
So web page one has a link to web page four,
which means if I were on web page one,
I'd find a link and be able to click it,
and it would take me to web page four.
A web page linking to another can be seen as a recommendation.
Web page one recommends web page four.
Again, the question is, what's the best web page?
While not answering the question,
an important insight is that higher quality web pages,
again, will tend to be linked by other high quality web pages.
I tend to think about it like high school popularity.
How cool are you?
It depends in part on who thinks you're cool.
If the coolest kids think you're cool,
then your cool factor just went up.
So how did Brynn and Page determine all this?
Their model can be seen as recommendations,
but also as a model of surfing the internet.
It's a model so it won't exactly replicate
how people surf the web.
In fact, it's entirely possible that no one
surfs the web according to the rules we're about to discuss.
Again, it's a model.
It doesn't have to be exact.
It only has to capture enough of the characteristic behavior
that it returns meaningful and reflective results.
So let's learn the model.
Since we are all different,
the model assumes surfing is random.
So a random surfer moves through the web
following very simple rules.
You can think of it almost as a game.
At each web page, the surfer rolls a die
to decide what web page to go to next.
Which link should the surfer follow?
You and I have different preferences
