But a professor at Swarthmore College decided to see what might be possible, what we might
be able to see in the data.
Mathematician Steve C. Wang decided to use rates of bunting, stealing, pinch-hitting,
and even the number of different line-ups used to determine similarities among managers.
Let's look at the 2008 season, which is when Wang did a bulk of his analysis.
Keep in mind, under this visualization is a lot of data.
It's the face itself that enables us to visualize the data beyond three dimensions.
Here's Tonant LaRusa of the St. Louis Cardinals, who used 150 different batting orders in 162
games.
This resulted in an elongated head with wider eyes.
On the other end of the tinkering spectrum, Philadelphia Phillies, Charlie Manuel, used
far fewer line-ups, which results in a much squatter face, and dots for eyes.
Don't worry about which feature means what.
Just look to see who's similar.
In a sense, you're looking for churn-off faces that could be siblings, who looks a lot alike.
For example, look at the Mets, Willie Randolph, and the Yankees, Joe Torrey.
Interestingly, Torrey was Randolph's managerial mentor when both were with the Yankees.
Looks like they have remained quite similar.
This encompasses a lot of information, and it means more if you already know and care
about the underlying data.
But even here, as always, the graphic cannot portray everything.
For one thing, this particular study categorized managers only by offensive style.
That ignores another important aspect of the game, which is decisions regarding pitching.
When does the manager send in a relief pitcher, and so on.
Another issue is how the graphic itself can push your story in a particular direction.
For instance, with churn-off faces, we perceive some features more than others.
We notice eye size and eyebrow slant a lot, so they tend to carry more weight.
So one needs to be careful.
How one maps the variables to the graphic can affect what we notice.
In general, we should think carefully about which features of a graphic will attract the
most attention.
Such limitations are inherent in any graphic, and simply should be kept in mind when presenting
or interpreting graphic results.
To conclude, when done well, graphics tell a story.
It's a limited story, but graphics can tell it clearly.
Remember, seeing the story can offer new insight.
