by more than a quarter of a second, 250 milliseconds.
It takes four tenths of a second, 400 milliseconds just to blink your eye.
So let's return to the Library of Congress.
It's archiving all of America's tweets.
Now this isn't all the content of Twitter but still that's a lot and depending on the
moment can be a whole lot.
We leave the borders of the United States for a moment to see how this is true.
The volume of tweets isn't uniform from moment to moment.
On Saturday, August 3rd, 2013 in Japan people watched an airing of Castle in the Sky.
They took to Twitter to share a key moment on a single word near the end of the movie.
In fact it seemed like everyone had the same idea at the same moment or at least the same
second.
In the evening at 1121 in 50 seconds in Japan Twitter hit a peak of 143,199 tweets in just
one second.
Let's look at the graph to see the spike in that volume.
Remember Twitter typically gets 500 million tweets a day for an average of about 5,700
tweets a second.
That spike of activity was about 25 times greater than the average rate of tweeting.
In fact Twitter's ability to handle this particular spike gave the company a chance to pat itself
on the back.
They had improved the efficiency and parallelism of their storage after problem surface back
when tweets had surged during the 2010 World Cup.
So when you hear that an organization like the Library of Congress is archiving something
like tweets, think about the amount of data they are storing.
Also about how fast the act of storage has to be during a spike.
Again think about the further challenges of making that archive accessible.
Users will want it to be stable, fast, and convenient and then multiply the hundreds
or thousands of terabytes just from Twitter across a lot of other organizations.
There are many, many data sets today that are very, very large.
For a data set to be meaningful and useful, it must first be stored and second be accessible.
With such amazing volumes of data, how can this be done?
In a nutshell, not with yesterday's methods.
I remember as a child going to the library and having a card catalog that I thumbed through
to find books for research projects in class.
We even had small workshops led by school librarians to help us learn to do this better.
Then the whole thing went digital.
In fact, I helped my school with some of the database work when I was in high school.
I remember the first time I entered an item into the school database.
It was a simple DOS program.
