Well, somehow we try to actually predict the next result.
In one experiment, scientists did this, but rather than rolling a die and flashing the
green light 83% of the time, they still had things randomized, but flashing the green
light 80% of the time.
So how did people do?
They got the right answer only 68% of the time.
We can think of this like a sport.
The rats and pigeons score 80% of the time and people score 68% of the time.
In the NBA, teams often have about 100 possessions in a game.
If this were basketball with these percentages, the rats and pigeons would win 80 to 68.
That's a pretty big win.
Indeed, attempts to use our higher intelligence leads people to lower scores than rats and
pigeons on this type of task.
Do you feel okay since you aren't going to be sitting at a desk across from someone
in a lab coat asking you to predict when red and green lights will flash?
But remember, financial markets are almost as random as those flashing lights.
Granted, it's only almost as random, but that can hurt us too.
We can yet again look too hard for patterns in the randomness.
A couple of accurate predictions on the market and an analyst can seem like an expert.
But how will the person do over the long run?
Again, we have a tendency to overlook randomness.
If I told you that I just flipped a fair coin and got heads 13 times in a row, what do you
think I would flip next?
To some part of you think it's more likely to be tails.
This type of thinking is common enough it has a name, the gambler's fallacy.
It's what can keep us at the tables in Las Vegas or pulling the slot machine levers.
But there could be a lot at stake in such thinking.
Interestingly, people don't always pick the option with the highest probability of success
over time.
Remember our pigeons?
They do.
Humans will move into that type of thinking when the outcomes really matter and the stakes
are high.
This can play into financial decisions.
If we are determined there is a pattern where there isn't one, we could be making the wrong
decision.
In such a way, we could actually make our worst financial decisions on small amounts
of money.
But before long, that can equate to a larger decision.
