Before he ended his time as a pitcher, Ruth extended his World Series consecutive scoreless inning streak to 29 and 2-3 innings.
This record stood for over 50 years.
Now, think about how I'm presenting the accomplishments of these legendary players.
Data that describes their play.
In particular, this data encapsulates the player, at least at a cursory level, and enables us to evaluate his play.
But do we really need the data, or is it simply quantifying something we could otherwise see?
Wouldn't we simply have noticed that Ty Cobb hit the ball so consistently?
Possibly, but it is very possible we might not.
To get a sense of why I say this, let's round Ty Cobb and Babe Ruth's batting averages down to two decimal places.
So we have 0.36 and 0.34.
We are now talking the difference of two hits in every 100 at bats.
So Ty Cobb got about one more hit every other week than Babe Ruth.
The stat shows us that both were consistent hitters, yet Ty Cobb stood alone and leads all players who've stood at the plate.
Statistics and box scores can unveil aspects of the game, but they simplify the game at the very same time.
Bobby Bragan, who managed the Pittsburgh Pirates said,
Say you were standing with one foot in the oven and one foot in a bucket of ice.
According to the percentage people, you should be perfectly comfortable.
In this case, the mean or average isn't telling you the whole story.
In some cases, a particular stat isn't very instructive.
In other cases, it's a matter of having that plus several other statistics.
But under every summary statistic is the need for data, and it is the data that we're analyzing.
Today, data collection in analysis is an art and a science of its own,
going far beyond young Billy Crystal sitting in the stands updating his box scores with summary statistics.
These days, we can look at all the data, not just stats that summarize the data.
Let's move from the baseball diamond to the hard court of basketball to see today's cutting edge data collection.
In the fall of 2013, the NBA signed a contract so sport view cameras are in every arena.
The cameras are generally perched in the rafters of the arena.
They snap 25 frames per second and the images feed into a computer that produces a treasure trove of data.
Sport view began in 2005 when an Israeli missile defense specialist decided to explore using defense system optical tracking technology to create sports statistics
and capture a lot of the data in the game.
This is an important place to pause.
I often note to my students, notice how many times in mathematics, ideas of the past are adapted to become breakthroughs of the future.
