You could do this by hand, but I programmed a computer to visualize half the court.
Then we simply clicked a spot on that visualized court and selected who took the shot.
And the program records the shot as well as who took it and whether it was successful.
The way we visualized the data helped the coaching staff.
Making out a lot of XY coordinates of a basketball court would have been much more confusing.
Red means the team was shooting well or was hot.
Blue means the team was colder and not shooting as well.
We quickly see trends in the graph.
Should the team go to the left to shoot?
That's where the coaching comes in, maybe.
Yet, maybe there is some other trend coming in.
How big should each circle be?
We found that any smaller circles didn't give much more detail on whether players did or didn't make their shots.
On the other hand, notice how the chosen size does show areas that are largely one color with little variation.
So this is an ideal resolution, detailed enough to show exactly what we are interested in, but not more.
One of the coaches noted that the data analysis gives them a jump start in their coaching and saves them time.
The data, again, is an opinion.
As we saw with Wolfram's email data, there are several ways to visualize data.
It could be some other visualization would bring out more information.
But it could also be that the coaching staff, with their knowledge of the team and through watching film, are able to pick up what is happening.
Or maybe the team should shoot from those hot regions.
What I found the most interesting in working in sports analytics was how we'd often share information with the coaches and then what happened next.
They'd ask another question.
Sometimes this involved looking at the data we already had in a new way.
Other times, it involved tracking new data.
Either way, this process of questioning was important.
Data analytics offers new insight, but not all at once.
With insight comes knowledge, but also the potential to learn more.
So be prepared.
Once data helps you answer one question, you are likely to have another and go back for more data.
But like sports, like our sports analytics group at Davidson College, you can keep digging, learning and improving your decisions along the way.
So this is what it's like to begin as a data analyst.
Collect data associated with a question that interests you.
Keep your own interest in mind.
Stephen Wolfram is a computer guy and a business owner, so he keeps data on keystrokes and phone calls.
The singer Beyonce is a performer who has collected video from every one of her performances.
