all the mathematical analysis again. Sometimes you need an analytical solution computed directly
from the data but often a simulated number would do just as well. If so simulation can save a lot
of time and allow you to quickly test many more ideas. While it's only a model a simulation can
if carefully constructed have enough realistic behavior that it will uncover enough characteristic
behavior to offer insight. With that decisions can be made. Simulation in general requires
some computer programming but not much only a little more than we have time for in a broad
course covering all of data analytics. At Davidson College I teach a math modeling course that covers
simulation among other topics. Here's what's impressive. Students who are only six or less
weeks into the course can start working on projects aimed at an international competition
called the mathematical contest and modeling. Two months earlier most of these students didn't know
any simulation. Four to six weeks later they're creating math models on real world problems
and within sight of working at a world class level.
Here is a quick digest of what we learn in such a course. First learn to create random events.
Suppose you learn that there is a 40% chance of something happening. How do you produce that in
code? Well you pick a random number that is equally probable to be any number between zero and one.
If that number is less than 0.4 then the event happened. Else it didn't. Second learn to create
cues of people entering a line. For this all you need to know is the average number of people who
come per day and the average service time. Then you can create random cues. But these cues can grow
arbitrarily long. Some lines do. Lines to get seasoned football tickets can wrap all the way
around the football stadium. On the other hand sometimes even a short line is too long.
If there are five people to buy items at the airport you might skip that store and hope for
another. I mentioned examples like this to my students to help them think. What's the nature
of your line? Will people get in that line? How long of a line is too long? If there is some
length you can try including that in your computer code. Maybe not everyone would agree on what's
too long. But you can change that later. Then learn to code simulations. You might code a game of
chance and compute the probability. The game of crafts is easy for example. It only takes a dozen
