So just to reiterate, in 1998, Brennan Page
were dropouts working out of a garage.
Before long, their company, Google,
became not just a business, but a verb
with people saying, I'll Google that.
By integrating the interconnectivity of web pages,
Brennan Page folded in a very important piece
of information that set their search engine apart.
By the way, that search system that
was on sale for $1 million in the 1990s
became the foundation of the Google company.
And by the summer of 2005, each of the founders
had a net worth of more than $10 billion.
Now let's return to our earlier question
as to how Google knows the algorithm will stabilize
or converge given enough time.
No matter how long we surf, could the number one site
change if we double the number of steps we've surfed?
Here we go a bit deeper with the math.
There is a math theorem called Perron's theorem
that guarantees that Google will always,
yes, always find a unique answer for any configuration
of the web.
How?
It turns out teleportation enables this.
Why?
If there is some non-zero probability
of surfing from any web page to any other web page,
then we are guaranteed to find an answer.
And for that answer to be unique,
we must have those non-zero probabilities for Perron's
theorem to hold.
We do, and bam, we have our unique answer,
guaranteed regardless of any configuration of the web.
That is a huge result.
And teleportation guaranteed that this happens.
The probability may be quite small.
But remember, it's non-zero, and that's all we need.
This tiny aspect of Google's model
guarantees the algorithm will always, always work.
Brinn and Page developed a powerful model
that created the company Google.
But with such prominence also comes much attention.
In particular, companies want to be at the top of web searches.
JC Penney did this, even for a search on Samsonite luggage.
We are now ready to have a sense of how this can be done.
Understanding PageRank can help raise a web page's spot
in a list of search engine results.
How?
