The iPhone went from development to store displays in four years.
The Boeing 787 Dreamliner went from a concept to commercial flight in nine years.
But the research and development of the new materials, such as the rechargeable lithium ion battery used in the iPhone, can take 20 years or more.
Projects such as the Materials Genome Initiative announced in 2013 are aimed at using data analytics to accelerate such innovations.
By gathering and analyzing data about materials in new ways, the goal is to reduce costs and cut the development time for new materials in half.
The name resembles that of the Human Genome Project, which set out to map the underlying structure of human genes.
The Materials Genome Initiative, in a similar way, is attempting to gain a deeper understanding of how elements interact to form more complex materials.
Both of these are essentially vast data analysis projects, and as more becomes understood, scientists and engineers will be able to create new materials.
And the Human Genome Project itself continues to stimulate new analytics, not only in biological research, but also in medicine.
Sequencing a single reference genome of 3 billion base pairs for human DNA was a huge first step.
But research is now uncovering a vast amount of variation between individuals and even between different cells within a single person.
What about the more distant future? Fans of the Star Trek transporter may want to take note.
We have more non-human cells in our bodies than we have human cells due to all the friendly bacteria.
The data challenges here will be even more enormous as researchers try to track all the members of the entire ecosystem that make up a single person.
As human beings, we have so much genetic material in common, and yet genetic data will also show that each of us are unique in a mind-boggling degree.
Medicine will increasingly be a matter of managing and using large data files that track and accommodate more and more of the variation that exists among people.
A genetic variation in one context that might be detrimental, but neutral or beneficial in another context.
And only more detailed data, both in big studies and from individual patients, will be able to make sense of this.
Traits may be expressed or recessive only in combination with other traits, making the combinatorics of variation even more complicated.
The tools we've seen for visualization will be enhanced in order to visualize such complex information, which will be a big gain for basic research.
And personal data will become the cornerstone of personalized medicine.
The data analytics pioneered to manage the pancreatic cancer of Steve Jobs will go mainstream.
Even the dosages might be adjusted based on the genome, so that the right dose of the right drug is given to match the patient's version of the disease.
Another spinoff for having individual genomes is identification and visualization.
In fact, we had DNA testing in the late 1980s, long before the entire reference genome was sequenced.
But with much more data, it's becoming increasingly possible to predict your facial features just by looking at your DNA.
Paleontologists have already been using DNA visualizations to show us revised pictures of our favorite dinosaurs in hominids such as the Neanderthals.
And the work on current humans goes even further.
Researchers began using data on G markers for just a few prominent facial landmarks, such as the tip of the nose in the middle of each eyeball.
But more recent work already uses highly detailed grids with thousands of reference points.
And these data grids are superimposed onto scans of 3D images taken with stereoscopic cameras.
