Almost instantly, in fact it felt instant to me, the query was returned with the book
I was looking for.
I was amazed.
How could the computer possibly look that fast?
Just like that card catalog became dated, so are some of the storage techniques that
worked with data sets that were considered large a decade ago.
We can see this further from two other fields.
A healthcare organization has patients records consisting of various tests from x-rays to
MRIs to sonographs to doctor's charts.
That's for every patient in that organization, which could be millions.
A legal firm may be sifting through piles of documents, which may include emails, electronic
calendars, and they need to index everything in relation to how the case is developing.
So they can find patterns and build their case over sometimes disparate pieces of information.
So there can be different approaches used to handle large data sets, especially very
large data sets.
However, size alone isn't the only determining factor in how to approach managing data.
Another issue is whether the data is in motion or at rest.
Given our discussion a few moments ago related to Twitter, let's see these ideas as they
relate to Twitter.
Data at rest would consist of analyzing past tweets about a product to get a sense of customer
satisfaction, at least on Twitter.
Data in motion could have the same goal, but the difference is immediacy.
Here, the company might keep track of tweets as they appear.
When a product is rolled out, what are people saying?
This could, for instance, allow one to quickly change some aspect of promotion or customer
service or even the product if that's possible.
There is also a cycle to data management.
Of course, you must collect the data, but what data you collect depends heavily on what
problem or question you're considering.
For example, I worked on a research project on discerning race time strategies in NASCAR
based solely on what was being tweeted during the race.
Could I know when drivers took pit stops if they changed any tires and if so, how many?
In another project, we worked on getting a sense of the popularity of restaurants, again
based solely on tweets.
Both projects ideally would occur in real time.
Can you see what questions we'd have to answer?
That's where you start in research.
What are we asking?
Then you start the cycle of data management.
