The bottom line is saving thousands of dollars every two weeks.
By collecting data across three restaurants and integrating it together, they could make better decisions that improved their company.
In other situations, we might not even know what we don't know.
Gus Hunt of the Central Intelligence Agency stated this really well in a 2013 talk.
He noted, quote, the value of any information is only known when you can connect it with something else which arrives at a future point in time.
So we want to connect the dots, but we may not yet have the data that contains the dot to connect.
So this can lead to efforts to collect and hang on to everything.
Further, the data from the past may not have been stored in a usable way.
So part of the data explosion is having the data today and for tomorrow.
The cost of a gigabyte in the 1980s was about a million dollars.
So again, a smartphone with 16 gigabytes of memory would be a 16 million dollar device.
As always, that scope keeps changing.
So as we said before, a 16 gigabyte phone may not seem like much memory.
Exactly. That is why yesterday's data may not have been stored and it may not be suitable for how we're storing it today.
This leads to a common way to categorize data into two types.
There is structured data and unstructured data.
Thus this level of categorization can help you learn more about your data and even help you think about how you might approach the data.
First, structured data. This is the type of data many of us are most accustomed to dealing with or thinking of as data.
Your list of contacts with address, phone numbers and email addresses or recipes are examples of structured data.
It can be a bit surprising though that most experts agree that structured data accounts for only about 20% of the data out there.
Where does this data come from?
There are two sources, computer generated data and human generated.
The sensor we talked about for athletes would offer computer generated data.
While it is tracking a human, the actual device inputting the data is a kind of computer.
Many other sensors also gather data from airplanes to smart buildings to scientific experiments to medical imagery devices to closed circuit cameras.
Another example of computer generated data is web log data.
Every time you log onto a web page, the server that contains that web page generates pieces of information.
For example, you can know what web page you came from and what time you came.
With just those two pieces of information, you can begin to analyze the traffic on a site.
When is it heaviest? Are there particular websites from which people come to your web page?
There is also computer generated financial data.
