Every March, the United States goes entirely mad.
Why?
Simply put, March Madness.
How crazed could things be in an NCAA Division I basketball tournament?
Come on, each tournament only has a few dozen college teams.
Each game has two nets and one ball.
But other numbers tell a different tale.
In 2012, the Week.com estimated that 86% of employees devote part of a workday in March
to the tournament.
11% of employees admit spending at least five hours of their workday following games.
An estimated $175 million in salary is paid to workers for their time distracted by the
tournament.
And all that was before Warren Buffett offered a billion-dollar prize to whoever could correctly
predict the entire tournament.
Let's see what the madness is all about.
Using what I call March Mathness, our tool of choice is Bracketology, where we use math
to fill in a diagram of brackets that looks like this.
For an NCAA basketball, things begin on Selection Sunday in March with the announcement of which
teams are in the tournament and the first-round matchups.
There are men's and women's tournaments.
Then it's your turn.
Who do you predict will win the first-round games?
From there, you choose who in your predicted second-round matchups will win.
You keep selecting winners from each round until you have selected a national champion.
This creates your bracket for the tournament.
If you're in a pool, how do you know who wins?
It really depends on how you keep score.
Some pools award each correct prediction the same number of points.
Others give more for the correct predictions in later rounds of the tournament.
Those predictions are given more weight.
This is what the sports network ESPN does.
How many brackets are possible?
It can be hard to believe, but there are more than 9 times 10 to the 18th power brackets.
That's a 9 followed by 18 zeros, or more than 9 quintillion brackets.
How big is that number?
It's more than huge.
It's much bigger than all 5-card poker probabilities, which are big, but merely in the trillions.
So we can't simply pick a random bracket and hope for the best.
Well, we can, but the chances are against us.
If we wanted to win just by guessing, our chances would be better in a lottery, with
odds of just a billion to one.
So we'll create math-generated brackets, and then see how they do in the ESPN online
