We could just measure the distances from the line, add those up, and be done.
But that ignores the fact that some values are going to be close to any line we choose
while others will be farther away.
We'd like to choose a line that minimizes those maximum distance points, keeps those
far distances as small as possible.
So instead of taking the least distance for each point, we take the least squares distance.
This is clever because by squaring, our biggest values are now huge, and minimizing those
huge values gets much more attention.
So least squares says take the square of all those distances and add those up.
Whatever line makes that small, that some smallest, is our best fit.
So let's use a least squares regression line for our Olympic times.
Now if we do, we find the equation of the line, y equals negative 0.0133x plus 36.31.
Before we go any farther, how did I just do that?
How did I find that equation?
I used Excel actually.
There are several tools that will do this for you.
From Excel to a program called JumpJMP to SAS to R and many others.
Here I simply had a table of data.
One column contained the years and the other the times.
Then I essentially hit a button and that formula came out for the line.
That's often how regression is done, a powerful technique quickly computed on a computer.
In a bit, we will do more examples as the most important part is learning to think how
to build those columns since the computer will do the rest.
Let's return to our formula for the Olympic times.
It helps if we plot the line in points.
We see that the time from 1896 is still an outlier.
Remember though, it is still being calculated into the data and because we use least squares
distances, our line is closer to that outlier than we would have using least distance.
Notice how close the line is to various points.
For 2012, it predicts Usain Bolt's time at 9.599, which is only 300s off.
Keep in mind it is also doing the best in a least squares sense for every other time
from 1896 until 2012.
Now let's look at our least squares line a bit more.
Remember the slope of the line is negative 0.0133.
Remember x is the year and y is the time.
So this slope predicts that every year we expect to drop the Olympic gold medal time
by just over a hundredth of a second.
So over four years we expect to drop by just over five hundredths of a second.
