tournament challenge, in which millions of brackets are submitted each year.
So how can we do better than mere chance when we predict our winners?
Simply put, the math we'll learn will rate every team in the tournament, from the best
to the worst.
We'll follow the math and predict the team with the better rating always wins.
In fact, we'll use methods previously used to rank teams in NCAA college football, which
historically has had holiday bowl games instead of a full tournament.
To visually represent the outcome of games, we'll draw an arrow from the winning team
to the losing team.
For instance, in December 2012, Davidson College beat the University of Kansas in men's basketball.
So we draw an arrow from Davidson to Kansas.
Such a picture is called a graph.
The teams are called vertices of the graph.
The arrows are called edges, or directed edges.
I often think of this as a poor sportsmanship graph.
The winning team is pointing at the losing team and noting, I beat you.
Let's look at some of the real data from 2012-2013.
How will we rank?
For now, let's look with winning percentage.
Simply take a team's total number of wins and divide by the total number of games.
If a team won 2 and lost 3, then that team has a rating of 2 divided by 5 or .4.
The higher the rating, the better the team is predicted to perform.
So let's look at the outcome of every game between two Division 1 men's basketball teams.
What does that graph look like?
Here it is for 2012-13.
How would you rank this?
It's hard to say.
Let's take a closer look.
Still pretty hard to say.
That's precisely why we need data analysis.
We'll use the result of every game between Division 1 men's basketball teams leading
up to March Madness.
Even though we will only rank the 64 teams in the first round, we will see how they played
against everyone to find our rankings.
How much data is this?
About 5,000 games.
Since we look at every game, we actually rank every Division 1 team which is about 350 teams.
And how do we get all this data?
It's gathered together and made available on websites such as massieradings.com.
This is game by game data.
Every site gives you the date of the game, who played, if the team played at home, since
sometimes games are played at a neutral location, and the score of the game.
