on which link to click.
So Google assumes you pick a link randomly on a web page.
So let's return to the small network we had earlier.
If we were on web page one,
then no matter what, we end up at web page four
as it is our only option.
Now at web page four, we have a 50-50 chance
of going to web page two or web page five.
But how does this produce a measure
of the quality of a web page?
Brinn and Page calculate the probability
of the random surfer being at any given web page
if this model is followed.
That probability is associated with the measure of quality.
If web page one's quality measure equals 0.07
and web page two equals 0.05,
then about 7% of the time,
you expect the random surfer to be at web page one.
And at web page two, about 5% of the time.
If these two web pages are both equally relevant
to the text you type into the search engine,
then web page one would be listed before web page two.
Remember, if web page one has nothing to do with your query,
then it will not appear in the search results.
It may be of high quality,
but again, it must also be related
to the content of your search.
You can try surfing the network you see on the screen
to determine which is the highest quality web page
under this model.
For web pages that have two links, just flip a coin.
Remember, if you have one link,
you are guaranteed to follow that link.
So, what do we do now that the model is set up
and we have the network of web pages?
You simply randomly surf the network following these rules,
but you must do it long enough that the results settle down.
For example, if I surf the network for 20 steps
and found web page four was visited the most,
well, then I surf the network another 20 times,
but this time I find web page one was visited the most.
So, which web page has the higher quality under this model?
We don't know yet.
We need to surf for a much, much longer time.
If you surf the network for 10,000 steps,
you would find web page one is visited the most.
This will most certainly be true
if you follow the network for 100,000 steps.
But how does Google know this is going to work?
