My variables will be 1's and 0's depending on which grid points were filled in your handwritten
B. Then I get a value out.
The value is almost never exactly 0 or 1.
Instead it is a value in between.
This can be thought of as giving me a probability of whether you wrote the letter B. This is
part of computer vision and classification, an important field in data analysis.
The United States Postal Service began researching how to have a computer read addresses in 1983.
The first prototype was deployed during the Christmas season in 1997 to read handwritten
addresses.
In that system, the Postal Service used in 1997 rejected 85% of envelopes.
It correctly identified the address in only 10% of those it read.
It doesn't sound all that great.
But it was already considered a success given the difficulty of this type of problem.
And it already saved the post office several thousand dollars.
Today, the large majority of letters are read and sorted entirely by computer.
Current reading success rates are above 90%.
So neither snow nor rain nor scribbled zip code can keep the Postal Service and their
computers using data analysis from delivering the mail.
Regression is a powerful tool in data analysis, whether saving big time dollars for the Postal
Service or aiding policymakers.
Regression can give us a better sense of what is correlated.
And a regression model does not have to be linear.
You could do least squares regression on a parabolic model, an exponential model and
so on.
Software to do this for you is getting better all the time.
The important thing is to understand what kind of correlation you are looking at.
Remember, correlation doesn't tell us why.
That can be its own challenge in step and data analysis.
Once we have a correlation, sometimes we use hypothesis testing to figure out why we have
a correlation.
Yet, regression is also a great tool all by itself, enabling us to model the past to
understand the future.
Listen and read news carefully.
You'll see how frequently regression is used in data analysis.
It's surprising that a well-placed line can so often unlock insight on our world.
