Consider the ratings for Fred and Sam.
There is indeed a lot of similarity.
The key here is that we never had to look at the data.
For large data sets, we can't absorb the numbers.
Further, we use mathematical measures of distance rather than looking at the graph
since we needed to go all the way down to two dimensions to see things in this case.
Remember with the picture, we were best using 50 or more columns of U.
Same will be true here. If we had 600 ratings, we would need much more than two columns of U.
In the picture, this would have been a very, very blurry image.
We don't have enough resolution to reach meaningful conclusions.
Now what? Suppose we get a new user, Jess.
We can compress her information down to two points and plot them in the plane.
We find who she is most similar to. Suppose it's Mel.
Suppose Jess hasn't seen Movie 1 or 3.
Then, we recommend Movie 1 and then Movie 3 since Movie 1 got a higher rating from Mel than Movie 3.
It's helpful to realize that we can also treat the columns of U as coordinates for the movies and find movies that are similar.
In this way, you create computational genres.
Now, there are a few more issues here. First, how low should our dimension go?
There isn't a hard and fast rule here, but the trick is using the singular values.
Let's assume we have 100 user ratings, about 60 movies from 600.
So, A will be a matrix with 600 rows and 100 columns. How many columns of U do we take?
The question is easier to pose as how many singular values do we want, and the key there can be seen if you graph them.
Note, the really quick drop-off. This is characteristic of singular values.
This is why we generally don't need a lot of singular values.
This is why, for example with the Durer image, earlier we got a reasonable image with only 50 singular values.
If this algorithm is so straightforward and creates good results, why did the Netflix prize take time?
Well, had the competition been to improve the algorithm by 5%, it would have been over quickly.
But it wasn't. Those last percentage points took more work.
As not everything is easily predictable. Remember the issue of time. How you rate movies can depend on when you rate them.
Further, some movies are simply hard to predict.
