with your online bill.
There is generally a button that says Download Data.
Be a data analyst and download your data.
Download several months of data.
If you text or talk on the phone a lot, you might be able to see similar patterns.
One friend could see a break for exercise, just like Wolfram saw in his sleeping patterns.
Now, let's see one more of Wolfram's graphs.
He keeps track of when he is on the phone, and then took those proportions and converted
them to probabilities.
Here we see the probability that Stephen Wolfram is on the phone during the day.
High probability of 60% or more on weekdays from noon through 5 p.m. with about a 40% probability
on weekdays and weekends from 9 p.m. to 11 p.m.
Again, even without the data of Stephen Wolfram, similar ideas can be explored with the data
that you do have available to you.
You could calculate similar probabilities with times from email or texting.
You can also perform data analysis with the tools of Wolfram research.
For instance, you can look at the connections of your friends on Facebook.
I used a tool from Mathematica available at www.WolframAlpha.com.
The social site linked in already offers this kind of graphing automatically, so Facebook
may have added it by the time you see this.
Anyway, here's what it might look like if you generate a graph of friends.
Each circle is a friend.
They are color-coded, such that a similarly colored group has a lot of connections among
its members.
Two circles are connected if they are friends with each other on Facebook.
You see several groups in this graph.
Can you imagine doing this on your own set of friends?
Do questions arise?
They did for me.
I quickly looked at the groups in those all on their own.
I began to think about what the data was telling me.
What did I see, and more importantly, what could I learn?
The green patch to the left, those are my friends from my high school days.
Why don't they connect anywhere else?
That's because a week after graduating from high school, I moved to the Midwest.
In another patch, there are my friends who are also college professors.
