by the Twitter effect.
In 2011, researchers from Indiana University in the University of Manchester published
an article in the Journal of Computational Science entitled, Twitter Mood predicts the
stock market.
According to their paper, watching 10 million tweets during 2008 led to 86.7% accuracy in
predicting the daily up and down changes in the closing values of the Dow Jones Industrial
Average.
Wow!
But wait a minute, what does your intuition say about that one?
Probably too good to be true, right?
Turns out they had a lot of tweets but only 15 days of stock market data.
Their high ratio of predictions involved only 13 out of 15 days.
Okay, it was a small data set, but the paper also did not divide their data into training
and test sets.
We know what that means over predicting the past and under predicting the present.
Good methods aside, there are some issues in sentiment analysis.
Number one, accuracy is never perfect.
How well a computer can assess sentiment is generally judged by how well it agrees with
human judgments.
But humans don't always agree with each other.
That is sometimes called inner-rater reliability.
And you can never expect 100%.
For example, workers on Amazon's Mechanical Turk, where the tasks are designed to be as
routine and straightforward as possible, were found to agree only 79% of the time.
So a 70% accurate program might be doing nearly as well as humans.
Think about it, if a program were measured 100% accurate, humans might still disagree
with it about 20% of the time.
Number two, data sets and documents vary in their amount of sentiment.
A lot of content lacks sentiment.
For example, a person may post, I just did my laundry, or trying a new operating system
for my phone.
One web page may have a lot of comments and yet have a less charged discussion than another
website with fewer comments.
So the quantity and character of sentiment may be independent of one another.
You may also get a different picture using blogs compared to Facebook, and both may be
different from Twitter.
Number three, words don't always mean the same thing.
The word bad famously can mean good as in, man, that was a bad song.
This is important for companies as they watch social networks for sentiment on their products.
There may be different lingo or different inflections for those who market video games
than those who market men's suits.
Further, some words are simply difficult to track.
