while holding all the others constant.
We saw this with our gold medal times.
Each year reduces the time by about one hundredth of a second.
This can be quite helpful in business.
Suppose you have data on sales, prices, and promotional activities.
Regression can give you insight as to what would happen if sales prices were to increase
by five percent.
What if promotional activities were increased by ten percent?
This helps marketing.
In their very popular book Freakinomics, Stephen J. Dubner and Stephen D. Levitt look
at regression as their tool to bust some of the myths, for example, about parenting.
Listen to some of their findings.
They use data to see what factors correlate to test scores.
They're calculating correlation coefficients and seeing which factors have the highest
r-squared value.
What's correlated?
Well, remember, correlation can be positive or negative.
Here are two that help.
The child has highly educated parents, positive correlation.
The parents have high socioeconomic status, positive correlation.
These aren't all that surprising.
That can be the case with data analysis.
Sometimes the results are what we expect.
They should be.
We shouldn't always be seeing what we don't perceive or expect in our world.
But we can also get new insights that isn't what we expect.
This can be the case for some of the factors Dubner and Levitt found that don't correlate,
not positive correlation, but not negative correlation either.
Here are two.
The child's parents recently moved to a better neighborhood.
That is, better neighborhood doesn't mean better test scores.
Disruption from moving doesn't hurt test scores, so no correlation.
What about this one?
The child's family is intact.
Sounds great, but didn't help test scores.
On the other hand, family not intact didn't hurt test scores, again, no correlation.
We often have variables like intact versus not intact, and they are just as easy to use.
In fact, it's important to note there is another form of regression we can use in such
