What went wrong?
Media reports about flu indicating the state of emergency declared in New York led to more
searches that year by people who weren't sick.
Google had already anticipated how media coverage of the flu could lead to spikes in searches
by healthy people for three to seven days.
But this time, flu season actually was worse than the previous year, and the searches actually
continued at a higher level throughout the season.
More media coverage and more flu meant that even healthy people did a lot more searching
for flu throughout that particular season.
Using all this, Google adjusted their algorithm, first by adjusting for spikes in searches after
media coverage.
They also refined how their linear regression throws out extreme values.
With these changes, their revised algorithm once again gave an accurate estimate of flu,
with 1% of what CDC data reported.
And this is always the potential.
Patterns do exist.
When we find them, we see how powerful they can be.
But the fact that there is correlation doesn't mean the correlation will predict, or will
continue to predict as well as before.
Again, correlation doesn't necessarily mean causation.
For example, a somewhat whimsical note published online by the New England Journal of Medicine
in 2012 reported an apparently strong correlation between chocolate consumption and a number
of Nobel laureates produced by the country.
Countries with higher chocolate consumption produced more Nobel laureates.
Did you start thinking about why this might be true?
The note suggested that chocolate has been shown to improve cognitive function.
And it went on to estimate that a rise of total consumption of 0.4 kilograms per person
per year might even correlate with an increase of one Nobel laureate winner per year.
But the author also playfully suggested considering reverse causality.
Maybe countries with better cognitive function are more likely to pursue the health benefits
of chocolate.
So maybe smart people are more likely to choose chocolate to stay smart.
True or not, we simply have a tendency to think in that way.
It's like it is hardwired into us.
Think about it.
It was to our advantage to see patterns.
The author of that note about chocolate and the Nobel laureates is himself a declared
chocolate lover who was born in Switzerland, the number one country for chocolate consumption
and per capita Nobel prizes.
