What?
We can't satisfy both equations and have an answer to that question.
Earlier, we handled this by finding an answer that approximated the equations.
We said x equals 60.
For our type of problem, we can approximate using what is called the least squares.
Instead of averages, we square each of our numbers, add them up, and take the square
root.
It's like a giant Pythagorean problem, but computers quickly and easily solve such problems.
So it is literally a matter of entering numbers into a computer and pressing enter.
Remember, this is going to be a system.
In the case of March Madness, with 5,000 equations, one for each game.
We can, though, form a smaller system with only 350 rows, one for each team.
That's still a lot, but it's quicker, and it's also how Massey has done it.
Let's see how.
Now, we are using the version of the Massey method that considers scores.
But you don't have to include scores.
In fact, when NCAA football used Massey's method, they didn't do it with scores due
to their concern that weights based on scores could encourage blowouts.
Well, you will be using scores to create our brackets.
Let's see how to set up the linear system for a fictional series of games in the South
Division of the NFL.
You can see a weighted directed graph for four teams during the season.
We'll represent the records by the teams by a weighted directed graph.
In this case, the number or weight associated with an edge is the difference in the scores
of the game.
You may not know the teams, but the graph makes it easy to see who won and lost.
Starting in the upper left, we see the New Orleans Saints beat the Tampa Bay Buccaneers
by 7, and lost to the Atlanta Falcons by 3.
In the lower right, the Carolina Panthers beat Tampa Bay by 3, and Atlanta to the left
by 10.
We are now ready to set up the linear system.
We could write these as equations, but for work in a computer, it's easier to use matrix
shorthand.
For example, if we have x minus y equals 9, and x minus y equals 1, that becomes a matrix
where on the first row we have the elements 1 and negative 1, and in the second row we
have the elements 1 and negative 1 again.
Let's do the same thing to make a matrix of our four teams.
We have four teams, so we will make a matrix with four rows and four columns.
The next step is to assign each team to a row.
Let's go left to right in our diagram, and have row 1 be the Saints, row 2 be the Buccaneers,
row 3 be the Panthers, and the last row the Falcons.
The columns have the same ordering as the rows.
