the meaning of such numbers.
Percentages suggest a different story.
The overall survival rate for men was 20%.
For women, it was 74% and for children, 52%.
Why are the percentages so different from the totals?
There were many more men on board than women or children.
So we see that the order to fill the boats with women and children first was mostly followed,
though apparently less so for children than for women.
In fact, third class women were 41% more likely to survive than first class men.
Let's return to an earlier statistic.
The survival rate for women was 74% and 21% for men.
Now let's take males and split by adult male and child.
In the group of adult men, 20% survived.
The group of male children, 45% survived.
Now we'll partition the group of children again by class.
When we do, we see that 27% of third class children survived and 100% of first and second
class children survived.
Okay, well let's continue this and let's move to the group of women.
Let's split that group by class.
First, second and third and crew.
93% of those in first, second or part of the crew survived.
46% of the women in third class survived.
These statistics tell us the tale.
Women and children in first and second class had an extremely high survival rate.
Unfortunately, the same survival rate didn't extend into the third class, although even
there women and children were much more likely to survive than men.
What we've been doing is a sort of informal decision tree analysis.
We started with Captain Smith's order and let that guide our splits that we made.
But we would get the same results if we had a computer using an algorithm from decision
tree learning.
We could have split by men and women, adult and child, or a few different ways by class
and crew.
In all, there are a number of ways to split at that first level.
So which is better?
A decision tree algorithm splits such that we get the best predictor of whether someone
survived, which is our target value.
For the Titanic, the best indicator of survival if you take only one attribute is whether
someone was male or female.
