So with a simple summary statistic, I get a very safe prediction.
Other predictions aren't as clear.
Sometimes that's because we have lots of uncertainty, even if we have lots of data.
For instance, we can't simply predict the weather with absolute accuracy all the time.
The dynamics are too fluid and dynamic.
In math, it's called a chaotic system, which means that small changes in one place can result in big changes elsewhere.
This is called the butterfly effect, a term coined by Edward Lorenz.
A hurricane formation Lorenz proposed can depend on whether a distant butterfly flaps its wings several weeks earlier.
That's a lot of uncertainty.
Other times, predictions seem impossible because we don't see any data or patterns to analyze it all.
Consider something like the lottery.
Clearly, someone happens to win from time to time just by chance, but having a model to predict a winning lottery number seems hopeless.
In fact, some lotteries you don't even get to pick your number.
You just buy scratch-off tickets and take your chances with whatever's on the ticket.
And yet, these so-called scratch-off lotteries have offered a possible point of entry for data analysts.
Maybe where winning tickets are shipped is not entirely random.
If there is any pattern, then it might be possible to predict where the next winning ticket will be sold,
allowing you to go there and try to buy up as many tickets as possible.
Stanford PhD Joe N. Ginther apparently used this approach to win the Texas lottery in 2006 and again in 2008 and a third time in 2010.
Now, I'm not recommending you start throwing your money at lotteries.
I am saying that data analytics will continue to become more powerful at cracking all sorts of problems,
and you may need to keep trying to get a successful outcome.
The same range of issues comes up when we discuss trends in data analysis itself.
Some things are clear, some have uncertainty that can be reduced,
and others may yield to a new approach to gathering data.
First, it is clear that analytics will change.
If a company you know today is still relevant and strong a few years from now, they will have adapted and changed.
The world of data analytics will, in many cases, pass you by if you stand still.
To see an example of this, let's turn to Google.
On September 11th, 2001, Google users were searching for New York Twin Towers and World Trade Center,
but the results had no breaking news about the tragic events of the day.
