It doesn't mean everyone's final grade is determined, not by a long shot, but I had
the impression that the first exam tended to correlate much more to final grades than
the first exam in my general education course.
Here I already had the data.
I had a grade book.
I just needed to put the grades together in Excel where I could calculate a correlation.
We'll talk more in a later lecture about how this works, but all I needed to do was
highlight my data for each class, use the Corel function in Excel, and I had my result.
A perfect correlation would have given the number one.
If you got an 84 on the first test, your final grade in the class would be an 84.
That's perfect correlation.
For calculus, the correlation was about 0.75.
For the general education course, the correlation was about 0.55.
My intuition was confirmed, backed up by data and data analytics.
Note, it doesn't tell me why this was happening.
That would take more analysis and study.
Now, you don't need to teach or keep grades to be able to do a comparison like this.
You could compare two projects at work, two schools, two recipes, two vehicles, or two
vacations, really anything that interests you.
Or you can compare just one case to typical values for that one case.
This is what a student learning analytics did at Mercer College.
She was taking a class from Dr. Julie Byer.
She asked her students to track personal data.
The student was concerned about his aunt, who used the free clinic in town and had diabetes.
The student felt her medication was incorrectly calibrated, so he kept track of her glucose
levels, which she was already measuring.
So the student gathered this data and compared it with acceptable values, and it looked high.
You could easily stop there.
In fact, in data analytics, that's often where we do stop.
But he even used a statistical test to see how likely it was that the readings would
be that high, just by chance.
That's called hypothesis testing, and it's sort of a statistical inference traditionally
called in when your sample is only a tiny part of a large population.
But in data analytics these days, we are often studying a whole population, or zooming in
on a specific case.
And so the main point from the perspective of data analytics is that he collected the
