that's distributed over all the computing devices everywhere.
Still, even individual data sets are huge.
NASA has deployed a series of Earth-orbiting satellites that continuously gather information
on our world.
In fact, so many applications are creating data sets that are so big that the ways we
traditionally have analyzed data sometimes do not work.
Indeed, the ideas we have today might not solve the questions we have for the data tomorrow.
Right now, data analysis is helping NASA ask a question like, how accurately can we predict
the beginning and end of a region's growing cycle?
As more and more data is collected, and as the technology we use to collect that data
changes, new questions will arise, which may mean we need new ways to analyze the data
to gain insight.
Data analysis is a fairly new combination of applied mathematics and computer science,
available in ways that would have been hard to imagine a couple decades ago, an inconceivable
100 years ago.
Why?
A lot of it has to do with data.
And this flood of new data is being organized, analyzed, and put to use.
On the Internet, Amazon recommends books for you to consider.
Netflix indicates its guests at what you might predict as a rating for a movie.
These are recommendation-based, not just for you, but on comparing your data with that
of millions of other people.
And suppose you give it a try if you take one of those recommendations, even if it isn't
the style of book or film you usually choose.
Well, sometimes we can be surprised with what we see.
Sometimes we like the recommendation, and we didn't even know we would.
Analytics or Amazon did know somehow.
Well, that's the somehow of data analytics that we want to explore through this lecture
series.
Online companies like Amazon, Netflix, Pandora, and so on are gathering rating after rating
after rating for millions of people, and then putting all of that data to use.
Other transformations are taking place in politics, sports, healthcare, finance, the
entertainment industry, science, industry, you name it.
Albert Einstein once said, we can't solve problems by using the same kind of thinking
we used when we created them.
This is definitely true today.
We are collecting data as never before, and that creates new kinds of opportunities and
challenges.
In fact, so many applications are creating data sets that are so big that the ways we
traditionally have analyzed data don't work.
Indeed, the ideas we have today might not solve the questions we have for the data tomorrow.
This is the idea behind the term big data, where the sheer size of large data sets can
force us to come up with new methods we didn't need for smaller data sets.
