So he skews the average.
If you are working with data, finding this anomaly can be helpful.
But if you are looking for meaningful averages and statistics, such things can be an issue.
So sometimes anomaly detection is part of data pre-processing.
But as we have seen in our earlier example, detecting anomalies is important to detecting
fraud or illness.
The next thing we need to think about as data analysts are the causes of anomalies.
They aren't all the same, and this is important to keep in mind.
First, data may come from a different class or source.
If someone has stolen a credit card, they are of a different class than credit card
users.
Bloomberg might be thought of as a different class in an economic sense.
He's in the Billionaires Club, but in mathematical terms, he's also just an extreme value.
He's what in regression we already called an outlier.
It can help us to lean on statistician Douglas Hawkins' definition of an outlier.
An outlier is an observation that differs so much from other observations as to arouse
suspicion that it was generated by a different mechanism.
Second, there is natural variation in data.
I'm a professor and students sometimes ask if grades will follow the bell curve.
This is a normal distribution, and a large amount of data can follow this.
Height is an example.
I recently taught a forward on the men's basketball team at Davidson College.
He's 6'11".
His height is less likely among men, so his height is an extreme value of the normal distribution
for heights.
Another source of anomalies are errors in data collection or measurement.
I recently had this in my own research.
We were looking at collections of Twitter data.
In our particular stage of research, we wanted to know how many times a tweet was retweeted.
In our collection, we only found the tweets were retweeted once, three times, eight times,
and so forth, nothing in between.
Keep in mind, we had 10,000 tweets.
Tweets were retweeted once or three times, but never twice.
Could that really be the case?
Yes.
Is it unlikely?
It is unlikely, quite unlikely.
So we spent time looking at our data and ensuring it was correct.
Was this real?
Was this a real and unexpected occurrence?
Collecting the data costs money.
