We keep posting updates on Facebook, and Facebook is in a new big data center.
Ready to capture, analyze, and present it until, of course, they someday need to move
again.
The issue of data storage is one that comes up more and more in data analysis.
If your business is especially dependent on analyzing huge amounts of web data, then Hadoop
can be part of the solution.
But you don't need any of that to tap the power of relational databases, which are your
first step up when a spreadsheet is no longer enough to hold your data.
And if you have only megabytes or even gigabytes of data, you are unlikely to gain either speed
or flexibility from pulling your data into a Hadoop rack of computers.
So there are other options.
In the case of our studies on Twitter data on restaurants, the company Twizu used another
company, a data supplier, to pull down all the tweets with certain search terms.
Then they created their own non-relational database with MongoDB, which stands for Humongous
Database.
This allowed everyone to have an efficient database for tens of thousands of tweets and
for everyone to log in and grab data of interest, whether that person was in North Carolina
or London.
In our NASCAR studies using Twitter data, we stored the data on our laptops in large
text files.
We created Python-based computer programs to read and parse the files.
So there are a variety of approaches.
Part of the question is, what data do you need to collect?
How much of it do you need?
If you need quite a bit, then how will you store it and remember how will you access
it?
If you ever consider using this for a new business venture, keep in mind, as even Facebook
had to do, what happens if you run out of storage?
What will you do then?
These issues are ever present with today's large and growing data sets.
So always keep the underlying storage of data in mind.
When you have a lot of data, it's an important issue that, when done right, can seem almost
as simple as storing all the data on your laptop.
