For this, we turn to another Bill James statistic called runs created.
This stat quantifies approximately how many runs a player contributes to the team.
Like the Pythagorean expectation, runs created is a fraction.
The numerator equals the quantity hits plus walks times total bases, where a single is worth one base, a double two, and so forth.
The denominator equals the number of plate appearances by that player.
Let's apply this to Scott Hatterberg, who was signed by the Oakland A's due to his high on base percentage.
It's especially interesting that Hatterberg had been a catcher, but was converted to first base.
Why?
The A's had figured out that he was good at catching the ball with players running toward him, but his throwing arm was weak.
They wanted him in a position where he could play a lot.
So let's apply the runs created statistic to Hatterberg using his 2001 record, since this is what the A's would have had when they signed him.
In 2001, Hatterberg had 68 hits, which reached first on balls 33 times and had 278 play appearances.
Working this out, we find 68 plus 33 times total bases, which is 85 divided by 278, which equals 30.85.
That is, Hatterberg contributed 30.85 points with the runs created statistic.
Now, compare this to Jason Giambi.
He played first base for the A's in 2001, and during the off-season was signed by the Yankees.
Giambi's stats correspond to him contributing 162.25 points.
Whoa! That is a huge loss! It was!
Giambi was second in MVP voting for the American League in 2001.
So why sign Hatterberg to replace such a great player?
Exactly! This thinking is easy to have and is precisely what allowed the A's to fill their team with players that other teams undervalued.
Let's look at both players' contributions in another way.
Remember, no team has an infinite budget.
The Yankees signed Giambi as a free agent for $10.5 million.
Suppose under this contract he performed like he did in 2001, then he would have contributed around 160 runs by the runs created statistic.
With his $10.5 million salary, each run created by Giambi would have cost $65,000.
Hatterberg came in with a salary only one-tenth of that of Giambi.
Each run created cost $29,000.
Let's look at it yet another way.
Billy Bean had a $40 million budget to sign his team.
With a $10 million salary, Giambi would have taken a quarter of the total budget.
For the team to reach 800 runs, he would have contributed less than a quarter of the necessary runs required to reach 99 wins under the Pythagorean expectation formula.
