We organize information into patterns all the time.
For example, look at this.
What do you see?
It's a face, of course, but notice how different this is to a real face.
This is very, very abstract.
We only have three circles and a line segment, yet we can make the connection.
Here are other images by mathematical artist Robert Bosch of Oberlin College.
Recognize the person?
Well, it's a good resemblance.
It is made entirely of one continuous line.
Here is a close-up of Maryland's left eye.
What about this?
Recognize that smile?
That's made out of dominoes.
They are laid down and then an image is created.
Here is an image made from M&M's from my book, Math Bites.
Here we use fewer and fewer candies, making the image more and more abstract.
Each time our mind has a way of organizing the data.
This type of thinking is ever present in us, in a part of how we think.
In fact, we can also make up patterns, seeing things that are not there.
For example, when we look at clouds or ink blocks or other random shapes, psychologists
sometimes call this peridolia, our ability to turn a vague visual image into an image
that we find meaningful.
We do this with what we see, and we also do this in how we think about cause and effect.
All athletes, for example, often look for patterns, patterns of behavior that lead to
success.
They are under constant pressure to perform at a high level, so if a player finds something
that meets success, they repeat it.
Maybe it helps, maybe not, but this can be taken to an extreme.
Consider these examples.
In baseball, Kevin Romberg played just 41 games for the Cleveland Indians from 1982 to
1984.
That's all it took for him to become one of the big leagues' most superstitious players
ever.
For instance, he refused to make right turns on the field.
Why?
Base running involves turning left, and only turning left.
He was a good hitter, and his percentage of times getting on base was impressively high.
Okay, but Romberg also tried to follow his left turn rule, even when playing defense.
