We were predicting outcomes of games day by day using all the data to that point.
We used a number of statistics.
One could only be calculated with the entire season's data.
We were using that information to know which teams were similar.
But just by knowing this piece of information based on all the data, we were able to predict
much, much better, too much better.
We had to be sure every piece of the algorithm was using data only available at that point
in the season and not in the future.
It took time to remove that assumption.
We had to think of another way to calculate the similarity of two teams.
But once we removed that assumption, the method still performed well.
But no, not like before.
And my students were proud.
Why?
They knew they had made strides as data analyst researchers.
Knowing when you've done something wrong, something too good to be true, can be as important
as doing something right, maybe more important.
Let's try another example.
Suppose we have a database of retail purchases.
We know the item bought, the purchaser, and the date and time of purchase.
We can construct a model that will perfectly describe who has bought what.
The method can pick up that the date and time of a purchase can predict the other attributes.
This is the same thing I could do in my earlier model for March Madness.
If I had past tournament data included, then I could perfectly predict who wins games that
have already been played.
That's what happens with the retail purchases too.
The model will not generalize at all the new data because the model is overfitted to past
times that will never occur again.
There are two issues here.
I included a variable that while predictive on the training set hurts me later with any
test set.
By cheating, by cheating to include too much information about the past, I'm getting worse
results at any future time.
I'm better off not having it as a variable at all.
Over including the past isn't the only problem.
Overfitting can also happen if we include a variable that really has no insight for the
analysis at all.
Did you know that statistics can show a strong correlation between who wins the Super Bowl
in economic performance?
Between 1967 and 1997, the first 31 years of the Super Bowl, the stock market gained an
