It could be important not to double-count the individual.
However, if we end up with that data that isn't descriptive, it can essentially be
garbage.
If this is the case, how can you expect meaningful results on the other side?
This leads to saying garbage in, garbage out.
This is a very common expression in computing.
One of its first uses was in a 1963 syndicated newspaper article about the first stages of
the computerization of the IRS.
Even though the expression became prominent in programming a few decades ago, the principle
was not new even then.
Consider the following quote of Charles Babbage, the English inventor of a design for the first
programmable computing device.
So, on two occasions, I have been asked, pray Mr. Babbage, if you put into the machine wrong
figures will the right answers come out?
Babbage continued, I am not able rightly to apprehend the kind of confusion of ideas that
could provoke such a question.
So, what does garbage look like?
How dirty is it?
Well, it may not look all that dirty to us.
Consider this simple question, are Bobby Miller from Charlotte, North Carolina and Bob Miller
also from Charlotte, North Carolina the same person?
You and I could guess it's the same person, but a computer would treat these as distinct
people.
These issues can be real.
Conversely, there can be two addresses for one person.
I grew up in a very small town outside Philadelphia.
It had around a thousand people total.
If someone asks where I grew up, I usually start with the town of about ten thousand
I grew up near, King of Pressure.
Heard of it?
Some have, it has a huge, huge mall.
If you know it, I can mention a smaller town near mine that is about three times the size
of my town.
Now often came to our home, not address to our town, but to King of Pressure.
As such, we were listed in some databases as living in King of Pressure.
At some point, it would be easy for such a database to have my family being from two
or even three different towns.
Easy enough.
But a computer without help from specialized software could easily see such entries as
