Here are the issues I teach my researchers to think about as we begin a project in data
analysis.
Fundamentally, we're looking at how data will be managed.
First, how much data will you have?
In working on the reviews for restaurants, we were working with tens of thousands of
tweets in the early stages of the research.
But we had to also keep in mind, what if what we did really hit the mainstream, which was
our goal?
What if suddenly a million people were using the app?
Does that make a difference?
If so, it might mean that you need a much more efficient algorithm, otherwise your
app may stall very, very suddenly with too many users.
For an app, how much of the data can you process live and how much will you need to process
offline prior to any search?
If you have millions of users, you simply may not be able to process all the requests
in the data live.
Google, for example, computes part of its rankings offline before you ever enter something
into the search engine.
Another important issue is the security of the data.
How secure must it be?
And one more, how precise should the data be?
Can we aggregate information?
Now, let's assume you are indeed using quite a bit of data.
Notice that you can't easily store it on your own computer or even with one external
hard drive.
At one time, you'd need a supercomputer to aid in this.
For most of us, that meant any such questions just couldn't be considered.
But today, that's changed.
The change came when companies like Yahoo, Google and Facebook turned their attention
to help offer storage mechanisms for the data that their services were helping produce.
An important part of storing and accessing data is data warehousing, which serves as
a central repository of data collected and then integrated from one or more disparate
sources.
They often contain both current and historical data, enabling one to look at current patterns
and compare them to past behavior.
This is an important feature.
Data warehouses generally are used to guide management decisions.
Note how Walmart decided to put cake pops on the shelves.
Now, a data warehouse is a relational database that is designed for query and analysis rather
