First, does the information even exist?
Is there data to reach any conclusions?
And second, if it is there, how do we capture it and know what it is stating?
In the NASCAR study, we found that we could discern the status of a NASCAR driver from
tweets during the race.
In the restaurant study, we found that we could determine reviews on a diner via what's
being posted on Twitter.
But when we started, we didn't know.
We looked around a bit to see, but in the end, we dove in and began doing preliminary research
to figure it out.
As part of the research, we both collect data, which means storing it, and also grab the
data in order to analyze it.
Once we have the data collected, we must decide how to store it and how to organize it.
We may also need to bring together data from multiple sources.
This is called data integration.
If your data is in motion, it may be better to have data integration happening over and
over.
You may even want data integration in real time, which is the opposite of dumping everything
just at once into a static and fixed database.
An important aspect of data integration, even if you do not have data coming from disparate
sources, is preparing your data for analysis.
We'll consider that in a separate lecture.
After the data is integrated, you can finally analyze it.
For example, Amazon will look at past customer actions from all the data that's been integrated
in its system, and then they can make an action.
For Amazon, that may be recommending a book.
There are business examples that you may not as easily see as connected to digital information.
Walmart uses data analysis.
When they learned via social media that cake pops were popular with customers, the company
quickly responded by putting them in stores.
But notice, the cycle of data management goes back to capture.
This is something I impress on my students and class-oriented in our research teams.
Once we act, we need to capture more data and validate the action.
For NASCAR, did teams take pit stops when we said they did?
For eating out, does our sense of public sentiment match what is really happening?
For Amazon, if they keep recommending books that aren't of interest, then the feature
could even become a nuisance.
In the case of Walmart, did the fact that cake pops were popular on social media correlate
to sales, either in stores or on the Walmart website?
