So the second element of the right hand side vector will be 17 minus seven minus three
which equals seven.
The Panthers won by 10 and by three so that entry is 13.
Finally the Falcons lost by 17 and 10 and won their other game by three so that entry
would be three minus 17 minus 10 which equals negative 24.
We filled in the entries for the entire linear system now.
A matrix times a vector equals a vector but there is one more step.
You can think of this as centering the ratings around zero.
It turns out that there are infinitely many solutions to the linear system that we have
up to this point.
This is easily fixed by replacing any row by ones in the matrix and a zero on the right
hand side.
That row says that the sum of the ratings should equal zero.
This essentially locks things down and moves us beyond having infinitely many solutions.
That's it.
We have our linear system.
We have a four by four matrix times a vector equaling a right hand side vector.
Moving forward how do we do this for more teams?
For March Madness we aren't talking four teams we're talking about 350 teams since
that's how many NCAA Division I teams there are in men's basketball.
So now rather than four rows we will have 350 rows and 350 columns too.
What does the data look like?
Again I grab it from massyradings.com.
Here are three lines of the data.
How do we get from that to the matrix?
The key is understanding the data.
It simply tells us the tale of the season in data.
Take just the first row.
That first number 735181 is the number of days since January 1st in the year zero.
Of course this is not because we can trace NCAA basketball all the way back to the time
of Jesus Christ.
This merely gives us an easy consistent way to compare days to know which is before the
other.
The second number 20121109 is the date given in year month and day format.
Now comes the team data.
The number 345 is team 345 in the data.
Next comes a one telling us that team 345 played at home and they scored 117 points.
They played team 85 who was visiting which is the minus one and they scored 75 points.
So team 345 played team 85 and won.
We can quickly integrate this into the linear system.
Again team 345 played team 85.
So we now go to row 345 and column 85 in our square matrix with 350 rows and decrease that
