What is that?
Indeed it is again Usain Bolt and his world record time of 9.58 on October 16, 2009.
This was in between his two Olympic races, and it was the fastest time of all.
Looking at the least squares line and the data emphasizes the significance of that world
record.
In all of this, we have used only two variables and used one to predict the other.
But regression can also be a much more powerful tool.
Regression is often used to determine how strong a correlation is.
For the Olympic winners, the correlation coefficient, often called R, was negative 0.91.
For the world records, the correlation coefficient R was even better at negative 0.97.
These are extremely high correlation values.
Depending on your field, much lower values may still give insight.
The square of the correlation coefficient is another commonly used statistic.
What counts as a good R square value varies enormously from field to field.
But the correlation coefficient is where the R square you might see actually comes
from.
Your regression may also have far more than two variables.
Even a hundred variables or more could be involved.
Let's look at one with over a dozen.
In May of 2007, a letter was sent to college and university presidents in the United States
concerning the U.S. News and World Report college rankings.
The letter was the president's letter and was initially signed by 12 college presidents
with others joining later.
Among several points, the letter stated that the presidents believe that the rankings should
be limited to, quote, data which is required to be reported to state or federal officials
or which the institutions believe in accordance with good accountability should routinely
be made available to any member of the public who seeks it.
A main request was for college and university presidents not to participate in the, quote,
reputational survey by U.S. News and World Report.
In the survey, college presidents give their subjective opinion of other colleges.
The letter also asks presidents not to use the rankings as a form of publicity.
How much does the reputation score play into the rankings?
Now, U.S. News and World Report doesn't detail the exact formula they use for the rankings,
and no one has reversed engineered it either.
With regression, we can try something different.
Can we estimate it enough to gain insight?
We just need data, which in this case is available.
For me, it only took a quick email to the Associate Vice President of Planning and Institutional
