They couldn't pay that much for such few number of runs.
Now Hatterberg would contribute about 3.7% of the runs needed, but here's the key.
He cost only 2.25% of the team budget.
By looking at each player's contributions in this way, Bean was able to create a powerful team that competed with the Yankees,
a team with over triple Bean's $40 million budget.
This is a great example of how we can use data analysis to come up with innovative solutions.
In particular, note how we combined ideas to create workable insight.
This is an important element of data analysis.
You create tools, but like building in a shop, you may use many of them to create something.
Of course, this approach to baseball is well known and used by many teams now,
but that doesn't mean all opportunities are gone.
In later seasons, for example, the A's began selecting players more for undervalued skills in defense,
and they also began using data on players who had not even begun to play professionally.
Now let's talk a bit more about the Pythagorean expectation.
This is a powerful statistic based on just runs scored and runs allowed.
Focusing on runs scored gave the A's their initial formula for success,
and when other teams caught on, they gave more attention to reducing runs allowed.
Can we take this approach from the dugout to the court or into the huddle?
It's not quite that easy.
If we merely apply our current formula, it doesn't correlate well to the total wins of a basketball team.
At first, this may seem like a dead end.
However, generally, when one tries to use a technique in data analysis in a new application, things must slightly change.
Professional basketball teams play fewer games, but many more points are scored than in baseball.
So it's plausible we might need a change.
How much?
That's the trick.
You don't know in advance.
But again, sometimes important steps in data analysis come from adapting existing ideas.
So is there a different Pythagorean expectation formula for basketball?
Daryl Mori, a sports executive, was the first to adapt the formula to basketball.
What worked?
The formula is the same, except the exponent changes.
