We've seen over and over in this series that one, there is a lot of data to analyze and
two, a lot of insight can be gained from analyzing it.
Now it's time to talk about data privacy and security.
For example, online cookies can be placed on your computer to keep track of you.
A store might access your smartphone to track where you walk and what you buy.
Predictive analytics might determine what you are allowed to buy or at what price.
Risk factors from your medical data might be cross-referenced with other databases.
Medical cameras and stores in public places might study your every move.
In short, what data is being analyzed?
How difficult is it to keep data secure and what can be done to improve security?
These are our topics for this lecture.
Recently, I was grocery shopping in my hometown of Davidson, North Carolina.
I was carefully loading eggs and other groceries in my car when I got a text from a friend.
The text message said, I hope your grocery shopping went well.
I hope you didn't break those eggs.
I literally stopped cold in my tracks.
What?
Wait a minute.
The parking lot was almost empty and my friend was nowhere to be seen.
He knew I wouldn't see him.
First to the grocery store is a strip of offices.
He was on the second floor.
Honestly, I always forget that there even is a second floor to that building.
So I definitely wasn't looking there.
I was surprised because I thought I was quietly doing my own thing unnoticed by anyone.
I was surprised because I wasn't aware of other ways I could be watched.
I was surprised because I didn't know how closely I was being watched and I was surprised
because I didn't know that a digital message was being created about what I was doing.
As you may have guessed, this story motivates lessons for this lecture on security.
What if someone had been blogging about my shopping trip or posting a video about it?
So how secure is our privacy?
With so much data, we often have less privacy than we assume.
How much can really be gleaned and known?
Often quite a lot.
Major companies and governments are now very good at this.
Sometimes companies and government work together.
In 2014, familiar smartphone apps, including Google Maps, Facebook, and Angry Birds were
shown to reveal personal information in unexpected ways.
Not just to the companies, to the U.S. National Security Agency, as well as to the government
communication headquarters in Britain.
Let's see an example where a large organization wanted to assure that customers' personal
data remained private.
We've discussed the Netflix Prize in the lecture on recommendations.
Again, it was the million-dollar contest that challenged experts in data analysis to use
Netflix data to produce better recommendation than Netflix did.
