Soon, the crew realized that the ship would sink.
Forty-five minutes after the ship hit the iceberg, Captain Smith ordered the lifeboats
to be lowered under the orders women and children first.
So passengers evacuated in lifeboats, though many were launched only partly loaded.
By 2.20 a.m., the Titanic broke apart and sank, with well over 1,000 people still aboard.
A distress call had been sent, but the closest ship to respond was 58 miles away.
It arrived about four hours later and brought aboard an estimated 711 survivors.
The sinking of the Titanic is an event about which new books are still being published.
And now, we turn to the data.
The British Board of Trade collected data in their investigation of the sinking.
Let's look at the passenger list of the 2,224 passengers and crew.
It's a list of all those passengers and crew, and for each person, we have four pieces of
data.
Number one, the sex of the individual.
Number two, age, which will be labeled as adult or child.
Number three, booking class labeled as first, second, or third class, or crew.
Number four, whether or not that person survived.
Let's take a moment and talk about class.
The three separate classes were determined not only by the price of a ticket, but also
the person's wealth in social class.
Those traveling in first class, the wealthiest passengers on board, were prominent members
of the upper class, including millionaire, philanthropist, and women's right activist,
Margaret Brown.
Second class passengers were middle class travelers and included professors, authors,
clergymen, and tourists.
Third class or steerage passengers were primarily immigrants moving to the United States and
Canada.
There actually isn't complete agreement among primary sources as to the exact number of
passengers on board, rescued, or lost.
Even so, what we can learn about this disaster, we can see in the data.
More complete lists also exist with names, places of origin and such, and we'll restrict
our analysis to show that we can do what we can do with four pieces of information.
First, recall Captain Smith order that women and children board the ships first.
What does the data say?
Well, 57 children survived, 316 women survived, 338 men survived, more men than women survived.
Were the orders not followed, what happened?
Remember, you must be careful how you interpret data.
It is true that more men than women survived, but be careful drawing conclusions about
