I again will work with a simple idea.
We can easily find the distance between two points in the XY plane.
A point in two dimensions can be seen as a vector with one column and two rows.
We have a vector with one column and over 700 rows.
The same formula can be extended to the distance between vectors of that size too.
So we'll do that.
In particular, the smallest distance wins.
So I can take your handwritten 3, a new 3, not already in my dataset, and see which of
our average digits it looks most like by using distance.
Here we are using average pixel values to compute distances to the pixel values of your
handwritten sample.
Smallest distance across all the pixels tells us which average number is closest.
How did we do?
Remember the handwritten 3s we saw earlier?
I know these are 3s.
So this is the basic idea and it usually works out well, but more complicated algorithms
for digit recognition also exist for a reason.
Sometimes it is hard to recognize a handwritten digit.
Sometimes we write fast and some of us frankly have bad, really bad handwriting.
Let's see a digit our method won't recognize.
This is meant to be a 3, but the method we just created classifies it as a 5.
Do you see why?
There are elements of the digit 5 that are within it too.
So maybe this is good enough and maybe it isn't, but really we've only tested one number.
We need to get a better handle on it.
Wait, we have 60,000 numbers.
We do, but we just use those to create the method.
We need to use another set of data.
Indeed, we need to test our method on data it hasn't seen.
That's why it would be great to have you write some numbers.
That would be unknown to my method and test how it does.
What I'm describing is a very important part of data analysis.
That big set of 60,000 digits is called the training set.
This is the data we develop our idea on.
Then we need to test our idea.
But again, it often doesn't work to test the set I already had.
So I turn to another set of data.
This is called the test set.
The data we are using is separated in order to be used this way.
