Then you look at each of these attributes and decide where to split.
You do if you improve your prediction.
Between males by adult and child, we find that the survival rate from 21% for all males
to 20% for adult men.
Then if we split by class, we find that second and third class men survive at a rate of 14%.
An interesting result if we split yet again is that third class men were twice as likely
to survive as second class men.
Let's look at how these factors help us.
The newspaper headline said women and children.
But if sex and age alone determined the probability of survival, we would expect women in each
class to have just under an 85% survival rate.
But this split, by this split, children had about 52% chance of survival and men 20%.
We saw this would be misleading for important subgroups.
Over 97% of 144 women in first class survived, 86% of the 93 women in second class were saved.
So the overall figure was quite accurate for second class.
But only about 74% of the women in both third class and crews survived.
There were 165 women in third class and 23 in crew.
So adding in class, we find 93% of women in first and second class and the crews survived.
Note what a strong predictor this is of survival.
Children of either sex in first and second class survived at a rate of 100%.
Those on the other side of these three splits were much less likely to survive.
Women in third class survived only about 46%.
Children in third class survived at less than 28%.
So we have predictive variables of survival for the titanic disaster.
From this, we uncover using only the numbers, the tale of that fateful night.
Also notice how we essentially create a series of questions that one can answer.
Are you male?
We now know your likelihood of survival 21%.
If you're male, are you a child?
We again have a survival rate and that's 45%.
Are you in first or second class?
And so on and so on with those series of questions that come directly out of our decision tree.
This very same setup can be applied in many other contexts.
For instance, decision trees have been a powerful research technique in medical research
on heart disease.
Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the world.
A nice attribute of decision trees is that they produce a questionnaire a doctor or patient
can ask.
