Have you ever looked back at the series of decisions that determine some course of action
for you?
In today's lecture, we'll see how a tool called decision trees can analyze many of
the variables far beyond what you might think of as decisions.
We'll see how we can combine research results from multiple studies to gain medical insight
or do a deeper dive into a single event such as what happened on the fateful night that
the Titanic sank or hunt for new customers.
Decision trees are one of the most transparent and powerful techniques in all of data analytics.
Let's start with the decision trees involving probability.
I'll use a medical example from the text, Staphs, Modeling the World by Bach, Veleman,
and DeVoe.
There are two studies.
First, a study by the Harvard School of Public Health called binge drinking on campus, results
of a national study.
They found that 44% of the college students engage in binge drinking, 37% drink moderately
and 19% abstain entirely.
A second study appeared in the American Journal of Health Behavior, and it reported that among
binge drinkers between the ages of 21 and 35, 17% were involved in alcohol-related auto
accidents, while 9% of non-binged drinkers in the same age group were involved in such
accidents.
Let's ignore the fact that college students are often a bit younger than the 21-35 year
olds of the second study.
Can we combine the results of these two studies?
That would let us determine the probability of a randomly selected college student being
a binge drinker and in an alcohol-related accident.
A decision tree diagram makes it easy to combine two studies and answer such questions.
We're interested in college students, so the first step is to branch out according to
college drinking habits.
So we have a branch representing 44% likelihood of a college student being a binge drinker,
37% of being a moderate drinker and 19% having abstained.
Here we have visualized the results of the first study about college students.
Now we fold in the second study about adult binge drinking.
First, we have that 17% of the binge drinkers were involved in alcohol-related auto accidents.
So we add this to the branch related to binge drinking.
Then we also know that 9% of non-binged drinkers were involved in alcohol-related auto accidents.
This gives us this.
Now let's look at our question again.
We're interested in the probability of randomly selecting a student and that person being
