Also, as with clustering, there are many possible definitions for similarity.
Once we have a measure of similarity, we can cluster.
David Glyke, Assistant Professor of Computer Science at Purdue University, displayed singer
data on an undirected graph.
Make sense, if you are similar to me, then I'm similar to you.
This enables us to use a very powerful clustering technique called spectral partitioning.
So let's get a bit more familiar with the data.
First, the maximum number of neighbors, artists similar to one another, is 875.
That one includes the Beatles.
The mean is about 81.
So we know who's similar to who.
Is that enough?
What can clustering do for us?
Let's create a matrix with this information.
We assign each row to an artist and give the columns that same ordering.
The element in a particular row and column of the matrix is a 1 if the corresponding
artists are similar.
Else, the element is 0.
Now we visualize the matrix.
Pink corresponds to a 1 in the matrix and black is where the zeros are.
Here is what we have.
We have a lot of connections and a lot of similarity.
But the matrix for this picture orders the artists in no particular order other than
possibly alphabetically.
Once we know the clusters, we can order the rows so everyone in one cluster is ordered
together.
Now, look at the resulting matrix when it's visualized this way.
What do you notice?
Suddenly there is structure in the matrix.
Those dark pink regions are our clusters.
Those are the regions with a lot of artists connected to each other but not as connected
to artists outside the group.
So let's find an artist who's in a particular cluster.
How about Elton John?
We know from earlier work that he is similar to Billy Joel.
But now we also learn that they are in the same cluster.
And so are Neil Diamond, Ringo Starr and Paul McCartney.
The pictures you are seeing visualize the matrix with a tool called Viz Matrix created
by David Glyke and one of his colleagues.
David created all the visuals we are seeing here.
