We definitely live in a connected world.
Email, mobile phones, social media, and video chatting all enable unprecedented connections.
But how connected are we?
How do we analyze that?
This is the area of networks, what are often called social networks, even when there is
nothing obviously social about the network.
We'll begin with one of the most famous ideas of social networks, degrees of separation.
Part of the popularity of this idea comes from a 1993 movie and 1990 play called Six
Degrees of Separation.
As the end of the play, a Fifth Avenue socialite in a climactic moment of reflection delivers
the following monologue.
I read somewhere that everyone on this planet is separated by only six other people, six
degrees of separation.
Between us and everybody else on this planet, the President of the United States, a gondolier
in Venice, fill in the names.
I find that extremely comforting that we're so close.
But I also find it like Chinese water torture that we're so close because you have to find
the right six people to make the connection.
It's not just big names, it's anyone.
Now wait, there are over seven billion people on this planet.
This statement would mean you can pick anyone on the planet and there exists a path of equating
acquaintances from that person to you or to me.
In particular, that path only consists of six people.
Hard to believe?
Our fictional socialite is saying that she read this somewhere.
Where might she have read this?
That is, where did the concept of Six Degrees of Separation begin?
In Europe, it started in 1929 with Hungarian author Frigues Carinthi, who used it in a
short story translated as Chains.
In the United States, this concept dates back to at least 1967, when Stanley Milgram, an
American social psychologist, conducted what became known as his Small World Experiment.
In it, he sent several packages to 160 random people living in Omaha, Nebraska, asking them
to forward the package to a friend or acquaintance who they thought would bring the package closer
to a final individual.
A stockbroker from Boston, Massachusetts, each starter received instructions to mail a folder
via the U.S. Postal Service to a recipient.
But with some rules, starters could only mail the folders to someone they actually knew
personally on a first name basis.
When doing so, each starter instructed their recipient to mail the folder again to someone
that person knew on a first name basis with the same instructions.
Each mailing was to get the package closer to the target recipient.
