But we missed the right balance.
In the end, there was a $9.5 million settlement in a class action lawsuit against Facebook.
The money?
It set up a not-for-profit group that addresses online privacy rights.
So here we see two very, very costly mistakes in privacy.
Both Netflix and Facebook would have been aware of privacy concerns about these projects.
But their projects did not have privacy as a primary objective.
And they did end up having trouble, in both cases, costing them millions.
There is another lesson.
Notice how an outside researcher blew the whistle and shared what was happening.
Without that, we wouldn't necessarily have known.
And in both cases, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission also got involved in an effort to
establish clearer rules about privacy online.
Facebook actually faced formal complaints on eight counts, one of which was the Beacon
Project.
And the day those complaints were settled in November 2011 was the same day that Facebook
CEO Mark Zuckerberg went online to write that the company had made, quote, high-profile
mistakes.
Not only with Beacon in 2007, but also in December 2009.
That was when Facebook temporarily dropped some privacy controls from its website.
Certain information that users designated as private, such as the friends list, was
suddenly made public without approval from users, or even a warning.
And these aren't the only such cases.
Google reached a 2010 settlement over a neglect of privacy by its defunct social service,
Google Buzz.
That settlement included agreeing to transfer 8.5 million to privacy groups.
There are other issues, too.
For example, the privacy of children is becoming more complicated.
I have a friend who never posts pictures of his children, even on Facebook.
That worked for a while, but now his kids are in elementary school.
They go on trips with friends and go to birthday parties.
Now his kids appear in other people's Facebook feeds.
So it is also getting harder to conceal a romantic relationship.
Consider the recent research by Facebook social scientist Lars Backstrom and Cornell University
professor John Kleinberg.
They found that your partner or spouse can be revealed simply based on your network of
Facebook friends.
If you've been married a long time, this may or may not seem surprising.
You might guess this has to do with the number of friends a couple share in common.
But that approach won't necessarily find your partner or spouse.
It may be that you share the most friends with a college buddy.
In their study, only about 25% of relationships could be identified based on mutual friends.
Instead, partners are more likely to overlap across many more separate groups.
Think of a huge birthday party.
When you turn 40, 50, or 60, one of your closest friends may not know your work friends, college
