Some were separated by as many as 29 steps.
To get a sense of why this might be true, here's a rough calculation for this.
There are 7 billion people in the world and each person knows X number of people.
Let's assume there are six links among them.
Here is the basic equation for six degrees of separation.
Seven billion equals X to the sixth.
When the equation is solved, X is about 44.
This means that one way for the theory of six degrees of separation to be accurate would
be for everyone in the world to have about 44 distinct acquaintances.
For a more recent example, we could look to Twitter.
To investigate the connectivity of the Twitter network, social media analytics company, Sysimos
Incorporated, examined more than 5.2 billion Twitter friendships, the number of friend
and follower relationships.
So a graph of that would have 5.2 billion edges.
After an impressive amount of careful computing, they reported in April 2010 that there is
an average of 4.67 steps between people on Twitter.
How about Facebook?
In November 2011, Facebook announced that there are on average just 3.74 intermediate
friends separating one user from another.
There were 721 million vertices in that graph.
Interestingly, for a while, the average eccentricity got smaller as Facebook got bigger.
Back in 2008, a much smaller Facebook had an average of 4.28 intermediate friends.
The types of graphs we've been looking at with edges representing connections between
the vertices are called social networks.
They aren't necessarily social in context.
They can be electrical power grids, telephone call graphs, or the spread of computer viruses.
It is important to note that the type of graph needed for an application can differ.
For example, Facebook friendships go both ways.
If I'm your friend, you're mine.
That's a graph with undirected edges.
Twitter's different.
I can follow you, but you may or may not follow me.
This is a directed network where the edges point from one vertex to another.
While similar, these can be quite different in terms of the analysis tools available.
You can easily cluster the Facebook graph with a very powerful technique.
It's not that you can't for the Twitter graph, but the technique for undirected graphs doesn't
necessarily and immediately port over.
Then there are other layers of analysis, just in modeling a system as a graph.
Is the existence of any connections between objects or vertices all you want?
Is it enough to know that we are friends at all?
Sometimes, but maybe you'll want to integrate the number of interactions we've had.
