Data sets are getting bigger, so a fundamental aspect of working with data sets today is
ensuring that you use methods that can sift through them quickly and efficiently.
In this lecture, we will talk about a core issue of computing, complexity.
Managing complexity is an important part of computer science and plays an important role
in data analytics.
We can see how important these issues are by looking at online purchases.
Billions of dollars are spent with credit card numbers flying through the worldwide
web to make online purchases.
When you make a purchase, you want to be on a secure site.
What makes it secure?
The data is encrypted.
We'll see what that means, and then it's decrypted by the receiver, so clearly it can
be decrypted.
Broadly speaking, encryption techniques are based on factoring really huge numbers.
How huge?
Really huge.
They may be 10 to the 75th power.
That's a 1 with 75 zeros after it.
How big is that?
The number of atoms in the observable universe is estimated to be 10 with 80 zeros after
it.
How do we know that someone isn't going to be able to factor such a number on their computer
or some large network of computers?
Just keep getting faster.
Maybe tomorrow there will be a computer that's fast enough and suddenly internet sales are
insecure.
This would make an interesting plot for a movie, but we are safe.
A computer simply cannot move at these speeds.
The problem would take hundreds of years to decode.
By then, your credit card number is pretty safe.
So having a computer even 1,000 times faster isn't going to be enough to crack the code.
The idea is that ensure the safety of such methods also determine how large a data set
someone can look at or if someone's data analysis technique can be done in real time.
To get a handle on this, let's see one of my favorite examples from class.
We can do it with a book of baby names.
At one time I used a big book of phone numbers in my office.
Today we'll use a copy of Le Miserable.
The book is among the longest written, over half a million words.
War and Peace is only a little bit longer.
Now say you chose a word on one of its approximately 1,500 pages.
How long would it take me to find it?
In math, it can help to look at a smaller problem.
Sometimes great insight is gained from smaller problems, enabling one to tackle and solve
a much larger problem.
