Think of stock indexes such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
This type of data enables us to predict the future such as the price of a stock based on its previous price movements in the previous hour, day or month.
The boundary between computer generated and human generated data is not fixed.
In sports, you might have someone collecting data by hand about where players shoot rather than having a sensor.
A professor might input grades manually or the grades might be read and entered by a machine.
A doctor may personally input medical information into a case file, but that may be in combination with data read automatically from routine scans or computer based lab work.
Now, we turn to unstructured data, which doesn't follow a pre-scribed format.
While perhaps 80% of identified data comes in this form, until recently, we didn't have mechanisms for analyzing it.
In fact, there were even problems just storing it or storing it in a way that could be readily accessed.
Scientific data often is unstructured and can be anything from seismic imagery to atmospheric data.
Everyday life these days also produces a lot of unstructured data.
There are emails, text document, text messages and updates to sites like Facebook, Twitter or LinkedIn.
There is also website content that's added to video and photography sites like YouTube or Instagram.
Now, if data is structured, it is more likely that a method, possibly around for some time, has been developed to analyze it.
Unstructured? Much less likely.
A million records in a structured database are much easier to analyze than a million videos on YouTube.
Now, so-called unstructured data can still have some structure.
Let's take one example of unstructured data, satellite images.
For a given satellite, all the images come in some aspect ratio.
All the images have the same number of rows to columns.
But this type of data is quite different than a record containing student data.
With student data, I know the first entry is the student number, second is the name.
While I know that the picture will contain pixels, I don't necessarily know what is in the picture and what is not in the picture.
I don't necessarily know where to look.
So, the framing provides some structure and adjacent frames may be related, but overall, the data is much more unstructured.
The information contained in satellite imagery depends in part in what interests you.
Keep in mind, a satellite image database can contain terabytes of data.
Roofing contractors are using only a very small portion of Google Earth.
Suppose you are trying to identify native rainforests or places where deforestation or reforestation is occurring.
Well, it's whether it's the condition of roofs or forests we want to identify.
Can the identification be done automatically?
