Remember in March 2013, that was reported to be 400 million per day.
This was up from 95 million tweets per day back in December 2010.
But what is trending depends on what's an anomaly, and that depends on what you're
looking for.
In 2010, Twitter changed how it identified a trend.
In doing so, what was considered a trend also changed.
Rather than being the most talked about subjects, Twitter wanted a trending to indicate what
is, quote, most breathtaking, and, quote, immediately popular.
These may sound similar, and overall they probably are.
But before this change, Twitter's trending topics were dominated by consistently popular
items.
In particular, Justin Bieber was present on the list.
That popular list kept anything new and hot in the moment from appearing.
Here's how Twitter explained this.
The new algorithm identifies topics that are immediately popular rather than topics that
have been popular for a while or on a daily basis to help people discover the most breaking
news from across the world.
To do this, Twitter tracks the volume of terms mentioned on Twitter on an ongoing basis.
Topics are then trending when the volume of tweets about that topic at a given moment
dramatically increases.
Then, it is different, trending and anomaly.
Again, here we see a lesson.
First, note that Twitter changed its definition, what worked at one time might need to change
later.
In data analytics, you often need to keep track of whether your methods continue to work
as we are in an age of ever changing data.
Anomaly detection is like a huge where's Waldo search.
But rather than having Waldo hidden on the page of a book, it's like having him hidden
on a sheet of paper the size of Manhattan or New York state.
Today, we look for oddities in huge data sets and we don't always know what the anomaly
is.
So, it might even be like where's Waldo when we don't know what Waldo looks like or we
don't know what he's wearing.
And sometimes we think we see Waldo but we don't.
But in medical testing is called a false positive.
Anomalies by definition aren't easy to find.
They are the surprises, the exceptions, the counter trends and the peculiarities.
As time goes on, more data unfolds, leaving a longer trail for some types of anomalies.
And research continues to create a more robust toolbox of techniques to find these special
cases.
The good news, we find such anomalies every day, improving our lives and saving money.
