This is another grouping, possibly in even likely a very different one.
So one way methods differ is over how to calculate distance.
The first distance we just saw is Euclidean distance, since it is measuring distance in
space, in that case the xy plane.
The second measure was the angle and is often called cosine similarity, because you can
measure by the cosine of the angles.
Let's see the difference between angular distance and linear distance on another example,
a questionnaire.
Can we find someone most similar to you?
It isn't yet a grouping, only a pairing, but we can extend this idea to entire groups.
Suppose you and two friends rate the 2011 Oscar-nominated films, Inception, King's
Speech and Toy Story 3, based on your interest in seeing them, either for the first time
or again.
We will rank between minus 5 and 5, with 5 correlating to really wanting to see the film,
and minus 5 being definitely not seeing it.
So you rate Inception with a 5, King's Speech with a 3, and maybe Toy Story 3 with a minus
1.
Jane rates the films minus 1, 2 and 3, and then John rates the films 4, 1 and minus 3.
Now treat these values as a point.
So your point is located at 5, 3 minus 1 in three-dimensional space.
Jane's is at minus 1, 2, 3, so the distance between your point and Jane's is the square
root of 5 minus negative 1, that quantity squared, plus 3 minus 2, that quantity squared,
plus negative 1 minus 3, that quantity squared.
When we take the square root of all that, we get 7.28.
The distance between your point and John's is 5.74, so you and John have more similar
taste, at least according to Euclidean distance.
Now note, this same idea can be extended to a hundred points.
You simply let each person be represented by a point in one-hundredth dimensional space
and use the same formula in a hundred dimensions rather than three.
What about cosine similarity?
An important attribute in this example is a rating of 3, 3, 3 and 5, 5, 5 would be considered
exactly the same.
Is that what you want?
It depends again on your goals and your data.
Let's turn to popular songs and singers.
We'll use data you can try that's available from the Million Song Database, the existence
of which was partially supported by the National Science Foundation.
The one million songs are by 44,558 distinct artists.
The artist in the song database came with a measure of similarity already given.
This is really nice as you don't have to do the heavy lifting.
