unpopular war? The idea was if you had a model explaining why voters will vote one way or the
other then maybe you don't need polling data tracking how they say they will vote. Data analytics
has transformed national politics in part by taking the opposite approach. Instead of hoping
for master variables to explain overall election get lots of data about voters. See how they vote
and see how they say they'll vote. As long as there is plenty of voter data available to aggregate
this will be more speculative kinds of prediction hands down. As we've seen this approach works
well when there is a lot of data. U.S. Senate and governor's races in the U.S. involve frequent
polling so those have plenty of data. So that's a good place to start when you'd like to do some
of this analysis yourself. But the less data you have the less confidence you can have in this kind
of analysis. U.S. House of Representatives races attract much less polling than Senate races.
Seats in state legislatures give even less polling. And yet the basic approach remains valid even for
smaller elections. There's just more room for error. If you want to know how people will vote
then focus on data about the voters. You may need to focus on other types of voter data such as
who they voted for previously, changing demographics of the district, political contributions.
Especially for small races it may also become important to have very granular metrics about
candidates themselves especially how they interact with voters. Remember in baseball it was new
statistics about players that raised analytics to a higher level. What if politicians had something
like say an in-person voter conversion percentage or a conversion rate for TV appearances? What about
a metric for who has the highest perceived fit with the interest in values of the district?
In any case there is a more general lesson in all of this. Data aggregation is not just for politics.
Waiting and aggregating data can work well for any messy complex field where no single variable
explains everything. We can look for an answer by gathering as much data as possible about that
answer. The data can include prior answers, predicted answers, and promised answers. Then we can
carefully aggregate all that data about answers toward a single best estimate of the answer we're
seeking. It's a lot of work but the more we bring together the better our answer will be.
