So this is growing fast.
If you sing 100 verses, you have more words than the number of atoms in the observable
universe.
100 verses can sound like a lot, but remember, if you ever sang 100 bottles of milk on the
wall or whatever other beverage you chose to use, that is possible with some songs.
It's not possible with this one.
The much faster growth comes from the variable in that exponent.
Rather than n to the tenth power, we have 10 to the nth power.
That's a huge, huge difference.
Early when I was searching for the word in Les Mis, I was using exponential decay to
get where I was going quickly.
I was able to search two to the nth power words in n steps.
So let's return to the issue of exponential growth and have it be a doubling similar to
how I search for the word in Les Mis.
Suppose a highly contagious virus hits.
It starts with one person.
The next day, that person and someone else is sick.
The next day, four people are ill.
Suppose the illness stays in Manhattan, which has about 1.6 million people.
Also let's assume it would take 10 days to create a vaccine.
On day one, 1 in 1.6 million people are ill.
Even after a week, only 64 people are ill.
After two weeks, about 8,000 people have been ill or half a percent of the population.
After three weeks or 21 days, you are at 1 million people.
And the next day, everyone's infected.
But note, on day 20, you only have 30 percent ill.
What does this mean?
If you wanted the vaccine available on day 20, when 30 percent of the population is infected,
then you needed to start it on day 10.
When 512 people or only .032 percent of the population are infected, that's really hard
to see.
Exactly.
Exponential growth can, to a certain extent, appear to be doing almost nothing and then
spike.
That's why paying attention to those small changes can be quite important.
Okay, so let's try another example.
This time, looking at the growth of photography.
In 1930, about a billion photos were taken.
Thirty years later, that number had grown to about 3 billion photos taken annually.
In 1970, about 10 billion photos were taken a year.
1980, about 25 billion.
1950, 57 billion.
And in 2086 billion photos were taken a year.
So what about the growth of photography at that point?
