There is no limit to the places data analytics can take you.
I got a call once asking me to offer a prediction about the following question.
Would snowboarders in the X games be able to do a triple rotating twist off the ramp
once a new design for that ramp came into use?
Well, I realized right away as so often happens at the start of an analysis that I had no idea.
That type of trick is called a triple quark, but I didn't even know the term.
What I did know was a menu of analytic tools, tools which you know from what we've covered in this course.
So what tool might you try?
At the time, my thought was that simulation would be helpful.
Now the kinds of simulations we did in this course used what is called discrete math to study discrete changes.
But I realized that the physics of a moving snowboarder would probably require a continuous simulation.
In physics, a continuous function is often the job for differential equations.
So I did what is often the case in data analytics.
I got the help of an expert.
With the physics involved in the differential equations, I needed to turn to someone who knew physics better than me.
This was the valedictorian of Davidson College, who was one core shy of being a double major in physics and math.
Together, we quickly built a very simplified simulation.
The snowboarders body was just a cylinder in our model.
At one point, the student turned to me and said, how odd it was to have data analysts saying that an athlete out there somewhere could perform a new trick.
But before long, we did come up with our prediction, which was, yes, the triple cork would be possible.
The very next day, we were proven right when someone actually did what our simulation had said would be possible.
Throughout this course, we have seen that data analysis allows us to predict the future.
The fancier, more recent term for this is predictive analytics.
Nate Silver, like Gallup before him, stepped onto the national stage with accurate election predictions.
Baseball changed with the advent of new statistical measures that gave moneyball managers better predictions about how well players would play.
This is our last lecture together.
So I thought it would be fun to look into the future and in a sense, consider the future of predicting the future.
What can we expect? What might come next?
Sometimes it's easy to predict the future.
For instance, I predict that Seattle, Washington will have at least two consecutive cloudy days over the next year.
Data shows that Seattle averages over 200 cloudy days per year.
So with a simple summary statistic, I get a very safe prediction.
Other predictions aren't as clear.
Sometimes that's because we have lots of uncertainty, even if we have lots of data.
For instance, we can't simply predict the weather with absolute accuracy all the time.
The dynamics are too fluid and dynamic.
In math, it's called a chaotic system, which means that small changes in one place can result in big changes elsewhere.
This is called the butterfly effect, a term coined by Edward Lorenz.
A hurricane formation Lorenz proposed can depend on whether a distant butterfly flaps its wings several weeks earlier.
That's a lot of uncertainty.
Other times, predictions seem impossible because we don't see any data or patterns to analyze it all.
Consider something like the lottery.
Clearly, someone happens to win from time to time just by chance, but having a model to predict a winning lottery number seems hopeless.
In fact, some lotteries you don't even get to pick your number.
You just buy scratch-off tickets and take your chances with whatever's on the ticket.
And yet, these so-called scratch-off lotteries have offered a possible point of entry for data analysts.
Maybe where winning tickets are shipped is not entirely random.
If there is any pattern, then it might be possible to predict where the next winning ticket will be sold,
allowing you to go there and try to buy up as many tickets as possible.
Stanford PhD Joe N. Ginther apparently used this approach to win the Texas lottery in 2006 and again in 2008 and a third time in 2010.
Now, I'm not recommending you start throwing your money at lotteries.
I am saying that data analytics will continue to become more powerful at cracking all sorts of problems,
and you may need to keep trying to get a successful outcome.
The same range of issues comes up when we discuss trends in data analysis itself.
Some things are clear, some have uncertainty that can be reduced,
and others may yield to a new approach to gathering data.
First, it is clear that analytics will change.
If a company you know today is still relevant and strong a few years from now, they will have adapted and changed.
The world of data analytics will, in many cases, pass you by if you stand still.
To see an example of this, let's turn to Google.
On September 11th, 2001, Google users were searching for New York Twin Towers and World Trade Center,
but the results had no breaking news about the tragic events of the day.
Google had crawled through the web a month earlier, so no news about those events was included in its data.
So Google temporarily placed links to news organizations,
indicating that those sites should be visited since the search engine wouldn't work.
From that start, Google News evolved rapidly.
In fact, Google now crawls through news sources much more frequently than it crawls through other sites.
Revised analytics have made search engines much better at predicting the range and timeliness of information that's most likely to be requested.
And there lies part of the key. Where will data analytics go?
In part, it will come from what we are able to dream, as today's innovators emerge around us.
In fact, even the act of typing in a search query now triggers predictive analytics.
In 2010, Google Search began offering auto-completion.
You type two characters and Google already anticipates what you are searching on.
Many websites now attempt to offer this to another achievement of predictive analytics.
In fact, an important feature of data analytics is that the more things change, well, the more things change.
They do not just stay the same.
In fact, Google's very success as a search engine may be creating conditions that make it harder to be successful in the future.
Remember that Google's original page rank posed by Bryn and Page depended on webpages linking to others.
However, due to how well Google works, many webpages may no longer try as hard to include links.
And fewer people may bother to bookmark webpages.
Instead, more people may simply query Google to find the same item again and again whenever they need it.
But wait, if there are fewer links available, then a key feature of the early web that Google depended on for its search may become less available.
Well, no matter where we go in this changing landscape, there are some fundamental principles that are unlikely to change.
So here are four principles that we can keep in mind as we think about predicting the future.
Number one, prediction comes from insight, not just the data.
When new technology comes, we often think it will make things better.
That's not always the case.
The same is true with more data.
It's how we use the data, not simply its presence.
More data, if not properly analyzed, can be a problem.
More data can mean less insight.
Remember how Gallup in his polls rose to prominence?
He had a fraction of the data but made better predictions.
The goal is good predictions and more insight, not necessarily more data.
Fundamental principle number two, the value of prediction comes from context.
Analysis is not just what you know.
You need to situate what you know so that it becomes the right insight for the right problem.
For instance, the insight you glean from a data set may seem relatively unimportant to your context,
and yet you turn out to be more important in a larger or different context.
An example of this occurred in 2011.
A multi-state outbreak of listeriosis infections was linked to whole cantaloupes from a farm in Colorado.
The outbreak strains were quickly identified in the Colorado patients, so far so good.
But this was the smaller context.
Then, through what is called DNA fingerprinting, the outbreak was connected with illnesses in 25 other states.
That's where the real value of the analysis became more apparent.
Without the ability to find the right context, many multi-state outbreaks would not be detected or controlled in time.
Fundamental principle number three, don't overestimate the value of any one prediction.
Results in data analysis are better seen as an informed opinion.
Remember our lecture on patterns.
We have the ability to read a lot into results and assume causation where there is simply correlation.
Remember the fact that shark attacks rise along with ice cream consumption,
and that doesn't necessarily mean one causes the other.
In March Madness brackets, you may have the best predictions in your pool,
but that doesn't mean you got all 63 games correct.
Taking just the first round of 32 games, if you could be 90% accurate on predicting the winner,
you'd only get all 32 games correct once every 30 years.
So, analytics can help improve our predictions, but they are not necessarily stating truth or absolute outcomes.
And finally, a fourth fundamental principle.
Don't underestimate the ability of prediction to anticipate and transform the future.
Don't miss the boat.
Every summer, I have a group of researchers who work with me in data analytics.
We almost always watch the movie Moneyball.
I always emphasize the courage it took for Billy Bean to follow and trust the data.
The A's were able to find the undervalued players, hire them, and compete.
To me, an important lesson from Moneyball is having the courage to follow the sound predictions and believe in the results.
In fact, analysts who get this point may not talk much about what they do.
Like quantitative analysts working for hedge fund companies on Wall Street,
their mathematical methods are essentially trade secrets.
These analysts are using analytics to find undervalued assets in arbitrage on the difference for as long as possible.
Data analytics in search for undervalued assets are spreading to many fields.
So, keep these fundamental principles in mind.
Let's predict the future of predictive analysis.
Let's imagine we are at a data analysis conference of the future.
What might we see?
I organize a sports analytics conference where each year the work falls into several categories.
First, tools evolve.
Google adapted its algorithm to stay current.
Sports teams look for the competitive edge with new algorithms that offer new insight,
from biomechanics to training to coaching strategies that range from draft picks to player lineups.
How bracketology has evolved in my own work is another example.
In 2014, I had national media covering my work in creating NCAA basketball brackets for March Madness.
I was on the CBS Evening News, Bloomberg TV, and covered by the New York Times, USA Today, and The Atlantic, among others.
They were struck with the success of methods I had validated in years prior, which you learned in our lecture on bracketology in March Madness.
The methods you learned were made publicly available, with people from over 25 countries running the codes.
But in the midst of the media frenzy, we were also trying new methods.
For instance, we tried aggregating the data in new ways that might remind you of Nate Silver's work in politics.
However, instead of aggregating polls, we were taking about a dozen statistics for each team and treated that as a vector,
which we can process using linear algebra.
We also took data points for all teams from the past several years, not just a single season.
We also used cluster analysis to put all the teams into groups, and we created brackets based on how one cluster tended to compete against another cluster.
A bracket we created with clusters as part of the ranking popped into the 100th percentile in the second round of the 2014 tournament.
That means no one got more correct predictions in a field with 11 million brackets.
Our normal methods were also doing well, very well, but the entire research team was naturally excited to see new ideas work so well.
So then, we turned to focus on what information each new method was capturing.
What might that method see that another method may not?
So watch for tools you've seen in this course to show up in new combinations.
Clustering plus ranking, simulations plus differential equations, decision trees plus regression, and maybe neural networks.
Expect the tools we've discussed to show up in many new ways.
Second, we can predict there will be new data sets.
Every year, new medical research emerges, and with it, often new data to analyze and study.
News media sometimes makes their data available for analysis.
Sports data is often available, and with the advent of new measuring devices, entirely new data is available,
whether play-by-play data or new data about conditioning and training.
In golf, data has been gathered in a system called ShotLink,
with information about every shot ever taken by every player on the PGA Tour for over a decade.
This shot-by-shot data allows tour players, sports media outlets, and researchers to analyze the game.
And as happened earlier in baseball, there is now a rush to determine which statistics can make better use of all that data to provide the most insight.
To stimulate work in the area, a ShotLink intelligence prize was announced starting in 2012.
A professor from the Columbia Business School won the inaugural prize for his work on the best ball striking on iron shots from key distances in the game.
This new area has data analysts looking for money ball-like insights in golf with this very new data set.
And like the Warren Buffett offer of $1 billion for a perfect bracket prediction, these new competitions are potentially open to anyone.
What types of questions can be answered? Time will tell. In each year, we will learn more.
So there will be new methods and new data sets.
Third, new technologies will continue to impact data analysis.
This can be software like sport view technology that led to a massive influx of new data in basketball and soccer.
Yet it can also mean new technologies that create new questions in data analysis.
For example, retina scan technology can track where we move our eyes.
Link to other data research using retinal scans has the potential to transform how we understand everything from reading to movie watching, digital gaming, online education, and even interpersonal communication.
Fourth, data analysis itself can drive new technologies.
Gordon Moore of Intel famously jump-started wider thinking about information technology with a very simple analysis.
He didn't have a lot of data, but just by looking at a very small data set about improvements in Intel microprocessors over time, he was able to make a powerful prediction.
He uncovered a rapid and regular doubling of processing power, and that prediction became the starting point for a technology roadmap that has shaped the entire information technology industry for decades.
New materials may become available, and that is another key source of technological change for new fangled devices.
Take lithium ion batteries. These are part of a family of rechargeable batteries with applications from cars to computers.
However, a general roadmap for such innovations is not yet available.
Creating a new revolutionary material can be a slow, really, really slow process, especially when compared to the rate other new products are conceived and introduced to the market.
The iPhone went from development to store displays in four years.
The Boeing 787 Dreamliner went from a concept to commercial flight in nine years.
But the research and development of the new materials, such as the rechargeable lithium ion battery used in the iPhone, can take 20 years or more.
Projects such as the Materials Genome Initiative announced in 2013 are aimed at using data analytics to accelerate such innovations.
By gathering and analyzing data about materials in new ways, the goal is to reduce costs and cut the development time for new materials in half.
The name resembles that of the Human Genome Project, which set out to map the underlying structure of human genes.
The Materials Genome Initiative, in a similar way, is attempting to gain a deeper understanding of how elements interact to form more complex materials.
Both of these are essentially vast data analysis projects, and as more becomes understood, scientists and engineers will be able to create new materials.
And the Human Genome Project itself continues to stimulate new analytics, not only in biological research, but also in medicine.
Sequencing a single reference genome of 3 billion base pairs for human DNA was a huge first step.
But research is now uncovering a vast amount of variation between individuals and even between different cells within a single person.
What about the more distant future? Fans of the Star Trek transporter may want to take note.
We have more non-human cells in our bodies than we have human cells due to all the friendly bacteria.
The data challenges here will be even more enormous as researchers try to track all the members of the entire ecosystem that make up a single person.
As human beings, we have so much genetic material in common, and yet genetic data will also show that each of us are unique in a mind-boggling degree.
Medicine will increasingly be a matter of managing and using large data files that track and accommodate more and more of the variation that exists among people.
A genetic variation in one context that might be detrimental, but neutral or beneficial in another context.
And only more detailed data, both in big studies and from individual patients, will be able to make sense of this.
Traits may be expressed or recessive only in combination with other traits, making the combinatorics of variation even more complicated.
The tools we've seen for visualization will be enhanced in order to visualize such complex information, which will be a big gain for basic research.
And personal data will become the cornerstone of personalized medicine.
The data analytics pioneered to manage the pancreatic cancer of Steve Jobs will go mainstream.
Even the dosages might be adjusted based on the genome, so that the right dose of the right drug is given to match the patient's version of the disease.
Another spinoff for having individual genomes is identification and visualization.
In fact, we had DNA testing in the late 1980s, long before the entire reference genome was sequenced.
But with much more data, it's becoming increasingly possible to predict your facial features just by looking at your DNA.
Paleontologists have already been using DNA visualizations to show us revised pictures of our favorite dinosaurs in hominids such as the Neanderthals.
And the work on current humans goes even further.
Researchers began using data on G markers for just a few prominent facial landmarks, such as the tip of the nose in the middle of each eyeball.
But more recent work already uses highly detailed grids with thousands of reference points.
And these data grids are superimposed onto scans of 3D images taken with stereoscopic cameras.
The data grids might remind you of how the post-off has solved handwriting recognition, but now the images are in 3D and each pixel contains multiple traits.
The same progression toward a data reference map is taking place with the materials genome initiative.
Here, scientists and engineers are seeking a roadmap that will make it easier to tune a new material to the exact properties needed for a particular application, and do it faster and cheaper than ever before.
There are many, many combinations that can be tried and arranged at the atomic level.
A huge number of them could have useful purposes, but most won't, and going one by one simply isn't possible.
So the materials genome initiative is using computers to model known and unknown materials and simulate their behavior.
In the end, they have lots and lots of data to analyze in order to help find areas that deserve a more careful examination.
The materials genome initiative has brought together several successful existing projects.
One example is the Harvard Clean Energy Project. It has created a huge database.
It started as a small proof of concept by examining organic solar cell materials.
The group calculated the properties of about 15 compounds.
With this, they predicted how well these new substances might perform without ever creating the material in a lab.
In the end, they created a new compound with near record breaking electrical properties.
Here, groundbreaking success came from looking at a few chemical compounds and from the work of a single graduate student.
And now, anyone from around the world can download a program that does this work on a PC and reports the results.
The program has calculated millions of potential solar cell compounds.
So in the process of making this new data available, new technologies become possible too.
This is true even in daily life. Here's how your morning commute might change.
The moment you get into your car, it could perform biometric readings and know it is you.
So the seats and mirrors adjust to your specifications.
The radio has your selections or your favorite station on the internet begins feeding through.
The navigation system on the car is automatically running with suggested routes for the drive you are most likely to take at that day and time.
Keep in mind, choosing which way to drive may not involve finding the perfect route.
Remember how UPS solves difficult problems to optimize the delivery of their packages.
It's a good solution, not a perfect solution.
In fact, the car itself may even drive the route for you.
Vehicle manufacturers such as General Motors and Nissan are shooting to release a nearly autonomous vehicle by 2020 with demos already being tested that use cameras and radar to steer the car.
Google Labs has lots of data in this area too.
Often, tomorrow's innovations can sound today like the material of movies.
Take the Hunger Games, for example. In the story, Katniss is injured and a sponsor sends her an antidote via a device.
She is stationed in a tree and suddenly flying to her side comes the medicine.
Amazing and fun to consider.
But this isn't just a story.
In 2013, Amazon announced its research using drones or automated flying helicopters to deliver packages.
You may make an order.
Then about 30 minutes later, it lands on your doorstep.
Keep in mind, there is a lot of logistics here.
You need to think about the placement of the drones in the shipping centers.
Like air traffic control, we'd need to think how the paths of such drones might collide and to stay free of each other.
But Amazon has lots of experience with logistics.
Think of the impact.
Suddenly, you could remember a birthday and order something an hour before the party and have it in your hand as you arrive.
What do you see as a need around you?
Where does data seem unruly?
Where do you need better decisions?
Where could you get access to data that might contain insight?
What insights would be genuinely valuable?
Answers to these questions could predict the next area of innovation.
These could be the next advances, large or small.
My students have helped design the layout of a food pantry for the hungry.
They've helped design software that places students into preferred internship programs.
One student analyzed his own music collection and another began looking at her father's business.
What about you?
Have you been thinking of a challenge where data analytics might help?
Probably the biggest thing I love about data analytics is that when I'm first confronted with a problem,
I have no idea how to do it.
It doesn't mean I can't.
It just means I don't know yet.
This can be quite fun.
It's like the snowboarder problem.
You can find ways to bring in data analytics, maybe with help, no matter what the question is.
You just dig in and create an answer and then try something else.
As you dabble in data analytics, you become able to look at many aspects of life this way.
I find that the best part is to talk with others about what you're thinking.
You're modeling the world, so there are always simplifications.
You aren't looking for the answer and you usually won't perfectly solve it.
But many times, people will give you input and begin noodling over it themselves.
In a sense, it doesn't take much to build your own team of researchers.
You let others know what you're considering and often people start giving input.
And if today's idea is impossible, hang on to it.
New technology, new algorithms, and new data continue to arise.
So keep tabs on that idea you've had.
In my research group, we often circle back to look at ideas that were originally beyond us.
What would you like to understand?
Data analytics is not only for the big companies of the world.
Remember that Google itself began with just two graduate students who had a question
and used analytics, which you now understand, to create an answer.
My hope is that these lectures help you better understand your own interests
and that the tools of data analytics can help you explore paths you would not otherwise take.
Once we find something, like explorers, we plant our stake and we begin exploring even more.
And lastly, share what you find.
You can pursue data analytics on your own, but it is also best as a team sport, no matter what your age.
So I invite everyone to join in, and I hope you will too.
Data analytics is giving us the ability to explore, improve, and enjoy our world as never before.
Data analytics is giving us the ability to explore, explore, and explore our world as never before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before
before before before before before from before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before before during this journey.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah,
yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah,
yeah.
