So one way to look at that type of thing is to convince yourself there is no small or
casual investment when it comes to finance.
But be careful thinking that there aren't patterns.
There are.
And if we find them, the consequence can be huge.
Having discussed a lot of cases where our pattern seeking goes wrong, let's see one
where a suspected pattern was refined and refined to give us genuine insight.
When you get sick, you may want to know what the symptoms indicate or what to do to feel
better.
Where do you go?
Maybe eventually to the doctor, but before that, a pretty quick reference is a search
engine.
Sick?
Search Google for more information.
This can give you more information about the flu and if there seems to be an outbreak
in your area.
In fact, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention request that doctors inform them
of new flu cases.
In time, they'd see a pandemic emerging, but by then the news was outdated by a week
or two.
There was the delay in simply relaying the information and then the CDC had to crunch
the numbers and share the news if something was found.
Two weeks of flu is breaking out is a long, long time.
In fact, epidemics or seasonal influenza can cause a quarter of a million to half a million
deaths per year.
Early detection and response in this area is of great interest.
The next time you get the flu and turn to Google, you are helping detect flu.
How?
You've found that the relative frequency of certain queries is highly correlated with
the level of flu activity.
But there's more.
Google knows the region in which you're conducting your search so they can actually utilize search
queries to detect influenza epidemics in areas with a large population of web searchers.
With three billion searches a day, Google had a lot of data.
A lot.
So Google took the 50 million most common search engine terms that Americans type.
Then they looked at CDC data on the spread of influenza between 2003 and 2008.
Was there some pattern in what people searched on when flu was spreading?
Note, this had been attempted before.
