But other pieces of data, like the score during each game from one minute to one minute, may
not be as easily available.
It doesn't mean you can't get it.
It's out there, but you may need to figure out how to grab it.
Many times, there is too much data to grab by hand.
So unless a vendor or website offers the data, you have to write computer programs to grab
it off the internet.
And that isn't always easy to do, even if you're a computer programmer.
Sixth and lastly, at least for now, while an insight or approach may add value, it may
not add enough value.
Several years ago, along with my collaborator Amy Langville of the College of Charleston,
we developed a ranking method applicable to Twitter.
If you searched on a term like data analysis, it wouldn't just return tweets related to
that term.
It would sort them according to the influence or potential impact of the person who wrote
the tweet.
This is similar to how Google ranks webpages, something we'll talk about in a later lecture
on search engines.
A big company that does Twitter searches was very interested in our idea.
They commented that it would allow new value in better results.
But then they also said, we'll have to see if this would allow enough value to our customers
to justify the research and development resources this would demand.
Not every new and interesting insight is worth the time or effort needed to integrate it
into existing work.
And no insight is totally new.
If everything is new, then something is probably wrong.
We'll talk about other misconceptions throughout the course.
But these are pitfalls that can obscure the big idea of data analysis.
What makes data analysis so powerful are fundamental techniques we'll learn for looking at datasets
large or small.
For example, a technique we'll learn later called the singular value decomposition makes
it possible for recommendation systems to find products I'm not even aware I might like.
Creation of new but very simple analytics in sports helps determine when to draft or
trade a player and how to play.
Analytics to combine data from many political polls has changed political campaigns and
can affect who wins.
Some fundamental concepts inform everything we do in data analytics.
How do we test your data?
How do we look for patterns in data without imposing patterns that aren't really there?
There is a lot to discuss and to consider.
Exactly.
That's the nature of data analysis.
We have a set of data.
