Data analysis is not just about large organizations and large data sets.
Data analytics is also about individual people, just like you.
Your financial details can be monitored and analyzed as never before.
Your medical data in history can be organized to give you, as well as your professional
caregivers, unprecedented insight.
It is now much easier to track, adjust, and understand any aspect of everyday life, including
eating, sleep, activity levels, moods, movement, habits, communications, and on and on.
These are exciting changes.
They make possible new fields, such as personalized medicine, life logging, and personal analytics
of all kinds.
And they are coming together for some of the same reasons that data analytics as a whole
is taking off.
First, the wide range of technologies and methods available to large organizations are
also increasingly available to individuals.
Virtually all the tools we learn in this course, like grouping data into clusters or finding
correlations with regression or displaying data with infographics, can also be used on
our own data.
They can use the ideas and techniques of data analytics to live healthier lives, save money,
be a better coach to others in many areas of life, and so on.
Second, large organizations are already accumulating more and more data about you and your world.
So they are, in effect, doing a lot of heavy lifting on your behalf if you choose to access
and make use of the data thereby accumulated.
That said, there is plenty of personal data analysis you can do even without needing access
to large data sets or sophisticated tools at all.
Let's start there.
I'll start with something I do for both enjoyment and exercise, swimming.
I swim in the pool at Davidson College, where I teach.
It's also used for competition, so it has a huge clock next to the pool, making it easy
for me to keep track of my time.
With time comes data.
Now, this is where you might get tripped up, right at the start.
There is a lot of data that could be kept on swimming or whatever you're looking at,
but the possibilities and the realities of having a lot of data can also be overwhelming.
Keep in mind, even simple analysis without extensive data can give insight.
For example, by just watching my times on the clock and later counting my strokes, I
learned the following.
