be more difficult to find connections of three, four, or five.
Now, the internet movie database has over 2.6 million movies and 5.3 million names.
That is a huge data set.
But even though all these people make movies together, it's still surprising how few steps
it takes to get from one actor to another.
In finding these connections, we are working through a mathematical structure called a graph.
In such a graph, each vertex is an actor.
A link or edge is drawn between two vertices when both people appear in a film.
Let's learn a few more terms.
First, rather than degrees of separation, we talk about the distance between two vertices
as the minimum number of edges that connect those vertices.
There are two edges between Kevin Bacon and Daniel Day-Lewis, for example.
Then the eccentricity of a vertex is the maximum graph distance between that vertex and any
other in the graph.
The eccentricity of Kevin Bacon is claimed to be six or less.
Finally, the center of a graph consists of all vertices that have the smallest eccentricity
possible.
So, is Kevin Bacon only six degrees of separation away from everyone else?
As of April 28, 2013, we find the following breakdown of actors and their Kevin Bacon
numbers.
First, we see that indeed there are some actors with degrees of separation greater than six.
But this is just over .01% of actors, so we are pretty close to that statement being true.
On average, it looks like most actors are much closer than six degrees of separation
away.
Now, there is only one person with a Kevin Bacon number of zero, and that's Kevin Bacon
himself.
There are 2,769 actors who have appeared in a film with Kevin Bacon, and 305,215 actors
who have appeared with those 2,769 actors who have appeared with Kevin Bacon.
So what is the average Bacon number?
We take zero times one and add that to one times 2,769 and so forth and find the average
Bacon number to be 2.994.
So this is the eccentricity of Kevin Bacon.
Now that's a lot of numbers.
Here is a visualization of the Hollywood graph and all those connected to Kevin Bacon.
It is created by Suck He at the University of Sydney.
In the very middle is Kevin Bacon.
It's called a polyplane.
Here, each blue dot represents a single actor or actress.
There are so many and so close together that they look like blue rings.
Kevin Bacon is the dot at the center, which is not quite visible in the given orientation.
Then you see several rings linked to the center.
