If you see a bush shake and a tiger jumped out, then it might behoove you to keep that
in mind.
Even if for the next hundred times that shaking is the wind and not a tiger.
That hundredth time, that's an important connection to notice.
There is a correlation.
A tiger could rustle a bush before pouncing.
But remember, that doesn't mean that a bush's rustle is a tiger.
There is a name for this.
Apaphynia is the experience of seeing patterns or connections in random or meaningless data.
The name is attributed to Klaas Konrad and has come to represent our tendency to see
patterns in random information.
But Konrad was actually studying schizophrenia in the late 50s.
He used the term to characterize the onset of delusional thinking in psychosis.
In 2008, Michael Shermer coined the term patternicity, defining it as the tendency to find meaningful
patterns in meaningless noise.
There is another end of the spectrum, of course, and that's called randomania.
That's where events with pattern data are attributed to nothing more than chance probability.
This happens when we overlook patterns, instead saying it was just totally random.
But the most common reason we overlook pattern data is that we already have some other pattern
in our mind, whether a real connection exists or not.
In his book on the origins of stories, Brian Boyd explains why we tell stories and how
our minds are shaped to understand them.
He argues that art is a specifically human adaptation.
Boyd further connects art and storytelling to the evolutionary understanding of human
nature.
For Boyd, art offers tangible advantages for human survival, making pictures and telling
stories has sharpened our social cognition, encouraged cooperation, and fostered creativity.
How can this help us from an evolutionary point of view?
Humans depend not only on physical skills, but even more on mental power.
We dominate that cognitive niche and, as such, skills that enhance it can aid us.
Looking for patterns from that point of view aids us, and when we see patterns, we create
meaning and may even tell the story.
Whatever the case, we do have a tendency to look for patterns, and that can be a real
problem and a real strength in data analysis.
The important part is to realize and recognize that we may unearth a pattern in data analysis.
It may even be surprising, but even if we can offer a possible explanation, that still
doesn't mean we've found something meaningful.
Let's consider a few examples from the website Correlated.org, which is devoted to finding
weird correlations.
