If you like to walk, does it make a difference where you walk?
If you walk on a trail versus pavement, or if you walk one scenic route versus another,
do these make differences?
It isn't always that you need to change something.
Sometimes it is simply a matter of having the knowledge to be informed about your choice.
I didn't always swim faster, but I had a sense of why I wasn't, and then could decide if
I wanted to adjust.
But while gathering data is worthwhile, be careful not to assume that data automatically
means insight.
In particular, just buying a device and collecting data does not mean you'll gain insight.
Many companies have made that mistake, collecting ever more data to try to take advantage of
data analytics.
They have more data, but again, that doesn't necessarily mean they'll gain insight, even
if they attempt an analysis.
In 2013, the Wall Street Journal reported that 44 percent of information technology
professionals said they had worked on big data initiatives that got scrapped.
A major reason for so many false starts is that data is being collected merely in the
hope it turns out to be useful once analyzed.
This could be like working in a laboratory and doing random experiments without a scientific
question you're exploring.
You can perform a lot of steps in a chemistry lab and collect a lot of data, but it's unlikely
that you'll produce a crystal of any value without the goal being reflected in how you
work.
In that same Wall Street Journal article, Darian Shirazi, founder of Radius Intelligence
Incorporated, describes the problem as haystacks without needles.
He notes that companies, quote, don't know what they're looking for because they think
big data will solve the problem.
On the other hand, once you have a goal or a question you want to answer, you'll have
much more success, both immediately and over the long term.
In fact, once you know what you're trying to learn, you can often think quite creatively
about how to collect the data.
I teach a math modeling course that teaches data analytics.
Sometimes my students cannot gather data on problems of interest.
Every winter they participate in an international math modeling competition called the Mathematical
Contest in Modeling.
Thousands of teams from all over the world participate.
