Suppose rather than lay Ms, I take a copy of Good Night Moon, a classic book for young
children.
It has about 150 words.
Now you again will choose a word on a page.
Can I guess it?
There are only 32 pages, so I can start at the front and read along.
People tend to speak at a rate of 120 words per minute, which is about 2 words per second.
So Good Night Moon at an adult rate of speaking would take about 1 minute and 15 seconds to
read aloud, about 75 seconds.
If we did this many times and you picked your word randomly, then on average it would be
somewhere in the middle.
So this would tend to take just over 40 seconds.
But wait, this technique isn't as helpful with lay Ms, I, reading two words per second
means I'd need over 69 hours.
That's over two days if I read the entire book.
On average, I could find a word in lay Ms, in just over a day.
That's silly and impractical.
This isn't the only way to look for a word.
If you cut all the words out and jumble them up, and I needed to know which piece of paper
was the one you chose from, then I might need such an approach.
But the words are ordered on pages, and I can take advantage of that.
So I'm going to cut the book in half.
Is your word in the pages that I hold in my left hand?
Yes?
Then I look only at those pages, else I look in the other half.
I just reduced the problem in half.
When I was reading only one word at a time, I was reducing the problem only by one word
at a time.
Not a big deal with Good Night Moon.
It became a big problem with lay Ms.
Now I can use this trick again.
With the half I have remaining in my left hand, I can split it in half.
Is your word in the portion that I'm holding in my hand?
Yes?
I look there.
No?
I look in the other portion.
So how long would this take?
For lay Ms, I start with half a million words.
Then I go to a quarter of a million in one step.
Then I go to 125,000 words in two steps.
Just over 31,000 in four steps, and just under 1,009 steps.
At some point, you will have one page of words.
Now you can split the words on the page and continue the process.
