Today, they can also balance an inverted pendulum that is articulated in the middle.
It does get even better.
The pendulum can be hanging straight down.
So the computer has to swing it back and forth until it's ready to balance.
If you see this in motion, it looks like almost nothing is happening, except maybe an experiment in chaos, until that magic moment when the pendulum stands still, as if hanging by a wire.
And no, I cannot do that.
I wish I could, but I can't.
Imagine that.
In the 1950s, a computer had learned to balance a broom.
I balance brooms, and that usually gets a lot of attention.
Did the field go crazy with activity after this?
No.
Overall, the results were disappointing.
As a general method for solving problems, part of this was due to the times.
Keep in mind, at the time, computers were less powerful than today's microwave oven.
Further, it wasn't until 1969 that two MIT professors showed that the concept needed to be a bit more complex.
But whether it's balancing an object or playing 20 questions or something more, there is one issue to address.
How does this work?
How do you get a computer to learn?
A neural network, natural or artificial, creates a complex behavior from simple units.
Get enough of them acting together, and you can create that behavior.
A neuron is a single cell that communicates with others.
A typical neuron in the human brain receives between 1,000 and 10,000 inputs from other neurons.
These signals are relayed to the cell body where they combine.
If the stimulation is high enough, the cell fires, sending an electric signal to its downstream neighbors.
The input layer of biological neurons receive their inputs from the environment.
In the retina, they are sensitive to light of various wavelengths.
In the tongue, they are sensitive to the presence of particular molecules.
The axons of neurons relay their signals to other neurons, and others are connected to other cells.
Like muscle cells.
This is how we learn.
A cat with its 300 million neuron network learns the sound of a can of cat food opening.
As people, we have a 100 billion neuron network and learn to write poetry, ice skate, and yes, possibly balance a broom.
So we are now ready to look at neural networks on a computer.
First, there is the input layer.
In the body, this interacts with the environment.
