Consider Stephen Curry of the Golden State Warriors, who set the NBA record for three-point shots during the 2012-2013 season.
You can see him shooting just outside the line that gets him three points per shot.
Between the numbers in the picture, we can also see that Curry is less effective shooting straight away than from the sides.
He's also more effective on the right versus the left side.
However, he is a dangerous shooter to opposing teams simply by being on the court.
This was clearly seen when he lit up the court in the playoffs in 2013, scoring 54 points in Madison Square Garden.
Consider the numbers.
He scored 54 points and shot 11 of 13 on three-point attempts.
He shot 7 for 7 from the free throw line, led the team in rebounds and assists, and scored 23 points in the second quarter alone.
What was so special about Curry's night?
Did we just get caught up in the fervor of the playoffs?
I think it was special, real special.
Why?
First, only seven players in NBA history have scored more at Madison Square Garden.
Listen to the names.
Well, Chamberlain, Elgin Baylor, Kobe Bryant, Bernard King, Rick Berry, Richie Gurren, and Michael Jordan.
The Knicks knew Curry would be the Golden State offense going into the game.
David Lee, the Warriors' second leading scorer, was suspended due to a brawl in a game in Indiana the night before.
The game only made this reality more evident.
Curry's teammates shot 18 of 44.
Steph dropped three-point shots like layups.
He only missed two of 13, which is 85.7%.
Keep in mind, six NBA Hall of Famers have a higher career shooting average than 85.7 from the free throw line.
Clearly, Steph is a great shooter, but perhaps this is simply randomness.
That is, maybe it's just that eventually someone like Steph is going to have a string of threes.
To understand this, Curry's three-point percentage was 45.3% in 2012-2013 season.
He shot about 603 pointers during the regular season in just over 100 in the playoffs.
Now, let's think of flipping an unfair coin that comes up heads 45.3% of the time.
If we flip the coin 700 times, how often will we see a string of 11 heads in 13 consecutive flips?
This will happen about 70% of the time.
True, but another stat indicates it was a rare sight.
Let's assume he was going to take 13 shots with a 45.3% likelihood to make them.
