face up. Each player takes his best five card poker hand from his two down cards and the five
community cards, and the player with the best hand wins. During the process of dealing, there are
several rounds of betting, and much of the strategy of Texas Hold'em comes from betting.
Here's where a simulation can help you play the game. You won't know, unlike the TV broadcasters,
in the World Series of Poker, what hand everyone holds. So let's find the odds of winning from a
given two card starting hand, assuming that no players fold. In a real game, players do eventually
fold, but we want to see the state of the game early on, when everyone is still in the game.
These probabilities can be computed quickly on a modern computer with simulation. These days,
a spreadsheet can do this kind of simulation too. Like ULM, we put the current state of the game
into the computer. Then we let the computer play thousands or millions of random games
and count the fraction of wins, losses, and draws for each player.
Suppose you are playing Texas Hold'em and your initial hand consists of three of clubs and three
of hearts. How good of a hand do you have? If you are allowed to have a computing device,
you could simulate the game say 100,000 times and see the resulting probabilities.
Doing so indicates that your hand leads to a win, loss, and tie, 53, 45, and 2% of the time.
What if you were dealt two fives instead? Now the probability of winning increases to 60%.
Would such information change how you bet?
In fact, one may bet a large amount, even with a poor hand, in hopes of convincing other players
to fold. This is called bluffing. Integrating this would involve a more advanced computer program.
So what is the best hand? If you take every initial hand and run 100,000 games and view
the resulting probabilities, you can determine this. Two aces is best, not surprising, and we
find that results in an 85% chance of a win. While such computers for Monte Carlo simulation
explained to ULM how to conduct experiments for cards in nuclear physics, simulation is an idea
that has been around much longer. Let's try an experiment from 1777, described by Comp Day Buffon.
It's quite simple. First, grab a toothpick. Next, line a piece of paper where the distance
between the lines equals the length of your toothpick. Then, drop the toothpick onto the
