Usually, we data analysts look at the data, analyze, and learn from it.
But in this lecture, we see how computers can be programmed to look at the data and
learn by themselves.
The computer, all on its own, looks at the data and figures out how to predict what is
happening.
How?
It's programmed to learn, like our brains, that can sound like science fiction.
It isn't, because it's being done today to create games, recognize what you write on
a piece of paper, and more.
To help set the stage for this, let's consider the game 20 Questions.
If you and I played right now, then you would think of anything at all.
I get to ask 20 questions that you must answer truthfully.
So I might ask, is it bigger than a bread box, or does it lay eggs?
If I guess your object in fewer than 20 questions I win, else you win.
This could seem impossible, there are trillions of things to choose from.
The key is to ask questions that essentially divide the options you currently have in half
with each guess.
We talked about this type of power in our earlier lecture on complexity.
If you start with a trillion options, then one question narrows things to half a billion,
and then after another question, you have narrowed things to a quarter of a billion.
In fact, if you could have everything with each guess, then if you choose one object
from a trillion, I could guess your object in 40 guesses.
Now, while there may be technically trillions of things from which to choose, it's unlikely
any of us are going to think of a trillion things.
Why?
Well, let's say you could think of a thousand things each second.
How many seconds would you need to think of a trillion things if you could continuously
think of a thousand things per second?
Just over 31 years.
Twenty questions has been played for over a hundred years.
It grew in popularity during the late 1940s when it became the format of a weekly radio
program.
It was transformed by data analytics when the computerized game 20Q was invented by
Robin Bergener in 1988.
Today you can play 20Q online or with the electronic handheld version.
My family got this to take on long car trips.
