Republican candidate on average than those of registered voters. After the 2012 election,
Gallup found that their particular way of calculating likely voters needed adjustment.
One indicator was, quote, thought given to the election. Sounds plausible,
someone who has thought about the election could be more likely to vote in the election.
But it turned out that this indicator hurt rather than helped their prediction. Gallup also gave
more weight to behavior in past elections than did other models. In 2012, it turned out that
likely to vote didn't necessarily mean voters did what they did in a previous election,
nor did it mean thinking about the election a lot before a poll.
Step five, regression. Sometimes a race doesn't produce very much good polling,
or it's biased in one direction or another. Other information, such as incumbency and
stature, can play a factor in a race. So linear regression attempts to predict a candidate standing
according to such non-poll factors. Step six, combined snapshot. We now have two pieces.
We have the regression result from non-poll factors and the adjusted polling average.
Now the prediction from regression is treated as a poll and given a weight in a re
and recombined with the other polls. This is intended to provide the most comprehensive
evaluation of the candidate's electoral standing at the present time.
Step seven, election day projection. But a future debate or political convention
may help or hurt a candidate. The election day projection captures no events between now
and the election. This step takes the data and extrapolates to election day. This step folds
in the undecided voter who may flip and flop throughout the election process.
Step eight, error analysis. Polls are forecasts of anticipated results in elections. Just like
weather forecasts, they are a prediction and good forecasts have a probability tied to them.
For example, Silver stated on the day of the 2012 election that Barack Obama had a 90% chance of
winning by day's end. Certain factors have been found to be important. For instance, the error
is higher in races with fewer polls. The error is higher in races where the polls disagree with
one another. The error is higher when there is a larger number of undecided voters. The error is
higher when the margin between the two candidates is lopsided. The error is higher the further
