data and compared to see what it meant.
With his new found information, the student and his aunt walked into the doctor's office
with the data and conclusions.
The result was a change in the aunt's medication.
In each case, from my grades to the glucose levels, what is needed is data aimed at answering
a question.
Let's see an example of what can be done if you are persistent gathering your data.
For this, we will turn to Stephen Wolfram, CEO of Wolfram Research, and the author of
A New Kind of Science.
He started collecting data about himself in the 1980s, that he's been keeping ever since,
so he has a lot of data.
For example, he archived every email since 1989, which is a third of a million emails.
Here is a plot he created of all those emails he's sent since 1989.
This visualization makes several things evident.
First, the gaps are from when he sleeps.
From 2002 to 2012, he pretty consistently went to sleep around 3 a.m. Eastern time and got
up around 10 a.m.
In early years, there was a trend toward staying up later and later, and getting up later and
later.
Then, there is that narrow vertical strip in 2009.
He says that was a summer trip to Europe, and thus, a different sleeping pattern.
Now, look at the place in 2002, where there is a sudden change.
That's when Wolfram finished his large book entitled A New Kind of Science.
His life changed, and we see it easily from a visualization of his email.
Keep in mind that data can often be analyzed in more than one way.
Wolfram himself did this.
Here is another visualization of the email data.
Here he plots the total number of emails he sent as a function of time.
We see a slow decrease in the early 1990s, when he was less involved in the day-to-day
management of his company.
Then, we saw that shift in 2002, and again, see it here, and Wolfram's jump back into
the company.
Telephone data is another possibility.
I've had a few friends in data analysis do this type of analysis on their cell phone
data.
If you have a cell phone, the cell phone company typically offers this type of information
