But data today may be more complete than data of yesterday.
The cost of a gigabyte in the 1980s was about a million dollars.
So a smartphone with 16 gigabytes of memory would be a 16 million dollar device.
Today, someone might comment that 16 gigabytes really isn't that much memory.
Exactly.
This is why yesterday's data may not have been stored or have been stored in a suitable
format compared to what we can store today.
Now, consider satellite imagery.
The images come in a large variety of aspect ratios.
While I know that a satellite image will contain pixels, I don't necessarily know what is in
the picture or not in the picture.
I don't necessarily know where to look.
I may not even know what to look for.
So we stand in a data deluge that is showering large volumes of data at high velocities with
a lot of variety.
With all this data comes information.
And with that information comes the potential for innovation.
Steve Jobs, charismatic co-founder of Apple, was diagnosed with a pancreatic cancer in 2003.
He became one of the first people in the world to have his entire DNA sequence, as well as
that of his tumor.
It cost him a six-figure sum, but now he had his entire DNA.
Why?
When doctors pick medication, they hope the patient's DNA is sufficiently similar to
the patient in the drug trial.
Steve Jobs' doctors knew his genetic makeup and could carefully pick treatments.
When one treatment became ineffective, they could move to another.
While Jobs eventually died from his illness, having all the data and all that information
added years to his life.
We all have immense amounts of data available to us every day.
Research engines almost instantly return information on what can seem like a boundless
array of topics.
For millennia, humans have relied on each other to recall information.
The Internet is changing that and how we perceive and recall details in the world.
Human beings tend to distribute information through what is called a transactive memory
system.
And we used to do this by asking each other.
Now we also have lots of transactions with smartphones and other computers.
They can even talk to us.
In a study covered in Scientific American, Daniel Wegner and Adrian Ward discuss how
the Internet can deliver information quicker than our own memories can.
Have you ever tried to remember something?
In meanwhile, a friend types it into a smartphone, gets the answer, and if it is a place already
has directions, in a sense, the Internet is an external hard drive for our memories.
