Second, decision trees require little data preparation, apart from maybe combining pieces
of data, as we saw in the example of web logs.
Other methods may perform better, but preparing the data can take a much longer time.
Finally, decision trees are often called a white box method.
We saw this in the Titanic example.
We were able to take the results and see from the data why each split made sense.
Other methods, by contrast, give a black box result, meaning that the result is harder to see or explain.
Decision trees do have limitations.
First, decision trees aren't necessarily performing the best split.
Our method was making only one split at a time.
For instance, our first split was male versus female.
We could have split over adult and child, but we weren't splitting over male child versus female child.
If I wanted an analysis that could be varied by changing the splits, I would use other tools,
such as support vector machines.
That's a model from machine learning, and we actually won't cover that, but it's basically a more nuanced way to do such splits.
Regardless of the underlying method, we can't consider every possible split,
especially for larger datasets with more attributes.
So we choose some way of splitting and do the best we can.
Just keep in mind, the split may not be the best.
On the other hand, if you split too many times, you may have great results for the data you're looking at,
but it may not work well for future data.
This is called overfitting, which we discussed in an earlier lecture.
Another problem with splitting too much is that the rules become quite complicated.
Statistically, you may have a good descriptor of who to give a loan,
but it may become more difficult for the loan officer to even implement.
Businesses wondering where to look for new customers can also turn to decision trees.
Let's look at an example from the book, Data Mining Techniques for Marketing, Sales, and Customer Relationship Management by Linoff and Barry.
They share an example of how decision tree analysis helped one of the author's newspaper clients, the Boston Globe.
They were interested in estimating a town's expected home delivery circulation for that newspaper.
They had lots of data, indeed hundreds of possible parameters, from demographic information to geographic.
The question was, which of these help predict future customers?
Why?
This means you can find a potential untapped resource and knowing to whom you should promote your product is the holy grail of marketing.
So how did they predict future subscribers?
First, they had to discern that percentages rather than raw totals were the right kind of target to take from their existing customer data.
Why?
This takes size out of things.
You may want to find a smaller town or neighborhood that is untapped.
