risk.
Especially if you're making a forecast about an earthquake 13,000 years in the future.
So bringing in geological data from deep in the past makes more sense than ever.
And it turns out that the geological data would have suggested the line continues all
the way, making that big earthquake much more likely.
So it all depends on what you're studying.
A hurricane may be predicted within hundreds of miles based on short term factors that
have become easy to measure.
Earthquakes by contrast depend on data occurring not only deep in the earth, but also spread
over decades if not centuries.
The kind of data needed is different in adjustments needed for lack of data are also different.
Now, noise isn't the only issue in overfitting.
It is possible not to have enough data.
It is possible to have too little noise.
In such a case, you may actually not have enough noise to accurately predict what is
happening.
If you have two points, you will fit the data exactly with a line.
Or if you have only one point, then you can draw any line at all.
But if you can get 10 to 20 points, then you are not overly waiting just one or two initial
measurements.
And if you can get a few hundred points or a thousand, then you are not overly waiting
a couple dozen points.
Again, the flip side is failing to consider how often unusual things can happen merely
by chance.
Suppose you're going to pick someone to help with your retirement funds that are invested
in the stock market.
To do this, you'll see how the person performed over a 10-year period.
It will suffice for the person to accurately predict year by year whether the market goes
up or down.
If the person guesses wildly, there is a one-half chance of guessing correctly.
So the probability of someone guessing correctly eight or more times in 10 years is just over
five percent.
One is the probability that the person does not get eight or more correct is 94.53 percent,
which we'll need in a moment.
So it is fairly unlikely that one analyst will get them right just by chance.
Now you decide to broaden your search and choose from 50 stock analysts.
You'll select the person who does the best.
You're still just looking for one person who gets eight or more selections correct.
Let's imagine that all 50 stock analysts just guess.
Yes, they are just flipping coins and hoping for the best and your business.
