Now we want to fill in the matrix.
We will take this in two steps.
First, there are the entries along the main diagonal.
These are the elements in the same row and column, such as row 1, column 1, or row 2,
column 2.
Looking at the element in the first row, first column, we're working with the team assigned
to that row, which for this is the Saints.
Now we simply put the total number of games that team has played in the season.
The Saints played 2.
The Buccaneers 3, so the element in row 1, column 1 is 2.
The element in row 2, column 2 is 3.
Now we have all the elements on the main diagonal.
Let's work with the first row.
This corresponds to the Saints.
We already have the first row, first column element assigned.
Let's move to row 1, column 2.
The teams correspond to this row in column would be the Saints and the Buccaneers.
How many games did they play?
One.
So we put a minus 1 into the row 1, column 2 entry.
So each off diagonal element equals negative 1 multiplied by the number of times the corresponding
teams played.
That's it.
We now know how to fill in all the matrix entries.
Let's look at the matrix.
You may wish to verify all the entries.
Let's look a bit more at row 1.
The entry in the third column is 0 since the Saints and Panthers didn't play.
There is a minus 1 in the last column since the Saints and the Falcons played once.
Now wait a moment.
We mentioned this method takes final scores into account.
Such information is placed in a separate column of numbers called a vector on the right hand
side.
Each row in that vector corresponds to the same team that it did in the matrix.
So the first entry corresponds again to the Saints.
We fill in the entry with the sum of the point differentials where a win gives a positive
differential and a loss a negative one.
That's a mouthful so let's see this computation in action.
The Saints played two games and won one by seven and lost the other by three.
So the right hand side entry associated with this team would be seven minus three which
equals four.
Now the Buccaneers won a game by 17, lost a game by seven and lost another by three.
