remaining 47 cards, another five are dealt for the other hand. How many different ways
can this be done? There are almost two trillion different ways. So if you wanted to store the
probability of every one of these hands winning at this stage of the game, you store probabilities
for these two trillion states. Keep in mind that even if two players are holding the same cards,
the number of cards available in the deck changes as the game progresses.
This changes the corresponding probabilities. So we would need to store trillions and trillions
of probabilities. Talk about big data. So is that how it's done? This is the key to data analytics.
We possibly could do it that way, but do we need to? No. There is another simpler way. Use a computer
to simulate the game, to see how we turn to another card game and travel to Los Alamos, New Mexico,
in the 1940s. Stanislaus Ulam, while working on the Manhattan Project that developed a nuclear
bomb during World War II, pondered the probabilities of winning a card game of Solitaire. Ulam was
a noted researcher, so one could wonder why he didn't just sit down and compute the probabilities.
The reason is the same as for poker. Such computations are inherently complex. Ulam explored
another route. He would play the game a large number of times and see the percentage of times
that he won. In fact, Ulam could play the game via an early mainframe computer that he programmed
to simulate Solitaire. He ran hundreds of trials and computed the proportion of time that he won.
Ulam. Such an approach became known as Monte Carlo simulation, as the methods often depend on an
element of chance, such as what cards will be dealt. Today, an ordinary spreadsheet can
generate and insert random numbers for you, such a command as the RAND operator. Such methods
will be used to simulate more important real-world phenomena, too. Ulam not only got a better
understanding of Solitaire. At Los Alamos National Lab, Ulam and John Von Neumann also created the
methods to simulate nuclear reactions. Today, Monte Carlo simulation is used to study applications
in such areas as physics, mechanics, and economics. And poker. Let's turn to poker,
and specifically the game Texas Hold'em to see how simulation could save us from developing
that database of trillions and trillions of probabilities. The rules of the game are as
follows. Two cards are dealt face down to each player. Then five community cards are revealed
