One restaurant in London is called Eat.
Yes, that's the name.
You can eat at Eat.
But most postings contain the word eat are not about that restaurant.
Imagine someone tweeting out a Dr. Seuss rhyme about this, eat tweets are neat, but nothing
beats eat meets on tweets for defeats.
Number four, another issue for sentiment analysis is getting a baseline.
What counts as negative?
Some things simply get a higher level of negative response all the time.
For example, a president with an 80% approval rating would be doing very well.
In companies, what if you are seeing 20% negative sentiment about your product?
Is that bad?
Not so bad if your competitors are creating 30% negative sentiment.
On the other hand, if 20% negative sentiment translates into 20% returns, that could be
very costly.
Let's turn to how a search engine determines what web pages are more or less related.
This can involve a vector space model in linear algebra, an important tool we saw in the lecture
on bracketology.
Now a vector space model relies on two things.
A list of documents and a dictionary.
The list of documents is pretty much what it sounds like.
It's a list of the documents on which you can search.
The dictionary here is a database of keywords, which could be some or all of the words in
the documents.
Sometimes it's not computationally possible to include all the words.
Those not in the dictionary return empty searches.
We can translate all the words into a table of numbers.
Each row in the table is a keyword in the dictionary.
Each column is a document.
The entry in a particular row and column is a one if that keyword is in the corresponding
document.
Otherwise, the element in the table is zero.
This is often called the document matrix.
But it's really a keyword document matrix.
Note, even with this matrix, there are computational issues.
Should every document be searched in its entirety for each keyword?
Because of the sheer size of the internet, some search engines read and perform analysis
on only a portion of the document's text.
They read only so many words in index from those.
But this isn't the only issue.
Do you require exact matching?
Will you allow synonyms?
