The Kepler Space Telescope, for example, gathered more data than could be stored and sent back to Earth.
Did that make it useless?
No, it simply meant you couldn't use all the data.
So the scientists carefully pre-selected about 5% of the data, which are pixels, which ones.
Those they deemed most relevant for each star of interest.
But excluding some of the data is important on much smaller scales, too.
Let's consider U.S. presidents.
That's a small group, and we can focus on just one piece of information, their time in office.
Their terms as president have ranged from 4,422 days, which was Franklin Delano Roosevelt to 31 days, which was William Henry Harrison.
Suppose we graph the number of days of everyone who served as president of the United States.
The graph would show a lot of one-term presidents, another group of two-term presidents, and those with non-standard amounts of time in office.
But if our data is accurate at the level of single days, we will see that there are 45 data points for a data set that ends with Obama, the 44th president.
Now, how is that true?
Who is this unknown president?
It's true that Harrison was the 9th president with an extremely short term.
But he doesn't hold the minimum value.
There is somebody, 12th in line, who had an even shorter term.
This is David Rice Atchison.
March 4, 1849 was a big day for then President Atchison.
That was his only day to be president.
It was supposed to be the day Zachary Taylor was sworn in as the 12th president of the United States.
The stormy weather led to muddy roads, so many who were coming hadn't arrived on the 4th.
Zachary Taylor said he refused to be sworn in on a Sunday, and the inauguration was postponed a day.
But James Polk, number 11, was no longer president.
And Taylor hadn't been sworn in, so Senator David Rice Atchison as chair of the Senate became president according to the United States Constitution.
Amazingly, when he learned of his presidency, it was basically over.
The Missouri senator had worked overtime for weeks, exhausted he lay down in the early morning of Sunday, March 4.
He woke up on the 5th.
Yes, sleeping through his presidency.
So, was he president?
Do you count him?
