elements value by one.
When we move to the right hand side vector we increase the value in row 345 by we increase
it because they won by 117 minus 75 which equals 42.
Since team 345 beat team 85 by that 42 points.
We also decrease the value in row 85 by 42 since they lost.
So that's how it's done.
The idea is to go line by line and accumulate everything into a linear system.
When we've processed every line we have our linear system ready.
Now we simply need to solve it.
Even a four by four system like the one we had earlier takes time to solve by hand.
So even a system of this size is nice to solve on a computer or with a calculator.
The function we're looking for solves a linear system.
Many programming languages have a function that performs a linear solve directly but
even in a spreadsheet like Excel this can be done.
You would compute the inverse of the square matrix on the left hand side then we would
multiply our square matrix by the tall vector on the right hand side.
So let's go back to the linear system formed by the four NFL teams we saw earlier.
When we solve that system we find the Saints have a rating of negative point one two five.
The Buccaneers one point seven five.
The Panthers four point three seven five in the Falcons negative six.
We rank by sorting the ratings in descending order.
So we rank the teams as the Panthers, Buccaneers, Saints and Falcons.
Now remember there is another helpful piece of information in the ratings.
We can predict teams that didn't play one another.
If the Saints in the upper left of our diagram played the Panthers in the bottom right this
method predicts the Panthers will win by the rating of the Panthers minus the ratings for
the Saints.
This equals four point three seven five minus negative zero point one two five which equals
four point five points.
Clearly we're not going to see a half a point scored.
This can be thought of as an expected value related to the score.
As I said earlier this method can reward blowouts.
A big win in one game against a weak team can increase a team's overall rating.
Remember that 17 point win played an important role in the results.
The method can be adapted to look only at wins or to dampen the reward for large wins.
For example you might dampen large wins by capping them at 15.
This does two important things.
First you aren't rewarded for big blowouts winning by 40 or 50 points.
Now you also aren't penalized if you only win by 25 and your rating compared to your
opponents rating says you should have won by 40.
Any time you see a score bigger than 15 you simply make it a 15 point win.
Now we know how to take a season of data and create a linear system.
