Could we see a time under nine seconds?
Beware of assuming that every regression line continues indefinitely.
Clearly there is some limit at which a human cannot run any faster.
For instance, the 100 meter dash will never be completed in two seconds.
However, where could the limit be between two and 9.63 seconds?
A book called The Perfection Point considers such a question.
It's by John Brankus, the host of ESPN's sports science show.
Brankus analyzes four distinct phases of the race, reacting to the gun, getting out of
the blocks, accelerating the top speed, and hanging on for dear life at the end.
He gives an analysis of why 8.99 seconds is the fastest hundred meter dash that can ever
be run.
Let's take the first phase.
The rules of international competition assume that it takes 0.1 of a second to react to
the gun.
A runner who begins sooner is considered a false start.
Bolt took 0.165 seconds to react, so there's room of about five hundredths of a second
for improvement there.
The point is, we assume our least square line continues, but not all the way down.
Instead, we can use some other information and set a theoretical lower limit.
Then we can use that limit.
So when would we reach the speed limit for this race?
Doing the algebra on our line, we find this would happen in 2058, which would mean we'd
reach the limit of speed in the 2060 Olympics.
It's just a model.
It may do pretty well for a while.
If the times begin to flatten out as we approach that absolute limit, the model would also
break down.
But it may have some predictive power.
We don't know exactly how much or how long, but it can still be quite useful.
Such plots can also illustrate when someone has significantly, significantly broken from
the trend.
This time, let's graph world record times in the hundred meters whenever they happened
in or out of the Olympics.
If we again perform least squares on this, we get a fit.
But notice the outliers at the beginning and end.
That value at the end has a huge drop.
It's computed into the least squares fit, but it's still a big drop below the overall
line.
