Let's see these types of ideas with a large data set.
Remember Enron filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy in December 2001, an unprecedented amount
of information was released to the public domain through the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission.
From this body of information, a research group at Carnegie Mellon University created
the Enron email data sets containing over half a million email messages.
These came from over 150 Enron email accounts covering a period from December 1979 through
February 2004.
The majority of messages spanned the three key years, 1999, 2000, and 2001.
In a highly compressed format known as GZIP, the database was about 423 megabytes.
The emails reflected the day-to-day activities of what was the seventh largest company in
the United States at that time.
And certain topics of discussion uniquely linked to Enron activities.
In particular, the infamous practices of price fixing, over-speculation, and deceptive accounting
which led to Enron's collapse toward the end of 2001 are all well-documented in the emails.
And we see this with data analysis.
Indeed, you are essentially forced to use it on something of this size.
Like before, we create a document matrix.
In this case, the rows are key words in the emails, and the documents in the columns are
emails.
Then what?
Well, we look for emails that have a lot of similar words in them.
And we find clusters.
One cluster contained, for example, the word touchdown.
Other words in that cluster were football, longhorn, Texas, quarterback, score, punch,
and tackle.
This group was discussing University of Texas Longhorn football.
The dataset also contained a small cluster of only 12 documents that use 447 terms.
The following terms commonly appear, fortune, CEO, COO, top, women, and powerful.
These terms and abbreviations, in fact, refer to Louise Kitchen, the top-ranking Enron
employee responsible for energy trading in Enron Online.
She was named one of the 50 most powerful women in business by Fortune Magazine in 2001.
In fact, all 12 emails were saved in Louise Kitchen's own private folder.
So what appeared to be a possibly interesting cluster after further inspection turns out
to be what is sometimes called an ego cluster, and thus, perhaps only of marginal interest.
Now, imagine being a legal firm tasked with looking at such a large dataset.
How would you begin?
Clustering analysis can't resolve everything, but it can find groups and speed up the process
of grouping information that could unlock important aspects of the case, all just by
clustering the words in email messages.
Published movie reviews have become another opportunity for text analysis.
The Stanford Natural Language Processing Group researches textual analysis in a variety
