in various media outlets as an electoral and political analyst. In 2008, Silver correctly
predicted the winner of 49 of 50 states in the presidential election. The only state he missed
was Indiana, which went for Barack Obama by only one percentage point. It's important to note that
in that same election, he correctly predicted the winner of all 35 U.S. Senate races. Now,
it wasn't hard to predict some of the results. That was easy. What was impressive was coming so
close to giving correct predictions for all the results. By the next April, he was named
one of the world's 100 most influential people by Time Magazine. Just before the 2012 presidential
election, Silver released his book, The Signal and the Noise. It reached the New York Times best-seller
list for nonfiction and was named by Amazon.com as the number one best nonfiction book of 2012.
On the morning of the 2012 presidential election, Silver posted the final update of his model
at 10.10 a.m., giving President Barack Obama a 90.9% chance of winning a majority of the 538
electoral votes. By the end of the day, Mitt Romney conceded to Barack Obama.
Silver was also a big winner as he had correctly predicted the winner of all 50 states and the
District of Columbia. Silver creates a poll by combining the results of multiple pollsters.
He was not alone in this approach. Josh Putnam, for example, of Davidson College, where I teach,
also correctly predicted the outcomes of the nine swing states. Both exactly predicted the
electoral college totals for the 2012 election. It is important to note that individual pollsters
were less successful. Rasmussen reports missed on six of its nine swing state polls. How did
Gallup do? They had among the worst results. In late October, their results consistently
showed Mr. Romney ahead by about six percentage points among likely voters. This differed
significantly from the average of other surveys. Gallup's final estimate of the 2012 popular vote
narrowed with a final prediction that Romney would lead with 49% of the popular vote and
Obama would trail with 48%. But Gallup also said that the margin of error was plus or minus two
percentage points for each candidate's estimate. So the Gallup prediction claimed very little
certainty at all. In reality, President Obama won the popular vote by 3.85 percentage points over
Mitt Romney. Interestingly, this result gave Gallup three poor election predictions in a row.
In 2008, their polls overestimated Mr. Obama's performance. In 2010, they overestimated how
