During the flight, Oren asked neighboring passengers about their ticket price.
Most had paid less, even though many had bought their tickets later.
For some of us, this might simply tell us not to worry so much about choosing close
to the date of a flight.
But Oren was Harvard's first undergraduate to major in computer science.
He graduated in 1986.
To him, this was a problem for a computer to solve.
He'd seen the world this way before.
He helped build Metacrawler, which was one of the first search engines.
InfoSpace bought it.
He made a shopping comparison website also snatched up.
Another startup was bought by Reuters.
So, Oren gave 12,000 price observations grabbed by his computer programs from a travel website
over 41 days.
He ended up with something that could save customers money and not just by comparing
current prices.
It didn't know why airlines were pricing the way they did, but it could help predict whether
fares were more likely to go up or down in the near future.
When it became a venture capital-backed startup called Faircast, it began crunching 200 billion
flight price records.
Then, Microsoft bought it in 2008 for $110 million and integrated it into the Bing search
engine.
What made it possible to predict future fares?
Data and lots of it.
How big and what's big enough depends in part on what you're asking and how much data you
can handle.
And you can consider how you can approach the questions.
UPS can't look for the optimal answer, but they can save millions of dollars finding
much better answers.
Again, they can do this by asking questions only answerable with the data that is streaming
in and available in today's data explosion.
What other misconceptions can there be about data analysis?
Let's clear up some misconceptions I encountered about my work in the field.
In 2014, my work in sports ranking and bracketology received considerable national attention with
coverage by the New York Times, CBS Evening News, and USA Today, among quite a few others.
In the process of the interviews, I noticed several common questions that reflect certain
misconceptions about data analysis.
So let's talk about these.
We'll see and discuss them more in coming lectures.
But in order to get the big idea of data analysis, let's be sure we build that understanding
that can help us have a solid foundation.
First, data analysis gives you an answer, not the answer.
With March Madness predictions for college basketball, people often thought the work
