one is from the election day. Given this, a candidate running for the Senate in Colorado
and another running for the House in Michigan may both be predicted to win by six points.
But one candidate may be perceived to win with 90% likelihood and the other with only 60%.
Step nine, simulation. This step keeps in mind that results in one election may be tied to results
in another election. For example, Senate results can be tied to results from the presidential level.
So factors are varied on the national and local level and then an election outcome is computed
on a computer. Thousands of different variables for the parameters are inputted. The results are
averaged to see who wins and with what consistency. Further, you begin to see the likelihood in
presidential elections of different states going Democrat or Republican.
In the end, the process produces robust results as seen in 2008 and 2012, but you don't have to do
all of this to get great results. The colleague I mentioned earlier at Davidson, Joshua T. Putnam,
did extremely well with fewer steps. He was one of just a few people in the United States, probably
fewer than half a dozen, who correctly predicted every vote in the Electoral College.
We tend to forget, but it's actually the Electoral College that elects a U.S. President.
And Josh's method is simpler. He takes state polls, adds weights for recency, aggregates,
and out pops his prediction. I'm oversimplifying a bit, but he says the biggest challenge is keeping
the data updated, scraping it from the sources and getting that into a form he can analyze.
For someone who wants to get started making predictions, it can be even easier. Keep it
simple. Just start with one state. Assign weights to each poll from that one state. Come up with
your prediction. Update your prediction as more polls come in. That's it.
And what's the core tool in all of this? In an address at the Joint Statistical
Meetings, which is the largest gathering of statisticians held in North America,
Silver noted that the average is still the most useful statistical tool. It's a cornerstone
of all the methods that are making election predictions so much more reliable.
Up to now, we have looked at predicting the result of an election,
but these methods also affect the running of the campaign itself. Now, let's see how big data can
help the candidates run their campaign. Using data analysis, campaigns can better understand
