We need data, lots of it.
In particular, we will want a lot of handwritten digits.
For this, we'll turn to the Mixed National Institute of Standards and Technology Database.
We will use the set of 60,000 digits.
For instance, here we see four different examples of the number three from the data set.
Can we get a computer to automatically recognize that each of these is the digit three?
Let's develop a simple method that uses averages.
So you can write the number three.
What we'll do is we'll take that number and we'll convert it into a grayscale image.
In order to compare things, I'll make it a small image that's 28 by 28 pixels.
That's pretty small.
This corresponds to having a table with 28 rows and 28 columns.
That equates to 784 cells in all.
Each element of that table also contains a grayscale color that corresponds to a pixel
in the image.
0 is black and 255 is white, and all the numbers from 1 to 254 are all the shades in between.
I'm going to take that square table and convert it into a long table with one column.
So I'll have a table with 784 rows.
Now I'm going to find an average grayscale value for the number 0, 1, 2, and so forth.
Let's do it for the number zero first.
There are about 6,000 images of the number zero in our database.
For each of those zeroes, again there are close to 6,000, I have a table with one column
and 784 rows.
Now I take every element in the first row of every table and take the average of those
numbers.
I'm finding the average value among all the tables for that first pixel of the number
zero.
Pixel is short for picture element.
I'll do the same thing for every other element of zero.
Put together the average values for the 784 elements, tell me what an average zero will
look like.
For example, here I have 5 handwritten 3s taken from the dataset.
Then I calculate the average of each pixel over all 5 samples.
This produces the average 3 over the samples.
Here's what I get.
I do this for every number over all the samples in my database.
Here are the numbers from zero to nine.
Now I take your number and want to find which of these numbers it looks most like.
How?
