The goal is good predictions and more insight, not necessarily more data.
Fundamental principle number two, the value of prediction comes from context.
Analysis is not just what you know.
You need to situate what you know so that it becomes the right insight for the right problem.
For instance, the insight you glean from a data set may seem relatively unimportant to your context,
and yet you turn out to be more important in a larger or different context.
An example of this occurred in 2011.
A multi-state outbreak of listeriosis infections was linked to whole cantaloupes from a farm in Colorado.
The outbreak strains were quickly identified in the Colorado patients, so far so good.
But this was the smaller context.
Then, through what is called DNA fingerprinting, the outbreak was connected with illnesses in 25 other states.
That's where the real value of the analysis became more apparent.
Without the ability to find the right context, many multi-state outbreaks would not be detected or controlled in time.
Fundamental principle number three, don't overestimate the value of any one prediction.
Results in data analysis are better seen as an informed opinion.
Remember our lecture on patterns.
We have the ability to read a lot into results and assume causation where there is simply correlation.
Remember the fact that shark attacks rise along with ice cream consumption,
and that doesn't necessarily mean one causes the other.
In March Madness brackets, you may have the best predictions in your pool,
but that doesn't mean you got all 63 games correct.
Taking just the first round of 32 games, if you could be 90% accurate on predicting the winner,
you'd only get all 32 games correct once every 30 years.
So, analytics can help improve our predictions, but they are not necessarily stating truth or absolute outcomes.
And finally, a fourth fundamental principle.
Don't underestimate the ability of prediction to anticipate and transform the future.
Don't miss the boat.
Every summer, I have a group of researchers who work with me in data analytics.
We almost always watch the movie Moneyball.
I always emphasize the courage it took for Billy Bean to follow and trust the data.
The A's were able to find the undervalued players, hire them, and compete.
