Still pretty easy to spot if you only have a thousand events.
But if your tracking happens billions of times, then an anomaly that's one time in a thousand
may end up happening millions of times.
We have to remember this when working with large data sets.
Statistically, an anomaly might be unlikely, but it still might occur a million times.
Anomalies are, by definition, not common.
In the natural world, many events and objects we notice and care about are common.
Yet anomalies are of considerable interest too, maybe even more.
One thing that is very helpful is to see a variety of forms anomalies come in.
If you and I were about to work together on a data set, we'd want to know what type of
anomaly we might be looking for.
You might not entirely know, but when you do, it can be quite helpful.
Here are some areas where anomalies are important.
First, fraud detection.
You may make a big purchase that garners that call from the credit card agency, or maybe
you've made a purchase far from home.
They aren't calling just to touch base with you.
They're calling because that unusual purchase is uncharacteristic of you and they want to
ensure the purchase was made by you.
The same idea of noticing a change in behavior, in this case in spending, can aid in detecting
fraud more quickly.
Next, intrusion detection on the Internet.
In 2011, security company Imperva monitored 10 million attacks targeting 30 different
enterprise and government web applications.
On average, there were 27 attacks per hour, or roughly one attack every two minutes.
The attacks appeared to mostly be probing for vulnerabilities on various sites.
If a vulnerability was exposed, Imperva found that the automated attacks could grow to upwards
of 25,000 per hour, or seven attacks per minute, per second.
From overwhelming or crashing a system to intruding in secretly gathering information,
attacks on computers happen or are being attempted every second of every day.
Third, ecosystem disturbances.
There can be atypical events that have significant impacts on humans, earthquakes, hurricanes,
floods, droughts, and heat waves.
Here, the goal is to predict such anomalies.
Fourth, public health.
These techniques can help with outbreaks.
For example, in 2003, Carnegie Mellon developed a system called What's Strange About Recent
Events, or WSARE.
It searched a database of emergency department cases for anomalies.
Sometimes anomalies just happen.
You can flip a coin 100 times, and sometimes, as improbable as it is, you'll flip 12 heads
