a binge drinker who's been involved in an alcohol-related accident.
We find this by first following the branch for binge drinking and then its branch for
an auto accident.
We can multiply the two probabilities along each path.
So we find 0.44 times 0.17, which equals 0.075.
In this way, we can fill out the entire tree.
We can also use the tree to find answers not already displayed on the tree.
For instance, if someone is a drinker involved in an auto alcohol-related accident, what's
the probability that the person was a binge drinker?
To find this probability, we are interested in a ratio involving the top branch, a binge
drinker who was involved in an accident, which was 0.075, and we divide that by the sum of
the branches involving an accident, which is 0.075 plus 0.033, or 0.108.
So we find this probability as 0.075 divided by 0.108, which equals 0.694, or about 69%.
Think about this.
We had two entirely separate studies, yet we combined their data to find a clear result.
The chance that a student who has an alcohol-related car accident is a binge drinker, and we found
that to be more than 69%.
Results like this may not be obvious from two studies, but the results become very clear
with tree diagrams.
Notice the kind of data analysis here.
We are combining the data of two studies to answer our own questions.
But you can, of course, also collect the data yourself.
I did this with Dr. Kevin Hudson and Dr. John Harris of Furman University.
It started with an example I gave in class.
I brought up the legendary Casey At The Bat story.
In it, Casey is so confident of his ability to score that he lets two strikes whiz by
without even trying.
What is the probability of his getting a hit on that last attempt?
It could seem like one-third if he hit like Ty Cobb with a batting average around .366.
But remember that a batting average is made on all pitches and not simply letting two
of three intentionally go by to raise the drama, then swinging just once and hitting
a sure thing.
So we used pitching data John and Kevin had already scraped off the Internet.
Here's the first branch of our tree, which is whether the batter swings at the ball or
just lets it go by without trying.
If a major league baseball hitter has two strikes and no balls, then we found that he
swings the bat 75% of the time.
So that's how often major league players do what mighty Casey did.
