The problem is posted on Thursday evening on the East Coast.
The students must model, come up with conclusions and recommendations, and write a 20-25 page
paper.
One year, they were modeling toll booths on a busy highway.
How many booths should be open at rush hour versus off rush hour?
Should the number vary even during rush hour?
How many of those lanes should be for cars with an easy pass?
The students decided to write a program that would simulate a toll booth.
To trick is, they needed to know how long it took to pay cash versus driver with easy
pass.
They didn't know.
They had to know quickly in order to move forward.
They combed the internet and didn't find much information.
So they went to the college union and timed the difference between paying automatically
with a campus ID versus paying cash.
This data wouldn't be exactly the same as a toll plaza, but it gave them an estimate
of what they needed.
Then they folded this into their simulation and they were awarded meritorious distinction
for their efforts.
Another year, the problem was more fanciful and involved a daredevil jumping over an
elephant in landing on cardboard boxes.
That time, a team at the University of Washington realized they needed data on landing on boxes.
They couldn't find any, but they could find boxes.
So they placed them in a room and they ran across the room, leaped and landed on the
boxes.
They kept careful data on their experiments.
That team won highest distinction for their work, among all the teams worldwide.
So having a clear goal makes a huge difference.
Instead of just piling up data in the hope's insight will just pop out.
Having a clear goal guide you into gathering data that can produce insight.
And with a bit of creativity, gathering the data may be much less onerous than you think.
In fact, sometimes you already have data, but you may not realize that you do.
Here's a personal example from my work teaching two different classes at Davidson College.
A calculus course and a general education course.
I've often felt that in the calculus course, how students do on the first exam set a
lot about how they would do in the rest of the course.
