So, we have a lot of data with more coming.
What works today may not work tomorrow, and the questions of today may be answered only
to springboard tomorrow's ponderings.
But most of all, remember that within the data can lay insight.
We aren't just interested in the data.
We are looking at data analysis, and we want to learn something valuable we didn't already
know.
So, let's look at some examples of this.
Now you don't need large data sets to pose computationally intensive problems.
And even at a small scale, such problems can be too hard to allow for optimal solutions.
For example, UPS must decide on a delivery route for packages to save time and gas.
Consider 20 drop-off points.
Which route is the best?
Seems simple enough, but checking all possible routes isn't that easy.
You have 20 choices for the first stop, 19 for the second, and so forth.
In all, there are about 2 times 10 to the 18th power.
How big is that number?
It has five times the estimated age of the universe.
I mean, clearly, we aren't checking that number of combinations on a computer each time a
driver needs a route.
Keep in mind, that's only 20 stops.
UPS has about 55,000 drivers every day.
Until recently, UPS drivers had a general route to follow.
It allowed for decisions on the part of the driver.
UPS now has a program called Orion, or on-road integrated optimization and navigation, to
help.
It uses math to decide on routes.
They can be counterintuitive, but save time in the end.
It doesn't find the best route, but a lot of research has been done to find good solutions
to this problem.
Keep in mind, UPS has a harder problem than simply finding a route to save time.
They must also consider other variables, like promise delivery time.
So how much can this save?
Under these two numbers, $30 million.
That's the cost to UPS per year if each driver drives one more mile each day than necessary.
$85 million.
The number of miles the analytics tools of UPS are saving per year.
Data analysis doesn't always involve exploring a data set that is given.
As questions arise, and data hasn't even been gathered, then the key is knowing what
question to ask and what data to collect.
As an example, let's join Oren Ezioni on a flight from Seattle to Los Angeles for his
younger brother's wedding.
Wanting to save money, Oren bought his ticket months before the idos were set.
