So computer appears about 0.01% of the time among all one grams.
How many one grams are there?
Over 472 million.
How do I know?
You can download the entire data set.
It's huge.
This data set has about 1,000 times more items than the number of word forms defined or illustrated
in the Oxford English Dictionary.
But you don't have to download anything.
Simply type in the n-grams that you're interested in and create the graphs yourself.
What about typing in data analytics and data analysis?
Let's search both terms together.
Here is what we get from 1950 to 2008, which was the last year of the original data set.
Goodness, look at data analytics.
Remember, a graph usually tells us only one story, and that can be misleading.
So let's look only at data analytics.
Suddenly, what looked like nothing is indeed something.
It's a small rise after all, but we would have missed the increase entirely if we hadn't
looked more closely.
And if we rescale the less common term, we can see the trend for both together on the
same graph.
Remember, this is simply showing us a trend.
We'd need to do more analysis to understand why.
For example, consider the terms which and wizard from 1800 to 2008.
Look at the spike in the 1990s.
That's when the first Harry Potter book was released.
But it isn't about just one book.
The frequency of wizard increased sixfold across all books at that time.
Google and Grams are already an astonishingly powerful tool.
You can drill down to search the underlying publications year by year.
You can refine your search in all sorts of ways to include what you want and exclude
what you don't.
What about social media?
Let's look at tweets responding to what happened in the Denver Broncos football stadium on
the wintery evening of January 8, 2012.
The game was in overtime and the Broncos were on a three game losing streak playing against
the heavily favored Pittsburgh Steelers.
But only 11 seconds into overtime, Denver Broncos quarterback Tim Tebow threw the longest
overtime touchdown pass in NFL history, ending the game and the Steelers season in incredibly
dramatic fashion.
The fervor in the Denver stadium created an internet tsunami.
USA Today reported that thumbs were typing at a rate of 9,400 tweets per second on that
