Pretty big challenge.
But there was also a personal security angle to this.
Now, Netflix knew they were supplying personal data, so they made an effort to remove identity
and identifying information.
For the first Netflix Prize, they were successful.
A Netflix Prize was awarded, and for researchers like me, the competition was a wonderful push
forward academically.
A lot of new ideas were discussed and tested.
My own research team worked with the data.
It was a big, enriched data set, covering about 480,000 customers.
But when a second challenge was announced, Netflix got sued.
The lawsuit claimed that Netflix indirectly exposed the movie preferences by its users
by publishing user data, even though efforts had been made to remove identifying information
and make the users anonymous.
The initial data was out there, so it had already been analyzed by academics.
In the end, 50,000 contestants wound up participating.
It was the fact that so many people were pouring over the data that made privacy advocates
more worried.
Plain if, Paul Navarro and others sought an injunction to prevent Netflix from offering
that follow-up challenge.
Netflix wanted to take the recommendation challenge another step.
They promised to include even more personal data, such as genders and zip codes.
This could answer some fundamental questions.
Are there movies preferred by women, sometimes called chick flicks?
Maybe or maybe, as with other things we've learned in this series, that's simply folklore.
Maybe Netflix could get better at recommending a date movie, and maybe that depends on where
you live in the country.
Answers to these types of questions can be very powerful.
Just think about movies and people that you know.
There might be lots of interesting questions you could ask, and with enough data, interesting
answers could be possible.
That lawsuit was settled, and the sequel competition was canceled.
As a researcher, this is like seeing the trailer for a sequel to a movie that actually looks
better than the original movie, and then being told later that the sequel collapsed and won't
be shown.
It's like a cliffhanger with no resolution, ever.
It's relevant to note that Netflix was dealing with several interested parties.
The company's blog posted that Netflix also settled a negotiation with the Federal Trade
Commission.
Remember, Netflix released data having already thought about security.
They didn't propose to release additional data without any forethought about the issue.
So how could one possibly figure out someone's identity in the ratings data when Netflix believed
such information had been removed?
One way is with other data.
For example, two privacy researchers showed comments on another site, such as the popular
