There is still room for improvement.
Underfitting is still a large issue for forecasts about intensity, which was not significantly
better than a few decades ago.
In fact, you may notice that fields where there is still plenty of room for improvement
will leave more room for error by referring to forecasts rather than predictions.
In a sense, the worst thing about underfitting is how it leads to overfitting.
When we don't have enough data, we overfill the gaps.
We may have some shiny gems of data in the mix, but that dazzles us into thinking we
know more than we do.
Overall, it's hard to be fooled by underfitting.
Your training data and your test data give poor results.
Your model doesn't work, and you immediately know it doesn't work.
But one must be more careful to avoid overfitting.
Overfitting can occur from more than one direction.
Over sometimes, an entire variable or model can cause overfitting.
We might call this misfitting.
It misses the boat entirely, as we saw the first years of the Super Bowl correlated with
the stock market.
It would have appeared that one had a great model.
But these sorts of chance correlations are going on all the time.
Instead of focusing on that one unusual correlation between sports and the economy, think of all
the thousands of things going on in politics, sports, and the economy all at the same time.
If we have all that data to choose from, the chance of finding five or ten or twenty data
points that are correlated somewhere is actually really high.
It's like coins being tossed.
So a rare correlation that's weirdly compelling when seen in isolation isn't really so surprising
after all.
And we definitely don't gain any deeper insight by letting that into our prediction model.
Second, another culprit is not appreciating the place of noise in real data.
Whenever data is collected, for example in a science lab, there is always some measurement
error.
We might even know that there is some underlying law or principle.
There are scientific laws that follow a line.
Increase the force and the resistance increases linearly.
But that doesn't mean that when you actually go into the lab and measure this that you
will definitely see nothing but that relationship.
You are more likely to see data that comes close like this.
We can fit a line through the data using a least squares line as we learn.
We saw this when we were looking at Olympic medalists in the men's one hundred meter in
an earlier lecture.
