Again, think of anything at all.
Text appears on the website or on this little ball that asks questions.
Answer them and you are on your way to 20 questions.
When I played online, the first question was, is it classified as animal, vegetable, or mineral?
I could answer animal, vegetable, mineral, other, or unknown.
If the game fails to guess in 20 questions, it takes an additional five questions.
If it fails to guess even with the additional questions, you win.
If you play the game, you see that it can win whether you guess a zebra or a carburetor.
It can be a bit stunning, so much so that you might want to buy one or send it to a friend.
That's how my family got ours.
Someone bought it for us.
But initially, this was an internet game and it became a sensation.
The link was emailed from person to person.
With no promotion, the link to 20Q was sent around the world.
In fact, this viral success played an important role in why 20Q did so well at guessing.
So how does it work?
How can a computer possibly guess what you're thinking of?
How did anyone figure out how to get a computer to make those decisions?
The computer, in a sense, figured it out.
How can a computer possibly figure something out?
Quick answer, artificial intelligence.
How does that work?
In this case, lots and lots of practice.
It's possible that inventor Robin Bergener could have created a database containing attributes of common objects.
Instead, he taught it only one object, a cap.
In fact, according to 20Q's published history, the system didn't even know 20 questions.
It knew only one question.
So then what?
He also built into the program the ability to learn.
Play a game, it learned from the game.
So he began playing, and to help the program learn quicker, he put it on a floppy disk and shared it with friends.
So each of them played the game learned.
By playing again and again and again, the program learned more objects, more questions,
and what series of questions tended to correlate with an object.
Then Bergener shared his program with even more people by putting it on the internet,
which helped it get better even faster.
