We've been looking at patterns and we've been looking at some of the tools of analysis.
Another key to consider early on is storing the data.
Now storing information is something data analysts have been doing electronically for
decades.
It's an old issue still worth asking.
Do you make the effort to save copies of your data in different places?
But today we are also dealing with huge data sets and in order to analyze them we have to
have a better understanding of how they can be stored and then how the data can be retrieved.
To get a sense of the amount of data today let's look more closely at the Library of
Congress.
It has a lot of data much of which has been kept for years in physical form.
It's the largest library of printed material in the world with more than 155.3 million
items on approximately 838 miles of bookshelves.
What makes up the Library of Congress?
More than 35 million books and other print materials, 3.4 million recordings, 13.6 million
photographs, 5.4 million maps, 6.5 million pieces of sheet music, and 68 million manuscripts.
The Library was founded in 1800.
Among its collections the Library has Thomas Jefferson's Personal Library of 6487 books
acquired in 1815.
The Library is still growing.
It receives about 15,000 items each working day and adds approximately 11,000 items to
its collection daily.
Between 2000 and 2010 the Library also archived 167 terabytes of web-based information and
much more after that.
That brings us to this lecture's topic, how to store all these items.
But keep in mind it isn't enough to store everything.
We also have to be able to find the data once stored.
In data analysis the data is often stored in digital rather than physical form.
Digital storage and reference isn't new.
Computers can store large data sets like the 155 million items in the Library of Congress
very, very quickly.
And we are now accustomed to such speed.
How many times have you said, wait a second, well these days that may actually be too long.
Google engineers have found that if search results are just a tiny bit slower even by
the blink of an eye people search less.
Remember there are multiple search engines and in the land of searching it is definitely
survival of the fittest.
The fastest to run out, get what you queried and returned is indeed the fittest.
Research showed that we will visit a website less often if it is slower than a close competitor
