Now, PageRank isn't the thing Google uses, the only thing
that Google uses to create search results.
So presumably, one can exploit other aspects of their search
too.
Again, a key is knowing what is being done.
To see this, we look to November and December 2003.
If you put miserable failure into Google,
the official White House biography of the president
was returned as the highest ranked query.
Somehow, this was happening, even though the words
miserable failure were nowhere on that web page.
How did this happen?
This is what became known as a Google bomb.
The architect was George Johnston,
who had started building this one about a month earlier.
Putting together a Google bomb was relatively easy.
It involved several web pages linking to the White House
biography of the president with an agreed upon anchor text.
This is the hyperlinked text that you
click to go to the linked web page.
In the case of the miserable failure project,
of the 800 pages that linked to the president's biography,
only 32 were part of the Google bomb
that used the phrase miserable failure in the anchor text.
But from November through December of 2003,
if you put the words miserable failure into Google,
the top search result was the White House biography
for President George W. Bush.
By January, a miserable failure query
returned results for Michael Moore, President Bush,
Jimmy Carter, and Hillary Clinton in the top four
positions.
It kept switching as the web savvy engaged
in this act of internet politics.
What part of the Google algorithm did this exploit?
Google wasn't just looking at the text on a website
to determine its content.
It treated the hyperlinked anchor text
that links to a site as a summary.
For example, if you link to the great courses,
you might link with the words the great courses
or the teaching company.
These words summarize the content.
By using such words, one can connect the web page
to words that possibly don't appear on the site.
Now, think again about J.C.
Penny coming up first for searches on dresses,
aerial rugs, and other products.
Between the selling of links and Google bombing,
