In fact, Nightingale used his data for the general population to create another important
graphic.
It was just a simple bar chart, but it hammered home that English soldiers stationed at home,
whatever their ages, were twice as likely to die in their barracks as were Englishmen
in the general population.
She was building a case that military sanitation was bad all over.
Florence Nightingale presented her innovative graphics to Queen Victoria and to the members
of parliament and to civil servants.
Those graphics were part of a series of publications she prepared between 1858 and 1860.
The graphs made her argument much easier to understand.
It illustrated the number and different causes of death during the war.
Let's look again.
Florence Nightingale's work clearly shows that far more soldiers were lost to preventable
diseases than because of battle wounds.
The argument was clear and compelling.
In fact, it was a call to action.
As a result, military hospitals improved sanitary conditions.
This greatly reduced the number of deaths.
Nightingale's clear argument led to important action.
Note how a graphic made the argument.
It told a tale.
You can follow it month after month, from July 1854 to March 1855 and from April 1855
to August 1855, with blue casualties due to infectious diseases dominating every single
slice of time.
Preventable diseases in blue are always greater than the combined number of military casualties
in red plus other preventable casualties in black.
The graphic does not display all its information with equal clarity.
In particular, the three colors within a wedge all start from the origin.
It looks like the colors occupy distinct places in each wedge, but in fact, all three colors
occupy the portion nearest the center.
This means that some of the blue soldiers with infectious diseases are covered up by
the other two colors.
But that just means that Nightingale's graph somewhat understates the number of casualties
due to disease.
Anyway, by dividing each circle into 12 equal wedges, the graph does a great job presenting
changes over time during each month of the conflict.
