What I mean is that you may not be able to know exactly what the computer learned, why, and how.
If you need to know that, a variety of machine learning techniques may not suffice.
But, if you simply need a predictive method, you have the data and the output you want to predict,
then using these techniques can be great.
All you need to get started with neural networks is software that performs neural networks, like Excel, Jump, Sass, or R.
Then, you take your data and think your inputs, the output, and then you will have to think about the layers that you want to predict.
So, you will have to think about the layers in a neural network and the number of neurons.
Depending on the software, you will break the data into three groups, training, validation, and test data sets.
The validation enables the software to know when it can stop learning and consider itself done.
It is then ready to be tested on the data it hasn't seen.
Well, there are still a variety of ways to improve them.
For example, ensemble methods use multiple models to better predict performance than could be attained from any single one.
You may not know exactly how to build your machine learning program, but you can use several versions to build a better one.
It is important to recognize machine learning algorithms can take tuning.
And sometimes, you simply have to try another approach, which is true in many parts of data analysis.
Remember that these techniques are focused on a defined task.
Our minds learn all sorts of things.
The 20-Q algorithm trained from many, many people playing the game and is now able to work through various possibilities.
Another program learned to perform path finding when you plop a robot in a room and press the clean button.
This helps underscore that data alone won't allow a computer to learn.
Just being shown a lot of calculus equations and problems,
even their solutions won't necessarily teach you that level of mathematics.
You need an effective way to be taught.
The same is true with this type of data analysis. The machine must be taught effectively.
But with the ever-present and growing amount of data,
there is a lot of interest in learning from the data and automating how we can learn and predict from our past.
Artificial intelligence is not just a technique in novels and movies.
It is used to explore and use many large data sets that we may not otherwise understand.
In the end, such methods can learn all on their own
and learn to predict our behavior for some task or come up with an intelligent alternative.
In time, the data analytics underlying artificial intelligence may help a car drive itself
or use what people are posting on websites, such as Twitter and Facebook,
to automatically write a news story, maybe even a story about machine learning in artificial intelligence.
