This enables them to find the cheaters and figure out how they're manipulating the game.
Another way to find the fraud has developed.
Investors often customize to a player adapting to what you're doing.
The data that customizes can also be analyzed to identify and stop fraud at the time it is
happening.
Analytical methods can determine common paths through a game.
So if you play a game, the game knows how likely you will progress through it.
By determining such average play, you then know what isn't average.
If a player falls outside the range of what is acceptable, it is flagged.
With credit cards, you get a call to check in.
With an online game, they could check in or even freeze the account and check in.
But let's note that it isn't the only type of play that might be of interest and help
overall revenue.
The same tools that pinpoint someone who advances too quickly might also find someone who progresses
quite slowly through a game.
Once you find such players, promotions can be offered for faster play.
Keep in mind that advances in data analytics have a direct impact on how and when we can
find fraud.
There are data sources that were previously ignored because they changed too quickly.
Traditional techniques simply couldn't handle them.
The insurance industry is an example.
They can refresh fraud scoring in real time.
But then that entire data set changes.
Averint behavior can be analyzed in employees too with huge log files from claims or bill
processing systems.
Now here is another lesson in data analysis.
At one time, analysis of such data would take hours or days to run.
Now billions of rows of data can be analyzed in seconds.
This speed has profound impacts on data analysis.
Applications that once demanded a sample or subset of the data can be used now with the
entire data set.
There isn't a need to find a representative sample.
You simply run it on the entire data set to learn and explore it.
Further, given the speed of modern algorithms and technologies, models can be tested, retuned
and tested quickly.
If a model seems to be failing and reducing in its ability to detect today's fraud, then
a refined model can be tested quickly and analyzed.
If it's efficient, it can be deployed quickly.
At one time, refined models might have been deployed only once or twice a year.
So here is the larger lesson.
Whatever you might consider today that's beyond your computing resources should be logged
