Have a question?
Search engines like Google play a huge role in our world.
The importance of search engines also makes them big business.
So in this lecture, we learn the data analytics of search engines.
Let's get a sense of all this with a story from December 2010.
Suppose you're interested in buying a dress for a friend.
You decide to try some online shopping.
So you go to Google and type the word dresses into the search engine.
Then you decide to look at betting and put the word into Google.
Finally, you search on area rugs.
Wait, you pause.
I mean really pause.
Why?
One company, one, was at the top of each of those lists.
Think of the options for a moment of all the retailers of these products.
I quickly think of Belk, Macy's, Amazon, Nordstrom, Walmart, or
in terms of web pages, even a Wikipedia entry on the item.
Nope, one company topped each list, whether it be dresses, betting, area rugs.
So you start inputting more queries, skinny jeans, home decor,
comforter sets, furniture, tablecloths, grommet top curtains.
Same company on the top.
Who?
JC Penney's.
Now Penney's is a giant in American retailing.
They have over 1,000 stores and had over $17 billion in revenue in 2010.
Still, couldn't we find a query where they weren't beating millions of other retailer sites?
Okay, how about Samsonite Carry On Luggage?
There you go, type it in and indeed JC Penney.
Yes, JC Penney bested Samsonite.com on a search for Samsonite luggage.
What you probably wouldn't have known in all your web searching is that this had been true for months.
This steady performance caught the eye of the New York Times.
And they wanted an expert in online search to take a closer look.
So they contacted Doug Pierce of Blue Fountain Media.
Pierce's research suggested that Penney's had used knowledge of Google's underlying algorithm
to raise the profile of their website on all such queries.
Before we proceed, it is important to know that this isn't illegal.
But such companies risk being punished by Google because they don't like it.
We'll talk about that more a little later.
For now, let's concentrate on Google's algorithm.
How can it possibly be gained?
There are literally hundreds of billions of web pages.
Yet even hundreds of billions can be hard to get a handle on.
How big is that?
Let's put it this way.
If every person on earth was given 100 web pages, we'd still have billions of web pages left over.
The internet is that big.
So again, how can someone possibly manipulate a system of that size?
The key is knowing how Google analyzes the system to form its search results.
We're going to concentrate on the PageRank algorithm.
