Hello. Failing to plan is planning to fail is a quote by Alan Lekeen, an author on personal
time management. Unfortunately, this quote is true for many students. Students that fail
or drop out of university often don't lack the intelligence or capacity to finish their
course successfully, but they do lack the planning skills and self-discipline to plan
their work and actually do it. Today, as May Vermuda and I will discuss planning with you.
Let's first look at the most important changes in your life when you start studying at university.
Study, home and friends. As May, what are the differences between life in high school and
life as a student at a university? In high school you get homework and you have many small
deadlines given by the teachers. At university, for some courses, the only deadline is the
exam after three or six months, so you need to plan your work yourself over longer periods
of time. If you started working only a few days before the deadline in high school, you
could often still make it. In university, that will be the recipe for failure. Another difference
is that in high school you have to go to school, but at university, most of the times it's
your own choice whether or not you attend the lectures. Also, when you're in high school,
most kids live at home and have parents who cook, clean and shop groceries. When you start
living on your own, when you start university, you have also a household to run. Starting
university also means making new friends and being a member of associations. That also
takes time. So, there are a lot of changes. What are your tips for planning your first semester?
My first tip is actually make a planning. Find out what is expected from you, when are
the courses practical work, work groups, deadlines and exams. Also, find out how much self-study
is expected per course per week. This is often explained in your study guide.
So how many hours does the university expect you to work on your study per week?
In my case, they expect us to spend 42 hours per week on our study, but the time you spend
on courses is only 20 hours. So, a common pitfall is that students don't plan enough
time for self-study during the week.
What are other common pitfalls?
Every period you have three or four different courses that you follow. Now, often you'll
find one very interesting and another less so. The risk is that you spend too much time
on the courses and activities you love and are very good at, and less on the courses
you find difficult or uninteresting. So it's important to plan how much time you spend
on each course.
Another pitfall is that you postpone everything till the end, because the deadlines seem very
far away. The remedy is to set intermediate deadlines for yourself. For example, this
afternoon I will finish the chapter on polynomials and I will do at least five exercises. It's
rewarding to make an activity list and to tick off finished activities of your list.
So to study effectively, you need to be able to focus on your work. It's important to be
in a quiet environment and avoid distractions. So how do you do that?
I like to meet with fellow students at the university to do work. There are some nice
quiet spots where you can work with four or five students at one table. However, I'm easily
distracted by Facebook, WhatsApp or other social media. If I have to be very focused,
I put my mobile phone on silent and I leave it in my bag.
So to summarize, to be successful, make a planning, try to find out what is expected
from you, set intermediate deadlines for yourself and find out where and when you can study
in a quiet environment. We want you to be very successful in this pre-university calculus
course. That's why we recommend the following activity. Make your planning for this course.
Good luck!
