I couldn't do what they hired me to do is to teach philosophy.
All you would need is a few students to make your life hell.
And, you know, your colleagues already buy into the ideology.
And they have a vested interest in making sure
that the ideology is promulgated throughout the institution.
And if you don't adhere to those values,
it's not like you're merely wrong.
It's that you're a bad person.
Hello, and welcome to Marshall Matters of Me, Winston Marshall,
for the Spectator.
Today, it is my privilege to speak to professor, philosopher,
author, former professor at Portland State University
till a rather dramatic resignation in September, 2021.
Peter Boghossian, Peter, thank you so much for speaking with me today.
Thank you. I appreciate having me on and getting to know you over the last few days.
Yeah, we've had some fun. Very cool.
If you wouldn't mind, maybe for listeners who aren't familiar with your story.
Yeah.
Maybe you can tell us why you resigned from Portland State University.
Sure. So I did my dissertation in the prisons with prison inmates,
and it was using the Socratic method, which is a way of asking people questions
to help the men.
And I say men because everyone in my study at the time,
the prison was Columbia River Correctional Institution.
It was all male to help the men desist from crime
so that they had tools that they could use.
So then I took the tools that I developed from my dissertation.
And then I, as you mentioned, the book, I turned the same Socratic questioning tools
to issues of religious fundamentalism and issues of faith specifically.
And then I came up with an app to teach people how to have civil conversations.
That's the key in this whole thing, civil conversations across divides.
And a book.
How to have impossible conversations about the same thing,
how to teach people how to have civil conversations.
And now, with Reed and I, we go around the world
and we do this thing called Spectrum Street Epistemology.
And epistemology is how you know what you think you know.
And we give people tools as part of my nonprofit.
We help them calibrate their beliefs to the evidence they have.
OK, so that's the little background.
2017, I first noticed a kind of sickness in the academy in around 2012, 2013.
The more I investigated, the more I was convinced it was from corrupt bodies
of scholarship, peer-reviewed literature.
My writing partner and I, James Lindsay, also co-authored the book with me.
We published our first Soquel-style hoax paper,
which is basically to see what you can get in the journal.
And we published a paper called The Conceptual Penis as a Social Construct,
in which we, it's a very funny paper, by the way.
I think it's very funny in which we claim that, among other things,
penises were responsible for climate change.
And the paper got in and there was a lot of criticism of the paper.
You didn't do this.
You should have done this.
You need more journals, higher ranking journals.
And so I said to Jim, OK, they've given us a roadmap.
Let's follow that.
And then we.
So they assumed it was serious and.
Well, yeah, they published it as a serious pair, like they thought this was it got
past peer-review.
But our critics said, well, you didn't you need to submit that to journals in
gender studies, because I was convinced at the time that the ideological rot,
the corruption was coming from very specific disciplines and fields,
fields that didn't try to falsify hypotheses, but tried to forward narratives.
So we publish or we wrote with Helen Plochrose also.
Sorry, what type of narrative?
What kind of fields do you mean?
Is that the grievance fields?
Is that fair?
Fields that forward grievances or that there's just there's racism baked into
the system system, post-colonial theory, post-colonial theory,
basically, post-modernism and all its.
Helen Plochrose calls it applied post-modernism.
So almost anything with the word studies in it, the purpose of those disciplines
isn't to do what one would think that one does in science, which is to
figure out what's true, test hypotheses, use the best, most rigorous methods
available.
But the purpose is to forward very specific conclusions about the world and
get those conclusions implemented and adopted to change public policies.
And their activism, essentially.
Yeah, it's it's yeah, it's even worse than activism because it's not
predicated upon something that's true.
It's predicated on complete nonsense.
How do you think they've got into the university?
Those those different studies?
Oh, how did our papers get in?
No, those those.
Rewinding a little bit.
Yeah.
Do we go back to the Frankfurt School?
Do we go, how does this leak into the American Academy?
Oh, boy, that's a long conversation.
It OK, so I'll give you the spark note to the cliff notes, notes version of it.
So is a general rule, people like people who are like themselves, people
hire people in an academy who have similar ideological dispositions,
similar positions about issues, similar stances.
And so I mean, you can see that strength through my mind.
You can see that, for example, in psychology, when behaviorism is in
behaviorist would hire other behaviors because they think it's true.
So let's talk about idea laundering for a moment.
This is a key concept.
Idea laundering, idea laundering, like money laundering.
Money goes in, dirty money goes in, corrupt money goes in.
And they they call it laundering because it used to be in New York
with all the laundry machines.
And then it goes out, laundered, and in that it looks it's all good
for the taxes so you could spend it, right?
So you can write, write checks for apartments or what have you.
The same thing is operative in.
An ideological sense or sense with peer reviewed studies
and peer reviewed journals, people have a moral impulse.
A bunch of people get together who have a similar moral impulse.
They start a journal.
People publish, people also with that moral impulse
publish in those journals.
These are not true.
They're not facts.
They're not anything.
They're just musings, usually of ideologues.
People have this idea.
They publish it and it comes out as a peer reviewed journal.
The more of those you get published, as a general rule,
it's seven papers in seven years and you get tenure.
So what happens is that that when you publish in in specific
journals and specific fields and it was out of the STEM fields,
now it's increasingly within the STEM fields.
You're more likely to get tenure.
When you're more likely to get tenure, you hire other people
who have similar beliefs.
So it's in it's called a promotion in tenure basket.
So you publish an article in a grievance studies field
in a journal, which is already corrupt to begin with.
But it looks on paper as if you're publishing and making a contribution to the literature.
So if so slowly, the academy was that's one explain.
There are multiple explanations.
That's why it's I pause to think it's a very complicated problem.
It the other we could literally do a whole podcast on this.
The other problem is that educational administrators were hired
universally who have ed school degrees.
We did a series on this with Lyle Asher's wire colleges becoming cults.
And the ideas that are forwarded are certain ideas that are inherent
in critical race theory without using the words critical race theory.
So oppressive systemic power imbalances, oppressive structures.
We need Heather MacDonald just has a new book about that from the Manhattan Institute.
But this is a problem that has consumed the academy.
And the question the question now is how do we get out of it?
Because virtually nobody disagrees that this is a problem.
Anybody who would look at it that we could look at it from cancellations.
We could look at it from sorry.
Well, no, and it seems like your career is that you you were caught
in the crossfires where those ideas were brewing for a long time and stewing for a long time.
And then you and you started to question those.
But you say no one would disagree that those are a problem.
And one of the things I try to work out is is this coming from the students
or is it coming from the the teachers, the professors?
And because if if no one agrees, it's if everyone agrees, it's a problem.
Yeah, then surely we wouldn't be in a situation where you had to quit.
Yeah, OK, so so what I meant by nobody, I should have articulated myself.
Nobody who's independent, who looks at the problem independently would say,
wow, there's no problem here, move along.
And anybody who questions.
I mean, even asked the question, you know, where's the evidence for this?
I was constantly accused of microaggressions asking for evidence became a microaggression.
Um, if if if you have a belief, if you want to institute a policy for whatever the policy is
that students need safe spaces or the trigger warning should be on syllabi,
these are just in an academic context.
If somebody says to you, OK, so you think we should do this institutionally.
What is the data for this?
What is the data?
So even if you pointed to a peer review journal that itself had been idea laundered,
right, the the the discharging of the moral impulse by some ideologue.
You should still be able to point to that.
But the idea that this is somehow a universal truth, which is weird
for people who don't believe in universal truth, but this is somehow a universal truth.
And everybody needs to adopt it and nobody is allowed to ask about any evidence for this.
That alone, even if it's true that there even if there were evidence
from microaggressions trigger warning, safe spaces, belonging, whatever it is,
you should be able to provide that evidence.
It seems ridiculous that that philosophy, that all that means of operating
could infiltrate the university is the antithesis of what one thinks the university is for.
Yeah, so to understand that, you have to understand how groups of smart people.
So and Michael Schoemer writes about this in the believing brain.
And I love this.
I talk about it all the time.
It's one of my favorite quotations.
Why smart people believe weird things because they're better at reasoning to bad conclusions.
So they're better at offering good reasons for bad conclusions.
Groups of smart people are better still.
So it's precisely because they were academics that they were better at writing to was morally fashionable.
So you have a bunch of people who are defending the dominant moral orthodoxy.
And then that's how that becomes institutionalized.
That's how you get the wide scale adoption of that.
They're not questioning.
They're not and there's a reward mechanism in place.
You get a job for life, you know, you go up in the promotion ladder, etc.
Can you explain to me peer review and how that operates?
Because I learned this or heard this rather recently from listening to Eric Weinstein
and his scathing criticisms of peer reviews.
I'm not sure I took it understood because that's quite a new peer review.
Didn't exist. Am I right until about 50 years ago?
A little more than that.
But yeah, so so the idea is that so there's publishing, all kinds of publishing is
publishing on Substack, which, you know, basically publishing on a blog.
There's publishing a zine or a magazine.
There's getting an article published, for example, in The Atlantic or Scientific American
or what have you, which is gone woke, terribly woke.
And then there's peer review. Peer review is a different animal.
So peer review, you submit an article to an editor who runs a journal and the journal
will be like, you know, journal of fat studies, which is one of our journals,
right, which doesn't do what you think it does.
The goal of fat studies is not to measure A1Cs or talk about, you know,
carb, carbs and protein.
What is the goal of fat studies?
The goal of fat studies is to advocate for fat acceptance and to claim that you and
that obese to claim that obesity is a narrative pushed by the medical profession.
And you can be healthy at any size.
That's the brief encapsulation of that study.
That's actually studied in universities in America.
Well, it's a journal, a peer review journal run by a woman named Charlotte Cooper
out of your island there, the UK.
So sorry.
Yeah, I am, I am, I am as well, who herself happens to be morbidly obese,
not necessarily that that explains anything, but the overwhelming preponderance,
the overwhelming number of proponents are females, the authors of these journals,
and most of whom I've seen are morbidly obese.
And so they don't like the word obese.
So every so if you think of the world as everything being a narrative,
a narrative is just a story.
Everybody has their own narratives.
Medicine has their narratives.
You know, rappers have their everybody banjo players.
I don't know anything about banjo, but we have an art.
You have a narrow.
OK, so everybody has their own narrative.
So the narrative of obesity, the word obesity itself captures a medical narrative.
They don't want the word obesity used.
They want the word fat used.
So because it's less offensive to them.
No, because they believe that you can be healthy at any size.
And if you say obesity, that's an inherently bad thing.
That's that's that's something that.
Buys into a medical understanding of a physical phenomenon.
So think about it like this.
Nietzsche says that there are no there are no moral phenomenon,
only moral interpretations of phenomenon.
So being fat.
So if I brought in a person who was like 400 pounds here
and you affixed a word to that person, you know, fat, morbidly obese,
whatever the word was, that would be a judgment on your part of the physical phenomenon.
Fat is used just as much as an offensive term as obesity or as a negative term as obesity.
Is it not? No, for them, obesity is the more offense.
Yeah, it's not just offensive, but it's it's
it's the description of a medical, again, narrative, a medical perception
of the world onto a fat body.
OK, so.
It's pretty stupid about to pay review.
That's the other thing is stuff is just so stupid.
I mean, it's just idiotic and it's the proponents of it are almost exclusively
to have mediocre minds.
It's just too stupid to sustain itself.
It's just too idiotic.
OK, so you're rather pessimistic then about
the state of the academy and it's completely pessimistic.
But so peer reviewed.
So the idea is that, for example, in the Journal of Fat Studies,
you get other people who have published in the journal and so they become experts
in the field, so somebody should be blind.
In other words, the reviewer should know who it is.
Look at the article and the best people try to vet that article to see whether
or not it should go into the journal based upon if it meets certain criteria
for the journal, right?
If it's scholarly or rigorous, is this.
But in most of these journals, and I do use that word
very specifically, it should be virtually all, but I'll just tone it down to say most.
The idea is that you want certain conclusions
to percolate into the broader culture.
And the way that you do that is that you
you have certain starting assumptions.
So if you want to get a paper published, you write to those starting assumptions.
They're a systemic.
The whole system is corrupt.
There is racism everywhere.
Whatever the whatever the starting assumption is, it doesn't have to be
something within the suite of woke ideology.
It could be something about barbers or what have you.
But we don't we don't have those.
It's only things that deal with identity level salience, specifically gender,
race, sexual orientation, things of that nature.
OK, so is do you think it's fed then that the the universities for me to think
it's completely rotten, these ideas have completely taken over.
Yes. Infiltrated everything.
Correct.
Presumably, you know, you describe in your
resignation that you were even spat on when you were there.
But actually, it seems perhaps that you left maybe because you just given up hope
that the university functioned as it's supposed to function as a place for
three, four and inquire. Well, I couldn't do what they hired me to do is to teach
philosophy. I was getting complaints constantly about everything when I challenged
to you couldn't even present the other side of an issue.
Now, that's not with every single student, but all you would need is a few students
to make your life hell and, you know, your colleagues already buy into the ideology
and they have a vested interest in making sure that the ideology is promulgated
throughout the institution and the largest society.
And if you don't adhere to those values, it's not like you're merely wrong.
It's that you're a bad person.
There's something endemically flawed with you and you need to go through some kind
of reeducation or you're just, you know,
irredeemable.
But you are now part of some what of an academic fight back with the University
of Austin, we actually are in Austin now, as we speak.
Can you tell me about University of Austin and why it's so important?
It's a university predicated upon
what traditional universities have always been, truth seeking.
It's run, it's present as Pono Canulus, Joe
Lonsdale, the entrepreneur is on the board of directors, Barry Weiss from the
Free Press is on the board of directors.
Faculty, your Ion, her CLE, Neil Ferguson from your island, a different part
of your island, historian, Kathleen Stock also from your island.
She's a very brave woman.
A lot of extremely brave women.
Similarly to you, forced to leave her university being hounded by the trans idea.
Correct. Yeah. Correct.
Yeah. So that's another type of derangement that maybe we could go into a little bit.
But so it's a it's a university we have the forbidden.
I'm coming back in June for the forbidden classes.
Kathleen Stock is going to be here as well for the forbidden classes.
David Mamet, et cetera.
It's really a fascinating group of people they've assembled like genuinely
interesting people and the university is set to open in 2024 in Austin.
The forbidden classes are in Dallas this summer and you're going to be there, right?
I am. I'll be there in June doing, I think, a question and answers.
So you know, I'm a I'm a believer in that.
I I've I've noticed this stuff in the Academy for a while, even though I
didn't actually go to university, but I I like the idea of building.
I think we need to build new institutions.
So I think that's the correct response.
There's one which idea is that we need to change.
And I kind of wanted to ask whether there's a new generation of teachers and
students going into the long existing universities who might be able to change
a rebel against these ideologies that you've been discussing or whether we need
to build new institutions completely.
And you know, I'm not sure which is right.
Maybe it's both.
OK, so before I say that, I will make a prediction.
You are going to love the students.
I mean, amazing faculty, since the level of intellectual engagement that you'll
find this summer is phenomenal.
Like off the charts, crazy.
And what I particularly like with the students is just the hanging out.
So we go to these classes and then come back and they just I mean,
it was very intense and they really are completely curious.
OK, so now back to the institution.
So there are two ways to look at the problem.
One way is the way that I believe is that they're irredeemable and you have to
build new things.
The other way is Chris Rufo's way and he's with the Manhattan Institute.
And he believes that reform is still possible once you kick out the DEI bureaucrats.
So let's lay that terrain a little bit.
Let's explain that.
So it is not possible.
It is not possible to have both DEI and free speech.
You either get DEI or you get free speech.
Anything else.
So you have a simple choice.
So anybody making a Chicago statement or this declaration, it's just not true.
It's Harvard put something up about that reason they have.
It's never going to work.
It's literally impossible because the whole mission of DEI is to limit what
people say so they won't so certain minorities won't be won't feel
quote unquote feel excluded.
The whole the whole premise of it is that the system is inherently racist.
Everything from who gets into the institutions and universities,
SAT scores, the whole it's just not possible.
So you have the Chris Rufo idea.
Now, here's the interesting thing.
So in 1945, Karl Popper also from your
island, Austrian English, the philosopher of science has a wonderful thing on the
paradox of tolerance and the paradox of tolerance is the idea that
to what extent should the tolerant tolerate the intolerant?
So when I'm taking it out of the academy, so for example, the Netherlands right now
or actually London to to an extent.
But Sweden.
To what extent should broadly liberal societies tolerate pockets of Islamic radicalism?
People who are
in those views about homosexuality, those views about covering of women, etc.
And so what we have.
So this is how I view the system.
You have a group of people.
Who participate in ideology.
That ideology has metastasized throughout the educational system.
Not only do they control bureaucracies, but they have a direct path to the president.
Usually there's a kind of hierarchical organization in which one
files complain to what have you have to go.
But the DEI goes right to the top.
They are offices searching for tasks with the assumption that sexism and racism
already exists and bigotry and homophobia, rank bias of some sort.
And we just need to figure out how it manifests.
That's a tenant.
That's an underlying principle of critical race theory.
So to what extent do we tolerate the intolerant?
And so Rufo is going after.
And he's being very effective.
He's working with Ron DeSantis right now.
And I hope he's successful.
And the criticism of Rufo, I don't think holds.
The criticism is you're trying to do things that woke people are doing on the opposite.
And so woke people.
What is Rufo doing? Sorry.
So Rufo is going in and eliminating DEI
bureaucracies so we can have more of a classically liberal education.
OK.
The problem is you just have to make sure that those aren't staffed by only people
who have another ideology or similar ideology.
Right.
So so the criticism of Rufo, then, is that
what he's doing is he's replacing one ideology with another.
OK. And and that's certainly something to be mindful of.
But the idea, then, that once these DEI
bureaucrats are kicked out and this is a very significant person, you know,
in Stanford, for example,
it's almost a two to one student ratio with diversity bureaucrats.
And these have these are enormously
well funded departments and individual positions are very highly paid.
So this is not a trivially financially trivial matter.
So to what extent should we tolerate the intolerant when the very people,
once they get kicked out from the DEI bureaucracy, they're screaming about free speech.
The very people who are taking away everybody else's free speech.
So I hope Rufo is successful.
I don't know if he'll be, but I'm not going to wait and find out.
I'm going to build new things.
I'm going to make an institution.
I'm going to help contribute to an institution that's based upon free speech
and open inquiry and genuine curiosity where people who have questions can ask
without fear of, you know, cancellation or being, you know, just a priori
repudiated to something someone says.
That's an interesting debate that we're having in Britain as well about CRT
in schools, not just in universities, but for those of us who believe in free
speech, how do we how do we deal with CRT and, you know, the banning of it altogether?
How do we get rid of it?
Or how can we say we're for a pro free speech if we don't somehow tolerate it?
And maybe that's the tolerance paradox.
But how do how does one deal with that?
Does that mean that you're not actually a free speech absolutist?
OK, so let's let's take a look at this,
because I think that's an excellent question.
So let's let's linger on this and drill down it.
So I'm going to give you some examples of ideologies.
And and so for, you know, phrenology, the bumps on the skull,
the Nazis were big into that, and they believe it was predictive of
intelligence and race and all this other silliness, which is simply nonsense.
Let's say that you had a group of people in a school system who wanted to
institutionalize phrenology, and so they would give scholarships based upon
people who had certain protrusions in their head.
You had these people who had classes in phrenology.
They taught phrenology.
It was throughout the curricula.
Should we allow phrenology in the schools?
And if you say, no, we don't want to allow phrenology in the schools.
Does that make you someone who's against free speech?
Hmm.
You don't have to answer.
I know I'm putting you on the spot, but let me give you another one.
So bracket that we can come back to that later.
Let's say that we have so phrenology is an idiotic ideology.
Is it harmful?
I don't know, maybe a little bit.
But OK, now let's let's another way of taking it right is that
Nazism is an evil ideology.
Yeah, that's where I was going next.
Yeah, so one and one needs to teach children about what happened.
Maybe it comes in a history class, you know, rather than a philosophy class.
We don't teach Nazi philosophy, but we touch what this is.
And maybe that's another way of of dealing it.
I guess the bigger problem with CRT is it's not really so much.
It's certainly not a history, although there's a history of the philosophy,
but it's a way of seeing the world and actually everything else is seen through
those correct prisms.
So it's kind of like a whole other
problem, right?
OK, so OK, OK, so let's let's go down that road.
So you have a few things going on.
We got the phrenology thing that we've bracketed.
Now let's say that somebody wants to teach some pretty insidious stuff, right?
So Nazi ideology, what have you?
Let's just use that's the gold standard for bad, right?
And if we attempt to kick those people out,
who want to institutionalize this and who are actually effectively institutionalizing
this, does that mean we're against free speech?
And what if they say, hey, you're trying to kick us out?
You know, Zeke Heil, you know, you're just violating my rights to free speech.
So so so.
That's the that's the paradox of tolerance, right?
That's the idea of to what extent should we leverage institutional mechanisms in
the system and at this case of Rufo and DeSantis, we're talking at the state level,
right, to kick out, to change the board of trustees, to then go out and extirpate
the entire DEI bureaucracy.
I would argue that you're not violating and I realized that many people are going
to listen to this and say, oh, this is some kind of right wing.
So no, it's not at all.
You would do that with literally any other ideology.
And just because the ideology happens to comport with your beliefs,
it doesn't make it OK that it's institutionalized.
And the other thing is, why is an ideology?
It's not falsifiable.
It's simply not falsifiable, at least for an ology is falsifiable.
A couple of times through this conversation, you've used the word woke,
yeah, which I think is a pejorative term.
Yeah. And but very basic question, because it seems to be
some debate about this or stumbling on this definition of woke.
What would you use to term woke?
A simple question, but what do you mean?
I mean, it's actually very easy to understand.
It's not even remotely complicated at all.
It's that there are systemic injustices to people who people who are woke.
To people who are woke, you can never be woke enough.
I did a one minute series of videos where I explain
words that woke people use in one minute.
It means that you have an awareness of systemic injustice.
It means that that injustice is somehow rooted in the system.
And usually that almost always, but not always, that revolves around some kind
of something with an identity level salience, race,
gender, sexual orientation, trans status, etc.
Isn't that quite a complex because I've just I've seen it as really just
excessive progressivism.
Yeah, I mean, so that's too simple.
Yeah, I mean, look,
people have called it Wesleyan calls it successor ideology.
Majid Nawaz calls it regressive leftism.
Helen Pluck Rose calls it critical social justice.
I usually use social justice uppercase essence.
It goes by different names and they basically mean the same thing.
Do you think in America are we yet to have peak woke?
Are we in the woke clash?
Where do we think we sit now in in the history of of wokeism?
Where do you think we are peaked?
I think we've peaked.
But the damage that it's done to the institutions is nowhere near over.
Like what would you what do you foresee?
Well, I mean, the police force, I see the American cities,
the more wokes, you know, the mayor of Portland, for example, is a public
disgrace, Ted Wheeler, he, him.
I see I that's just a kind of signaling, right?
So he's he's more concerned about.
I mean, he really should be concerned almost exclusively with rampant crime,
300 percent increase in murders, homelessness, drug addiction,
you know, helping the people who who need help who are on the streets.
But instead, he has a and it's not just Wheeler, it's just this strain of
NDAs on prosecuting crimes.
And it's it's a systemic breakdown.
But I think that we are past peak woke and I'll give you some pieces of evidence
for that. Well, I tell you one of the things, a few of the things that's changed.
I think that the our brains are wired for testimony.
And so the testimonies of detransitioners, I think it's some pretty
ghastly stuff. And most but not all those people are.
Have a girl, Shariah writes about this irreversible damage.
These are basically young gay kids told that they're born in the wrong body and
then they need to transition.
I heard Katie Hertzog saying in an event once that she's she's gay.
And she said that there are no her her.
I think she termed it FEMM friends said that there are no butch lesbians anymore.
They've all transitioned. Wow.
Actually, there's a Hannah Barnes,
written a book called Time to Think About Travelling in Britain.
And and she shows it's something like of the female trans.
It's over 80 percent are gay.
And I think if the male trans is over 90 percent, it's high again and very high
autism, which is to say autism and and that's also it's changed over the time.
I think in the last 15 years, it was a majority, a male phenomenon.
And now it's become a majority female phenomenon.
But so that that's sort of it's it's changing and continues to change.
And it's by age group as well, which is
Debra So and Colin Wright write about this.
It's by certain age groups, younger people who are more susceptible to this in
certain counties, you know, up to 15, 20 percent in California.
I can't remember the name of the county.
So you have so Jason D Hill puts the the figure at point zero, six percent of the
people are trans. And so anything other than that, you have to ask why.
Is it that we're more lax and society doesn't care anymore?
So people who are hiding it.
But again, I just want to be crystal clear as I have to be in every one of these
interviews, anybody can lead any type of life they want.
And if you want to be trans, you should absolutely knock yourself out.
And you should live a free life.
Nobody should.
That's absolutely inexcusable to harass them on or grief someone.
People should live any lives they want.
I'm talking about something very different.
I'm talking about a few things, specifically, I'm talking about
transitioning children before they're 18 and specifically hiding that from parents.
My my son wanted to die his hero when he was 17.
He needed a note from his parents.
You know, there's a looper in the hormone, there's chest binding.
There's so I'm talking about a very specific thing.
And then I'm also talking about
trans women in sports.
And I'm talking about trans women in prisons
or women's only spaces more broadly.
But specifically, I'm talking about
the detransitioners of young kids.
And I think that's one of the things
it's not going to be the cancellations.
It's not going to be people realize fundamentally there's something
ghastly about mutilating the genitals of children.
Absolutely. You see the photographs.
I don't know how anyone could possibly look at that and and think otherwise.
And I just want to linger on that for a second.
But that's why my prediction to you is that
once the ideology falls into ill repute or disrepute,
what you'll see is epic gaslighting.
And you're starting to see it now, which is also why I see it.
I never believe that this is not nobody wants to defund the police.
There's an article in the New York Times.
Yes, we really do mean abolish the police.
And the same people are saying, well, so I think that there's going to be.
Well, I did maybe disagree with you on this is that in Britain,
I think we're past peak trans ideology and the madness of it.
And again, I have agreed of everything you said.
I would never you can just identify as anti trans.
I'd say I'm a pro woman and also pro protecting children.
Right. Right. But at the ballot box, for example, and this we had this in Scotland,
Nicholas Sturgeon had to leave the leadership of the Scottish National Party
because she was unable to answer the question, what is a woman?
People see that and they go, are you insane?
Even leader of the opposition in England and Britain?
Sorry, Keir Starmer says that 99.9% of women don't have a penis as in one in a thousand do.
Right. And people see that and you go insane.
And it's unpopular in the ballot box.
But here in this country, I see someone like Dylan Mulvaney and there's
I don't see the same backlash for here.
I don't see people.
I see certainly conservatives and I see
women's rights activists digging in their heels and upset about it.
But I don't see ideas being changed.
It just seems that people are just doubling down in their own little silos.
Yeah, it's difficult.
I can't I can't say I just read and I just came back from Australia and we we had
some pretty interesting meetings and we met with deans and heads of think tanks
and reporters and as we walked out of that meeting, the thing that I said to myself
was that I said to myself as well, these just like they're almost exactly a year
behind, just they're just waiting till it comes from them.
And as I walked out, Reed said that exact same thing to me.
It's like, well, just give give it a year, wait a year.
Yeah, yeah.
Let's see this again.
So so I can't I can't speak.
I can say when I've been in Europe that curve is about and we should probably
maybe we want to talk about how woke ideology spreads in non-English speaking countries.
Yes, that's very interesting.
How does it spread in London?
Because it's starting to happen now in Europe.
It's been very much the preserve of the Anglosphere for a while.
And I starting to see it in France as a pushback.
And I think it's because gender self ideas coming into place.
And that seems to me to be the backdoor that woke
ideologies coming into into non-English speaking Europe.
Do you agree with that or OK.
So so and Macron is doing some interesting stuff with that.
And I but although I have to say I don't like his recent posture.
Pro-China and against the United States that are old venerable friendship.
So OK, so I published a piece in November 8th in the spectator about this.
So so this is kind of it took me a long time to think about this.
When I was in Austria, I gave a talk with lawyers and I said this is coming in six months.
And basically, everybody laughed at me.
And then I went back in six months and the same guy, one of the guys who laughed at me
came on. So sorry, I'm so sorry.
So let's talk about how wokeness spreads.
So for wokeness to work, it needs one thing.
It needs a double meaning of a word.
It means that that means that one woke word has to have two meanings.
It has to have the meaning in common parlance and it has to have the woke meaning.
So this is referred to as the Mott.
We spoke about this briefly, the Mott and the Bailey.
The Bailey is the way that woke people use the words.
The Mott is the way that normal people use the words like equity,
inclusion is a good one, including one.
Of course, you want people to be included.
And so what happens is in like when I was in Hungary or
Austria or basically any place, any any place outside the Anglesphere
and that includes India as well.
When you translate a woke word into another language,
the only thing that translates is the Mott is the primary meaning of the word.
The secondary meaning of the word doesn't it can't translate.
It doesn't translate.
So the consequence of that is that in order for woke to infect a system and spread
throughout the system, it has to be an English word.
So interesting.
So which words are then heading heading the continent?
The same words that we use in English, diversity, equity, inclusion,
blind, the whole list, the whole thing, they use English words.
Now, woke can work in any language, but English is the language of woke.
And so you can't like if you did that in German or Hungarian or what have you,
it just wouldn't it wouldn't make any sense.
And then when it made it into public policy documents, people would say, well,
look, we know the definition of the word.
What are you talking about?
But when it makes it into a public policy definition in the Anglosphere,
then the woke people go to the Bailey, they go to the woke definition of the word.
And it's too late at that point because it's already in public policy.
And that's so interesting.
Yeah, there's a perhaps zooming out a little bit.
But back to the idea of woke, you before we started recording,
you talked about so you gave me the impression you sort of given up and
engaging in conversation with the woke, which is striking, given that you've
written a whole book about how to engage and dig into the epistemology of
woke thought and and and how to have positive conversations.
Indeed, the book is called How to Have Constructive Conversations.
And yet you have seemed to have given up.
Have you given up?
OK, no, no.
So let me clarify, this is really important.
So we're talking about, by and large, a group of people who believe
that dialogue and discourse are inherently not only racist in and of themselves,
but they it's called privilege, preserving epistemic pushback.
The person who is engaged in the dialogue, it is just a way they're only
engaged in the dialogue as a way to maintain power.
And if you're a woke person, I don't want to give that platform for platforming,
a non-consensual co-platforming.
I don't want to engage that person to amplify their voice to hurt marginalized
people. So it is a choice they themselves have made to not engage
their people with whom they have some ideological disagreement.
But the consequence of that ultimately is that it's a mimetic device to
prevent the ideology from any kind of penetration from anything that could
dislodge the ideology or could decrease the confidence that any of the propositions
in the suite of beliefs that the ideology holds is true.
So it's not that I won't engage.
It's that any time that those there are any and they're not even engagements,
they're just kind of ad hominem attacks.
That's certainly because one of the things I found having read your book
a few years ago is actually unless both parties read the book, right?
Only one of them, one of you read the book, it's very hard to you need to get
both people to approach the conversation in that way.
So are you leaving? Are you sort of is there a follow up where it's like
conversations over?
Yeah. So that's the thing about an impossible conversation.
A conversation in impossible conversation, you can have a conversation with someone
who has a radically different metaphysical belief about angels and all this or
whatever, a radically different political belief.
It doesn't matter what it is.
When I taught in prisons, the concern was never that
people would disagree with me or say screw you with the middle finger.
The concern was always that they wouldn't say anything
because if they don't say anything, there's nothing to hook on to.
There's no conversation.
So, you know, if someone doesn't want to have a conversation with you,
you can't kidnap them, put them in your trunk and beat them until they want to talk
to you. That's a literally impossible conversation.
So the conversation is impossible if no one wants to have a conversation with you.
OK, can also zooming out again.
Yeah, so as a prominent new atheist thinker writer and speaker,
I wondered if you might see a link between did the new atheists cleared about?
We've talked about trans.
We've talked about work.
I would throw in environmentalism and does one of these new quasi pseudo
religions, Michael Schoenberg, Björn Lundberg.
Talk about that. Absolutely.
Do you think I would be unfair for me to say that the new atheists perhaps cleared
a path by killing God again for these new religions to these new
quasi religions, pseudo religions to flourish?
Is there a link?
Absolutely true.
And I think there was a
Polly and attitude that many new atheists had
that somehow will will bury God,
but I'll turn a phrase from Nietzsche and everybody's going to be living in some
rational paradise, little did anybody know at that point, although the canaries
in the coal mine were in the new atheist movement, the skeptical movement.
We started to see this in the very beginning.
That what would replace it would be horrific.
I mean, we would just be.
I mean, look, look, look, look with the kind of things that we're dealing with now.
And so that it's called the substitution hypothesis.
I can never remember if I came up with this or Peterson or my apartment.
I don't really remember where this comes from.
But the idea is that it's a substitution hypothesis.
So what it's like Game of Thrones, you know, you only you ever watch Game of Thrones?
No, you're kidding me.
I this is a recommendation.
Yeah, well, that's just amazing.
You should begin immediately.
But anyway, you're the only reason that you have new gods is because people don't
believe in the old gods anymore, right?
So the substitution hypothesis is when you get rid of the Abrahamic traditions or
whatever is traditional religion in a country, something else will come in.
Some other form of a rationality will come in and substitute for what was lost
because the default is you just have to believe in some rationality or
religion doesn't have to be a rational visit or another.
No, we would have to be a worldview that wasn't
substantiated by the evidence because that's what substitutes it.
OK, so with if you're fighting now, not just as you were fighting in the
universities, you're fighting across the world to defeat these new
pseudo religions, what are you going to replace them with?
Oh, that's that's a great question.
The first thing you have to do is you have to replace them with the
institutions that have been corrupted, right?
So you have to replace them with the University of Austin's, for example.
That's that's that's brick and mortar, so to speak.
What about the OK, OK, so let's let's take let's take a hierarchical look at this.
There's theory, institutions downstream of that is belief, right?
So there's the theory.
I'm talking about the beliefs.
I want to understand that.
Right.
So so the way that people get the belief is from the theory through
the institutions, then they start believing it.
So if you change the institutional structures, if you change the way
that the academies are functioned and running downstream of that, that's why
there's a there's a woke contagion.
The woke contagion started in
it's well, it actually starts in K through 12.
But the way that you teach in K through 12 is you go through a College of Education.
College of Education are predicated not upon seeking truth, but alleviating oppression.
That's a ubiquitous phenomenon at every ed school in the country.
OK, so the way that you change the beliefs at the bottom, there are two ways.
One is street epistemology.
There are actually three or four ways.
But one is street epistemology, what what we do in our video.
And our concrete explanation on that is because I've seen the videos.
But yeah.
So street epistemology is a way to it's a nonconferential confrontational,
non-eversarial way to have better conversations to help people and yourself
reflect upon the confidence in your beliefs and whether that confidence is
warranted by the reason and evidence you have for believing it.
So you're going out on the street.
Yeah, all over the world.
Strangers together.
Never no actors, 100 percent random people, strangers everywhere.
We just got back from reading.
I just got back from Australia.
We just got back from Florida.
We just got back from Puerto Rico.
We're going to go to your island next.
And what we do is we just put tape on the ground from strongly disagree,
disagree, slightly disagree neutral to the strongly agree.
We ask people what they want to talk about and we take epistemology,
what it is, how you know what, you know, out of the universities and we bring it
to the streets and we give people tools that they can use to not only have civil
conversations, but to figure out if they're warranted or justified in the
confidence of their beliefs.
We just did a really interesting one the other day with a young girl.
We don't usually we never do people under 18 because you need parental permission
to view, but her mom was there.
And the claim was Miley Cyrus was the best singer ever.
I never really, I mean, I heard in Miley Cyrus, I couldn't tell you.
I listened to Tool and Heavy Metal.
I couldn't tell you one song, Miley Cyrus, you know who Miley Cyrus is?
I'm a great Mara of her music.
And she's a great talent in apartments.
I know nothing about her like wrecking ball, you know, wrecking ball.
It's a great song.
I listen to Heavy Metal.
I don't know any of this stuff.
We'll have a little session.
Miley says, well, I don't know if I don't know if I know you well enough to want
that, but did I do something wrong?
I don't know. No, no, no, just on my second.
So so she, you know, her claim was Miley Cyrus is the best and she stood on the
strongly agree, but after only a few questions in a few minutes, you know,
she went to the agree, just targeted,
Socratic questions to help her think, to help her give her a tool.
And I told her mom, it's like, you can do this with her with anybody.
You can just work.
So anyway, so the one one of the ways downstream what replaces it is you give
people tools so that they can lead a better life.
And this is a way that the word community is actually applicable.
They can help their communities.
Sorry, that's wonderful.
And actually, it's particularly effective seeing is you're filming it so people
can watch it and it's it's free and it's free.
But, you know, I think my question sort of without being sort of too rude.
Don't worry about anything you want to me, believe me, we're getting rid of a pseudo
religion. Yeah.
And the I don't know.
I don't quite see a street of epistemology great as it is.
I can't see how that's going to be a new and it's not.
It's not. No, no, no, it's not.
OK, so so the older I get here, if I can tell you one conclusion,
I've come up with in the 56 years of my life.
Going on 57.
It's that.
The best way to make a positive change.
Isn't either in the way people believe things or in the way societies ebb and
flow, it's through values.
And so what people value matters?
And if you believe that certain things I believe and my guess is that you believe.
And as we explore our friendship, I'll come over time to figure out if you actually
do believe this is that certain value, you can value certain things to lead you
to a good life and you can value certain things to lead your community to flourish.
And if once you admit that, then you can you have to admit by necessity certain
things you can value lead against your own well-being and that of your communities.
And so we have to give people tool sets to enable them to value the right things.
But even before you do that, you have to think about that structure.
Theory, institutions, people.
Right now, what's happening is the reason that people's car.
Beliefs are there instead of people.
Well, what people and what they believe.
So you they have the theory, the theory informs the institutions in K through 12
and colleges of education, the people in those academic in that academic meal,
you think of the Academy as an ideology meal where they want to replicate this
ideology and they teach that to students.
The first order of business is to shut shut that replication process.
Well, how this idea makes sense to me is in fact, as I see it,
is almost that's how the critical theory has managed to come and attack those
greater beliefs we have.
But really, in essence, it's it's built the other way.
Those great institutions didn't come from theory institution.
And they came the other way around where it's belief.
Then we build institutions and then theory on top of that.
That's how it was constructed.
So if we're dealing with the belief itself,
I can see how that's a good way to to attack the new beliefs and new religions.
Right. It's the same tactic.
But I'm talking about the beliefs themselves at the core.
If we're going to eventually defeat these
ideas that we dislike, which, as I've now said a few times, are new religions.
Right. What's the new religion to replace?
OK, so this is extremely important.
OK, so.
The difference is at some level in a religious
architecture, at some level, at least in the Christian tradition,
the Islamic tradition isn't the case.
You need some kind of a faith based belief.
You need some kind of a way.
If you're if you have, you know,
if you believe that you have eight confidence in something or even nine,
if you believe that you have eight evidence on a scale from one to ten,
but your confidence is nine,
there's a difference between the confidence,
the evidence you have and the confidence you have.
That slack is usually called faith, like it's made up by something.
But in the new religion,
critical social justice, woke is and whatever you want to call you,
whatever you want to call it.
Ultimately, you have bodies of peer-reviewed literature, which are corrupt.
We've just discussed that that they can point to so they don't need any faith.
Like ultimately, someone who's versed in this can point to it and then it
percolates throughout.
So it's not so there has to be some
prophylactic in place to prevent people from believing other deranged things.
Right. So I don't know what's going to come after woke is.
I have a very strong suspicion about what the next cultural war will be about.
And the next cultural war will be about
whether or not and people who are ordinarily strong bedfellows like Christians
and atheists weren't, but now they are.
Most of my supporters are actually Christians.
But the next culture war I predict will be
those who want to save legacy institutions and those who want to destroy them.
Steven Pinker wants to save them.
I want to destroy them.
So that will be the next culture war.
So it's not like it's the substitution.
It's an intra-cultural war.
That's a war amongst the people who agree with this ideology.
So these certain ideologies we've been
calling them woke going too far, right?
That's not a culture war to replace, let's say, the trans-culture war,
because that's this is within the anti-woke community.
No, no, I call it.
I think I think these I could be totally wrong about this.
I would be completely wrong.
I think this whole thing is going to it's just so idiotic.
I just cannot believe it's it's sustainable.
I'm amazed that it's gone this far, but I don't see this being around in 10 years.
I see it being replaced by and, of course, you know,
a few nukes in American cities could change everything immediately,
which is part of the other problem.
You know, I try never to even mention Dylan Mulvaney.
I don't even like the fact that I mentioned it or.
Sorry, I brought him up.
No, no, no, that's fine.
But the the the problem is then that that is a failure.
The obsession with drag shows, etc.
It's a failure to morally triage or even socially and politically triage the problems
we have like Portland, Oregon, Portland, Oregon is becoming a huge cesspool.
Homelessness, drug addiction, crime,
on a national level, we have inflation, we have problems to Ukraine war.
We should simply not be talking about Dylan Mulvaney.
It's it's insane.
You know, Douglas Murray, our mutual friends is it's like it's, you know,
people are trying to sneak nukes in and everybody's worried about everybody's
pronouns, but I think that that it's not that one religion will replace another
religion, it's that if people value certain things that will lead their community
of flourishing, and these are not particularly difficult things.
In fact, I would argue they're all rationally drivable.
Compassion, basic human decency, civility.
If you don't like a statue, that's fine.
You petition through democratic process to have the statue removed.
There's no like thug rule where if you don't like a deer in Portland,
they've ripped down, you know, they've ripped down the Abraham Lincoln statue.
You said earlier in this conversation that it's all about narrative and all
of these ideas have a narrative and there's there's truth to that.
We all function with a narrative, as individuals or a narrative and that
greater narrative science can't fill that, right, that new narrative.
We need to.
Now, again, I would say it's a metaphysic on which to build, build it all.
And OK, so I'm hammering, perhaps, OK, so much the same point.
No, no, no.
So if you have a metaphysic
and so let's say that one's metaphysic is they believe that there's some kind
of a supernatural realm populated by all these entities or they believe that
throughout in the time space continuum, there are certain points that that a
godhead or some kind of divine being came in and intervened and somebody walked
on water, you know, bread and loaves, wine, water, whatever it is, heal people,
whatever it is, those those phenomenon, those phenomena are usually grounding
for the value system.
In other words, if you don't have those, then you can't have the value system.
And I'm telling you in no uncertain terms, that is simply not true.
OK, well, so tell me, because that's exactly the argument I'm making.
Well, how is that not true?
So if it is the case, so let's say so so you have.
So there are two possibilities, right?
There's a possibility that that and that and let's say we don't know what
universe we're living in, right?
There's a possibility where a creator intervened in the space time continuum
and did these things that are we term miracles.
And let's say that you don't know if you're in that universe or you're not in
that universe, my question to you is, would the value still hold?
And I would say to you that the values independent of the universe in which you
knew you're in the values, many of those values would still hold.
How you treat people, treating people with kindness, being a decent human being.
Why would those values still hold?
Well, because you can figure them out.
You can derive them, which is why they've held in the beginning.
They didn't hold, of course, the metaphysics helped, you know, at least
people believing that there was so if people believe that someone walked on water,
they're far more likely to believe his pronouncements than if they believe he
didn't walk on water.
So the metaphysics is in a sense a way to
concretize and sustain a value throughout a long period of time.
But you can have the same value independent of whether or not someone walked on water.
You can have it independently, but it could just as well be
coincidental that you have it independently.
And there's no reason why you can't argue against that value.
So it could be.
But I mean, it certainly could be.
But then again, you could reason to certain values.
I mean, look, in a judicial system, which by the way, sorry, no, go ahead.
Well, you can reason to certain values, which is exactly why whenever metaphysics
has been removed from a society or a civilization,
that those morals completely get twisted and 100 percent hell breaks.
Yeah, no, that that's correct.
That's that's not an argument that the metaphysics is true.
That's an argument that it has socially detrimental effects.
That's a big difference.
Sure.
So but doesn't that argue against the idea that you could still have those morals
that you would still have those morals?
Because I would say no, not necessarily.
You wouldn't necessarily have the same values.
Sorry to use your word.
Yeah, or you can say morals to the changeable.
You might be some of them might be interchangeable and come in me.
But I wouldn't say that they are
obvious that those morals are not.
One I don't think one can assume or would have the same morals.
Yeah, you're right.
You're certainly right.
You can assume that you have the same morals.
But equally likely, why should you?
I mean, you you you there is something I find
disturbing about believing things that are almost definitely false
so that society will function more smoothly.
I'm not unsympathetic.
I guess, you know, if my kids were butchered by a lunatic,
would I much rather have that lunatic believe in some kind of metaphysics?
That, you know, a perpetual fear of hell so that he didn't do something deranged
and I'd still have my kids?
Well, yeah, I would. I would.
So so I think maybe my to borrow a term, my situatedness
or maybe as Henderson says, that's just a luxury belief I have, I don't know.
But there is something I just don't think you can compromise yourself like that.
I just I just don't I think to maintain your integrity.
You have to believe true things in every realm.
Like you can't just say, well, you know, metaphysics, you know, I'm just going to.
No, I just I just think that that that's
that's something pernicious to an individual's integrity.
Well, I'll I'll I'll have to
mull on that at fear enough.
But I would concede that there's an element of
absolutely an element of faith and I liked your term earlier that, you know,
the notch, the the eight to the nine and yeah, I agree with that.
But on a positive note, if I may, I thought that was a positive note.
Not to me.
OK, OK, sorry about that.
Can you tell me about your not for profit that you've been working on?
Yeah, National Progress Alliance and we are a small nonprofit and we
promote free speech and civil discourse and fight woke ideology and all of its
manifestations, which are which is the
one thing at this moment that is really preventing us from seeing more civil
and more civil and just society.
So that's what we do.
Great. And a small team, two full-time employees and a bunch of part-time employees.
Wonderful. And how can and people find out about it and National Progress Alliance
and everything we're 100 percent donor funded.
So we do all of the YouTube videos.
We that's, you know, it pays for stuff.
We go read and I go around the words of volunteer.
We go around the world.
We make videos. We give talks.
We teach people how to have productive conversations.
We teach institutions how to keep wokeism out, how to, you know, avoid this madness
from infecting their society.
So it's a it's a it's a big job.
It's so wonderful to see that after the hellish experience you had at
Point State University that you've you really like a plane taking off into the
wind. It's just now your reach is global and and you're really putting everything
into before you were trying to destroy these ideas in the universal question.
Right. Now you're doing it on the on the world stage.
And that's and that's very inspiring.
I'm sure a lot of people watching you, I appreciate that.
I mean, I can't do this alone.
I have a lot of people who help me.
And so, you know, this is how it's this is not a one person thing.
You really need a community to borrow that turn of phrase, but you actually do need
people and, you know, we're donor supported.
I have an incredibly dedicated staff and this is just what we do full time.
And I'm incredibly grateful to be able to do that.
Well, yeah, thanks.
My dad just told me, make sure you leave the world better when you left than when
you got in and I think that's what we're trying to do.
Wonderful stuff.
Well, Peter Boghosian, thank you so much for your time.
Thank you. I appreciate it. Thank you.
