Yeah, alright, let's do this.
Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Brotsky.
I'm Stephen Zuber and we have two special guests today.
I'm David Youssef.
I'm Jai Sticky.
Yay!
David is in town.
He was here, what, a year ago, about?
Almost exactly, yeah.
Okay.
Hasn't been that long.
It was when I was doing the renovations, right?
Yeah.
So I guess nine months ago.
It was a while.
Yeah.
Thanks for having a couple episodes.
Yeah, but anyways, he was on an episode and he's here visiting us again, so we decided
to have him on for this.
Yeah, alright.
I'm feeling kind of organized, but we can just run right into this.
Are we ready?
Yeah, well last episode you, at the very end, asked me this question and I was like, I don't
know who this is, whatever, I don't want to talk about it, and then it's come up again,
so now we're going to talk about it.
What was the question you asked me at the last episode?
We had somebody write in and ask if we had any thoughts about Carl Benjamin slash Sargon
Avacad being kicked off of Patreon, and I thought it'd be kind of a quick 10 minute
thing to run past, and there's a bit more I guess to talk about there, so.
10 minutes, haha.
Yeah, exactly.
Well, I don't have much more than 10 minutes of thought, but I'm sure you guys will get
me, get my thoughts going, exactly.
Even if we each only have 10 minutes, that's 40 minutes.
So to be clear, does anyone have a lot of background with Sargon Avacad?
No, never heard of him before you asked that question.
I've watched a few of his videos, and the truth is, he's not neoconservative, and he's
not exactly alt-right, but he's definitely leaning in that sphere, and a lot of his views
seem very politically incorrect and just downright wrong.
What about you, any background on this guy?
I knew of him as like an anti-SJW, that was it.
I had literally never seen anything that he put up, or I'd heard the name Sargon Avacad,
but I thought it was some ancient Egyptian prince or something, turns out he ripped
off his name from some ancient figure like that.
So I knew that this was somebody who was around saying things, but I didn't know who it was.
So what happened with Sargon Avacad?
Yeah, so, well, I guess what happened was he was kicked off of Patreon, what, like three
weeks ago, early December?
And like right after that happened, right after you asked me, I suddenly started hearing
about it, because it became a thing with Sam Harris and a bunch of other people.
It became a big thing, and part of what made this more fun to talk about is, I want to
say a couple of days later, Sam Harris announced that he was leaving Patreon, and I think he's
their largest content creator as far as the money he brings through the website.
I really, I didn't know that.
I haven't verified that, but somebody, I saw a post on it on the subreddit ModeratePolitics,
and they said that he was, I'm not sure, but-
Even if he's not at the top, he's right up there.
Yeah, he-
I'd like to make an update.
I just found out today that Jordan Peterson and Dave Rubin also said they were going to
leave as of today.
So it's going bigger, more people are leaving, and they're both pretty hefty hitters.
Well, we've lost a few patrons, I know, who just, you know, are going with this and
then like, fuck Patreon.
I remember the first time this happened about a year and a half ago.
That wasn't about somebody being kicked off, that was them changing their payment policy.
Right, yeah.
And there were several people who left because of that too, but then they changed the payment
policy back, and we got most of them back.
That reminds me, we lost somebody who was at the $10 level, and we need to give them
some.
Well, I mean, it's not, you know, I fully support your decision to leave if this is where you're
at.
I don't think we're leaving.
Maybe we'll decide where we're at after the show.
I don't plan on it.
Maybe you just turn your mind.
What's the top alternative to Patreon right now?
There is none.
Yeah.
The top alternative is setting up your own PayPal thing.
That's what they're doing.
So Jordan Peterson in the video he put out today with Dave Rubin, I watched it this morning,
explained that they were going to try to release something by January 15th, but they've decided
to push it back.
Whoa, that is way fast.
Yeah, they've decided to push it back by another month or so, so they can really like
sharpen it up.
But they apparently got emails and results from people who work at Google and Amazon
that want to help them set up a cryptocurrency based alternative.
Why cryptocurrency, man?
Because then no one can trace it and they can't stop it.
Intellectual dark web.
Yeah, it's also a major barrier to entry.
Yeah, seriously, who cares if people can trace the money that you've donated?
Unless they're terrorists.
Well, in that case, you probably don't want to be funding.
Well, that's my point though.
Like, unless you're buying drugs or supporting crime, you don't need to hide who you're
giving your money to.
Well, no, that's the thing.
The reason that they got rid of Sargon of Akkad is because the credit card companies
asked them to, which is terrifying.
That's not the official story.
No, it isn't.
But the official story is full of holes as well.
Well, the official story, so we'll get into that and then I want to hear this possibly
conspiracy theory too or not.
I know that there was another platform that they were moving to, and I forget what it's
called that was based in Russia, that then PayPal kicked back and said, no, we're not
letting you guys use that one because PayPal is the money transaction person behind Patreons.
So that is sort of monopolizing them out of the ability to take money off the internet,
which is interesting.
But I don't know.
So my understanding, sorry, we're going to say something.
You know, I'm just kind of wondering why no one else was setting up their own platform
with Patreon being such assholes and PayPal like fucking people over.
But I guess they are now.
So they need to work on something that is not Patreon or PayPal related.
So I think that's what they're doing.
There was a non-Patreon PayPal supported one that they were then kicked off of too.
So I kind of thought like Q was sort of silly sounding before, but like now I guess might
be a thing.
What?
Q was like some service that are trying to advertise themselves as like the new alternative
to PayPal.
Was that the letter Q?
Yeah, just the letter Q.
I remember that.
That was a currency though.
Like some kind of, yeah, e-currency or something.
I wonder how that's doing now.
I've generated a lot of buzz in that.
I don't hear about it anymore.
Right.
It came and it went.
But you know, we do need some alternative to PayPal.
Anyways, we are getting off topic.
Oh no, this is all somewhat related.
I think.
So again, just doing some quick homework on Carl Benjamin, the guy who goes by the online
name of Sargon of Akkad.
He has the Wikipedia page and that's where most of my homework came from because I didn't
get around to watching any of his videos.
I guess I probably could have, but frankly, I just wanted to see like, all right, what's
quick and dirty?
And I trust Wikipedia's analysis of everything.
So the first part, like there's one of the top paragraphs was, here's the quote.
Benjamin's early YouTube videos often promoted anti-feminism.
His channel first drew attention during the Gamergate controversy in 2014 when he argued
in one of his videos that members of the Digital Games Research Association were actively plotting
to influence video game development to conform to their ideological feminist agenda.
And then in, I'm sorry, yeah.
Yeah, real quick.
I don't think, I mean, unless we are here to like trying to judge whether he deserved
to be kicked off or not, is that what we're doing?
Because I don't, I don't think that's necessarily all that relevant.
Like we already know that he's sort of a, he's probably anyway from what I've heard
some sort of light right leaning troll and anti SJW and I'm willing to concede that.
I think I, my, my, my, I have one more quote and then I was going to make my quick case
about why I think, I think we are here to kind of debate that point, whether or not
he deserved it.
Okay.
So then the next one, and again, Rita's Wikipedia page, there's good and bad.
I think Enya's summary is basically accurate.
But then there was another one in May of 2016 in response to the Labor Party politician
Jess Phillips statement that rape threats are commonplace for her.
Benjamin said quote, I wouldn't even rape you in a YouTube video and repeated this
on Twitter.
They declined to apologize for the comments.
So I'm sure he said things that are insightful and interesting to a lot of people, but my
quick takeaways of this guy is kind of a professional asshole.
And so I think the official story for why he was banned off a Patreon was that he had
used the, the, the basically the one word that we're not allowed to say, the N word
in a video and they're like, Hey, you can't do that, it's hate speech.
And so what you said is that it's full of holes was that it wasn't on his own channel,
I think.
And he was using it the opposite of the pejorative way that's usually used.
He was making fun of like racists by calling them like white N words or something.
And he was trying to use an insult that he knew would hurt those white supremacists the
most and using that word is an effective way to do that.
Right.
There's not really any good pejoratives for white people.
No, not really.
And I think, and he was doing it like he's,
Listen, honky, I don't need you.
That's right now.
But that's just a very silly word.
I don't know if anyone's actually offended by that.
I always thought cracker with white and square.
And again, that's a very funny word.
It is.
It's not like it doesn't have the punch there.
I mean, because there's no history of violence associated with it.
Yeah.
Once there is, then we'll have an insult with punch.
But yeah, someone will get to work on that.
So there, there are official reasons for banning him was kind of just, it seemed like, you
know, we're grasping at straws.
But my, my thing is that I, it seems like he has a history of being a professional asshole.
And they were like, look, we're sticking your shit.
And here's, it's kind of like, I don't know, being brought in on some, you know, they,
they got, you know, not Pablo Escobar, the other big,
Chappo, whatever big drug guy they caught on tax fraud.
I'm blanking on his name.
You know what I'm talking about.
Hocapone.
Hocapone.
Yeah.
So it's like, all right, we can't get you on what we really hate you for, but here we
got you.
You know, fuck you.
Yeah.
But Hocapone would actually committed crimes.
Right.
I use it as an analogy to say, we can't catch you on what like we really want, because,
you know, we can't pin that down, but we're going to get you for whatever we can.
And are you, are you okay with that?
With Hocapone situation?
Or with Sargon?
I mean, with, right now with Sargon, in general, are you okay with that?
But also in this specific situation, I mean, in general, are you okay with someone in power
saying, well, I can't pin anything on you, but I don't like you.
So I'm going to make some shit up.
Okay.
So there's, I think the situations are too disanalogous for me to make a comparison.
There, because on the one hand, we're saying, we're going to take away your freedom and
put you in jail, not just because I don't like you, because Capone was breaking the law and
hurting people and killing people.
So like there, you know, that was more like, we need to get you out of society by whatever
means necessary.
And we're not going to just kill you because we're too cool for that, I guess.
No, they killed lots of people without due process back in that time.
Fair enough.
And continue to.
That's true.
I guess the difference between that and Christopher or Carl Benjamin's position is that he, no
one's taking the ways right to do stuff.
They're just taking the ways is they're, they're saying, we're not going to let you make money
through us doing it.
Okay.
Right.
So like he could presumably set up his own, you know, saying we won't let you use our
surface.
Right.
Okay.
Which is the only game in town apparently.
It is.
Okay.
I think so.
Yeah.
I mean, I'm pretty sure that you could still do.
Yeah.
On an easy scale.
Like, um, you can sign up through, you know, somebody, I'm not sure if he could do his
own PayPal.
I don't know if PayPal has explicitly kicked him off or not, but I know people can do that.
There are, there are ways to do a box and be like, please mail me checks.
And there are ways to do like recurring monthly payments through PayPal too.
So, you know, presumably if you wanted to do that, he could, um, I think my thing is
like, as far as is it, is it wrong to deny him the ability to use their service is kind
of what you're asking.
Uh, yeah, I think I'm torn.
Like on the one hand, it's like, it's, if, if I owned a Patreon, I'm like, well, you're
an asshole.
I don't want you using it.
Right.
So like, but Patreon is not owned by one person.
Patreon is a dragon.
It is a non-human entity.
And at that point, it gives up some rights in my opinion.
I, I have this real problem with services and platforms using their power to fuck individuals.
Uh, for example, lots of neo-Nazis, I am sure, use things like Microsoft Word to write up
their screeds and then print them out and spread pamphlets around colleges, right?
People still do that nowadays because we invented the printing press for this, right?
Anyways, I'm sure not neo-Nazis use Microsoft Word and they probably run their computers
using, uh, Microsoft Windows and Microsoft Windows doesn't fucking discriminate.
They're like, we're a platform.
This you buy our product, you can use our product.
We don't go around vetting and judging everybody.
And I mean, that's, that's what a platform is.
I don't want my fucking nail supplier to go and vet everyone and make sure that are you
using this nail for a, you know, culturally approved product because if you're using it
for something that is too far to the right or too far to the left where you're not allowed
to do it, it's like you fucking run a hardware store, sell me your goddamn nails.
So, and I mean, Bill, Bill Gates like went off on Google and YouTube and Facebook for
this sort of thing.
At one point he said, you call yourselves a platform, but a platform is something that
creates far more value than it captures windows, arguably when it runs well, creates a lot
more value than is captured.
And same with Word and Excel and all those things.
The entire internet.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And the, these companies capture almost all their value.
They steal, not steal, they gather all these metrics on us.
They sell them to advertisers.
Every single bit of value that they can squeeze out is captured and squeezed out.
They're not, they're not true platforms in that sense.
But also in the sense that now they're even judging who can and can't use their product,
which I think is complete bullshit.
All right.
I know we're not giving our guests a lot of time to talk right now, but I just had opinions.
I'm going to jump back at that anyway, because we disagree so seldom that I think this is
interesting.
So you guys will feel just a shadow of us anytime.
I think, all right, so I'm going to do the reducto at absurdum that I do to illustrate
like any point to see if there's, is there any point where you'd say, look, now I'm okay
with them banning them from Patreon?
Like if, if, if Osama Bin Laden had a Patreon account, would you say they shouldn't let
him use it?
If you're literally breaking law, if you're using your free speech to a call to for violence,
incitements to violence or harassment.
So you would do it at law breaking?
Yeah.
Okay.
That's why I was pointing out that the Capone example, I don't think is quite the same.
And that like the tactic of catching somebody for some technicality, that's not a tactic
that I would want my enemies to be able to use against me legally.
So if, you know, the current culture weren't what he was also breaking tax, tax laws, wasn't
he?
Yes, he was.
So like they got him on an actual thing that he actually did.
And I guess that sounds like a joke, but the truth is, think about the amount of money
Al Capone had and that if he had been taxed, that money would have gone towards schools
and hospitals.
Like there's a real case to be made that that was the crime that did the most damage in
the long run.
I didn't mean to cut you off though.
That was pretty much my point.
Yeah.
And your point still stands whether or not like that was an actual thing.
I see what you're saying.
I guess for me that are you familiar with how the justice system works nowadays in that
this is basically what happens to people.
I have never been brought up on charges.
Well, I mean, I haven't either, but I've read enough about it.
The 99% of cases never go to trial.
And if they did, the system would collapse.
We do not have the infrastructure, the people, the courts, the judges, the money to actually
give everyone a fair trial.
So what happens is someone gets pulled into the police station under suspicion from the
officers that arrested them.
And they're like, look, we got you on this and this and this and they will name not.
I mean, what they want you on is you were selling heroin or something, right?
But they're like, we got you on position of this, we got you on possession of a weapon.
You don't have your permit up to date.
They will throw so many things at you.
And they're like, look, we can press all these charges.
You are looking at a hundred years in jail, or you can just plea to this, this one charge.
You only spend 10 years in jail.
And the thing is a lot of people who are actually innocent plead guilty.
They'll take two years in jail for something they didn't do because one, they're facing
these huge charges.
And two, they know that if they're one of the tiny few people who push back and like,
no, I didn't do this, prove it, you know, prove that you did this, the court cannot
allow people to do that en masse because then the system would grind to a halt.
So they fucking throw the book at you if you try to fight it.
Right.
And a much smaller scale, you get those the traffic tickets too.
Yeah.
If you pay, if you pay your ticket early, you pay a reduced fine and fewer points in
your license.
Whereas if you take it to court, you agree that you're going to pay a maximum of whatever,
150% of the face value of the ticket, plus you get like double the points.
So it's like we're incentivizing you to just not exercise your rights.
And so yeah, it's weird.
But the thing is, how many people are not guilty of a felony?
Have you watched something that you have not paid for?
Never.
Right?
Have you ever done a substance which is controlled by the government?
Probably not.
I don't feel comfortable in this room anymore.
I'm a good, drug-fearing, God-loving patriot.
Literally every single citizen in the United States can be put in jail if the government
wants you in jail.
I'd like to point out something.
It's a pain in the ass to fight it, but I actually have been prosecuted for things and
I do fight traffic tickets and I've never lost.
That's because cops almost never show up to the hearings to stay too busy.
If you are willing to show up every single time, I've always had them say, why are you
here?
Why did you decide to fight this?
And my answer is usually, I don't care about the money, I just don't want any points on
my license.
And every single time the judge is like, if you care about it enough to fight us and
risk doing that, I'm okay with it.
And they just give it to me.
Yeah, that's what I've heard, but it's just so much trouble.
If you're willing to be the jerk and be more persistent, the system actually favors the
normal person, but most people don't go after it because it is such a pain.
And a lot of times, the reason people will accept those plea deals is because they'll
keep you in the jail until you make a decision.
And if you accept and take the plea, they'll send you home.
They'll often get you out on time served.
Yeah, and you now have a phony on your record, but you got to go home.
Yeah, and I think traffic tickets are kind of like a watered down version of the actual
law.
I was in the courtroom once waiting for somebody else's time before the judge and the guy before
him owned a bar downtown.
And the way that works actually, anyone's allowed to just go sit in court if you get
super bored and you live near a courthouse, you can just go listen to all the dumb shit
people get dragged in front of the judge for.
Yeah, that sounds fun.
Yeah.
Yeah, go watch some lives to get district torn apart.
Anyway, so he was driving people home from his bar after close and he had an unregistered
gun in the car, which he uses for self-defense in the event that something happened because
he drives drunk's home because he's a chill dude.
So it made it sound like, oh, wait, maybe the gun was registered.
I forget what the deal was because the guy...
There was some technicality.
There was some technicality and maybe he didn't have the right...
I can't remember what it was.
In any case, we're getting really far afield, but I'll finish this quick story.
He had said...
I was...
Because he was right in front of me and he's talking to his lawyer and stuff and then his
lawyer talked to the...
You know, they're talking to the room and the judge and whatever.
And the lawyer had said, all right, look, if you do this, you could face up to eight
years or whatever it was.
This is some high number because you've got this, this, and this.
But if you just do what the judge is saying and plea, you just get served a couple months
in jail.
And it's like...
So when they asked him, how do you plead, he said, I plead guilty, but I want it on the
record that I didn't commit the crime of being charged that I'm pleading guilty to.
And they said, fine.
So it's weird.
But yeah, all that aside, I feel like we're slipping into that same...
We're sliding down that slippery slip without the intellectual dark webbers want us to,
which is that being de-platformed or being called out on Twitter is the same as being
charged with a crime and it's not.
No one's gotten as far as I know to Karl Benjamin's house and cuffed him, right?
I don't think anyone gives a shit about being called out on Twitter.
Most people would like Karl Benjamin would actually probably like that because it would
give them more views.
I was being trolly.
But yeah.
Okay, okay.
But being taken off of Twitter, not Twitter, Patreon, that for a lot of people, that's how
they fucking pay for their heat during the winter.
And that's his livelihood, sure.
To be fair, he earned what, when he was kicked off, he was making 12K a month.
So if he didn't have money to save for the winter, that's on him.
But I'm being an asshole.
Yeah, no, no, no.
And I mean, to be fair, it's not even that I care about the money that much.
It's like, I mean, we're on Patreon, we make some money.
If we got kicked off, whatever, both still jobs have jobs, right?
But it's the fucking principle of the matter that you can just make people these promises
like, yeah, we'll be your service.
You can use us, everything.
And then be like, oh, no, we don't like what you're saying.
Get out of here.
I dislike them exercising censorship powers.
So you're drawing a line between a business owner and a dragon like Patreon or Apple or
whatever, right?
I'm drawing a line between someone being silenced for having the wrong opinions.
And even though I do think his opinions are wrong, I'm like, let him say it.
All right, so may I make an argument where I agree with you, but I'm attacking it from
another side.
Sure.
Let's think about the consequences of this.
Really, someone is going to create a Patreon alternative.
And I do believe that they will try in order to prevent this from happening again to create
a very resilient and anonymous system, probably involving a cryptocurrency, but I can imagine
a few different ways they would do that.
And what's this going to do?
It's going to attract all the actual neo-Nazis.
It's going to attract the actual dangerous people, because now we have forced a group
of people to create an anonymous donation system in order to support themselves.
Even if you think Sargon of Akkad was completely wrong, I think this does more damage than
good in the long run because it's just going to polarize things further and create a new
platform that will enhance more hate speech.
If they kept it on Patreon, then they could have said, hey, we gave Sargon of Akkad three
warnings and now we've taken him off for a month.
He'll be back on in a month, but we're giving him a warning and they could have enforced
the idea without creating this terrible dynamic.
Yeah, they kind of just merited him.
Yeah.
That's actually a really good point, and that's a good way to put it, that they martyred him
on this, because they, as far as I know, he didn't get real warnings or something.
I did see the video that the person who told us about this sent in, and he wasn't given
a heads up.
He wasn't given a slap on the wrist.
Like I said, a month's off, saying, look, we're going to hold this month's payments
from you because you need to get your shit together.
That would have been probably a good enough wake-up call, and then maybe he would have
done something different.
But you know, I should be able to make it, again, absurd.
If you went to Bakery and somebody came in and said, I want a cake that says fuck the
Jews with big swastika on it, would you make it for them?
I would not.
And can I explain to you why?
Aren't you silencing their way that they wanted to celebrate with their cake?
Yeah, their free speech.
No, no, no.
Here's the thing.
If I had pre-made cakes available and refused to sell them to a Nazi that wanted to write
fuck the Jews on his own cake, I would absolutely sell that cake to them, because it's just
a product there that for anyone to buy.
If they want me to invest my labor to, like, customize it, then that's a different thing.
Even if all of your cakes came with a tag on them that says, made by Inyasha's Bakery,
and so when they post pictures of their big Jew-hating cake on YouTube or on Facebook,
it's going to have your tag on it.
Whatever, man.
I'd make cakes, people buy cakes.
I think people sell notebooks, and then they write racist thing in them, but I've never
looked at a notebook company and said, you're supporting hate speech.
Even when their names are at the top of it, I've never really blamed them.
No, no, but the manufacturers of Tiki Torch did come out and say, like, we don't condone
what those idiots are doing with our Tiki Torches at that white hate rally, so.
Well, that's because they were using the product incorrectly.
If someone was to stand still to keep the bugs away, if Tim was to actually, like, start
some kind of hate campaign on my bakery, being like, how dare you sell to Nazis?
I would say I do not condone the conditions, the actions of these Nazis, but I wouldn't
stop selling to them.
All right, so I think for me, I don't know, I'm torn, and maybe there's a less fringe
example than Sarkhan to look at, which is Alex Jones was kicked off within a week of
like.
Did you say less fringe?
I meant less controversial example.
OK. Yeah, thank you.
Good point. So he was kicked off of what?
YouTube, Patreon, Apple and some other giant thing within a week.
Maybe Twitter.
Yeah, social media platform.
Yeah. And so this came the week that he because this is Alex Jones is the the
conspiracy theorist radio show host who boasted a weekly phone call to Donald Trump
before he became president.
And he was like he's the main guy behind like the the school shootings being fake
and those parents are paid actors.
And so when he would say, you know, hassle these these actors because they're just out
there to try and stir up the shit and take our guns and people did that.
That's the buy for years.
And then finally, probably people to kick him off was when he encouraged his listeners.
Well, I don't think he said go out.
I don't think he said, quote, go kill Robert Mueller.
What he said was like, you know, I've got a big audience.
He'd better be careful or something.
It was some it was a big threat against the director of the Special Counsel of the FBI.
And that was like, all right, cool.
Finally, we got him.
We can't get him on being a complete fucking piece of shit.
But we can get him for breaking this, you know, for towing this legal line.
Yeah. And so for inciting violence.
Yeah. So well for implying incited violence.
Right. Right.
So that's implying inside of violence might not even be a crime,
but do you do you support him being taken off?
I think once it's at the point where any reasonable person can tell that he is
threatening someone's life, then yeah, I see, I think.
And I know that this is a slippery slope.
Maybe you guys will talk me off of it.
And I'm sorry, I'm dominated in the conversation here.
But I think for me, you have the most extreme opinion.
I do, which is that like I would have been on favor with kicking him off two years ago
when he had said, hey, look, those those brave parents are a bunch of bunch of
phonies, you guys send him a bunch of letters and here's their addresses.
Go give him shit. Oh, at that point, I also would have been OK,
kicking him off, because that is that's doxing people.
So for they for them to be harassed.
Well, I mean, they're also in the phone book, right?
So like, I don't know if it's doxing and these people, you know, gave their names
on the news, like that's I don't think it's even really doxing other than
it is just saying go be an asshole.
These people I think are harassing.
Is that actually against the law?
Like I think our harassment laws are a little too light.
That sort of thing should be illegal.
Is it not? I guess I don't really care what your information is public.
I think that it's fair use to publicize it further.
Like the truth is, I'm pretty sure if someone did like 20 minutes of
Googling, they could probably find my phone number.
Oh, yeah, short somewhere online.
And if they publicize that somewhere, I probably wouldn't be happy about it.
But I don't think I have legal ground to tell them to take it down,
because at worst they could just be like, click this link
and I'll redirect you to David's number.
Like I don't think there's any way around that.
Yeah, there's a point that I wanted to make where I do actually think
that there's a difference between, for example, the small cake shop
and like the huge platform like Patreon.
I think that the scale does matter after a certain point,
because even if your phone number is in the phone book and people can find it,
if someone with a really significant audience behind them publishes it,
then you get a huge stream of harassers.
You know, it's it's worth making the distinction at some point
by how much damage can be done to either the person who's livelihood
got taken away or by the person who's being harassed.
Quantity has a quality all of its own.
So your position then is that it's it's you draw the line at the law,
whatever the law is, presumably, maybe, I don't know.
Zoomably. Yeah.
But it's I'm drawing the line at the law
because I think the law is fairly reasonable in this regard.
And the difference between the cake shop owner and
well, I guess you you bit the bullet in the cake shop owner,
which is like I'd sell it to him anyway.
Yeah, I actually disagree with that.
Really? Yeah.
I also wouldn't hire a neo-Nazi like to work on my house, right?
Like if I was I didn't mean to drop, but I just wanted to add another example
that, you know, you did a lot of housework last year.
If you were contracting out some of your work because you needed help or something.
And there was, you know, applicants or whatever.
And, you know, one guy was like, yep, I'm a neo-Nazi asshole.
I got swastika tattoos on my face and this guy is like, I'm a normal dude.
You probably would hire the normal dude if I had the choice between them.
Yeah, even I mean, I think the idea that like you you don't want to support
somebody who's going to use your money or your your whatever to.
No, it's not nearly that.
I would just be much less comfortable having a neo-Nazi in my house or around my person.
I think I didn't make that point very well.
I guess I'm sorry, just go back to yours.
I've lost my train of thought.
Yeah, I don't have a good like place where I would draw the line necessarily.
That would be the difficult thing to do.
But like, for example, you know, Ash's bakery, if you did bake a cake for a neo-Nazi,
that could ruin your reputation among, you know, the small area that you operate in.
Yeah, but if you were in the fifties and you served a sandwich to a black person,
that could ruin your reputation too.
Yeah, but there's one case where like you're doing the right thing.
And one case where you're doing arguably the wrong thing.
I mean, like neo-Nazis are not analogous to 1950s black people.
OK, OK, no, I'm going to actually like step in here.
The fear is this, even if it's completely justified now, what we're doing
is allowing Patreon and the mob, because that's really what it is.
It's the overzealous social justice warriors who may have a good point,
but are using their numbers to pressure a company with ideology to change their
actions and to deplatform people.
And it's really easy to just expand that out.
The fear is that maybe this guy does deserve to be kicked out.
Maybe his morals are genuinely bad enough.
But once we've set that precedent, it's easier and easier to expand that
to just everyone who disagrees with the party line.
Who's the guy who directed The Guardians of the Galaxy?
James Gunn. That's literally what happened to James Gunn.
Well, he apologized two years earlier.
That's the most infuriating part.
He actually publicly apologized for that, but it wasn't enough.
James Gunn thing was different. He was fired.
He wasn't said, you can never direct again.
We're taking away your director's license.
Well, I mean, it's nice that there's more than one employer in that industry.
There isn't more than one Patreon.
OK, so I see the point you're making, I think.
But that's besides the point.
You thought it was unjust that he was fired, right?
Well, to David's point, the whole like they didn't.
First, they went after the Jew hating neo-Nazis.
And I didn't speak up because I'm not a Jew hating neo-Nazi.
Then they came after, you know.
So like I I'm familiar with the with the line of reasoning.
And I I think it's maybe a slippery slope fallacy to say, like,
then they're going to go after everyone else.
Well, it's not a slippery slope, but it's actually happening.
Yeah, like I've seen it.
I think it's kind of what happened to Jordan Peterson.
Like I think he started very sensibly,
but he made one or two positions that made him not socially acceptable.
Transgender lobsters or whatever.
Yeah. And what ended up happening is because he was being
he became so polarizing, the only people who would accept him
and talk to him was the right.
And you can watch him become more right wing over the year
because he is had no one else to communicate with.
By ostracizing him, you just radicalized him even further.
That's my fear with deep platforming people.
You're just going to keep pushing them to more and more extremes.
And do you think Sargon of the Cod or his followers are going to become
more reasonable or more inclined to the liberal viewpoints
that the end goal of the Patreon company?
Are they just going to become more pissed off?
I like that line of reasoning because it's it's sort of
completely separate from everything that Sargon says or does.
It's more just like, what do you think is going to happen?
And that's that's an important consequentialist way to look at it.
And I I think it's hard to.
I'm sure there's a way to make that example, not follow through, right?
It's like, if you take away, you know, whatever.
Like maybe his followers won't follow him to a new platform.
And this will effectively close his channel.
But I don't think all of his followers are going to leave this
with a good taste in their mouth about Patreon or the social justice
warriors and the mindset that push this forward, even if in the future
they are very correct and they should change their mind.
This is going to taint it forever.
Well, I also think one of the reasons these people are
silenced because the silencing, this is effective.
It makes they they're the lives of these people harder.
When they say these things, they're punished for it.
Other people see that you get less of this speech.
But I am Donald Trump as president.
That is my rebuttal. It doesn't silence it.
It doesn't change. It just pushes it underground.
And then when people have the opportunity to vote anonymously,
they will let it out.
I think I was going to make the I was going to say the exact same
sentence for a totally different point, actually, that like I think
since we did that episode on punching Nazis, I was just thinking about that.
I'm not I'm not more in favor of punching Nazis necessarily,
but I'm in favor of taking them off of Patreon or, you know,
not letting them post YouTube videos or something, right?
Well, and I get.
Do you think that Sargon's a Nazi?
No, that's not the point. I'm making I mean to equate that.
I'm making a separate thing.
And I think the reason I was thinking of Donald Trump is that like
we're in a very reactionary stage now as a society
because we have this this admitted child molester.
Well, let me not be super straw manny.
He's he's he used to brag about busting into the locker rooms
of his child beauty or of his beauty pageants because he's because
let's not forget that he was also on the flight logs of the guy
who had his own Lolita Island.
Yeah, there's also allegations of you were unaware.
No. Oh, yeah, I'll send you the information then.
But a few years ago, there was some creepy millionaire
who they arrested for having a private plane that he would take people
to his own Lolita Island.
And if you look, Donald Trump's name is on that list
of people who were on the flight logs, as is Bill Clinton, interestingly enough.
But everything is corrupt and terrible.
We can talk about that later.
Wow. I think I brought I brought up Trump because, like, it's it's a
it changed the pulse of society like a lot.
Like it would be one thing, you know, Clinton had to least go up there
and pay face values like being a good person.
And, you know, he couldn't get up there and say, quote,
I could shoot somebody on the Fifth Avenue and I wouldn't lose a single supporter
and be totally right about that. Right.
If Bill Clinton did shoot somebody in Fifth Avenue, people would stop voting for him.
He at least had to hide it when he raped someone.
But I totally. Yes.
Didn't he? All right.
I think I'm not sure what the litany of Bill Clinton's sex crimes
were compared to Donald Trump's one.
I'm pretty sure Clinton wasn't wasn't trailing 16 odd allegations
before he became president.
You know, the the level of of that kind of thing used to be a deal breaker.
It used to be a deal breaker.
And now, again, doing it 15 times isn't right.
Bragging about it isn't, you know, so that's where people are like reactionary, too.
And I get maybe I don't I'm I'm not a I don't like the label
social justice warrior.
Looks like that makes it sound like I'm I'm a sympathizer.
I'm not. The tactics are disgusting.
The witch hunts essentially.
Yeah. And, you know, and and they can be just as bad.
They do doxing of people that they don't like.
You know, I've seen I couldn't pull up an example because it was a couple years ago.
But, you know, where they they're mad at somebody.
So like they sent them pictures of like their kids leaving school.
But you know, we know where your kids are and all that.
So like. But you're OK with it in this one case.
Well, no, what I'm saying is that I'm more sympathetic to their to their
just to the steel man version of their goals.
And like I'm sympathetic to their their motivations.
Like things are things are kind of fucked right now.
I'm absolutely in favor of their goals.
So I am in favor of social justice, too.
It's their tactics that I have issue with.
Yeah. And so I think the whole, I don't know, I I'm I didn't like the idea.
I guess people could do whatever they want with their money and stuff.
But like if, you know, somebody owns, does somebody own patron?
Is it publicly traded? I don't think it really matters.
Like the point is, is like if somebody using using a service that I made
or that I that I helped that I co-owned or something, you know,
if we ran a blog on our website or something and guest contributors could post things
and it turned out that one contributor would say
fairly inflammatory things on our blog.
And then, you know, probably the most inflammatory person on our blog,
just to make the example easy, but not, you know, full out, you know,
batshit crazy, but then they did batshit crazy stuff on their own time.
And they frequently linked to their, you know, they were super prestigious.
And they like, Oh, look, I post on the Bayesian Conspiracy website all the time.
Look at how cool I am.
But they would go off and say terrible things, you know,
the Sandy Hook parents are our actors and, you know, all this and that.
I think it'd be fine to say, you know what? Sorry,
we don't want you posting on our blog anymore. You kind of suck.
Yeah. So like your don't you think it's fair to give them a warning first
and be like, Hey, we would appreciate it if you're not going to link to us.
Like we'll be fine if you posting, but please don't link to us.
If you're going to say these things like the idea is not that there should not
be a line somewhere. I agree with you that there definitely should be a line.
And even Patreon has the right to draw a line and say, we don't want to support this.
The issue is the method in which they executed, they gave no warning.
They did not communicate and they essentially succumbed to the mob.
And the worst thing is if they back down and switch,
now they're sending an even worse message that's going to encourage even more
crazy people like Sargon of Akkad. Yeah, like they've put themselves
in the worst position by doing this. It was a dumb execution.
And I I think that the manner in which he was kicked off is is related,
but a separate issue from just the idea of like, should he be allowed to use Patreon?
Can I make a counterpoint Craigslist?
Like Craigslist is famous for not really judging or giving any fucks.
They just put up your ad and that's it.
But they just got rid of there.
Like they did get rid of their adults because they were required to by law.
Yeah, they got rid of their what their adult section, their adult section.
That's their prostitution section.
Basically, yeah.
But Craigslist, just, you know, we're a platform.
Put your ads up. We don't vet. We don't do anything.
I mean, they would if it was actual stuff like
exploiting children that would get taken down.
They were like guns for sale.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
But for the most part, they're like, you can put whatever you want on there.
And I respect that.
I don't I would not respect Craigslist nearly as much if they were like,
Oh, I'm sorry, you're too Christian.
You can't sell your Bible payer for nearly here.
Or, oh, I'm sorry, you're too rationalist.
You can't advertise your blog here.
You know, I think I think Craigslist made a never made pretensions
about being like a good company, like a morally grounded company.
Like, did the the thing I was about to say, I don't call themselves the Christian.
No, no, I don't mean that.
But I know that like Craigslist is famous for people selling people stolen shit.
OK, so like I break into your house, steal your TV and put it up on Craigslist
that night and like Craigslist doesn't care.
It's like, we're just we're just facilitating the deal.
It's not our problem where the stuff came from.
Is Craigslist supposed to look into every single TV that's put on their website?
No, but I think it would be cool if they found somebody who was
constantly selling stolen stuff that they're like, all right, we're going to
we're going to ban your account.
OK, OK, so let me like point out something.
So they did ban the prostitution section, right?
They also got rid of that from Backpage, which is another big website
that had a similar function.
And if you ask sex workers, their lives are much worse now.
Yeah, they're much harder.
They're much more dangerous.
They're being pushed back out onto the streets and having to rely on.
And I bet you if they tried to start monitoring who was selling
stolen stuff online on Craigslist, what you would end up creating
is either another website or go back to the old way where people would
just try to fence it in person.
And that's probably a lot more dangerous and risky, and it would probably
have more violence.
Like it's by banning people selling stolen stuff on your website.
You have not stopped stealing.
And I don't think it would.
I don't think it would stop the person who was willing to steal in the first place.
You've just made the entire process of stealing and selling more risky
and more dangerous along the whole way.
Well, not just that.
Craigslist isn't a police department.
They don't have investigators.
That's the police's job.
If you ask Craigslist to start policing that thing, they're going to do
the same thing that the every single website has had to do since
Fausta Sesta got passed.
They're just like, I'm sorry, you're not allowed to sell any TVs on our site at all.
This block got passed. Fausta Sesta.
It's the sex worker.
Yeah, it's the big sex worker bill that fucked over all the sex workers
in America, basically.
And it is the reason that it is speculated that's one of the reasons
that Tumblr got rid of all the porn stuff.
It's just like if one person out there is using Tumblr to facilitate sex work,
then we're fucked.
And so just outright ban on it entirely.
Well, I think I'm sorry.
I was going to say, I think Tumblr's thing was that they've been having people.
Miners have been posting sex videos themselves for since the inception of Tumblr.
Right.
And they've gotten a handful of slaps on the wrist.
And I think finally, whatever happened, they're like, you guys need to get this
shit under control or your guys are going to all go to jail or whatever.
Right.
So they're like, all right, cool, ban hammer.
Super hard.
Right.
The entire law is fucked.
It's basically doing that to the entire internet.
Well, I don't know.
I guess I need to look at this lot and I think about it.
I just know that I think Tumblr's thing was specifically about minors
posting pornography of themselves.
What I'd heard about Tumblr was that advertisers weren't comfortable
with putting their content along with the porn.
And not that that was like the major, you know, driving force behind it,
but that was a major consideration.
I thought it was specifically underage porn.
Like porn sites do great, you know, I was about to say, I'm pretty sure
Pornhub can support advertising on a few risque tumblers.
But they don't get like tied advertising.
That's true.
But their, their supply of advertisers is very limited.
There were mainstream advertisers that wanted to, I mean, Tumblr has a, it
was a massive platform and it had, you know, I guess it continues to a huge
audience, but there was like too much ratio of weirdness to, you know, tied ads.
So tied, you know, and other mainstream advertisers were threatening
to pull their stuff off.
Then that, I'm sure the Tumblr thing is more complicated than I summarized
it for, because you're right.
Like if, if Tumblr's main revenue comes from people putting ads on it and
normal, normal companies, like, you know, tied, you know, you don't pay to use
Tumblr.
Exactly.
So, um, they're, they're kind of at the whims or at the mercies of their
advertisers.
If their advertisers are all saying, we're pulling out, unless you guys make
these changes, they're like, well, I guess we're going to make these changes.
That brings up a related thing.
I know that there's been a handful of people like TV personalities who will
go on TV and say something and stay in a racist or whatever.
And then their, their advertisers are pulling.
Um, what are your thoughts on that?
That is, well, my thoughts tonight is the same thoughts of the Alec Jones
things from earlier, where if they do something outrageous enough that people
aren't willing to watch them and advertisers aren't willing to support
them, that, that is how this thing is supposed to work.
Those are two separate things, though.
People are still wanting to watch Alex Jones, but advertisers are unwilling to
put their name behind him.
I'd like to point out that Alex Jones now makes more money than ever.
Right.
I was going to say, if Alex Jones is willing to work for free, then whatever,
but, uh, these companies like CNN or whoever it was that fired their people
aren't willing to take that hit.
And so they let their people go.
I mean, that, that is kind of the market speaking.
But are like the advertisers doing something wrong by saying, we're not
going to give you our support anymore?
Cause like, are they, are they dragging us in this case?
Are they people?
Go ahead.
Two things.
Uh, I'm going to go to the bathroom and you had something to say.
I actually didn't want to hear.
Okay, go ahead.
Oh, wait, well, wait.
Did you say, yeah.
Well, then I don't know what I was going to say about advertisers is that they
aren't not people.
Um, yes, it's the scale argument again.
Yeah, but, but like, if I'm, if I'm tied, if I'm tied's advertising chairperson,
they don't want to be tarred by, yeah, yeah, I don't, yeah, exactly.
So like, I think that it's, as the person representing tied to the public,
it's totally within my, my rights.
And it's my responsibility to say, oh, I'm not going to support Alex Jones.
Right.
So, all right.
We definitely need to put a GIF and the notes here of all of those many awesome
ones where it's like, yep, it's a tied ad.
Um, I'll find a good one.
Uh, there's a ton of like high quality GIFs where they'll like subtitle for
something else and a little pan away to the fence with the guy for Stranger
Things and be like, yep, it's a tied ad.
Like from the Superbowl tied commercial.
Anyway, I have no idea what you're talking about.
Oh, they're, they're wonderful.
Okay.
Um, here's, so yeah, my, my thing on my thing with that is that if I, if I was
tied and, uh, you know, whatever, it could even be retroactive.
You know, fuck it.
Well, geez, now I'm sounding like somebody supporting kicking out James Gunn.
The difference with James Gunn is that he didn't actually do anything wrong.
Okay.
Where is, where if it had come out that James Gunn had raped 30 people in 2010,
then like, cool, fire him, kick his ass, whatever.
Did, um, I don't know, I run straight to the reducto ad absurdum to make sure
that my points have, have a grounding somewhat.
I agree with you here, but I don't think either Sargon or that lady that got
fired from CNN raped 30 people.
No, they didn't.
That's not, I wasn't saying that.
What I was, what I was doing was a step back.
What, what I was saying is that there is a ground where I would be, where I would
say, okay, cool, I'm okay kicking somebody out for something they did retroactively.
I established the baseline at somewhere absurd, not, not absurd that it's at
somewhere extreme.
I, I am going to say that the difference in that case is that a, the CNN, CNN is
not a platform in the same sense that YouTube or Patreon is.
Allow me to quickly explain, um, where I'm coming from ideologically here.
I am an ancient man.
Now I saw the internet born and I remember at the time when it was internet was
supposed to be the thing that freed us from the corporate overlords.
Like there's, you can only get your book published through major publishers,
right? Oh, or you can put it up on the internet and anyone can see it.
You can only get your movie produced through these few Hollywood elite
cartels, or now you can just put it up on the internet and anyone can see it.
It was this great democratizing force and YouTube for a long time was that anyone
could put a video on YouTube.
YouTube didn't care.
They didn't vet videos.
You just put it up there and anyone could see it.
And if your shit was good, people would watch it.
People would tell their friends, people like, check out this hilarious thing
that I saw on YouTube and it would get eyeballs and the major media corporations,
the normal routes that censor people, the governments had nothing to do with it.
And now YouTube and all those things are like, Oh, we're not actually platforms.
We are part of the system.
If you do not toe the corporate line, we are silencing you.
And fuck all of that is my opinion.
You're, you're lofty goals of the internet never being capitalized.
Word was never going to happen.
No, I know this is this is my, this is my old idealist who's, you know, been
ground down by reality.
I'd also like to point out something.
We all hated it when YouTube included ads, but the money they generated from that,
they started being able to give back to the video producers for the first time.
So yeah, for a long time, you could be independent and put videos on YouTube.
But unless you were able to leverage that in some way, YouTube was not enough
to sustain yourself.
Now that is not true.
Like you actually have people who survive on YouTube.
The corporatization of it made it more viable for actually more people to speak
their mind freely and to communicate.
Like I think that it's not as bad as it looks at the moment to have corporatized
the internet, but it is annoying.
It also gave a lot of headway for some really unsavory characters to have.
What I had the phrase, some bad motivations is the bad way of putting it.
I had a better way of putting it.
Perverse incentives.
Thank you.
Yes.
Mind reader.
High five.
I was literally thinking ill-gotten gains.
So the perverse incentives to get views at all costs.
And then you get those unsavory characters who are, who's that guy who went to
that, the forest?
Logan, something Logan Paul.
Yeah, yeah.
I had a friend over a few weeks ago and we were talking all about him and
apparently as a brother and they, yeah, Jake Paul, then they do all kinds of weird
shit and like that.
So the capitalization of YouTube also did that.
Yeah, well they're total douchebags.
Right.
But that doesn't mean that they should be kicked off of YouTube.
No, no, no, I'm making a lighter point here, which is saying
that by, by doing, by being able to give a big, give back to content creators on
YouTube, it also incentivized people to be really gross, to do whatever
talk to YouTube.
I don't know if that was even the corporatization of YouTube.
I think it's also just the attention.
Yeah.
Like if someone wants to do something so outrageous that advertisers won't be
associated with it, fine, demonetize their video, but leave it up there.
Well, I think in this case, I was thinking of like, it, it, since their
bottom line is number of views, they'll do whatever it takes to do that.
Even if it's like freaking out little kids and pretending to get murdered
with a shotgun and stuff.
I think we're talking about something else at this point though.
We are.
I was just, yeah, I was responding to the, the corporatization of YouTube.
So the, I'm just not okay giving the powers of censorship to these corporate
conglomerations.
I think that it's fine to give them censorship powers, but they need to be
upfront and have a decent process that people can fight against.
Like Sargon of Akkad has no, like, recon pen, like no way to reconcile with
PayPal and, uh, Patreon, he can't go up to them and say, Hey, what can I do to
change my channel to bring it back?
They just destroyed him and that's not, that's, that's my boundary.
I'm not against them having a line.
I'm not even against them banning people, but if they're not going to do it
in an ethical above board and transparent way, it's too risky.
It's way too risky.
There's way too much potential that right now the people in charge of those
companies and the constituency they're aiming towards is very liberal and has
really good ideas, but that's not guaranteed to be true forever.
Yeah.
The culture could easily change.
Yeah.
And then, then maybe you are, you've created a precedent where you're
allowed to discriminate now based on the majority not liking what you say.
Yeah.
Like Sargon can't like go to court and fight his traffic ticket in this case.
Right.
It's like a, almost a whole different rule of law is being used in both of these
cases.
That's, that's a very good point.
Yeah.
It's not actually fair.
The law would have been more reasonable to him.
I do appreciate your guys's moderate viewpoint on this.
I still strongly disagree.
I'm sticking with my extremist.
They should not have any powers of censorship, but I realize you guys will
probably win in the end.
Well, so I think I'm agreeing with you.
What, what if they had terms of service that said you can use our website, but
you can never use the N word in a, in any context outside of a historical context.
And if you, so if you do that, you can do whatever it's kind of like saying,
I'd be fine with that.
I think that's perfectly reasonable as long as they're upfront, they're clear
about it and it's not in their 36 hour long document.
Um, but you know, if there's like a, if there's a list of, of no no's at the top
of their terms of service and said, you can't use the N word, you can't post
pictures of minors in technically legal, but obviously not cool, whatever, like,
you know, whatever borderline child porn or something.
Um, I'm trying to think of other things that child.
Yeah.
That's so sad.
So I'm trying to think of other things that like are technically not illegal,
but like we're like, we can say as a company, you can do whatever you want,
except for these things.
Would that have been all right?
Or would you say no, no, no, if you're going to, if you're going to be as
biggest patron on, you have to allow anyone to come on there, post softcore
child porn and use the N word with abandon.
Yeah.
As long as you're willing, I like it that you're willing to die on this hill.
I am.
No, that's totally cool.
I mean, the, the softcore child porn, you're getting into again areas where I
have moral qualms with the actual thing.
Like I, I, again, also not good with people calling for violence on YouTube.
But, uh, in general, no, they, I'm not good with their being censorship powers.
I understand, you know, okay, you just can't say the N word, but then we just
have seven new dirty words.
Sure.
Um, going back to Tumblr for a minute too, there's kind of a sense in which this
goes back to a whole band items store discussion.
And I guess I'm pulling away from the moderation a bit, but, um, whether it was
like the foster sister thing, trying to keep people from using Tumblr for
prostitution or whether it was the advertisers, one of the negative
externalities about them banning all of the porn sites was that I know there
were a bunch of fan artists and, uh, fanfic writers who also got banned because
they were drawing like, uh, Sherlock and Watson having sex or whatever, you know,
or like they had one picture with titties in it at one point, but like some of
these people actually like, they made their livelihood off of commissions and
they got banned over things that weren't even like the target.
Yeah.
Certainly the execution there, they hit, that's why I think that it was largely
some huge push, whether it was their, um, yeah, because they, they, they hit
back really, really hard and they're like, no, we're not even going to analyze
stuff.
We're going to just run some, some image search software on every picture on
the website and ban everything that flags anything without looking at it.
Yeah.
A bunch of people were panicking beforehand too.
And they're like, I don't even know what to delete from my blog before
they do the purge.
Yeah.
So people got hit and they didn't even understand why they didn't even have a
blog that had anything pornographic on it.
They might have reblogged something that someone else at one point, like it's
just a mess.
I mean, on the one hand, this is also a, a reminder that as long as you are
running on somebody else's, uh, software, someone else's thing, you're never
safe and everyone should have their own blog whenever possible.
But I know, I know, I know that's not, I mean, that's, that's one of the reasons
I've never bothered with Tumblr.
Any of those I'm like, nope, just going to get my own website, pay the money,
you know, because I know I can always keep it up unless like the government
actually comes and shut me down.
But again, that's not necessarily true either.
If, if, if people have already gotten Patreon and, and YouTube and
PayPal and everything on their side, who are they going to go to next?
They're going to be like, okay, ISPs, we see that you're still allowing
this person's content through, through the internet.
Yeah.
Okay.
Web hosting service.
We see that you're still hosting this guys.
I mean, even if I were to buy my own server that I have up 24 times, I
still got to connect to the internet through wires somewhere, some sort of
service provider, they can just contact Comcast and be like, you're
letting this guy's data through.
Don't you know he's a Nazi?
Well, that's why I'm pro net neutrality.
I'm just going to jump in and say this.
I'm honestly, I think I'm leaning a little bit more towards Enias's side,
but it comes down to a fear of the end results.
Like I have very little moral positions about this, honestly.
But like I said, I'm worried that this is just going to create a new system
where it'll be easy for worse people to funnel money in even more hidden ways,
because that's what is incentivizing right now.
And that's way worse in my opinion than anything Sargon could have said.
I do like how you're very easily and it seems just able to take the long view
and say, look at what this is going to do.
Forget what you guys, you know, forget the reasons you're doing it, all that.
Just like, look at what will probably happen.
That's, I think a valuable thing to look at.
And I didn't even think of those considerations before you mentioned it.
Yeah, I'm terrified of what this isn't going to create in the next year,
because I think what you're going to see is a Patreon alternative at the end of
the year. And I guarantee you it's going to be used by a large number of people
who would never dare go on Patreon because it would have brought them too
much scrutiny. But now that they have a subtle way to funnel money that cannot be
hacked, even if it was created for a good reason, it's going to end up helping
neo-Nazis and alt-right people.
I do think I would like to be on this Patreon, whatever.
What I was just going to say is it's going to make it harder to make Patreon
alternatives because of the whole, if you create something that's like,
we're anti-witch hunts, all the witches are going to go there.
That's like what you were just saying, David.
Yeah, pretty much.
But at the same time, the reason the witches are going there is because it
protects everyone, including witches.
So you would actually probably be, I mean, more secure financially.
Like it would be more difficult on this future platform to demonetize you,
but you would have to share that space with really terrible humans.
Well, I mean, if literally everyone is on two platforms, then if one
platform gets rid of them, you know, there's less incentive for the one
platform to do that anyway, because they aren't hurting that thing as much.
They can still survive.
I would like everyone to be on two platforms just so that they aren't,
you know, putting all this power in one corporation's hands.
I should point out that the reason that Sam Harris left Patreon wasn't out
of solidarity with anything Carl Benjamin said or did, or with any sort of endorsement
or even protest.
It was more just like your thing of like, you know, in the event that Patreon wants
to, you know, swing the band hammer a little harder, I don't want to take the risk.
So I'm going to just be all fully self-sufficient.
Same reason I have my own blog.
You just, you don't want to be reliant on other people to that extent.
Yeah.
The thing is now all of Sam Harris's enemies can kind of point at him
leaving and say, aha, we knew he was a neo-Nazi.
Yeah.
Fuck them.
They were going to say that anyway.
I can't wait to say that.
And yeah, honest, I mean, you mentioned that Jordan Peterson's gotten more
annoying in the last year.
And I know that I think now I don't know a lot about him.
I get the impression that he was never ready for like the level of attention
he got.
I agree with that 100 percent.
The second he got the spotlight, he's just like, oh, I need to keep the light on
me and keep saying crazy shit.
And now he's like full climate change denial.
Yeah.
I read, I read 12 Wolves for Life and it's got none of that, uh, the stuff
that you see him like blogging about now or the people talking about him.
It's a great book.
And I honestly, I will still say this to this day.
If you look at his old YouTube videos, his lectures as a teacher, he seems
like a brilliant professor of psychology and a guy with a lot of insight.
Listen to him about psychology and not politics or meteorology.
Or maybe even mythology.
That's sort of where I'm at with Sam Harris now is like, he had a lot
of fun stuff to say on philosophy.
And like really again, I think this is going to be running the
theme until he's out of office.
Literally everything got worse when Donald Trump became president and like
including his podcast and everything Sam Harris has been talking about for the
last two years, it's a lot less of like fun conversations on, you know,
cosmology or physics or AI or whatever.
And it's more just like, oh my God, let's keep, you know, if we, we have
to edit out the sounds of us breaking each other's arms, jerking ourselves off
about, you know, let me, let me rephrase that.
I don't know.
This was a joke from Rick and Morty, or bastardized version of it.
When he was like, now it's just all this, you know, intellectual, dark
web, self masturbation stuff.
And like, look, we're so victimized guys.
Cause, you know, whenever I say that black people are unintelligent, I get
kicked back on Twitter.
Look at us.
And it's like, yeah, it's devolved into culture wars.
Yeah.
And it's super annoying.
And like, you know, his, they're even talking about, um, I heard about this
in the very bad wizards, like a, an anonymous peer review journal, um,
where people can go out there and publish all of their bull, you know,
they're possibly bullshit, but possibly, you know, just politically
incorrect findings, um, and hide their identity because they're so afraid of the
fallout.
I, I do like how, and again, I'm not in academia.
Maybe things are worse, uh, for academics than I thought, you know,
Should there be a place to publish scientific findings that you don't think
you can because you would get crap for it?
I think that's, that's what the thing is for.
All right.
Um, but I don't, I guess I don't know, again, a lot about how the
internet academics work.
I would like to think that if they're solid science, we know what you're
saying, people will publish it, you know, they don't like it, but maybe
that's not the case.
Oh God, no.
So, all right.
Um, I mean, academia has more backbiting and politics in most places.
Well, I guess my, my rosy-eyed view of science would have been that, you
know, the science speaks for itself.
I mean, that's pretty much what happened to that guy who got fired from Google.
I don't remember his name now.
Right, right.
But like, I read the paper he wrote and I don't think it was tactful.
I don't think it was.
The phrasing was unfortunate.
Yes.
But none of the data he pointed out was wrong.
He lit, and the worst part, the thing that made it most infuriating is at the
end, he's like, okay, these are the reasons I think there are not enough women in
tech, here are my suggestions to fix it.
So even if you thought he did everything wrong at the end of his article, he
legitimately was just trying to fix it, but because it was not politically
correct, he got screwed for it.
And that was not even like, that was an internal memo within Google.
It would be so much more terrifying to try to do that on a public platform and
publish it.
Like, that's so scary.
I think people have a right to be wrong.
Like, I don't even know that he was right.
He very well may have been absolutely wrong with what he wrote.
But you have a right to be wrong about something.
And not be considered a bad person for having said it.
Well, yeah, not be kicked out and made a pariah.
Did you get a chance to say the thing that you were waiting to say a few
minutes ago?
I know it's been a while.
I think I forget what it was.
If it's important, it'll spring back to mind.
I'm just actually thinking of how relevant this all is to the less
wrong posts.
And also that we've been talking about this for a very long time.
We're starting to just talk in loops.
Yeah.
All right.
Shall we move on?
Yes, but I'll move on.
You have final thing to say.
My final thoughts on this is that I understand much better your position.
I think I've said it pretty well before.
And I think with the combined might of Inyosh, David and Jess, I think I've
moved more towards the idea that banning him was a bad idea, uh, or more towards
that position.
I think I still like the idea.
Like if it was, if it was my website, if I owned PayPal, I would say, no, I'm
not going to let you use it.
You fucking suck.
I think I stand by that, but I do see the point that like this isn't you,
Steven, the person or even, you know, John PayPal or John Patreon and their,
their personal thing.
This is a gigantic company.
And for a lot of people, it's the only way they get stuff coming in and out.
And I, I think I see where you're coming from, but as far as, uh, saying the
bad thing or maybe being wrong and public being okay, uh, Louis T.K.
was back in the news this week.
Oh God, I heard about this.
What happened?
He, he's been doing a bit of standup.
Um, and he, he made a joke.
I didn't read the full joke.
And I don't know if there's a video of it or not, but it made, it made the, if
you're familiar with Louis T.K.'s comedy, he makes like a lot of like
jokey arguments and has fun.
And he does it in a way that is often like insensitive.
So the joke that he made this week was, um, that being a kid who went to a
school where a school shooting happened, it doesn't make you interesting.
And that, you know, millennials are boring or something.
I forget the full context, but it was, it was.
It strikes a little too close to home.
It wasn't inflammatory in the sense that, you know, he's saying like, look,
just being involved in a school shooting doesn't make you interesting.
So the kickback was being super insensitive to that.
And if I'm missing an important piece, let me know.
I don't think I am.
I think that was the thing.
It was a really, it was a mean joke.
But so my thoughts on that is that it's a mean joke, perfectly consistent with
Louis T.K.'s brand of humor.
You know, he's, he's made mean jokes in the past, but this isn't even, uh, a target.
He didn't, he didn't name a name and say, you're boring.
Right.
I think he was just saying that like, you look having something scary and
interesting happening near you, it doesn't make you interesting.
Um, so my, my, I heard about this yesterday and my thought was like,
cause I could tell what the person who told me this wanted to hear was
like, isn't he a fucking shithead?
And I'm like, well, if he wasn't already on such thin ice for where he's at.
That joke would have been perfectly fine in a routine of his three years ago
before this drama came out.
People would have, some people would have been unhappy still, but it would not
have like stuck out like a sore thumb the way everyone is like looking at him
right now.
I totally, that was exactly what I had said.
I mean, that's basically a Sarah Silverman joke.
She could deliver the exact same joke cause her character is also like a horrible
person.
That is actually a very good point to make.
And I think that the, my thinking was just that like, come on, Louis, you've
been an entertainer for so long.
You know what the public perception is right now.
You got to ease back into this.
If you're going to get back in at all, you start making jokes surrounding
dead kids, um, you know, not, not hypothetical dead kids.
Like he had one joke about, you know, having, uh, plastic bags where you
could put, uh, you know, dead bodies in every three feet of America, because,
you know, people should be allowed to kill people or something, whatever it was.
Oh, murder should be illegal.
That was the bid.
Um, and then yeah, we'd have, you know,
public ways of disposing of the bodies because people are doing it all the time.
Just like acid baths on the street and stuff.
Trash cans, it was plastic bags.
Oh, okay.
But, uh, so that joke, that joke was funny.
I don't think it stood out that much, you know, even though he probably talked
about dead kids in that joke.
Um, in this, he's talking about people who he's talking tangentially to people
who actually exist.
Yeah.
Specific inflammatory cultural phenomenon.
And you know, it, at least it wasn't, uh, it wasn't inflammatory.
But I guess what I was, I was thinking what David had said that like three years
ago, this would have been a Louis CK joke that we could all laugh at or say,
ah, man, you're being kind of an asshole and just roll our eyes.
Like, well, I guess that's Louis.
But now it's like, dude, come on, you got it.
You got to take it easy.
Um, anyway, that was, that was my Louis CK bid.
We have a section on the notes called, uh, Stevens.
What was it?
Stevens pot, stir Stevens pot or something?
Yes.
Stevens, uh, stir the pot.
I don't think that's how it was for, I kind of, stir Stevens pot.
I like it better this way.
It makes me feel like I'm entering an escape hatch with you.
Enter the Steven pot quickly.
How else will we get to Mars?
Let's see.
Side topics slash, uh, to indulge Steven slash stir the pot is what it was.
Oh, um, and, uh, actually now that I scrolled to that in our notes, I'm
going to just plug really quickly.
I heard about, and then listened to episode 45 of very bad wizards on gender
differences, whereby the philosopher is in my words, whereby the philosopher, I
forget which one is the philosopher, which one's the psychologist.
The philosopher was very obviously wrong and completely missing the point the
entire fucking time.
And the psychologist was, was being as patient with him for as long as possible.
Before he's like, again, I forget which one's the philosopher, but he was like,
no, man, point to me a study where like, you know, um, you know, girls who are
forced to play certain toys, adopt certain ideas and then, you know, are pushed
out of whatever job market or something.
It's like, are you fucking kidding me?
Listen, you're being an asshole, dude.
This, this is the shit, like, you know, that we, that we've been doing in
psychology for 50 years is like, yeah, but my daughter, you know, says whatever.
He's like, yeah, but me, we've been doing studies on, on populations for
50 years, man.
So it was, it was a lot of fun to listen to.
And I think if I had to guess that whatever one of the philosophers
positions have evolved a lot since then, um, but I do encourage anybody who's
down for some, it's not even like outrage inducing because there's somebody
level headed there.
I don't listen to your suggestions anymore ever since I listened to the Massimo
Puglussi, uh, Eleazar Yudkowski debate, because that was infuriating.
Really?
Dude, I like Massimo and I'm a stoic myself.
And I just wanted to like strangle him the whole time.
I was like, and I was like, this is not that difficult.
Like you're way smarter than me.
You have a PhD.
Why are you not getting this?
But, but it's at least different there than watching Massimo give an hour long
lecture whereby he's wrong the entire time and uninterrupted, right?
That's true.
At least with that, with the Massimo versus, uh, Eleazar debate and with
the, uh, Tamler versus, uh, David, is that their first names?
Yeah.
Uh, at least they're there arguing and there's somebody there saying,
all the shit to the wrong one that you want to say anyway.
So at least it's validating that way.
Yeah.
That kind of just reminds me of what we were talking about, like why I don't like
to listen to debates anymore, because I still don't want to hear the 50% of the
conversation where someone is just giving the same tired argument.
Luckily, this isn't that bad.
And, you know, take, you know, listen, like I said, the, the, the subject was
basically, uh, they, they start with, um, a paper that they both kind of
disagree with and then they get onto the absurd with it that argued that, uh, you
should have like good toy diets for your children that let them play with, like,
that's the hard part that they disagreed on.
Like, should they be forced to play with, you know, guy toys, if they're a girl
or girl toys, if they're a guy, like the same way that you force to get
to eat vegetables, type of balance.
You'd like forcing a child to play with certain toys.
I mean, I think those people don't understand what the word play means,
because literally one of the definitions of play on any person with
psychology, we tell you, is if someone's trying to force you to play, you cannot play.
Right.
It is not play.
Then you're just making your children pick up dolls and put them back down in
front of you to make you feel good.
Yeah.
I was given a lot of Barbie dolls and, uh, of course, I like shaved their heads
and painted them and made them into centaurs and stuff.
I mean, like, you know, cause they're going to do what they're going to do.
They're going to be who they're going to be.
So you can get on board with the two of them at that point.
And then they get on to like, basically whether or not, like the incentives
that kids have to have certain toys and then how that affects them growing up.
It was a fun episode.
That was my indulging start the pot suggestion.
So that was episode 45 with very bad wizards.
And I forget the name of the episode, but number 45.
Excellent.
Was this a recent episode?
No, it was like two years ago.
Okay.
So yeah.
So you were saying someone might have changed their opinions by now.
Well, it's kind of interesting.
He definitely has because one of the more recent ones he was arguing.
It's whichever one his mom is, uh, Christina, uh, half summers or whatever.
What's her name?
Or not Christina.
Shit.
The one that he was arguing with in that episode a few episodes ago.
Uh, he's arguing with his step mom.
Yeah, what's her name?
I don't remember her name, but that's Tamler.
She, she's the Intellectual Dark Web academic.
Oh, okay.
And, uh, or she's an academic in the Intellectual Dark Web.
She's, she's one of the pictures in that, that essay that we linked to that had
the pictures of people taken under street lights and stuff.
Okay.
She, she's on that.
Um, so yeah, he was arguing with her basically making a lot of the reverse
arguments that he made in this episode.
So a couple of years later, he's evolved quite a bit.
So, um, at least there's that.
Yeah.
I think it would be interesting to listen to a debate where someone who was
giving the same tired arguments actually changed their mind, like part way through
or kind of,
Well, you never change your mind in the middle of a debate because, you know,
it's happened to me once or twice.
It's happened to me once or twice, but I think that might be a side effect of
rationalist training and trying to accept a good argument as quickly as possible.
Cause I've never seen anyone else do it.
It could happen in a personal debate, but not like anything public.
Yeah.
You're absolutely right.
Is this public?
Cause I changed my mind a little bit on the Patreon stuff with you guys.
So I would consider this basically public.
I, I don't think so because the reason it is going to be put out for the public.
But the reason you don't back down in public debates is because of the pressure
you, of the audience watching you.
I think that's a real psychological factor.
I think it's also because in those sorts of debates, there's two sides that are
going at it and we were just kind of like discussing something.
And like, it's not like any of the four of us came in with exactly the same views
and wanting to gang up on anyone else.
So that's different.
Well, none of that characterizes the very bad wizards episode either.
So that's good.
Um, yeah.
So do you guys want to talk about the two articles we had from less wrong today?
Yes, we do.
Let's do it.
All right.
Onto the strong post.
The first one was the scales of justice, the notebook of rationality and apropos
to what we were just talking about.
Uh, in this, Eliezer points out that everyone in an audience at a debate keeps
a mental running count of how many points each speaker scores against the others.
At the end of the debate, the speaker who has scored the most points is obviously
the winner.
So everything he says must be true and everything the loser says must be wrong,
which is probably a little bit of an overreaction or overstatement.
But I think it's, he goes on to defend that in the specific context that he's
talking about.
Yeah.
Um, he uses the example of like a nuclear reactor.
Uh, so he says, all right, well, if you go, in fact, this is a real study
that they did, which may or may not have replicated who knows, but something
like this is probably definitely true where, um, what's the name of the effect
where, uh, it's not the horns effect.
Yeah.
I was going to say Halo and horns, but I think that is what we're going to do
with people.
That's the other effect I know.
Um, well, the idea that if you go to somebody and say, Hey, we've got a new,
um, nuclear reactor prototype that's more likely to melt down.
It's like a point against the reactor.
But if you say, Hey, it produces less waste, that's a point for it.
And yet if you tell somebody, Hey, we've got one that, uh, um, produces less waste,
they'll also guess that it's also less likely to melt down because those two
facts are logically distinct.
Yeah.
And so they assume that if something's good about it, well, then it has to
have all good traits.
There's something's bad about it.
But until you, Hey man, this thing melts down more often.
Oh, well, then it probably produces more waste too.
Huh.
It's, so the point is that he's saying that people view things that way naturally.
Yeah, that, that.
If he thinks he says people would view these as two facts opposing each other,
or in fact, they're not opposing each other at all.
They're just two different facts.
They're descriptors of the reality of the nuclear engine in this case or the nuclear
reactor, but they're not like judgment calls about whether or not it's good.
Exactly.
Yeah.
The primary point of the article, um, I pulled a
quote out was that these two facts can be cited by different sides of the same
debate, but they're logically distinct.
The facts don't know who's side they're on.
Uh, and I took that to mean it's kind of another expansion on the policy debates
shouldn't appear one sided essay.
This one says that, uh, despite our brains, natural tendency to view arguments
or facts as tools or as soldiers, which we could either use for fighting on our
side or against our side, facts don't exist to support sides.
The facts are just words that we use to describe the physical qualities of a thing.
Yeah.
And so he uses the, the example per the name of the, the post, the scales of
justice that lady justice carries a set of scales where presumably the facts
against and the facts for way each side of the scales, whichever one comes down
heavier, that's, that's the verdict.
Um, he had, you know, so, so running with that, he says that not all arguments
reduced to mere up or down.
Lady rationality carries a notebook wherein she writes down all the facts that
aren't on anyone's side.
And I think, yeah, that's maybe a good way to look at.
It's certainly like policy debates.
Maybe that's not the best, arguably way to look at crime or something.
I don't know, but even says in there that like, there are certain situations,
like did John Doe kill John Smith?
Like, yeah, there is definitely a scale of justice system there and we should use it.
I think it's, I try to remember this idea, even if I don't remember this exact
article, whenever I get riled up and sure, I'm correct about something.
Cause like, whenever you start to feel sure you're correct about something, it
means you're viewing all the facts through a lens and you should go back and
be like, what am I, what facts don't fit in on either side?
And where should I check that notebook of rationality and reassess myself?
I looked at, uh, he also pointed out that there's, you know, it, there's a
binary question such as, did John Doe kill so and so, and then there's other
things that aren't binary.
It's weird that we always have these kinds of idea of there being two sides
or that this is good or this is bad.
I think he said that as like an overall good or a bad feeling about
something that colors your judgment on it.
That's a good point and thanks for reminding me.
That's the main difference is that here's a proposition for my new nuclear
reactor is not, did John Doe kill this person, right?
And one of those has a yes or no question.
The other one's just like, here's my idea.
Here's the pros and cons.
Well, in the end, you have to decide, are we going to build the reactor or not?
Yeah, but, but one is like a matter of fact, a matter of historical or
scientific fact or something, right?
And in that case, there'll be pieces of evidence for and against it, just like
you'd expect.
Whereas like evidence in assessing the nuclear reactor, the hypothetical one in
this case, it's not so much evidence as it is arguments.
But I think what the point that he's making is that people don't see that
they don't emotionally feel the difference until it's pointed out.
They see them as the same thing.
They see arguments against it as being evidence that it's a bad thing.
I think the point is that like, even if you eventually accept that the
nuclear reactor should be built, you must still accept that there is a
greater chance of meltdown and know that.
Whereas, or if you make a decision that a nuclear reactor should not be built,
you also have to accept that there will be more nuclear waste now because of
that decision.
And you made the decision you made, but don't forget the facts.
Yeah, that even when it does come down to a up or down binary, you know, are
we doing the thing or are we not?
Remember that the facts aren't on a side.
They're just what they are.
There's something limiting about thinking of something as an upward down to, I
think this example might have actually come from the essay that comes after
this, but you talked about cars and he was saying, for example, you know,
people get hung up on the idea of our cars, good or bad.
And then there prevents them from thinking about what should be like
engineered traffic differently.
Cause what you're trying to do is minimize deaths, not figure out whether
cars are good or bad.
Same thing with the reactor.
You could say what we were trying to do is generate X amount of energy with
this amount of, so like you don't want to silence people from coming up with
ideas because you can actually take some of their ideas.
Like the road argument, maybe the problem is not that cars are good or bad, but
maybe we should change the material that roads are made out of.
So they have more friction and it would cause less accidents or something.
Yeah, automate traffic.
Yeah.
I think in the next post really ties into this point too.
But like just another example of not all arguments being up or down, you know,
in some, in some metaphorical slash literal sense, people who are anti
any sort of gun control, take that position with the weight of dead
children weighing on one side of the scales, right?
Like they're saying, yep, we're accepting a certain number of dead kids every
year because we care enough about.
Because we think that the risk of losing our guns would put us under further
tyranny that would be worse.
That would be the best steelman argument.
Exactly.
Whatever the argument is.
Yeah.
And to be fair, I think I've spoken out against this before.
I think that's a really shitty argument.
I think the government has all the nukes and fight, fight helicopters and stuff.
Like again, they're not going to nuke the population, but like we're not going
to win against tanks with our, with whatever guns the Vietnamese would disagree.
Like I actually very much disagree with you on this one because I hang out with
enough crazy gun nuts in PA that I know that if it came down to it, like no
one's beating a predator drone.
I 100% agree with that.
But guerrilla warfare is highly effective and very dangerous.
But I think that you are correct in that, that is a facetious argument.
It does not actually strike and does not help.
Like, and it's also not, I think what their motivation motivator is, right?
I think that the guns are fun to shoot.
They really are.
They really are.
And, and it's, it's a, it's a skill that when you're good at it, it's very satisfying.
The loud noise that kicking your hands.
Like it's a fun thing to do.
Yeah, that's like arguments or soldiers kind of.
Yeah, it is.
And it's, it's a great example of just people putting up whatever they can.
Exactly.
Putting as many soldiers as they can.
And, you know, the defense of tyranny is a really strong soldier to put up in
the fight, even if it's not one that they really support.
Guns are fun.
It's not like a argument that's going to make you look good.
Totally.
Random quick question, just because I'm crazy.
If we'd had predator drones in the Vietnam war, would we have one?
No, I don't think we would have one.
Cause like the reason we lost Vietnam is cause the Vietnamese were smart enough
to start publicizing those losses we had, even though we were beating them
significantly, we looked worse.
And it was public outcry that defeated Vietnam.
It was all psychological and predator drones would only enhance that.
Why do you think that ever since Vietnam, they don't show wars the same graphic
level they used to?
Yeah.
That's when they introduced all the major regulations on the reporting of war.
Showing the bodies of soldiers and stuff.
Kids and like small groups of soldiers that were operating in stealth and they
had like vastly inferior weapons, but a predator drone couldn't find them
in the jungle necessarily.
Well, they probably couldn't even find them.
Like you don't want to drone someone in the city.
Or that, yeah, I was about to say, they do all the time.
My bad, but yeah, they couldn't find them in the jungle.
So on the next essay about regulation, I actually kind of disagree with him.
This next essay is called blue or green on regulation and tell us why.
So, or at least I disagree with one of the examples he brings up.
He talks about how, I forget what he said, maybe it was like cars kill 7000
Americans or something, but he's like the FDA kills 50 to 100,000 Americans by
delaying drugs from being approved.
I think that's just a bad point, quite frankly, because every time you go on TV,
you're always seeing an ad like, did you take this drug 20 years ago and now you
have like bunions on your lungs, please contact us for this settlement.
Like I understand the point he's trying to make here.
And to not fall into the fallacy we just talked about about being like, this is
just good or this is just bad.
I get what he's saying, but this is not a good example.
Like the reason that we delay those things, even if they are drugs, they'll
be future approved is to try to prevent as many of those long term problems as possible.
I believe his argument is that they are far, far too strict.
And they delay things too long and they make things cost too much.
I disagree with him based on the number of drugs that we end up finding out have
terrible side effects 20 years later.
In fact, I don't think they're strict enough.
I agree with him based on how much it costs to get any sort of drug onto the market.
Scott Alexander writes some great things about like why, how now doctors can
give you fish oil after a 20 million dollar.
Melatonin too.
And melatonin, yeah.
And people in Europe have just been doing it for years because people already
know that it's safe.
It's just that they can't sell it until they go through these hoops.
There's a number of things that the FDI has really dragged its feet on
and it has taken much longer.
I, as a personal example, had a vasectomy just last year because I was sick
and fucking tired of waiting for vasogel to get approved by the FDA.
Truth.
I had been like seven years and I was like, all right, fuck it.
I'm apparently never going to get this.
So.
But would you want it to have it if there was a chance that in 20 years
your junk would fall off?
Yeah, there's a pretty good chance it's not going to fall off.
The, the, um, the, five percent is too high a chance for me.
I'm just going to say that right now.
Much lower than five percent.
Uh, the, that's what he's saying, that their risk tolerance is way, way too low
and ends up killing more people than it helps because the amount of people that
could be saved, if things were just sped up a little bit is higher than the
amount of people that will be hurt due to something slipping through the cracks.
I would like to see the statistics about how many, how much money has
been given to people who took pharmaceuticals that 10 to 20 years
later really ended up messing them up in some way because I actually think
that that point is incorrect, but I don't have any data and I would like
to find the data because I'm pretty sure you're right.
It would be conclusive one way or the other.
Like we could probably get a clear answer for what it's worth.
You guys are both saying I'm against Eleizer's point or I'm for Eleizer's
point or on his side, rather.
I don't think he was making it.
I don't think he's picking.
He was trying to do it all falling.
I just think this was a bad example and I wanted to point out that I've been.
I think he pointed out, I think I just wanted to say that what he's saying
may be factually true.
Whether or not, if he's trying to illustrate a larger point with that,
I think it's different, but you know, if whatever, I didn't click the link
that this is a hyperlink in the post that the FDA prevents 5,000 casualties
per year, but causes at least 20,000 to 120,000 casualties by delaying
approval of beneficial medications.
So that's FDAreview.org.
Presumably, maybe they've done their homework.
I'm not sure.
But you know, whether or not, I think even if you take that as true, the point
is, is that good, is that okay?
Is that an acceptable loss?
Is that, are we willing to do that for the risk of saving people from bad medicine?
To be more on topic, the idea that we should try to decide policy and
regulation not based on our preconceived sides or actually, I think this article
might be more relevant now than when it was written, because now we definitely
have the culture war leaking into our decisions about regulation and the
tribalism that comes with that.
So there is a real value in being able to be objective and look at all the
data in the notebook of rationality.
Yeah, I think it's funny that Eleazar fell into his own trap.
I thought it was really funny because he starts out kind of going back on the
earlier Birch's Law essay, saying that he opened it with saying that if people
are allowed to behave in stupid ways, they will.
This will inevitably lead to people hurting themselves.
And then people took that to mean that he was pro-regulation, but he was just
trying to say that I'm just stating a fact about the situation and I could have
brought up the best points for the other side, but that would be missing the
point.
I shouldn't have to.
And then he goes ahead and gives the whole other side of the argument, even
though he said he shouldn't have to.
I think that was on purpose.
Yeah, it was just funny.
It was.
And I think what he was to be, in my reading anyway, was that it was like,
this isn't an argument with sides, but if you're assuming I'm taking one
fine, here's the other side's position.
But I think the whole meta point is that there aren't sides, or rather, there
shouldn't be sides here.
There's just the facts.
And then you take in all the facts, you try to get them as unbiased as possible
and then process them as unbiasedly as possible.
And then you weigh them with whatever you value and then you decide what your
policy proposal is.
You know, the example of cars is really easy, right?
I'm actually not sure what the best arguments are for not putting in a
lower speed governor on cars.
Like it turns out, if you take at least a lot of cars built like after 2000 and
on an open highway and go like 115 miles an hour, it stops accelerating and then
just coasts you back down to 80 before you can use the accelerator again.
Yeah, cars have governors on them that don't let you just go 150 miles an hour
if your car is physically capable of it.
So why doesn't that kick in at 90?
Because there are no speed limits that let you go above 90 in the country.
Well, I'm not sure what the argument is, but the real reason is that like it's
fun to go that fast if it's safe to do so.
Well, and sometimes it's convenient.
Totally.
Um, the way that we found out about this when you're driving through fucking
Kansas, yeah, that we were going through the middle of nowhere, Nebraska, uh, I
don't know, 10 years ago with a friend who in his car was 2003 or four Pontiac.
It wasn't something fancy.
It was just what was around.
And, uh, when we got it, I can't remember, it was 110 or 115, but we would go
miles.
So several minutes not seeing anybody.
So we were just like saying, Oh, our fast car can go and, you know, by that
speed car shaking a lot.
You know, there's a lot of uncertainty of the structural integrity of the car.
And like, you know, am I going to just, you know, hit a light bump and just go
careening off the road or something?
And then the car like, and you're just, it just idled until, or rather it just,
the accelerator stopped working until like I said, hit 80 or 85.
Is that after you would already hit on 115 or whatever?
Okay.
It was whatever top speed you hit, then it slowed it down.
I'm sure there's something that we can look up on whatever it is.
And how long was it before you could go back up?
Until the car hit whatever 80 miles an hour.
Oh, and then you could then you could accelerate again.
Yeah.
And how old was the car?
It was like a mid 2000s.
Okay.
Yeah.
I want to say early 2000s, 2001 or three or something.
But anyway, I brought that up as just a, a thing that the, the argument that like,
look, cars kill people.
It's not an argument.
That's just a fact, right?
So, you know, 30,000 Americans die every year in car accidents.
That's, that's a bad thing.
Nobody wants that.
Is that an acceptable cost for having cars?
That's the question that people try to answer, right?
Or is that an acceptable cost for having cars the way they are?
And the answer we've collectively given is yes.
Yeah.
So, but like the facts aren't biased themselves.
Like again, just like the fact that kids die every year playing with their parents
guns or in school shootings.
That's not an argument.
That's weird.
This sounds weird to say.
Like let's use that as an example.
Well, kids die every year from opening up their parents like pain medicine that
their parents have very good reasons to have and taking too many.
Does that mean that we need to like make it even more difficult to open the pill
bottles?
Should we just get rid of all pain medications?
Because should we get rid of swimming pools entirely?
Because children can die in them.
It's weird to say that like, you know, the number of dead kids every year is,
isn't an argument against guns, but it's, well, no, it is an argument against guns,
but it's just one thing to consider.
It's also just a fact about like what it means.
Oh, I see what you're saying.
Yeah.
I was trying to make it like just, just, here's, here's
all the facts that we can put together now, way how much you care about them.
But yeah, the swimming pool thing is something that people bring up all bring
up a lot and the medication thing is important too.
And sidenote on medication.
God, I, whenever I bring home, you know, like even especially if it's over the
counter stuff, like, etc.
Or whatever, when I buy it, I'll bring it home and then open it immediately.
Cause fuck opening that stuff when you have a headache and you need it.
And you're just like, oh my God.
And then then you've got to sit there and like punch the little wrap thing that
doesn't tear off properly and it makes that loud popping noise and you already
have a big headache.
So that's super annoying, right?
And if it was even more, even if it was even harder to open, I'd be even more
annoyed about it.
So I feel like I got a glimpse into your life just there.
Like a brief, brief image of like angry headache, Steven.
Yeah.
I like punching a bottle.
I'm using like the knuckle to bust through the, I wish, I wish the listeners
could see the technique he's using.
It's truly wonderful.
Cool.
Do you like not, the tonial clipper you got in your bathroom?
I do.
And I, and it's easy to get open when I'm not needing medication.
It's just like when you get in there and it's just like, Oh God, I need this
right now.
And you're like, I can't fucking open this.
That's my minor gripe.
And I don't care how many dead kids it costs me.
I want to be easier to open.
I'd like to point out that when we were just talking just now about like, you
can't just say, I'd like to shoot my guns or you can't just say, yes, we're
willing to accept these deaths for cars.
He points it out here that we all know what happens when you try to trade off
a sacred value against a non-sacred value.
It's why when someone says, but if you don't ban cars, people will die in
car crashes, we don't say, yes, people will die horrible flaming deaths and
they don't deserve it, but it's worth it.
So I don't have to walk to work in the morning, which is technically what
we've all decided as a society, right?
It's worth the convenience, despite innocent people dying in car fires.
Instead, you say, how dare you take away our freedom to drive?
We'll decide for ourselves.
We're just as good at making decisions as you are.
That sounds a lot more like the gun debate.
And him using cars here over the guns was a really great idea.
Yeah.
But I also feel like that's not really the argument.
The real argument is that cars save us opportunity time.
Like for every person a car kills, think about people whose lives were saved
by ambulances and Ubers taking them to hospitals at a speed that they could
not have walked.
I think you're you're just making a argument for the sake of winning the
argument at this point, because you could easily make a law that only
ambulances or people, you know, only vehicles taking people to hospitals or
other emergency situations are allowed to drive.
I don't think we could sustain our economy, though.
Or we certainly couldn't.
You know, the number of population that we have without cars.
Right.
It's worth it.
Choosing, no, no, we're choosing those deaths for the economy that we have.
For the humans that are sustained by that economy, because if we didn't have
cars, it's not like those people would disappear.
They would die hungry and the economy would fall apart.
Well, we could have much denser cities.
I think if we put the if we if we put all the ingenuity and money behind it,
that we could to refactor the like the job market, you know, what you're
like, this sounds like a solvable problem.
The point that's fair, but the point is, isn't that's, but we're having
an argument that I think he's trying to avoid and that, like, we're not really
having where we're raising points about why cars are a good idea.
But that's not that's not the point, right?
No, it isn't technically what he's saying isn't false.
This is about our freedom to drive.
We want the freedom to choose that convenience over the risk of death.
It's just put in a much more sacred value sort of way, rather than a, we did
the math and we prefer the convenience sort of way.
Yeah, there's kind of signaling that comes into play about what
arguments you are and aren't allowed to use, which is kind of a whole other
point, but it's still kind of interesting.
Maybe that should be a lesson we take out of this, which is we should try to
not allow, at least in honest discussions, our fear of signaling from being
honest about the good and bad qualities or the different qualities of a
possible regulation.
I agree completely.
That also hinges on having a person on the opposite side that you trust.
Because if you think you're up against someone who doesn't care and will
treat politics as a winner, take all, do whatever you need to win thing, then
you're not going to just say, we did the calculations and we think the
convenience is worth the deaths.
You have to catch it in these frames.
Otherwise you'll be crucified.
Isn't there a Slate Star Codex post about the difference between people who
believe that we are just disagreeing about something?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Mistake theory versus like your theory, conflict like you are malicious.
Yeah, I wanted to do an episode on that too.
I feel like that's very much related because one of the comments to that
pointed out that how you deal with a person in a disagreement and whether
you default to assuming mistake or conflict has a lot to do with, do you
think they are acting in good faith?
Because if you think someone is acting in good faith, you are more willing
to just believe it's a mistake.
But if you think they're being malicious, then you're not going to extend
that and you're going to end up falling into this scales of justice, right
or wrong mentality.
So maybe the answer is to be good rationalists.
We should be nicer to each other.
I also think this is a great reason to raise the sanity waterline because
then if there's more people that you can trust to have these conversations
with that aren't going to use them to crucify you in the public, or even
if, you know, the public won't accept your crucifixion, they'll be like,
look, we're all rational enough to consider these numbers.
That would be a better world.
Yeah, like the best world would be a world where someone can be wrong and
they won't be ostracized for it as long as it's clear that they were trying
their best.
Yeah, the Google guy.
Yeah, that's really the one I think of.
Even if he's 100% wrong, I don't think what happened to him was fair.
And hopefully we can become a society that is more capable of reading
the notebook and less inclined to look at the scales.
Well, like just the perverse way, the weird way that things get when you're
considering arguments and by extension facts to take sides, you get, you know,
again, climate change denial, you know, Oh, that can't be true because it
would be bad for business.
Right.
And because it's bad for business, well, then I deny the facts.
And so like, that's just a really like taking out its face.
If you do that with like another thing, um, but like, say nutrition, like, well,
I like Snickers.
If you, if you say they're bad for me, I'm going to just disagree with your
science because I think Snickers tastes good.
And therefore I'm not going to take it before that they're out for me.
That sounds insane to make that argument.
Right.
It sounded insane already when you did it for climate science, but, but
that's more mainstream disagreements.
I was trying to pick something even more in America.
Yeah.
Uh, so the, not, not just, I wasn't giving sympathy to the climate change
denier deniers.
I was just saying that, you know, you can use this anywhere.
And it sounds insane, um, to, to the fact that, you know, what, what climate
changed, I guess, not climate change deniers, what, you know, unregulated
business proponents should be saying is like, sure, it's bad for the environment,
but it's good for business.
And, you know, that, that sounds, that sounds like too, like evil to say.
So they should say, we'll use our profits in 50 years to save the environment or
something.
Also, let's not forget that you could always say like, yeah, we are climate
change deniers, but they might have like a few good points.
Like I heard the argument recently that whenever a lot of volcanoes explode,
you see a general drop in the earth's temperature.
Cause there's ash in the sky.
There's been like three volcanoes in 2018 and there is, it looks like we
might have another one in Hawaii in 2019.
And there's a very good chance it's going to lower global temperatures for
the next decade.
This does not mean that global warming is not happening.
And it does not mean that climate change isn't real.
But because anyone who brings up the point that things might actually get
colder for a little while is automatically thought of to be against
climate change and a denier, they're shoved into that camp.
Like we aren't listening to those people because it sounds like it's
signal something bad when that's not their goal.
They're just trying to put out a piece of data.
Is that actually happening?
I didn't know that happened either.
That's a really good example of a case where somebody for our side, though,
could be a, well, like I'm assuming we're none of us are climate change
denialists, but, uh, you know, that, that's a person who, well, what was I
trying to say there?
Yeah, that like, you know, we're pro the side of climate change is real, but
that's the side of climate change is real.
Actually negatively painting someone who could have been an ally because
you're trying to make it a blue or a green issue.
Who was just trying to point out a fact that, Hey, it might actually
get colder for a while.
And then if like this would be a person who this winter, if it was
unusually cold, they would point out and then people would be like,
don't you get it?
Temperature and weather isn't the same thing as climate.
You hate the environment.
When really that guy was just trying to be like, Hey, maybe we should also
deal with the ash in the sky.
That's interesting.
I would hope that our side, the scientists aren't that, the league.
Yeah, but if they are, then that sucks.
But you're right.
If they, if they are, then they're failing and they should just be, yeah,
look in 50 years, temperatures are going to be crazy.
But right now they're weird because of whatever atmospheric ash.
Then I would like to think that fact would be absorbed by scientists and
they would just keep.
It's not just said, just the like pro climate is like a blue and green issue.
Yeah, which is insane.
So you will get the pro people that aren't going to listen to that guy
because he sounds like he's like giving a greenish position.
Yeah, that's very important.
And then you're going to have the green people who are going to misinterpret
him and be like, yeah, the world's only getting cooler.
These climate change deniers are wrong.
And then 10 years later, when the temperature is like four degrees higher
and New York is underwater, they're like, oh, maybe we shouldn't have listened to that guy.
It is just weird that, I mean, that's the whole point.
All these posts, but I just, the meta step back point, like the fact that
you're desired to have a certain policy proposal or decision can impact on like
the fact that you're, I know that like this is what we're talking about.
But I'm just seeing this like kind of like an original seeing right now.
And it's blowing my fucking mind.
Um, I might have said this before.
I'm having deja vu right now.
So, uh, yeah.
Yeah.
I think it's important to notice to that or to, you know, be aware of the idea
that even though we like consider ourselves rationalists, our brain still
work like this too.
It's like really easy to think of, oh, like people who are aren't
rationalists have all these biases, but we do too.
And we have to be aware of them.
Well, I think you can train yourself to be less affected by it.
Like, I think there's actually studies that show that the more you learn
about cognitive biases, like to an extent, the more affected you are by them
because you think that you understand.
I, okay.
So that's the thing.
I believe that rationality has nothing to do with understanding
cognitive biases.
I think it's all about building instinctual patterns of thought.
Like, like a martial arts technique.
One of the things you should do is anytime you hear someone say something
absolutely outrageous, you should immediately try to steal man, their
argument, like make that a habit, especially for the people you dislike.
And then eventually you'll be less likely to fall into blue, green thinking
because you'll immediately see the strongest part of both arguments.
I think what Jess was talking about was called sophistication bias where
when you're aware of cognitive biases, you can point them out and your
opponents and then say, I don't fall, I don't fall prey to these
cause I'm, I already know the bias.
Yeah.
No, but I agree with what David was saying.
Like that was, I think actually one of the strengths that the
rationalist community has over like the atheist movement, because I did
see a lot of that, like, uh, making fun of religious people for their
cognitive biases, acting as though they didn't have any themselves.
Yeah.
And it's, it's, uh, training the kind of subcognitive techniques is sort of
the whole point.
Yeah.
And whatever, whatever tools work for you, some will work better than others.
I think the science of rationality is still working that out.
But one thing I try to do is if I, if I'm reading something, this is
something I did about going, I was reading a lot more philosophy in college
was like, if I came across something that I was agreeing with a lot, I found
my, if I noticed that's nodding my head, I would stop and I'm like, all right,
hold on, go back a couple of pages and then try and rip apart everything you
just read, tear it to shreds.
Cause if, if you're agreeing enough to like be physically, physically
agreeing with it, Steven, you're, you need to check yourself before you're
just, uh, running with it too hard.
So yeah, this sounds a little too good.
There's something tribal going on here.
I always go with the opposite feeling, which is like, if I ever noticed
myself getting really angry at hearing someone.
And I know that other people find him popular, especially when I know that
they're, they're reasonable people that I trust on other things.
I always go, okay, I'm obviously missing something.
So what am I missing here?
What, what would be the best interpretation point received?
David, I'll check out David Peterson's stuff.
I was thinking of Jordan Peterson too, because I actually had this like
really knee-jerk reaction to just like a lot of his mannerisms, the way
he had been presented.
I was like, I should probably go read his book actually, because.
Yeah, his book is delightful even.
Even if I don't like what he's been doing with that, I found the book
really hard to get through.
But I think that I agree with a lot of his points in the book.
I've seen enough of his videos that I do not feel compelled to read his book.
The book is different from the videos though.
But he's gone off the deep end.
He's doing a talk, I think with, uh, Dave Rubin and Sebastian Gorka.
And if anyone doesn't know, Sebastian Gorka is the closest thing
to a living supervillain I'm aware of.
He was a right-wing nationalist from Eastern Europe who helped
Trump get elected and has may or may not have supported Hungarian war crimes.
And he has a goatee and literally talks like this.
Yes.
Don't you understand, my good fellow?
It's not necessarily a reason to think he's evil though.
A lot of people have accents.
Supporting neo-Nazis in Eastern Europe is a very good reason for me to think you're evil.
I was talking about the accent.
And the goatee.
And the goatee.
I think that was worse.
Listen, as someone with a goatee who sometimes speaks with an accent,
I definitely don't trust him.
And his deep scar on his face and his cat that he's petting while he's on stage.
Right.
Yeah.
I just look up YouTube videos of Gorka and I'm telling you,
if you don't think he's a supervillain, message me.
I want to end with, okay, first of all,
I've noticed that a lot of the times when we end talking about these,
I pull out his quotes at the very end because they're very punchy and good.
Just realized this is another thing that makes him such a great essay writer.
He always ends the essay with something that's like,
ah, damn.
Or else like, oh, fuck yeah.
Or just something that's so poignant and emotionally engaging
that you want to read the next essay.
And it sticks in your mind.
So I'm like, yeah, this guy's good at writing.
Anyways, he ends with, imagine for a moment
that much of what the Greens said about the downside of blue policy was true.
That left to the mercy of the free market,
many people would be crushed by powers far beyond their understanding,
nor would they deserve it.
And imagine that most of what the blues said
about the ground side of green policy was also true.
That regulators were fallible humans with poor incentives,
whacking on delicately balanced forces with a sledgehammer.
Close your eyes and imagine it, extrapolate the results.
If that were true, then, then you'd have a big problem and no easy way to fix it.
That's what you'd have.
Does this universe look familiar?
Love it.
Yeah.
Wait, that looks, that reminds me of home.
I don't know what you guys are talking about.
All problems are easy and where I live.
Mostly it's delusional, but it's nice.
So did we have anything before we finished and move on?
No, I don't think so.
I think, I do get, I think it's fun.
And that's, that's one thing that I like.
We've got a meet up tonight that, you know,
I'm looking forward to going to because there's the norm in the community where,
you know, at least we're getting there with, you know,
some of the people aren't, you know, super into this stuff.
But, you know, where you could,
where somebody could be taking a strong emotionally charged stance
and they could just say, hey, look, Steven,
you realize that like you're using that fact as an argument, right?
I'm like, oh, shit, you're right.
Let me, let me, we can agree on the fact or disagree on the fact
and then research it and see who's right or wrong.
And then I'll just tell you what my values are
and we'll see what we can do about this.
But I think it's the, the ability to be able to point to somebody and say,
hold on, the fact isn't choosing your side.
And for them to, you know, not to say fuck you or I'll make it,
choose my side and to say, oh, wow, you're right.
Yep. Let me, let me reassess what's going on.
I find that to be indispensably valuable.
Yeah.
That's where I'm at.
It's a good community to have.
Totally.
For next time, we will be reading the less wrong posts,
super stimuli and the collapse of Western civilization
and useless medical disclaimers.
There you will be links to both of these on our website,
as usual, TheBaseinConspiracy.com.
Yep.
All right.
I was going to say we should do listener feedback.
We just had a few quick ones, but at this point,
it's just about time for us to leave to our meetup.
I don't think we really have time.
Yeah. I don't have much to, much else to run on.
Yeah. There's some feedback, but I do want to save those
for time when we have actual time to address them.
Yeah.
Let's see. Anything else to cover?
I think just thank our patron.
Yeah. Oh, wait, video game section.
I don't have anything in here, but as far as a light note,
I've been playing Red Dead Redemption 2,
which I'm not in love with.
It's a popular game.
It's all.
I've heard so many good things about it.
It's, I played the first one just like a few months ago
to give it a shot because I didn't really,
I hadn't played any of them.
And it plays like a rockstar game.
It plays like GTA where it's kind of clunky
and all the buttons do a lot of things and.
If you crash your horse, does it explode?
No, but you can run it like accidentally into a pole and kill it.
So.
Oh, no.
Oh, I think you can do that in real life.
It'd be a better horse rider.
You really bond with it too.
Like, because you care about it and you get to name it
and it's, you're like the time that you spend with it,
like your affinity with it goes up.
This is like if your Tamagotchi died every time you dropped it.
It's super weird how the psychology of that thing works
because even in Horizon Zero Dawn,
I was like getting kind of emotionally attached
to some of the robots that I was riding around
and I started naming them unofficially.
Oh, no.
It's anyway, I guess this isn't interesting,
but I feel like it's clunky.
The story feels kind of like I'm not invested in it,
even though I'm playing through the story and it's,
but that's that it's beautiful and there's a lot to do.
You can run around.
I like the immersive aspects to it.
Like you need to eat, drink and sleep
and keep your health up and stuff.
You can get overweight.
So can your horse need to moderate that?
Wow.
And you don't find that annoying?
No, I like that.
I like all that stuff.
But what I don't like is that the entire game feels like work,
even at the quests.
I was about to say,
I don't like controlling my own diet in real life.
I know.
Like why would I want to do double the work
and help it for a digital creature?
Just take some pixels off.
I think what I like is like in Horizon Zero Dawn,
like for example, the game can last,
I don't know, however many in-game weeks,
but you never need to sleep.
And it's like, you know,
and I don't want it to be like where you're getting tired
and fatigued to the point where it's ruining the game,
but I like it a little bit, right?
Yeah, it didn't break my immersion.
There's been games where it did kind of,
even Horizon Zero Dawn,
the thing that broke my immersion was whenever you jumped
into icy cold water wearing basically like a leather bikini
and then you got out and you're just running around
fighting more robots.
I was like, no, you'd just be dead of hypothermia.
Yeah.
You create a lot of body heat fighting those robots.
I guess.
You should spend more time at Russian bathhouses.
We'll talk about it later.
Okay.
You can spend like your entire months long
play through of Skyrim, never sleeping or eating.
And yet there's options to sleep and eat in the game,
but it's like just for fun.
No, sometimes you need to eat a lot of cheese to heal.
To heal, sure, but you know,
if you have healing spells and potions, you're fine.
I don't know.
So when I played through Skyrim a couple years ago,
I did it with all the mods that had all the immersion stuff.
I realized this was way over the head
and we could probably cut all this out.
This is just video game talk.
I thought it'd be fun to end on a light note
that didn't matter to anything.
So everyone tell me why I'm wrong about Red Dead Redemption.
I feel like I must have a cold, dead heart or something
because I never get attached to the things in video games, really.
Do you, are you able to play the dark route in games at all?
You kind of choose your responses or choose your game path
because I have a hard time with that too.
I mean, I'm able to.
I generally don't want, I generally don't, but I can.
I'm looking for orphans to murder.
I tried to do it.
I've actually, I just started playing on the, what is it?
It's not the Life is Strange sequel before the storm.
Right.
And I was like, I'm going to make this character behave like an asshole
because that's actually in character for her.
And I found it so hard to just go up to NPCs
and say mean things to them,
especially if they gave me a sad expression afterwards.
Like she goes like and talks shit to her mom,
who's like a like single mom.
I feel like you should save this conversation for super stimuli
because once they make you care more
about the digital creatures than real humans,
then we're in a bad place.
I care more about real humans.
For now.
I did kind of love Vivi from Final Fantasy IX.
I would have been sad if something bad happened to him.
You do have a heart.
So that's not about the moral choices and stuff
and choosing the bad character.
Like I can't do that.
I always play the Paragon of Virtue, you know, like Bioshock.
You can harvest the little sisters or you can save them
and you get less, you get less power points,
but you get, you get the warm fuzzies.
I usually do the thing that's more story interesting.
I remember in Mass Effect there were times
when you could do an option like during the cut scenes
to either choose a Paragon thing
or to choose a, what was the renegade?
And the renegade was the evil one supposedly.
But there were a lot of times
when like only one of the options came up.
And whenever you pick the option,
you would get a more interesting storyline event happen.
So I didn't care.
I was like, whether it's good or evil,
I will always pick one if there's only one option
because it's more interesting that way.
Red Dead 2 handles that really well
in that the first game you're playing
like a reformed outlaw where he's like,
I'm just trying to do the right thing
and get back on, you know,
go over, live on my ranch with my wife and kids.
This one, you're still part of the gang.
This, this takes place before the first one.
And so your partner still-
Oh, that's a prickle too.
Yeah, you're still part of the gang.
And so like for tasks that you have to go do,
you've got to like, you know, go collect loan shark debts
and like just beat this guy up in front of his wife and kids.
And it's like, I don't really want to.
But it's like, it's perfectly in character
for Arthur and Morgan to do this.
So I guess I'm going to kick this dude's ass.
He shouldn't have gotten those debts.
So it's, it's, but it's fun that like,
it makes it okay for someone like me
to play kind of a bad guy.
So like I still do nice things, but like,
if I'm going to, you know, rob a cherry at once in a while
and turn it in for cash, well, I'm an outlaw.
That's what I'm supposed to do.
I could not stand that you could kill the prostitutes
and GTA to get your money back.
That just really sick of me.
That's the moral line that you draw.
You know what, I have a special place in my heart
for sex workers and they're just,
they're vulnerable people.
And it's just, it was so fucked up.
I think a lot, I mean, I, I only played those games.
I found those games really clunky to play.
And some of those mechanics have been worked out in Red Dead 2,
but like, I didn't even play the games because of that.
The whole thing was that like,
you could run around killing everybody.
Yeah, I know.
But the fact that like, everyone was like,
by the way, you can fuck the prostitutes,
get your health up and then kill her and take your money back.
I was like, fuck this game. That's just.
It's still illegal in the game.
You still get, you still get wanted.
Fuck this game.
No, that's fair.
If, you know what, if you didn't like,
get your money back or something,
just making that incentive be part of the game.
But that's not a real issue.
If you just hand it over to the cash,
it's still going to be on her body, right?
So, to hell with you, Steven.
No, no, I'm going to argue this, Steven.
If we wanted to be realistic,
you should have a chance of getting Chlamydia
every time you go with them,
and then your health would just go down every day.
Other people in the game, when you kill them,
do you loot their bodies and take what cash they have on their wallets?
Sometimes, yeah.
Doesn't their money explode out of them?
Like, and it shows up on the street?
Yeah, so.
Everyone has money.
Actually, the only safe people in GTA are the homeless.
There's nothing of value.
All right.
Okay, anyways, we are done.
Oh, yeah, we got to thank our patron.
That's right.
This week, is it my turn or your turn?
Uh, we've heard these, like, weeks apart,
and that's why we never remember whose turn it is.
Rock, paper, scissors.
Why don't we let Jess do it?
Jess!
Okay, hand me the...
Oh, one that I'm not sure if I can pronounce.
The patron this time is Jonathan DeWette,
and we want to thank you for being our patron,
and please don't leave Patreon over.
Or if you do, join...
Join the other patron that we're going to do.
Or consider giving us crypto from the strange crypto platform
that'll be the alternative soon.
All right.
We haven't got that set up yet, though, so...
No, it doesn't even exist yet.
Yeah, so that said, Inyasha,
are you going to keep using Patreon?
I know we're after the episode,
but like I mentioned,
we had one of our largest owners leave
because they're protesting what they did to Sargon of Akata
and what they're probably going to do to other people.
I'm still on Patreon.
It's hard, because I want...
I didn't follow Sam Harris to his website
to keep paying him there, so...
See, I would do the opposite.
Like, I want to keep supporting the people that I'm supporting,
but I don't want to support Patreon.
So if they had an option available,
if there's some other platform,
I would much rather support them through that other platform.
Or don't even directly.
Or, yeah, but that don't even directly is hard.
It is.
And I would, you know, encourage them to do that
because that would make me feel better.
Right on. I can take it.
All right, anyways, we're done.
So thanks, everyone.
We will see you in two weeks.
Bye.
Bye, everybody.
Thanks, everybody.
