We're making headway in our overview of the universe.
We've now looked at the various denizens, planet stars, galaxies and so on, and how
they've spread about. Uniformly on large scales, but lumpy on small scales.
And we've also looked at the basic stuff from which they're made. Atomic and dark
matter, light and neutrinos, and dark energy. In this lecture I want to give an
overview of the history of the universe, starting with the Big Bang and ending
way in the future. I'm afraid I'll be moving along at quite a clip, roughly
eight million years per second. But don't worry if you don't quite catch
everything first time, I'll be returning to essentially every theme in later
lectures. So let's get straight away started by postponing a key question to
lecture 7, which is how do we measure the age of the universe? It turns out to be
13.7 billion years, plus or minus about 0.1 billion. As a humans this is a huge
span of time. It's three times the age of the earth. It's 50,000 times older than
Homo sapiens, and it's a million times older than all of recorded human history.
It's difficult to conceive of such a span of time, but here's one approach that
provides a human terrestrial perspective on cosmic history. At the top of a force
story building sits the Big Bang, while at the bottom is the present time. Here
you can see some key events and periods. The first stars, the first galaxies, the
formation of the earth, the emergence of simple and complex cells, the first
multi-celled creatures and so on. Now to get to humans you really need to zoom in
on that lower part. The lowest four inches contains dinosaurs and mammals. The
lowest one millimeter contains all of the genus Homo. The lowest 10 microns, that's
the size of a human cell, contains all of recorded human history. And finally the
lowest hundred nanometers is a century of time, roughly a human lifespan. So we
need this nested zoom to bring our own brief lives into the story. But in these
lectures we want to look at cosmic history not through human eyes, but in a
sense through nature's eyes. And so we need to adopt a different perspective,
one which zooms in on the beginning, not the end, for the simple reason that cosmic
change occurs incredibly fast near the beginning. And after that it slows down
so that by today we live in an old, very slowly changing universe. So this diagram
gives our new perspective by plotting time on an exponential axis, starting at
the Big Bang. This bar represents a factor of a thousand in time. We go from a
million years to a thousand years to one year. And continuing to a second, to a
thousandth of a second, a millionth of a second. And I've sort of broken the axis
just before a microsecond and simply put the Big Bang at the end. Now I've
identified ten important stages that we'll focus on. And if you can keep these
ten stages clear in your mind, it'll really help you follow the story as we
encounter each of them in future lectures. Before we visit these ten stages I
want to point out an important feature of cosmic change. Its pace starts out very
frantic, but quickly slows down. The first four of our ten stages occur in the
first ten minutes. The next four span a billion years. There seems to be this
bizarre compression of activity at the beginning of time. And I want to show you
why that is. Actually the reason is pretty simple. The universe begins its life
exceedingly dense and hot, but as it expands its density and temperature both
drop initially very quickly, but then more slowly. This graph shows how the
temperature drops as the universe expands. Mathematically, temperature is
proportional to one over the cosmic size. So if we go backwards, when the
universe was ten times smaller, it was ten times hotter. A hundred times
hotter. So you can see that as we approach the Big Bang and size goes to
zero, temperature must zoom off to infinity very rapidly. Now just as you'd
expect for any substance as temperature changes, the nature of the substance
also changes. For example, steam into water into ice. And it's like that with
the universe. Early on, as the temperature is dropping rapidly, lots of
changes are occurring in rapid succession. But later, as the temperature drops
more slowly, so the changes occur more slowly. So with that introduction, let's
now briefly go through these ten important stages in cosmic history. So right
at the beginning, the Big Bang's expansion is launched by a mechanism
called inflation. If you like, inflation is the bang of the Big Bang. As we'll
see in lectures 30 to 33, it's thought that inflation begins with a seed
region of a very special kind of dense vacuum. Rather like a very dense
version of modern-day dark energy. Now when space itself weighs something and
makes gravity, a rather strange thing happens. Instead of gravity making the
region collapse inwards, the downhill direction, if you like, is outwards. And
so the region quite naturally falls outwards, expanding all by itself. Now
since there is nothing to stop this expansion, it just keeps going, getting
faster and faster exponentially. So we have a huge expanding region of dense
vacuum. Now, the reasons which are not yet fully understood, this period of
inflation abruptly ends. And the vacuum energy is converted to an immensely hot
broth of every kind of subatomic particle. So the upshot of all this is that
within a fraction of a nanosecond, the universe is launched as a rapidly
expanding space filled with an exceedingly hot dense gas. And it's from
this gas that all the stars and galaxies will finally emerge. Back to our cosmic
timeline, there are a number of fascinating things that happen in the
first millisecond. That's a thousandth of a second. And we'll return to them all
in lectures 27 through 29, but here I'll just hit the high points and group them
all as stage two. It's in these first moments that the forces of nature take
on their current form. Now these forces, strong, electromagnetism, weak and
gravity, affect everything we know. They bind protons into atomic nuclei and
electrons to atoms. They drive nuclear and chemical reactions and they hold
planets and stars together. They are the agents of change and energy release in
the universe. Now unless you're familiar with modern particle physics, you may
not realize that these four great forces of nature actually change their
character in places of high temperature. Now although these changes are
imperceptible at millions or billions of degrees in the amazingly higher
temperatures of the early universe, these forces were radically different. And in
fact, at the earliest time, they were joined as a single force. So this diagram
shows as the temperature dropped, the character of each force emerged separately.
And so by about a tenth of a nanosecond, as the temperature dropped below a
million billion, that's 10 to the 15 degrees, the final separation of the
weak and electromagnetic force was complete. And from that moment onwards
until today, those forces, which are so crucial to everything we know, have
remained essentially unchanged. Now in addition to the birth of the forces,
these early moments also saw the birth of atomic matter, the stuff we're made
from. Initially the universe was filled with just quarks, photons, electrons and
neutrinos. It was way too hot for composite particles like protons. They
were just bashed apart in the energy of all the collisions. But by about 10
microseconds, the temperature dropped sufficiently for quarks to remain bound
together in groups of three to make protons, antiprotons, neutrons and
antinutrons. And if we adopt the sort of geological style naming convention,
then as the quarks were converted into protons, the universe passed from what
we call the quark era to the hadron era, where hadron is just a fancy term for
protons and neutrons. Well continuing on, at about 100 microseconds, the
temperature dropped below another critical threshold when almost all the
protons and neutrons were annihilated by antiprotons and antinutrons. Now
fortunately for us, not quite all the protons were destroyed. For reasons that
are not yet understood, roughly one in every billion protons managed to survive.
In a sense, you can date the birth of the protons and neutrons in the atoms of
your body to this time, about 100 microseconds after the Big Bang.
Okay, coming forward to a time of a few seconds, that's stage three, the same
thing happens to all the electrons and anti-electrons. There's a brief period of
carnage when they almost all annihilate, but one in every billion electrons
manages to survive, and these ultimately become the electrons we now find in the
atoms that you and I are made of. Now when the electrons and anti-electrons
vanish, the dominant constituent of the universe becomes photons, light. Or at that
time, because it was so hot, gamma rays. Going back to our naming terms, we've just
left the lepton era, where lepton is for light weight particles like electrons,
and we've now entered the radiation era, where light is dominant. The radiation era
lasts for nearly 60,000 years before handing over to the matter era.
Now at this point, you may be feeling a little uneasy. One second seems just too short a time
for so much to happen. It seems almost absurd. The reason of this, excuse me, the resolution of this
worry is, I think, both simple and yet profound. It's difficult to think of things that happen
much shorter than a second, for the simple reason that thinking itself, having a thought,
takes about one second. But for a thought to occur, billions upon billions of things must happen.
Let's return to our atom's eye view from last lecture, where we imagined atoms to be the size
of marbles. So with that perspective, our brain is twice the size of the earth.
And neurons are thousands of miles long. To an atomic electron whose single orbit
feels like one second, a human thought takes almost 30 million years to unfold.
Stated poetically, nature's thoughts occur enormously faster than ours. To nature, that first
cosmic second feels like an eternity. And in it, there is time enough for many eras to pass.
So let's continue with our story of the young universe, coming to stage four, when the universe
is about a minute old. Now at that time, the conditions everywhere were rather similar
to the centers of present-day stars. And this immediately raises a very interesting possibility.
As you may know, it is at the centers of stars that temperatures are high enough
to drive nuclear reactions. The sun shines, for example, because in its core, hydrogen
is being converted into helium. So could something similar happen in the young universe?
And the answer is yes, it does. As we'll see in lecture 25, between one and three minutes
after the Big Bang, conditions were just right for hydrogen, hydrogen fusion. And during that
brief time, the universe underwent a stunningly powerful burst of nuclear fusion that converted
a quarter of the cosmic hydrogen into helium. Now when you do the calculations properly,
it predicts a final product of 25% helium and 75% hydrogen. And amazingly, wherever you look in the
universe, that is basically the composition you find, 25% helium and 75% hydrogen. This is a
fabulous confirmation of our understanding of the three-minute-old universe.
Now at this point, the pace really slows down. Not much happens for thousands upon thousands of
years. The temperature steadily drops. After a year, it's down to 3 million degrees. After 10,000
years, it's down to 20,000 degrees. But this is still way too hot to form atoms. And so the gas is
ionized, just protons, photons, electrons and helium nuclei zooming around, bashing into each other.
As the universe expands, it also gets more dilute. For example, after about 10 years, the gas is then
already thinner than the best man-made vacuums on Earth, about 100 billion times thinner than the air
we breathe. Throughout this time, the primary quality of the universe is its enormous brightness.
Photons of light, outnumber protons and electrons, a billion to one. And it's not just that they're
more numerous. If we divide by their, excuse me, if we divide their energy by c squared, the speed of
light squared, we find that light actually weighs more than the matter. That's why this is called the
radiation era. But remember from last lecture, as the universe expands, the density of radiation
drops more rapidly than the density of matter. And so there comes a time around 60,000 years
after the Big Bang, when these two densities are equal. And from then on, matter's density is dominant,
and we enter the matter era. Now this transition from a universe dominated by radiation to a
universe dominated by matter leads to a number of interesting things. But here, I'm going to
use it to introduce the universe's expansion history. How the universe's size and expansion speed
depend on time. So as the universe expands, the gravity of all the matter and radiation
pull back, causing the expansion to slow down. This graph shows up the y-axis, the speed at which
any two parts in the universe separate from each other relative to their separation speed today.
As the universe expands, we move to the right from the left, and as usual, both axes are exponential.
So you can see that the expansion speed was much faster in the past, and for most of cosmic history,
the expansion speed has been slowing down. You can also see how the rate of slowdown,
the deceleration, changes as we pass from the radiation era to the matter era. The line is steeper
in the radiation era. Later on, as we move into the dark energy era, look how the expansion speed
stops slowing down and starts speeding up. That's the famous accelerating expansion caused by
dark energy. Here's a more well known diagram that plots the actual separation between two points,
rather than the separation speed. Again, starting at the big bang on the left, but this time with
simple linear, not exponential axes. It's a classic graph that will meet a number of times in the
course, and I'm calling it S of T. You can think of it as how the size of the universe, S, depends on
time, T, and we'll look at why it has just the shape that it does in lectures 11 and 12.
Okay, back to our timeline. Between stages five at 60,000 years and six at 400,000 years is a
particularly beautiful time in the universe, because the temperature drops from 10,000 degrees,
which is blue hot, to about 3,000 degrees, which is red hot. So the color of the light in the
universe slips slowly through a rainbow sequence, from blue to green to yellow to orange to red.
It's a really quite wonderful spectacle, and we'll look at that in more detail in lecture 14.
Stage six at 400,000 years occurs when the universe cools past another critical temperature,
3,000 degrees. Below this temperature, electrons can finally remain attached to protons to make
atoms of hydrogen. It also brings about a remarkable transformation. The universe changes
from being foggy to being transparent. It takes about 80,000 years, but from then on till today,
the universe is transparent, which is of course why we can see distant galaxies.
Now it turns out that we actually witness this transition as the microwave background.
Remember from lecture two, the diagram of the universe we witness. Looking out in any direction,
we see back in time, through the transparency of space, out to, up to, but not into, this fog.
The inside wall of this giant sphere is a wall of bright glowing fog. Now the light waves from
this fog are stretched by cosmic expansion as they come to us, and they arrive as much longer
microwaves. They're the famous microwave background. It gives us a direct picture
of the universe when he was only 400,000 years old.
Now one of the most important qualities of the microwave background can be seen in this
famous all-sky image. It is slightly patchy, and this brings us to the very important topic of
lumpiness or roughness in the universe. The reasons we'll get to in lecture 32,
the seeds of cosmic lumpiness go right back to inflation when tiny variations in the density
were spread throughout the expanding universe. Since the universe is now extremely lumpy,
galaxies here and there with gaps in between them, a key question is how did the initial
slight lumpiness begin to grow? Obviously we'll look at this in later lectures, but basically
lumpiness in dark matter was able to grow from 60,000 years onwards. But because of its fogginess,
the proton and electron gas was held back, and its lumpiness couldn't grow until after 400,000 years,
until after the fog had cleared. Now during that interval, the conditions were right for a delightful
phenomenon. The universe was filled with sound waves. The combination of a brilliant light
trapped by a foggy gas behaves just like a lightweight high-pressure gas, and when this gas
permeates a clumpy distribution of dark matter, it responds by falling into and bouncing out of
the clumps of dark matter. And these oscillations are sound waves. In a very real sense, the whole
universe behaves like a multi-piped organ. In lectures 15 and 16, I'll be playing you the sound
that these cosmic organ pipes made, and showing you how cosmologists have used the nature of the sound
to measure quite accurately many important properties of the universe.
While continuing the story, after the fog clears, we enter a quieter, cooler period where the
temperature steadily drops. It passes human body temperature after about 15 million years.
At this point, although everywhere continues to expand, the expansion of slightly denser regions
is a little bit slower than everywhere else, so the overall lumpiness continues to grow.
After about a hundred million years, stage 7 on our sequence, these denser regions finally halt
their expansion, turn around, and begin to collapse inwards. Once the collapse gets going,
it proceeds quite rapidly, and by about 200 million years, sprinkled across the entire universe,
are collapsing pockets of dark matter and atomic matter. And it's in the centers of these that
the universe's first stars are born. These first stars are huge by today's standards,
and they shine like beacons, and they bring to a close that long 200 million year period of darkness,
and for the first time, they light up the sky like thousands of brilliant jewels. Quite a wonderful
transition. Now these first stars have brief million year lives, which end when the star dies
in a gargantuan explosion. It's a supernova explosion. And the star's spilled guts spread out
and carry newly made chemical elements out into the otherwise pristine environment.
This process of element enrichment by successive generations of stars has continued even to the
present time, so that by now, 2% roughly, of all the atoms in galaxies are of elements heavier than
the original hydrogen and helium. And I'll be telling the story of this, what's called stellar
nucleosynthesis, in lectures 23 and 24. And of course, it's really the story of how the atoms
that ended up in you and me were actually made. Okay, from this point onwards, a primary theme
for the universe is the growth of ever larger structures in a hierarchical process, meaning
small things gather to make bigger things, which in turn gather to make yet bigger things.
So by stage eight in our sequence, around a billion years, the first groups of stars have
gathered to form galaxy building blocks. And finally, these are actually visible to us in the
Hubble Telescope's deepest images. This whole period of galaxy formation is really fabulously
active compared to today's rather sedate universe. New stars are being born, massive stars are
exploding. It's really quite a fabulous fireworks display. And it's captured, I think, quite nicely
in this artist's impression. We're rapidly approaching today's universe, but let's pause
about five billion years ago to notice several interesting things that I've loosely gathered
together under stage nine. So about this time, galaxies began to mature into the kind that
we see around us today, like this nice looking spiral, which we're seeing at a look back time
of five billion years in the Hubble Ultra Deep Field. You can almost imagine this being the
young Milky Way galaxy, and out in one of its spiral arms, a young sun and solar system are
forming with a young Earth. It's also around this time that the large-scale web-like pattern of
galaxies throughout the universe was becoming more well-defined as galaxies flowed into the
web strands and then down into places where they intersect. And where they intersect,
the first huge clusters were forming, like the one here, containing thousands of galaxies
zooming through a region a few million light years across. Out on the cosmic scale, a rather
interesting and very gentle transition was also occurring. Starting about five billion years ago,
the universe's expansion speed started accelerating as the effects of dark energy began to be felt.
Now by the present time, not too much has changed, but let's extend this graph into the future,
say to the next 50 billion years. You can really see the effect of dark energy driving an exponential
expansion, such that the separation between galaxies doubles roughly every 10 billion years.
So as the billions of years will go by, we will live in an ever lonelier universe.
Our own galaxy will merge with a few neighboring galaxies to make a huge ball of stars,
but otherwise, all other galaxies will get further and further away from us. In fact,
as each galaxy's expansion speed away from us passes through light speed, it'll become forever
invisible to us. And no matter how powerful our telescopes might be, we'd still see none of them.
So 100 billion years from now, 100 billion years from now, our visible universe will contain only
our galactic ball of stars, no Andromeda galaxy, no other visible galaxies, no visible microwave
background. Everything will have been pushed beyond what is called an event horizon, a profoundly
inscrutable boundary of invisibility. Now an optimistic way to look at this potentially
depressing future is that we're lucky to be alive relatively early in the life of the universe
when there is a rich cosmic history still visible to us. I've mentioned already how 20 years ago
much of what's in these lectures wasn't known. Amusingly, 100 billion years from now, very little
of what's in these lectures will be known either. As I said in the first lecture, now is an ideal
time, both culturally and cosmically, to learn cosmology.
