This lecture begins Theme 3, where we'll be visiting the first million years in the
universe's life. It also begins our steady march through the various periods in cosmological
history. So I want to take a few moments to get our bearings and see what the next 24
lectures and 6 themes will bring us, using the timeline from lecture 5.
So here we are at Theme 3. Notice we're starting neither at the beginning nor at the end, but
somewhere in the middle at this crucial transition period within the first million years. It
gives us a window on the even younger universe, but it also sets the stage for the birth of
the first stars and galaxies. So Theme 4 then picks up that story and traces the evolution
of stars and galaxies from their birth to the present time.
Theme 5 looks at an important piece of our own lineage, the construction of the many
types of atoms that make up you and me. And part of that story goes back to the minute
old universe. And that prepares us to visit, in Theme 6, the extremely young nanosecond
old universe, when matter and forces first took on their current form.
Now up to this point, the story is remarkable in its coherence and completeness, but it
lacks a launching mechanism. It lacks a theory for the bang in the big bang. So Theme 7 will
explore that theory, it's called inflation, and it has some wonderful and extraordinary
consequences. And finally, as with any cosmological story, scientific or traditional, our own
conscious presence raises broader, more philosophical questions that I'll briefly explore in Theme
8, and that'll naturally bring this course to its close.
So let's now begin our visit to the first million years. It's a great place to start
for a number of reasons. It's the earliest time we can witness the universe directly
via the microwave background, so it's on a secure observational footing. But it's also
on a secure theoretical footing, because the conditions at this time are relatively simple
and well understood. The microwave background also contains an absolute goldmine of information,
partly about the universe as a whole, partly about the stars and galaxies that are soon
to be born, and partly about the even younger universe, including the inflationary period.
And lastly, from our perspective, a nice quality of the first million years is that the conditions
are relatively easy to understand and intuit, as well as being stunningly impressive. As
we'll see, this time is characterised by brilliantly coloured skies and intense heat, and a loud
semi-musical sound, all of which we'll meet in due course.
So let's begin relatively gently by recalling that as we look out into the universe, we
also look back in time. So a galaxy five billion light years away, we see as it was five billion
years ago, not as it is now. So pushing this idea to its limit, if we look fourteen billion
light years away, we see the universe as it was fourteen billion years ago.
Well, what was going on fourteen billion years ago? The universe was being born, so that's
what we see, the universe's birth. Perhaps even more bizarre, it doesn't matter which
direction we look at, all directions end far away in the universe's birth. So the amazing
fact is that out there, beyond the stars and beyond the galaxies, lies an all-sky panorama
of the Big Bang. It's just sitting there waiting for us to study it. Using our picture of the
astronomer's view of the universe, we can now ask, what do we see, if anything, of this
outermost shell, is the Big Bang visible? The answer is very definite, yes, and it's
not difficult to see why. The Big Bang was very hot, and hot things glow brightly. In
fact, for reasons we'll get to in a moment, the relevant temperature was three thousand
degrees Kelvin, and we know from lecture four that a gas of this temperature glows with
a powerful deep orange light. So we expect to see, in every direction, a brilliant orange
glow covering the sky. Well, this flies in the face of common sense, because the night
sky is dark black, not bright orange. So something's clearly missing in our thinking, and what's
missing is redshift. At such a huge distance, the redshift is enormous, and the orange light
waves that are stretched a thousand thousand fold from a millionth of a meter to a thousandth
of a meter, that's a millimeter, and that's in the microwave part of the electromagnetic
spectrum. So, the Big Bang is directly available for us to study as a panoramic microwave glow.
This of course is the famous Cosmic Microwave Background, or CMB for short. I never seems
to be impressed by this. There are in fact as many microwave photons coming from the
sky as there are photons of light coming from a full moon. So if by some quirk of evolution
we developed microwave-sensitive eyes, at night we could see our surroundings and we
would cast shadows by the light of creation, what an absolutely stunning notion. So when
you next look out at the night sky, try to feel the presence of the microwave background,
the glow from the Big Bang. It really is there, but your eyes don't see it because of its
huge redshift. Now before we proceed, let's clarify exactly
what the microwave background actually is. For example, is it the Big Bang itself? The
answer is no it isn't. It's the universe 400,000 years after the Big Bang. And to see why this
is, we need to look more closely at this outer portion of our astronomer's view of the universe.
So furthest away, longest ago, sits the Big Bang itself. It's like the first second,
if you want. Inward and to the right are forward in time. The universe starts out very hot,
so hot that atoms can't yet form and the gas is ionized. Nuclear and electrons separately
zoom around freely. This kind of gas is foggy, you can't see through it. So the early universe
is filled with a bright glowing fog. But as the years pass, the universe expands and
cools. And after about 400,000 years, its temperature dropped past a critical value of 3000 degrees,
below which electrons become attached to nuclei and atoms could finally form. Now this transition
also makes the fog clear and since then the universe has been transparent. So we look out
through the transparent universe up to but no further than this wall of brightly glowing
fog. As the bright orange light crosses the universe on its way to us, its waves are stretched
a thousand fold by cosmic expansion and they arrive as microwaves. So the microwave background
comes from a wall of 3000 degree glowing fog. And it's a little bit different than
400,000 years after the Big Bang. Now the thickness of this boundary in this diagram
is a little bit misleading. Here's a more accurate diagram of cosmic history. With the
Big Bang on the left and now on the right, 14 billion years later. If we match this to
an 80 year old human lifespan, then the Hubble telescope looks back to 10 year old pre-teens.
The James Webb Space Telescope will look back to 2 year old children. But look where the
microwave background is. At 400,000 years it is equivalent to just 12 hours after conception.
This isn't just the infant universe, nor is it even the embryonic universe. It's the
pre-embryonic universe. And just as for humans, the universe at this time is radically different
from the universe we know today. Now let's recast this using distance instead of time.
Here's a 26 mile marathon race from us to the Big Bang. In this case, the microwave
background is just 4 feet from the finishing tape. How frustrating. We can see almost to
the Big Bang itself, but not quite. It's forever hidden behind an utterly impenetrable
wall of fog. Let's now spend a few minutes looking at
first the prediction and then the discovery of the microwave background, because it provides
a nice example of the often confused and serendipitous nature of scientific progress.
The story begins in the mid 1940s when the theoretician George Gamow began to calculate
what actually happens during the early phase of the Big Bang. Gamow wanted to see if the
Big Bang could make all the different kinds of atoms we find around us, the chemical elements.
Now because you need over a billion degrees to make atomic nuclei, Gamow guessed A, that
the Big Bang might have been a very hot kind of fireball, and B, that the thermal radiation
from this fireball might still be visible today, but redshifted into the microwave range.
Now at that time, the instruments were nowhere near sensitive enough to detect this radiation,
so no one looked for it. And in addition, a year or two later, more detail calculations
by other people showed that most of the chemical elements are in fact made in stars, not in
the Big Bang. So perhaps surprisingly, this early 1940s work by Gamow, which actually
predicted the existence of a microwave background, essentially disappeared and was forgotten
for about 15 years. It wasn't until the early 1960s that calculations
of a hot Big Bang were done again, independently by two groups, Yakov Zeldovich and collaborators
in Moscow, and Jim Peebles and Robert Dickey at Princeton. As before, these calculations
predicted the fireball's thermal radiation should be visible as redshifted microwaves.
Now Robert Dickey was also a superb experimentalist, and so he immediately set about building
a detector to see if he could see this microwave emission, and by May 1964, the Princeton group
were close to making their first measurements. Now meanwhile, completely unknown to Dickey,
an hour away at Bell Telephone Labs in Holmdel, New Jersey, two radio astronomers, Arno
Penzias and Robert Wilson, were also trying to make an extremely sensitive microwave receiver,
but for quite different reasons. This was the early days of satellite telecommunications,
and to support NASA's ECHO project, Bell Labs had built a large microwave horn antenna.
And by 1964, Penzias and Wilson had managed to make an accurate measurement of the microwave
emission from the sky. But something was quite puzzling. Their signal was too strong. 35%
came from the atmosphere, 10% came from their amplifier, leaving 55% unaccounted for. It came
from all directions, and was constant over time, and they were completely unable to explain
it. Then one day, Penzias heard about the Princeton group's prediction of the microwave
background emission from the Big Bang, and Penzias immediately phoned Dickey at Princeton,
who happened to be in the middle of his weekly lunch meeting with his group. At the end of
the conversation, Dickey put down the phone and famously said, well boys, we've been
scooped. And indeed they had. It was Penzias and Wilson who later received a Nobel Prize
for discovering the cosmic microwave background, arguably the most important scientific discovery
of the century, with the possible exception of Hubble's discovery of cosmic expansion.
Now I'd like to add that in retrospect, the background radiation had already been detected
on several occasions by various different groups. But each time it had either been dismissed
as too uncertain, or its significance hadn't been appreciated. In fact, this whole episode
in the history of science is full of missed opportunities and confusion, and it reminds
us that science rarely proceeds in a clean, linear fashion, especially in the midst of
an unanticipated breakthrough, like the discovery of the microwave background. Now as you might
imagine, in the half century since its discovery, the microwave background has been the focus
of enormous scientific scrutiny, both observational and theoretical. So let's now leave those
early days and come forward to look briefly at some of the more recent observations. Here's
a selection of CNB instruments from the last decade. Two are high in the Andes, and since
our own atmosphere emits at least some microwaves, it's important to get above as much of it
as possible. And of course, the best place to go is above the entire atmosphere, into
orbit. And the most impressive results have come from satellites, including NASA's Cosmic
Background Explorer, or COBE, and the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe, or WMAP. It's
named after David Wilkinson, whose long career in CNB studies began back in 1965 as one of
the boys in Bob Dickey's group, scooped by Penzius and Wilson. Now to show you how far
technologies come in 50 years, WMAP was placed well beyond the moon's orbit in a stable
gravitational pocket called L2. It took data continuously for five years, and generated
an all-sky map about a million times more sensitive than those first detectors back
in the 1960s. So let's now look at the kind of data these satellites have provided. As
with any source of radiation, one of the first things astronomers ask is, what is its spectrum?
How does its brightness change with wavelength? The reason is that a spectrum can tell you
a huge amount about the source, and in this case, the source is the young universe. So
in 1990, the COBE satellite made an extremely accurate measurement of the CNB spectrum.
Now remember from lecture four, we are expecting some kind of thermal spectrum that is generated
by the ceaseless collisions of nuclei and electrons in a hot gas. The sun, for example,
has an approximately thermal spectrum, since its light comes from a hot atmosphere.
So here are the COBE data points, spanning wavelengths from a half a millimetre to five
millimetres. Now through these data points is plotted a theoretical, pure thermal spectrum,
which as you can see, matches the data stunningly well. I was actually present when this plot
was first shown publicly at the January 1990 meeting of the American Astronomical Society
in Washington, and the audience of almost a thousand astronomers spontaneously stood
up and applauded for almost a minute. The applause was, I think, really for two things.
They were of course acknowledging the incredibly hard work and skill of the COBE scientists,
but they were also expressing their delight, and perhaps relief, that the universe conforms
to simple physics, and might therefore be ultimately understandable.
So what do we learn from this thermal spectrum? Recall from lecture four, for a thermal spectrum,
the peak wavelength and overall intensity depend on the temperature of the object.
So, what's the temperature of the microwave background? It's a very precise 2.725 plus
or minus 0.002 degrees Kelvin. Now remember, degrees Kelvin are degrees
centigrade above absolute zero, so 2.7 Kelvin is extremely cold, and this may strike you
as odd, since the gas emitting it is so hot. But don't forget redshift. When a thermal
spectrum is redshifted, it stays a thermal spectrum, and the shift to longer wavelengths
corresponds exactly to a shift to lower temperature. So the microwave background, redshift stretch
factor of a thousand, takes a 3,000 degree thermal spectrum and turns it into a 3 degree
thermal spectrum. Now there is in fact another way to look at this. As the universe expands,
its contents cool, and in the 14 billion years since the microwave background was formed,
the universe has cooled from 3,000 degrees to 3 degrees Kelvin. And so the microwave
background simply reflects the current temperature of the universe. Now what else do we learn
from the CMV spectrum? Well the fact that it has a thermal shape immediately tells us
that the young universe was hot, not cold, and hence cosmologists talk not just of the
Big Bang, but it's the hot Big Bang. And this in turn means we can study the very early
universe using our knowledge of high temperature physics, as we'll see in lecture 27. But perhaps
more importantly, the precision of the thermal shape tells us that the young universe was
in a particularly simple state, which physicists call thermodynamic equilibrium. In this state
all the various components, the light, the electrons, the nuclei, all exchange energy
back and forth freely. And each has the same well-defined temperature. And this enormously
simplifies the situation. To a physicist, hot gas in thermodynamic equilibrium is one
of the easiest things to understand. This is sometimes hard for people to accept. One
somehow expects the early universe to be desperately complex and difficult to understand,
perhaps because it's such a remote and alien realm. Whereas in truth it's much simpler
to understand than almost everything that we find around us here on Earth.
Let's now turn to the spatial properties of the microwave background. Since it's a 360
degree panorama, what image does it show? What patterns are visible, if any? Now the first
thing to realize is that what one sees depends very much on the degree of contrast enhancement.
Just as normal photos look quite different as one fiddles with the contrast, so the microwave
background looks quite different as one changes its contrast. Now secondly, remember that
all sky maps appear as ovals, a bit like the full Earth maps. So, at the lowest level of
contrast, the microwave background looks completely uniform. Remember in lecture 3, this is the
most spectacular demonstration of isotropy. The universe is amazingly similar in every
direction. It also tells us that the young universe is very smooth. So long before there
were any stars or galaxies, the universe was simply an infinite ocean of extremely uniform,
hot, glowing gas. This is also good news for cosmology, because smooth gases are much easier
to study than clumpy gases.
If you now subtract the average brightness and contrast stretched by about a thousand,
you see this odd pattern. It's a bit like a yin-yang symbol, whose technical name is
a dipole, meaning there are two poles. There is a slightly brighter area here and a slightly
dimmer area here, with a smooth change in between the two. The effect is rather interesting
and is caused by the motion of our galaxy, the Milky Way, through space. See if our galaxy
is moving through the universe, then the microwave background is slightly Doppler shifted. It's
bluer and brighter in the direction of motion, and it's redder and dimmer in the opposite
direction. And these in turn correspond to slightly hotter and colder temperature ahead
and behind. And the difference in temperature, delta T over T, gives us the velocity relative
to the speed of light, V over C. Now using this, it turns out that our galaxy is falling
at 600 km per second towards the constellation of Hydra in the Southern Hemisphere.
Notice I used this word falling. What's happening is that although galaxies basically move with
the overall Hubble expansion, they're also being pulled by their neighbour galaxies,
and this adds a falling motion on top of the expansion motion, and that's what makes the
CMB dipole. What's causing our galaxy's motion is a huge assembly of thousands of galaxies
sitting several hundred million light years away in the direction of Hydra, and we're
effectively falling towards it at about 600 km per second. Now don't worry if you didn't
quite follow that, we'll come back to this whole topic in lecture 22.
OK, now when we subtract the giant dipole pattern and contrast stretch again, there is
a strong feature running across the sky caused by the microwave emission from our own Milky
Way galaxy. Now fortunately, as this spectrum shows, the Milky Way emission has a quite
different spectral shape than the microwave background's thermal emission. And so as
long as we have maps made at several different wavelengths, as all these WMAP images are,
then you can remove this contaminating Milky Way emission to leave the pure microwave background
image shown here in the middle. Now this final microwave background image is extremely important
in cosmology. But before looking at why, I just want to quickly review what we've done
using a spherical depiction of the sky instead of an oval one. Here's a picture of the Earth
and from it we look out into space and see the optical celestial sphere with its stars
and constellations. If we look at the same celestial sphere but using a microwave telescope,
instead of seeing stars, we see an amazingly uniform microwave glow which is shown here
in green. If we then remove the subtle Doppler dipole and Milky Way emission and contrast
stretched by about 100,000 times, this is what we see. Slightly brighter and darker patches
but cover the sky. We can see them all if we spin it around like this. Now this pattern
is made from slight patches from small to large, all randomly superposed on top of each
other. The amplitude of the patchiness is about 1 in 100,000 and that's equivalent to
the height of a bacterium on a bowling ball. So this patchiness is very, very slight indeed.
Now one can view these patches in two different ways, both of which are correct. First of
all they represent regions of slightly higher and lower density in the hot gas. The over
dense regions contain slightly more mass and gravity will ultimately pull them into
galaxies and clusters of galaxies. While the slightly under dense regions contain slightly
less mass and these will ultimately become the spaces or voids between galaxies. So the
patches are the seeds from which galaxies will grow and will pursue this perspective
in lectures 17 and 18. Now the second way to view the brighter and darker patches are
as the peaks and troughs of sound waves. You see the higher and lower density together
with higher and lower temperature makes higher and lower pressure in the hot gas. But pressure
variations are in fact sound waves. So the microwave background gives us a freeze frame
image of sound waves in the early universe. They're caught as they cross this wall of
fog and will pursue this perspective in lectures 15 and 16. Now it may not be obvious to you
as you look at this image, but this patchiness contains a huge amount of information. Now
what exactly will we be talking about in the next couple of lectures? But to illustrate
this richness of information I'd like to end by briefly developing a metaphor that parallels
the time of the microwave background with the equivalent time in a human's life, just
12 hours after conception. Now in the case of a human at that time there are no structures,
no arms or head or organs. There's just a single cell with its DNA. Now likewise in
the universe at that time there are no structures. There's no stars or galaxies or clusters. There's
just uniform hot gas filled with sound waves. Now for a human that first DNA is immensely
important. It determines to a large extent the future development of the child and adult
and it also contains a lot of ancestral evolutionary information. So it is with the cosmic sound.
It determines in large part how the universe of stars and galaxies will grow and it also
contains information coming from much earlier times. So in a sense then studying the microwave
background and its patchiness is to astronomy what the human genome project is to the life
sciences. In fact one might also almost call it cosmic genome project. Well with this introduction
now in place we're ready to visit the first million years. What was it like back then?
What would we have seen and felt and heard? And why were there sound waves? And what can
we learn about the universe by listening to them? Well we'll find out in the next three
lectures.
