This is now the third lecture in which we're taking a close look at the first second in
the life of the universe. It's a time characterised by enormous temperatures and densities and
rapid expansion. And last lecture, we went back to a microsecond when the furnace was
fully alive in the sense that all the particles of the standard model were present in full
abundance. And as time passed, an expansion cooled the furnace. There was a cascade effect
in which particles annihilated with antiparticles in a sequence, first the heavier ones and
then the lighter ones. And finally, we arrived at the minute old universe with more or less
today's composition, mainly photons and a few protons, helium nuclei and electrons.
Well in this lecture, I want to visit the pre-microsecond universe. I know this sounds
a bit absurd, but by now you should be familiar with the enormous speed with which nature
thinks so there'll be plenty to keep us occupied for the next 30 minutes looking at just that
first microsecond. In fact, there are three primary themes I want to focus on. First, I want to look
at whether there are any more particle thresholds at even higher energy associated with new particles
we've not yet come across. Second, I want to look at how the laws of physics and in particular the
four forces subtly change as the temperature drops. And finally, I want to explore why that
carnage of matter-antimatter annihilation somehow managed to leave behind a small amount of matter
to make you and me and everything else around us. So let's start by regaining our bearings using the
time-temperature graph that shows how the universe cools and thins as it expands. The version of this
graph we're using last lecture is just this portion in the lower right. Remember, we have
neutrino decoupling at one second, quark confinement at 10 microseconds and before that we have the
quark-gluon plasma. So I've really extended the graph to earlier times. Look how the time axis goes in steps
of 10 to the 5, all the way back beyond 10 to the minus 40 seconds. The scale factor also spans a huge
range. You can see the size of today's visible universe at these earlier times. 10 light-years,
solar system size, earth size, football field size and at 10 to the minus 40 seconds it was just a
millimeter across the size of the ball in the ballpoint pen. And of course, at these extremely
early times the temperatures and densities were outrageously high. Now it won't come as a big
surprise to learn that we're moving into conditions shrouded in genuine uncertainty and ignorance. So
let me just qualify that now. Remember today's biggest particle accelerators can achieve energies
of about 10 TeV of energy, which gets us back to about 10 to the minus 14 seconds, basically the entire
rectangle from last lecture. These accelerators of course have helped build the standard model of
particle physics, the laws of physics that occur within this box. And as far as we can tell,
it's an extremely good and well-tested theory. So one might crudely identify this region with
well-known physics and this with known physics, while before that is uncertain physics. Or stated,
slightly differently, most cosmologists are very confident back to one second, pretty confident
back to about a microsecond, optimistic back to the limits of this box at about 10 to the minus
14 seconds, and they have their fingers crossed before that. Now while we're on the topic of
uncertainty, I should mention that everyone agrees there is a boundary of absolute ignorance around
10 to the minus 43 seconds. It's also called the Planck time. This is where Einstein's general
relativity breaks down and gravity inevitably takes on a quantum form. And as you may know,
we currently have no quantum theory of gravity. It's a notoriously difficult thing to develop. So
until that's done, this time and these conditions, I mean if they ever occurred, remain fundamentally
unknown. So with these various warnings, let's take a deep breath and step off into this rather
unknown terrain. What happens when we go to ever earlier times with ever higher densities and
ever higher temperatures? Well, the standard model has no heavier particles. So the quark
on plasma just gets denser and denser and hotter and hotter. Now this may seem a bit unreasonable.
How can stuff be denser than an atomic nucleus? Isn't that the densest thing there is? Actually,
the answer is no. And here's why. Remember how much space there is inside atoms? A nucleus at the
center of an atom is like a fly at the center of a football field. Remove that space from atoms
and you can fit the entire human population inside a sugar cube. Now that's nuclear density,
100 million tons per cubic centimeter. But the same story also applies to protons. For reasons
I don't have time for just now, we think that the real size of quarks is a mind-boggling 10 to the
20 times smaller than a proton. So three quarks zooming around inside a proton is like three
viruses zooming around inside the solar system. There's plenty of room to cram the quarks more
tightly together. Now if the standard model is the whole story, then not much happens to the left of
that rectangle. Across 20 powers of 10 in time, it gets 10 powers of 10 hotter and 40 powers of 10
more dense. That's an enormous tract of time. As much in an exponential sense as from a millisecond
to 10 billion years. So if really nothing happens, then it's earned its name the particle desert.
There are no interesting features on the landscape. But in truth, we know the standard model is
incomplete and several of the possible extensions beyond the standard model do suggest interesting
things occur. And perhaps the desert isn't quite so featureless after all. So one of these
extensions to the standard model is called supersymmetry. This theory suggests that in the very
early universe, the laws of physics were identical for the two great kinds of particles, the fermions
and the bosons that we met in lecture 27, the matter particles and the force carrying particles.
Now, if this is true, then the early universe, in the early universe, there should be a second set
of much heavier particles. Each particle of the standard model should have a super past, excuse
me, difficult to say, a super particle partner of the opposite kind. So although these particles
haven't yet been discovered, physicists have already named them. I suppose it's a bit like
choosing a baby's name before it's born. So the super partners of the standard model fermions,
the electron, neutrino and quark are bosons called the electron, snutrino and squawk. You just add
an S prefix. And the super partner particles to the standard model bosons, the photon,
w and z and gluon, are fermions called the fotino, the wino, the zino and the gluino. You just add
an eno post fix. Now, from our perspective, the most important fact about all these super
particles is that the heaviest super particles are unstable and they decay to the lightest one,
which is itself stable. It isn't yet known which of them is would likely to be stable. Possibly
it's the fotino or maybe an odd mix of several in a state called a neutrino. But either way,
we have a new particle to consider which survives into today's universe. Now, I hope you can see
why this is fabulous news for astronomy, because we need a particle outside the standard model to
explain dark matter. We know there's six times more matter out there than there are protons,
neutrons and electrons. And we know it can't be neutrinos because they're too lightweight.
They move too fast to gather around galaxies and clusters. So we need a heavy, stable particle
that's not one of the standard model particles. Maybe the lightest supersymmetric particle
solves the mystery. Back to our time temperature diagram. There are reasons to place the super
partner particles around here and perhaps the lightest one arrives here. Ultimately, these
particles emerge with all the rest as dark matter, providing, as we saw in earlier lectures, the
scaffolding on which stars and galaxies and the galaxy web later form. So this is a wonderful
story and it may soon be tested directly because the newest accelerator at CERN has
sufficiently high energy that many physicists feel it will be able to create the lightest
supersymmetric particles. So finally, the primary constituent of the universe's matter would be
brought into our experimental arena, where it could be studied in detail.
Now let's turn to our second major theme for this lecture, the emergence of the four forces.
But really, I want to place this in a larger framework and talk about the emergence of the
laws of physics. This is surely a deep subject. Why does nature behave the way it does?
Now to a physicist, nature's laws arise from what are called invariance principles or
symmetry principles. It's a slightly tricky concept, but it boils down to asking whether an
interaction between particles would or would not be affected by changing some aspect of the
situation. For example, if we move the interaction from one location to another or if we change the
particles to antiparticles, is the interaction affected at all or does it stay the same?
If the changes don't affect the interaction in any way, we say the interaction is invariant
under that change. And there's a rather unexpected consequence of that invariance.
Something else, some other quantity, quality, excuse me, is conserved during the interaction.
For example, the fact that interactions aren't affected by their location, whether it's over here
or over here, leads directly to the conservation of momentum. The fact that interactions aren't
affected by when they occur, whether they happen yesterday or today, leads directly to the conservation
of energy. Now this link between the changed quantity and the conserved quantity isn't at all
obvious. And it was first famously worked out by the great German mathematician,
Emi Neuter in the 1920s. Now it turns out there are many of these paired quantities.
And while some are classical like location with momentum or time with energy, others are quantum
mechanical and they involve some more abstract qualities down in the quantum world. But the
bottom line is that these invariance principles and their conservation laws, they really are the
laws of physics. Or stated the other way around, the laws of physics are nothing more than the
consequence of whether nature does or doesn't ignore certain things. Now as it happens, exactly what
nature does or doesn't ignore depends on the energy of the interaction. In general, at very high
energies, nature ignores almost everything and the interactions are in some sense more perfect,
more global and all-encompassing. This of course was a situation in the very early universe,
when the energy of all interactions was exceedingly high. The laws were more perfect, more unified.
But as time passed and the universe cooled, some of these invariance principles no longer
operated or they operated with less precision. Physicists say the symmetries were broken and
as a result the laws of physics changed and so the way particles interacted also changed.
This is why particle accelerators are so important. They're able to take us back to a time
when the laws of physics were different and they help us track how these laws evolved
into their current form. So with that preamble, let's now look at the forces of nature and see
how they've changed. In today's old cold universe, we learn even in grade school that there are four
forces, gravity, weak, electromagnetism and strong. Let's just quickly review these and put them into
the context of the standard model. So here are the particles of the standard model. Over on the
left we have the bosons, the force-carrying particles. What does this mean exactly? Here's a little
animation of a quantum mechanical view of how forces act between particles. A boson particle
hops between two particles and the energy and momentum that it carries alters the particles
trajectories. So a force has acted. So let's briefly go through these forces. Gravity is the force
that holds you to the earth and planets in their orbits. It acts between all particles, is carried
by gravitons and is extremely weak. The weak force only operates deep inside particles and causes
them to change as in radioactive decay. It also acts between all particles and is carried by the
W and Z bosons and as its name suggests it's relatively weak. The electromagnetic force
drives lightning bolts from clouds to the ground and keeps electrons in orbit within atoms.
It only acts between charged particles, it's carried by the photon and is of intermediate strength.
And finally the strong force keeps quarks bound inside protons and neutrons and binds
protons and neutrons together in atomic nuclei. It only acts between quarks and gluons,
it's carried by gluons and as its name suggests it's the strongest of the forces,
about a hundred times stronger than the electric force. Now in our day-to-day lives we really
don't experience the mighty power of these forces. The strong and weak forces are confined inside
particles and the electromagnetic force is enormously muted because positive and negative
charges are so thoroughly intermixed. But to give you an idea, imagine I had two grains of sand
and I took all the electrons from one of them and put them into the other and I took all the protons
from the other and I put them into the first one. Then I held each grain at arm's length. There's an
attractive force because opposites attract. But how big is that force? Can I hold them apart?
The answer is very definitely no. There's 18 billion tons of force. I need 8 million
space shuttles pulling on full throttle pulling in opposite directions to keep these grains of sand
apart. So these forces are stunningly powerful if you bring them up into our macroscopic world
and fully expose them. So returning to the early universe, it turns out that in the exceedingly
hot environment the nature of these forces was different. For example, before 0.1 nanoseconds,
the electromagnetic and weak forces were blended into a single force called the electro-weak
force. So prior to that time, there were really only three forces. So let's put this
electro-weak transition on our time temperature diagram. Here it is at a tenth of a nanosecond
when particles had about 100 GeV of energy. As the temperature dropped past this point,
the weak symmetry condition was broken and because of this, the electro-weak force took on two
different geysers, the electromagnetic force and the weak force. Notice that the transition is
well within the region studied by particle accelerators and so this whole transition is
actually very well understood. Now during this transition, another extremely important change
occurred. If we go back to our diagram of the standard model, you'll remember this odd particle
called the Higgs boson. Well one of the consequences of the electro-weak symmetry breaking was that
this particle, or more accurately the field associated with this particle, changed and from
then on all the other particles interacted with this field and as a result gained the mass that we
now measure them to have. So before 0.1 nanoseconds, none of the particles had any mass. They were all
in a sense like photons. So without this change, all the particles that make up our world would
always be moving at the speed of light and as the universe expanded, they would have been redshifted
away to almost nothing, just like the microwave background photons. So this electro-weak transition
with its changing Higgs field has really had some very crucial consequences.
Well now we have two of the four forces united. Can we unify three? There are several reasons to think
that the answer is yes, but the best evidence is the way in which the strengths of the three forces
changes with increasing energy. They converge on a single value. This diagram shows the predictions
of the standard model which are backed up by measurements for how the strengths of the forces
for how the strengths of the forces change from low energy on the left to high energy on the right.
The three forces seem to be converging towards the same strength. The strong force gets weaker
while the electromagnetic force gets stronger. The convergence is even better if we include
supersymmetry in the calculations. They seem to cross at a single point up at the incredibly high
energy of 10 to the 16 GeV. Okay let's go back to our time temperature diagram. This energy occurs
way back at 10 to the minus 36 seconds or 10 to the 28 degrees. At this extraordinary temperature
it is thought that the electro-weak and strong forces become tied together in what's called
the grand unification theory or gut force. Now you don't need me to tell you that this is an
enormous extrapolation beyond familiar conditions, but this kind of approach has worked before. Newton
extrapolated from the falling apple to the earth orbiting the sun about as big a jump,
but clearly we're in the realm of uncertain physics here. Actually there's quite a bit of
indirect evidence for the gut force. In addition to the crossing of the four strengths,
grand unification also explains why electrons and protons have exactly equal but opposite
charges and it also gives an exactly correct prediction for the ratio of the W and Z masses.
But perhaps the most interesting prediction of the gut theory is that the proton should
itself be slightly unstable so that in time all atomic nuclei will undergo radioactive decay.
Fortunately we don't have to worry about this. The current estimate for the proton lifetime
is around 10 to the 36 years. That's a billion billion billion times the age of the universe.
Now there are in fact experiments to look for this proton decay. See if you gather 10 to the 36
protons, that's about a million tons of matter, then on average one proton will decay per year
and perhaps you can detect this. Actually that's the principle behind this 50,000 tonne chamber of
water surrounded by very sensitive light detectors located under a mountain in Japan. Now so far
no proton decays have been detected but the search continues and there are plans to upgrade this to
a million tonne chamber. Now let's look at the third theme for this lecture, how the universe
narrowly escaped total matter-antimatter annihilation. So from last lecture remember at very high
temperatures collisions create particle-antiparticle pairs so the composition of the early universe
before say a microsecond was an equal mix of matter, antimatter and photons. Now in today's
old cold universe the laws of physics always require a particle to be created along with its
antiparticle. No process can favor the generation of matter over antimatter, they are true equals.
So if this were true in the early universe there would be exactly equal amounts of matter
and antimatter, so the matter-antimatter annihilation would be totally complete. Now since the
annihilation ultimately makes photons we'd have a universe with just photons, just light, nothing
else. Well here we are made of matter so clearly this can't be the whole story.
Now one possibility of course is that the universe really is balanced in matter-antimatter
but while the Milky Way galaxy is made of matter perhaps the Andromeda galaxy is made of antimatter.
You could never tell just by looking because matter and antimatter behave identically. It's
only when the matter and antimatter mix that you know they're different because they annihilate
to make gamma rays. Well it turns out that although intergalactic space is pretty empty
it isn't that empty and we would easily see the gamma ray radiation coming from the boundaries
where matter and antimatter mingled. So we're really quite sure we live in a matter universe
with no antimatter left over from the Big Bang. So there must have been an asymmetry in the matter
antimatter production in the early universe so that after the period of annihilation there was
a bit of matter left over. Now an important question is how great was that asymmetry for every proton
that survived how many annihilated? It's actually easy to figure out this because each annihilation
makes a photon and these photons become the microwave background. So the ratio of annihilations
to surviving protons is the same as the ratio of the number of microwave background photons to
cosmic protons and we know what this number is it's about a billion. So there's your matter
antimatter asymmetry one part in a billion excess of matter over antimatter it's a very very slight
excess. So here's the situation in the early universe for every billion antimatter particles
in blue we have a billion and one matter particles in red after the annihilation is over that one
extra matter particle is left standing and is surrounded by the two billion photons in yellow
made in the annihilation. This is really a remarkable situation for several reasons first
every proton and electron in your body has survived a game of Russian roulette with a
billion bullets and one blank they are incredibly lucky to be here. Secondly all the matter that
you see around you in the earth and stars and galaxies is only one billionth of what was made
in the Big Bang it was an enormously more fertile event than appears at first sight.
And thirdly if there hadn't been this very slight matter asymmetry the annihilation would have been
complete and the universe would contain only light which might have been more beautiful but there
would have been no one to appreciate it. So let's look at how this narrow escape happened. The idea
the idea goes back to 1967 when the famous Russian physicist Andrei Sakharov realized
that generating a matter antimatter asymmetry needs three rather general conditions here they are
one quarks and leptons must be able to interconvert two matter and antimatter reactions must differ
in some way and three these processes must occur in a non-equilibrium state
which happens during periods of rapid change. Now if we look to the standard model for these
mechanisms you won't find any. The physics responsible for generating the matter asymmetry
is beyond the standard model and is currently basically unknown. Of course there are several
theories which tend to focus on one of the two major transitions the gut transition and the
electroweak transition but along with supersymmetry, grand unification, quantum gravity and inflation
matter asymmetry is just one more feature of the early universe that must await future breakthroughs
before we can say that we really understand it. I want to end this lecture on a slightly more
reflective note. We've been talking about how in that first second all the particles were created
and the laws of physics shifted and changed. But what determines those laws? How does nature know
to generate a quark-antiquark pair and not two quarks for example? Where does the knowledge reside
to do all these things just the right way? Currently our best guess is that the knowledge is
somehow embedded in the vacuum. Remember by pumping energy into the vacuum it creates all the particles
in ways that obey these laws. So in some sense the knowledge to do that is located at every point
in space. Everything rests on this extraordinary entity. It's the vacuum that is nature's ultimate
bedrock. It gives life to the universe and it informs it how to behave.
