Welcome back to our four lecture exploration of the remarkable phenomenon of cosmic inflation.
In the last lecture, we learned how the early universe might enter a brief phase in which
a dense vacuum arose and fell outwards in a brief burst of exponentially accelerating expansion,
which launched the standard hot big bang universe.
And at the same time, it solved the flatness, horizon and monopole problems that had plagued
the normal hot big bang story.
You would remember there was one more problem needing to be solved, the structure problem,
the fact that the universe is neither wildly lumpy nor fatally smooth, but in Goldilocks
terms it's just right.
One of the critical challenges facing any cosmological theory is, can it generate the
seeds of roughness from which stars and galaxies grow?
Now I'm glad to say that almost as soon as inflation had been introduced, in part to
solve the other problems, it was quickly realized that it could also solve the structure problem.
In fact, as we'll see, inflation achieves this task so well that most cosmologists
now view this as one of inflation's most impressive qualities.
So that's the theme for this lecture, inflation's remarkable ability to generate the seeds from
which galaxies grow.
Now to see how this might happen, we need to remember what it is that's expanding during
inflation.
It's a quantum field.
And the answer to the source of roughness is in that first word, quantum.
It's not an idle word.
Now in classical physics, a field would be completely smooth, but in quantum physics,
a field, and in fact pretty much everything, is subject to ceaseless and profoundly random
fluctuations.
And ultimately, it's these fluctuations that are going to be the source of cosmic roughness.
So let's look at this topic of quantum fluctuations in a bit more detail.
In our everyday lives, we get the distinct impression that objects are essentially well
defined.
They have smooth boundaries, and if left to themselves, they can be perfectly still.
Even if we knew they were made of atoms, and these atoms were jostling around, we might
still view the atoms as little spheres behaving in a predictable way, bouncing this way and
that as they collided with each other.
Well it turns out that this perception of nature is only approximately true.
If we were to zoom ever deeper into objects, we'd find a rather different world, one that
was much less orderly and precise.
It turns out that the bedrock of nature, the cloth out of which everything is woven, has
a built in ceaseless dynamism.
Its constituents are not well defined, and their properties continually vary with a sort
of inherent blurriness.
Now this rather unfamiliar behaviour of nature is described extremely well by the subjects
of quantum mechanics and its close cousin, quantum field theory.
You may not know this, but these are in fact the most successful theories that physicists
have ever constructed.
Not a single experiment has ever disagreed with them.
So even if we can't easily intuit this kind of micro world, it really does seem to behave
that way, and we should trust what these theories have to say.
So let's have a look now at how quantum fluctuations might generate structure during inflation.
So the most important thing to recognise is that the energy of all things, including this
quantum field, continually fluctuates, up and down and up and down.
Its long term average looks like the smooth field on the right, but at any instant the
field has some roughness and looks like the region on the left, with very slightly different
energy from place to place.
Now we must add to this picture a crucial feature.
The region of vacuum is experiencing and accelerating expansion, and this alters the situation in
an extremely interesting way.
Let's focus on a patch of vacuum and watch its expansion.
At some distance, the region's boundary is moving away from its centre faster than the
speed of light.
Now remember, space itself can move faster than light, it's just that things can't
cross space faster than light.
Now the place where this light speed threshold is crossed is called the Hubble sphere, and
once it's crossed, the material outside becomes fundamentally disconnected, severed if you
like, from the material inside.
OK, back to our quantum fluctuation.
Let's imagine, at one particular moment, the fluctuation makes the energy slightly higher,
and while it has that higher value, the region expands through the Hubble sphere, and as
it does so, it gets disconnected, and instead of going back down again, gets frozen in.
It becomes a real enhancement with higher energy.
Let's follow that again with a slightly different diagram.
Close to any location, the energy in the quantum field fluctuates randomly, but as soon as
the expansion makes the region bigger than the Hubble sphere, the fluctuation no longer
oscillates, but freezes at whatever energy it had when it expanded across the threshold.
And then on, it's locked in, and the field has a genuinely different energy.
Overall then, because of expansion, quantum fluctuations are becoming real fluctuations.
Roughness is being created everywhere, as regions expand past their Hubble spheres.
Well, we're beginning to build up the picture here.
So let's make this a bit more quantitative and see if we can span the huge gulf between
tiny subatomic quantum fluctuations and enormous galaxies.
So let's just choose inflation to occur at 10 to the minus 20 seconds.
So the expansion doubling time is also about 10 to the minus 20 seconds, and the Hubble
sphere is about a hundredth of the size of an atom.
So quantum fluctuations get frozen at that size.
Now let's imagine inflation lasting 40 doubling times.
So that tiny region grows by about 2 to the power 40, which makes it about 100 yards across
at the end of inflation.
Now at that point, normal expansion takes over and makes this region about a million
light years across today.
Now, and this is the crucial point, if the original quantum fluctuation gave a slightly
higher vacuum energy, then it will lead to a slightly denser region that over time collapses
to become a galaxy.
On the other hand, if the original quantum fluctuation gave a slightly lower vacuum
energy, it will lead to a slightly lower density that over time becomes a void or gap between
galaxies.
So overall, inflation takes a tiny quantum fluctuation, makes it real, and then stretches
it to cosmic proportions.
Now so far, I've just described how a single fluctuation might have turned into a single
galaxy.
But in reality, of course, every location is generating fluctuations.
So these figures help show what's going on by following five tripling times of a single
small region.
In this first one, you mainly notice the expansion itself.
The initial region is so tiny you can hardly see it, but it grows by a factor of three
between each step.
And by the fifth step, it's grown by three to the fifth, or about 200 by 200.
And that now fills the whole square.
Now this second set helps us to focus on the growth of roughness by not showing the expansion.
We start with our single region of vacuum, filling its tiny Hubble sphere, which here
is shown as a square.
Now it expands to a three by three region.
Its fluctuations get frozen in, and so these new regions inherit slightly different values
of the vacuum energy.
But then each of these nine regions spawns another three by three set, which in turn
have slight fluctuations.
This repeats and repeats, and gradually generates an ever richer pattern of roughness.
Notice how the fluctuations build up.
For example, a somewhat lower fluctuation entered in the top right of the second step.
And so from then on, the top right is always going to be a bit lower, even though later
fluctuations introduce additional finer levels of structure.
I hope this last square looks at least vaguely familiar to you.
Let me jog your memory with a picture of the microwave background.
It's covered with roughness on all scales, from huge regions to small regions, all superposed
in a patchwork that looks very similar to the little example I just showed you.
Now you may worry that there's a big gulf between the time of inflation and the time
of the microwave background, but that's really not important.
Remember that everything on the microwave background larger than about two degrees,
that's the size of these little circles, has not been in contact since before inflation.
So stated slightly differently, those big patterns on the microwave background are exactly
as they were at the end of inflation.
Nothing's changed.
Now if inflation took place at 10 to the minus 36 seconds, as many cosmologists suspect,
then the region we're seeing was about the size of a bacterium at the end of inflation.
So the microwave background is giving us a picture of a bacterium-sized piece of the
universe when it was only 10 to the minus 36 seconds old.
Now do you see why the microwave background image is so profound?
It's not just a depiction of a hot glowing fog at 400,000 years.
It goes much deeper than that.
It connects us almost directly to the era of inflation.
It's like a microscope and a time machine rolled into one.
It takes us back to the Big Bang's inflationary launch and it photographs it.
Now this is already a stunning realization, but let's continue along this line.
Here's another familiar image, a map of the web-like patterns of thousands of galaxies
spanning several billion light years.
Once again we should begin to look at this differently.
Those mottled patterns were made in the quantum world, down on scales much smaller than an
atom.
You're seeing a pattern of subatomic quantum fluctuations written across billions of light
years using galaxies for ink.
These are wonderful examples of the wholeness of nature.
The behavior of nature's finest level, the quantum character of the vacuum, helps craft
a giant framework for the entire universe.
It's the quantum in the cosmic.
It's a transcendent idea.
Now at this point all I've done is to describe how inflation might generate roughness in
the universe.
I want to spend the rest of this lecture outlining some of the evidence that supports this idea.
So you'll understand why cosmologists are becoming more and more confident that this
is what actually happened.
So first of all let's look more closely at the type of roughness made by inflation.
Does it match what we find for the real universe?
Now remember from lecture 17 we learned that there's more to cosmic structure than simply
saying the universe is lumpy.
There's a size dependence of the lumpiness which we've been calling the roughness spectrum
or power spectrum to use the proper term.
So it's critical to find out A what the roughness spectrum that comes from inflation is and
B whether that matches what's observed.
Now it turns out that one of the more robust predictions of inflation is a rather specific
kind of roughness spectrum and here's a sketch of it.
I'm not going to go into details but just mention that a pure exponential expansion
should give a roughness spectrum that's a straight line with a slope of 1.
Density variations increase for smaller regions that's to the right.
Now let's not forget from lecture 17 that as the universe evolves the small scale roughness
is suppressed.
And so in today's universe the roughness spectrum looks more like this with a peak and less
roughness on smaller scales.
But notice that the primordial spectrum is still present for the larger scale on the
left of the peak.
Let's now have a look at the observed roughness spectrum for the real universe.
We've seen it before in lecture 17 when we focused on the fact that it had a peak but
here we're focusing on that part to the left which hasn't been affected by any suppression
because that gives us the primordial spectrum.
As you can see a slope of 1 does seem to fit the data fairly well.
Actually the situation is much better than it appears because we know how suppression
affects the smaller scales.
So in practice we can fit across the entire roughness spectrum.
Here's one of those nice movies made by Max Tegmark that compares a set of models to the
microwave background sound spectrum at the top and the galaxy roughness spectrum at
the bottom.
Now in this case the models vary just the slope of the primordial roughness spectrum
and sure enough the best fit to both data sets gives a value for the slope very close
to 1.
Now actually with more recent data it's been possible to go one step further.
You remember I said that the slope of the roughness spectrum is only exactly 1 if the expansion
during inflation is exactly exponential.
Let's bring back our model of inflation from last lecture.
As long as the ball sits at a fixed height on the hill so the energy density in the vacuum
is constant then we have pure exponential expansion.
But when inflation ends and the ball rolls down the hill the vacuum energy drops so the
rate of expansion slows down and it turns out that the roughness generated at the end
of inflation is a little bit less than it was in the midst of inflation.
And what this does is to introduce what cosmologists call tilt, the fact that the slope is slightly
less than 1 and also curvature, the fact that the slope curves more to smaller scales.
Now at the present time, that's 2008, tilt has been found.
The slope is 0.961 plus or minus 0.014 but curvature hasn't yet been seen.
Now these slight deviations from a simple slope of 1.0 are tremendously important because
they tell us about the shape of the hill down which the ball is rolling and that in turn
tells us a great deal about the nature of the scalar quantum field that's driving inflation.
See when you think about it this is a truly remarkable piece of physics.
On the one hand we have multi-billion dollar accelerators pushing the study of particle
physics to limits near 10 TeV of energy and on the other hand we can use the microwave
background and its image of inflation to study particle physics at an entirely new
realm of energy, 10 to the 12 times higher.
It gives us a window on the biggest particle accelerator of them all, the Big Bang itself.
There are two more observational fingerprints of inflation that I want to talk about.
The first one has been observed and the second one may be soon.
The first goes right to the heart of the nature of quantum fluctuations and that is their
randomness.
You see one of the most puzzling qualities of quantum fluctuations is that they are profoundly
random.
It's not just that they're very complicated and can't be predicted like the path of a
hurricane.
The fluctuation mechanism is inherently random, not even it knows what it will do next.
What that means is that as the fluctuations leave the Hubble sphere they get frozen at
a random part of their cycle, for example whether they're at their highest or mid or
lowest part is random.
Physicists say the phase of the fluctuation is random.
Now when the fluctuations are of this kind with random phases they're called a Gaussian
random field.
You may have heard that term Gaussian curve or Bell curve, it's a statistical term that
incorporates this issue of randomness.
So a very important test of inflation is to see whether the observed fluctuations are
in fact a Gaussian random field.
Now there are several ways to test this but a very simple method is the following.
Remember this image of the microwave background is colour coded, slightly denser regions are
in red, slightly less dense regions are in purple and the mean density is in green.
So all you do is to make a histogram of the amount of sky at each density, in other words
at each colour.
As you can see the histogram makes a nice Gaussian or Bell curve and this shows that
the microwave background is a Gaussian random field.
It has exactly the random quality that inflation predicts.
Actually there's a rather interesting consequence of this kind of roughness.
It means you will never find any specific shape or image in either the microwave background
or the galaxy web.
So that metaphor I used back in lecture 16, the microwave background as a primordial document
written by nature giving an account of her birth has a flaw.
There could never be any visible script or image, the patterns are profoundly random.
But of course it's exactly that quality together with the all important roughness spectrum
that is so revealing.
Nature writes her message more subtly than we humans might without using hieroglyphs
or pictures or words.
Now the second observational fingerprint of inflation which has not yet been observed
are gravity waves.
See when inflation is occurring it doesn't just make fluctuations in the density of the
vacuum.
It also sends out ripples in space time itself.
Inflation sort of grabs hold of space and shakes it.
These ripples are called gravity waves because remember in Einstein's view gravity arises
from space time being curved and so a wave like ripple in space time is also a wave like
ripple in gravity, hence gravity waves.
Now it's actually possible to detect these gravity waves by, as you might guess, carefully
studying the microwave background.
Now this time it's not the patch in us itself, it's another quality we've not yet talked
about called polarization.
Do you know when you look at a blue sky through Polaroid sunglasses and then tilt your head
from one side to another, the sky seems to change.
That's because the light scattered from the atmosphere is partly polarized, meaning the
light vibrations tend to be in a specific direction, for example more wiggle up and
down than wiggle side to side.
The Polaroid sunglasses only let light wiggling up and down through, so how much light you
see depends on the orientation of the glasses.
Now the same thing can happen with the microwave background sky.
The light from the glowing fog can be slightly polarized and that polarization is preserved
as the light crosses the universe and arrives as microwaves.
Now the microwave telescopes that are used have the equivalent of Polaroid lenses, so
they can see if the microwave sky is polarized.
This sketch illustrates a pattern highly exaggerated, showing the direction of microwave wiggles.
But in truth the amount of polarization is very slight and the patterns very complex.
There is a particular pattern shown here that is only produced by gravity waves.
It's called a B-mode pattern, for reasons I don't want to go into.
The wiggle directions make a kind of spiral and they're a clear signature of gravity waves
moving through the foggy gas just as the microwave background was being formed.
Now currently, as of 2008, these B-mode polarization patterns are still too weak to be seen, but
the hunt is on and there is great hope that the next satellite to map the microwave background
called the Planck satellite will soon find them.
Now it's hard to overstate the importance of that discovery if it comes.
In many ways it would do for the theory of inflation what discovering the microwave background
did for the theory of the hot big bang.
It would change its status from being a very promising idea to a very likely reality.
Now I want to end this lecture on an acoustic note.
You see, with all this talk of making roughness, let's not forget that we're setting the stage
for all those acoustic vibrations that go on in the first 400,000 years.
Remember from lecture 15, we can think of all the density, peaks and troughs as a whole register of organ pipes.
And as time passes and the horizon expands, gradually starting with the smallest pipes,
they start sounding as gas falls in and bounces out making roughly spherical sound waves.
But what inflation does is it makes the entire set of organ pipes with all the notes ready and waiting to be played.
In a sense, you can think of that initial roughness that initials as an initial set of organ pipes.
They hold a latent sound, a silent sound. It's just waiting to unfold given time.
So why don't we do what nature can't do?
Let's cheat time and play the entire register all at once to see what it sounded like.
Here's its spectrum. It's a straight line with a slope of one.
And this is what it sounds like.
It's pure noise. It contains the deepest notes and the highest notes.
It's like having an infinite piano keyboard and with flat arms, you press all the notes down together.
Now I know this doesn't sound musically very majestic, but the role it plays in the universe is utterly majestic.
See, what this sound is doing is, in a sense, it's shaking the universe's contents with all possible frequencies.
And just like a violin bow slipping across the strings shakes the string and the violin with all possible frequencies.
Only the natural resonant frequencies of the string and the violin emerge as music.
With the universe, the dark matter, the atomic matter and the radiation all respond differently to that initial primordial shaking.
And over time, their own sounds emerge.
So here, at 400,000 years, are the sound spectra and sounds of how the dark matter and atomic matter have responded to that initial stimulus from inflation.
Remember, they've been shifted up by the usual 50 octaves to put them into the human audible range.
Those sounds are what lay the foundations for building all the stars and galaxies.
So no, the primordial sound isn't music to our ears, but the symphony it started is still being played out across the sky and down here with you and me.
Let me briefly review.
In this lecture, we've looked at how inflation might solve the structure problem, why the contents of the universe are spread about slightly unevenly.
We've seen that during inflation, tiny quantum mechanical fluctuations can get frozen as real fluctuations when they expand faster than light away from their place of origin.
The expansion then stretches these fluctuations to cosmic proportions.
When you allow for the fact that fluctuations are created at all locations and throughout inflation, you end up with a pattern of roughness that amazingly matches what we find both in the microwave background and in the distribution of galaxies.
It has the correct roughness spectrum and it has the quality of randomness we expect from a quantum mechanical process.
With these basic matches between the observations and theory in place, the hunt is now on for more subtle features that can really test or refute the theory of inflation.
The roughness spectrum may tilt and curve just slightly in response to the slowdown at the end of inflation.
And gravity waves created during inflation should leave their fingerprint as polarization patterns on the microwave background.
This is a subject in the midst of development. Progress is rapid and the stakes are high.
But if you think we've reached the end of the story about inflation, think again.
Some of its most amazing qualities I haven't yet even mentioned, but I will of course in the next lecture.
