Hello, I'm William Calvin, professor at the University of Washington in Seattle.
The following video is tailored for somewhere between a general audience and a general scientific
audience, but there are about two slides that are entirely optional that are really aimed only at
oceanographers. You'll find, in addition, an audio only version of this. If you go to my web page,
WilliamCalvin.org, and you'll additionally find the PowerPoint file and the PDF file of the slides.
This picture shows a bucolic summer scene in Seattle with Mount Raider sitting there like a
ice cream sundae, 55 miles away. This will look rather different in the future.
Most of the snow is gone by the time this picture was taken, and so what you're seeing
there is the permanent ice. As many of you will know, that permanent ice is likely to be gone by
mid-century. So while Mount Raider may look white in the water, by the mid-summer it will look like
a deeply furrowed pile of rock. But it's not really the aesthetics of this or the gradual
global warming that's been talked about so much that concerns me here. I'm going to tell you a
story about why we've got a much more urgent problem and why the answer to a carbon sequestration
must be rather big and quick. Here's just an abstract of the points I'm going to go through.
Sometimes a stream of air or water discovers a new path and climate then may suddenly flip
into a new mode of operation. Going to go through a series of sudden shifts in climate or near
misses that have occurred. To back out the danger zone for more of them, an appropriate goal would
be to remove nearly all of the excess CO2 and put it back in the long-term storage into this in
the next 20 years. That's 30 gigatons of carbon each year. Drawdown, this would be an emergency
repair, not a substitute for a low-carbon energy diet. We'll still have that problem.
Chemically scrubbing the atmosphere is unlikely to scale fast enough to do this, and while doubling
forests might reach the need in 600 gigatons a year, rainforest, forests are not secure enough
given the trends in fire and drought. We're even burning down rainforests at the moment.
To avoid competing with the world's food production and therefore people,
most sequester or gang carbon must come from new biomass grown in new places. Here I explore how
ocean pumps might uplift nutrients and then with other pipes and pumps sink the new organic carbon
into the ocean depths. Instead of sinking only the debris that's heavy enough to settle out as an
iron fertilization, we would be sinking the entire organic carbon soup of the wind mixed layer
before its carbon reverts to CO2. The CO2 produced in the depths will reach the air
400 to 6000 years later. Spreading it out over that period greatly reduces the damaging peaks
in ocean acidification and global fever. Now conclude with a discussion of the various pros
and cons of this approach. Our focus on the long-term and on getting rid of the underlying
causes of climate deterioration while sounding logical has become a dangerously inadequate
approach by now. While deforestation and fossil emissions got us into trouble, it does not follow
that fixing them will get us out of trouble. The situation is beginning to resemble locking the
barn door after the horse is gone. It doesn't really recover the horse and indeed there's no more
horse to protect by locking the barn. Second gradual overheating is no longer the correct focus
for understanding the risk we now face. Our fast tracks to disaster must be forestalled.
Brief peaks, whether it's temperature or high water or whatnot, usually do the damage long before
changes in the average get around to it. For example, for high water, well this is a peninsula
here in Calviston, Texas that's got to be covered up by sea level rise. Obviously,
temporary rises in sea level from storm surge were quite capable of doing the damage.
Here's the heat wave in Europe in 2003 that killed about 35,000 people.
And this just shows you the Swiss summer temperatures for 140 years and how they were
distributed. The coolest summer was in 1909, the warmest summer was in 1947. But that's the story
up to 2002. In 2003, the temperature jumped off the chart. Let's say it is a good six degrees
above, six standard deviations above the mean. Now by and true, this is regional climate change.
The global mean temperature actually didn't spike in 2003 as other areas were cooler.
But there have been eight sudden shifts or error misses in a mere 30 years on a global scale. In
other words, I'm not just adding up the regional scale climate shifts like droughts and such
from various places. I'm going to talk about the number of global scale climate shifts or
error misses that we've had since 1976. The first one, the oceanographers and atmospheric scientists
talk about occurred over the winter of 76-77. Initially, the focus was on the western
Pacific Ocean, but it was realized later that it was a much more global event.
One of the results of it may be the way the El Niños pattern shifted. This just shows the 1950
to this year record for El Niños. This is roughly locked to temperature in the central
Pacific. But in fact, it's a multivariable index. The red arrows going upwards are El Niños. The
blues going downwards are El Niños. You can see that up until 1976, basically, El Niños dominated.
The warming El Niño events were not very large and not very long. However, after 1976,
what you see is almost the flip. As I say, the El Niños are big and sometimes long,
and the El Niños are short and typically small.
This just puts that together with what the temperature did. This is global mean land
temperature, the sea surface temperature looks somewhat similar. The most interesting part of
this is that you can't see enough trend from 1950 through 1976. This was despite the fossil fuel
emissions tripling during this period. The excess CO2 doubled, and the temperature for some reason
wasn't going up. Then, certainly by 1977, it was going up at the rate of about three degrees per
century, essentially what's been predicted for global warming for some time. The reason that
you have this ramp following a flat period may very well be due to something like there's a
natural control system that tries to keep the temperature constant, but then it runs out of
cooling capacity. In other words, things that would help cool it in the face of these perturbations
by fossil fuel emissions would be things like increased cloudiness, increased evaporative cooling,
whatever. But like most air conditioning systems, there's a point at which you have saturated that
capacity. If you keep perturbing the system now, it starts going up linearly. It's still
regulated to some point, but the addition is now overwhelming the regulation.
Now let's talk about drought. What I'm going to talk about is that from 1950 to 1982,
there's not much change after 1976, but during this period, a major drought as a percent of the
global land surface was about maybe 14 percent. Now what that means is the two most extreme
classifications of drought, PDSI, more than minus three, for example, only affected 14 percent of
your surface at any one time during that year. However, things changed very much at the same
time as the big El Nino in 1982. Global drought doubled and it stayed up at double for a good
15 years until the next major El Nino when it did this went up to triple and stayed up at triple
for about six years before coming back down to double. So what you see here are major excursions
perhaps triggered by the El Ninos, but not going away when the El Nino goes away.
In other words, it's as if the system is latching up in a new state of having twice or
triple the amount of drought that it had during this 1950 through 1982 period.
This just tries to put that together with temperature ramp in the El Nino story.
What I particularly want to discuss now are some of the things that aren't shown here because they
didn't happen. During the 1997 El Nino, there were big forest fires in Southeast Asia and in the
Amazon and emissions that year of the burning basically tripled. Then came back down, but in
2005, which is sort of on the end of a prolonged El Nino, there was a severe drought in the Amazon
aggravated by the big keepwave in the Caribbean that created the Hurricane Alley for Katrina and
New Orleans and Rita and Houston. We've had two situations where if we had an El Nino that was
twice as long but still big, so just take either these big 82 or 97 El Ninos and make it one year
longer, we could have either burned or rotted most of the trees in those two tropical rainforests
and the excess CO2 from either both burning and rotting could have taken a 50% jump.
That's to say there would have been a sudden worldwide escalation of climate problems and with
little recovery because as trees try to go back in the Amazon, certainly they never really get to
trees. The ecosystem flattens out with grasslands and a little brush and it really doesn't make
it back up to trees, so that's a permanent loss of biomass into the air. Such a big burn would
of course be a mass extinction event. It was about half of Amazon species, similarly in Southeast
Asia, home of three of the six remaining species of apes. So I've been going through here for you
some abrupt shifts. There's a total of four to six depending on whether you want to count
these three as one or not. We've had the drought going, the drought tripled, the drought went back to
double and we've had four new messes. I've just told you about two of the men, there's two more
coming in various spots. That's quite a few to have in various places. Basically six spots
So basically every three years having such an event.
Additional surprises of course could be bigger than the previous ones. We could easily spiral
up to catastrophic climate change before we'd have a chance to haul it back down by technology.
But most of the surprises could probably be avoided by quickly recapturing the excess CO2.
This is very different now from reducing the new CO2 added to the air. This is countering that
and taking back all that we've put up there. We might not have to take back all of it, but
I'm going to show you the calculations for all. So it seems an appropriate goal for our emergency
repairs. In fact, put the genie back in the bottom, remove dearly all of the excess CO2,
put it into long-term storage and finish, not start, but finish the job within the next 20 years.
Even during that period you'd expect a half dozen additional abrupt events or near misses.
In addition to the low-carbon diet we need for the long run, we need emergency repairs for the
short run. In our invention, that's analogous dialysis where you clean out the toxic substance.
An emergency room patient with an aspirin overdose, well we used to have to send them home with
advice not to repeat that. We were losing about 25% of those aspirin overdose patients
to heart attacks. The aspirin stirred up that kind of trouble. What we do now is to use dialysis
to toxify them and this is basically our situation with our CO2 overdose. We need to remove
the excess, the toxic substance. Considering the rate so far, it's got to have to be quick
and it's not just the half dozen actually, there might be more because the excess CO2
has now doubled since 1976 bubbles. Like heart attacks, sudden climate shifts can range
unpredictably from minor to catastrophic and about the only reasonable approach to it
because there's so many different kinds of abrupt climate change is to stop pushing the system so
hard and backtrack. That means basically taking CO2 out of the air. Now this graph here just shows
you emissions since actually 1750, the area under this curve starting 1950 here. Basically
there's we have emitted 350 gigatons up through last year and if emissions continue growing at
the 3% per year rate that they have been for the last decade, we would expect another 250
gigatons to be released into the air in the next 20 years. So we have a total of 600 gigatons to get
rid of. That is to say we have to draw down first of all an amount sufficient to counter all of the
continuing emissions and then the green part here shows you the amount we have to draw down
to get rid of the past emissions. So we need a capacity actually of about 34 gigatons a year
because there's this five-year ramp up. So that's the capacity we have to aim for.
Now what's capable of doing this? We obviously need emergency repairs that are swift and sure
and when we start looking around at how to take carbon out of the air,
most of them don't look either big or quick and they certainly don't look very secure.
We need for example to sequester 600 gigatons of carbon and that's about what's in the force
that remain and of course we could replant a lot of the what was taken away over the centuries
and get 600 gigatons back. However, even if you could find the space in the water to do this,
the climate forecast is for more drought, more high winds, making this insufficiently
secure against fire and rot. So Freepin Dyson's favorite fix, while it might have worked back
in 1977 when he proposed it, is really a non-starter in today's climate with all of that
doubling since then. We can't go around ignoring the other dimensions of the climate problem we
now have. We can't even protect our existing rainforests from fire and drought.
So how do we remove so much CO2 without doing it on land?
Those schemes abound for scrubbing CO2 with proprietary chemicals like they do in submarines.
Time is too short to rely upon finding the power to run such a giant with new industry.
But it's not necessary to remove CO2 directly from the air to reduce its concentration there
and that's because photosynthesis already removes about 210 gigatons each year in creating
in creating organic carbon molecules.
Now they capture but of course it all goes back into the air at the end of the carbon cycle
and it's released both from respiration and from solid decomposition as biomass burns and rots.
If we intercept some of the decomposition carbon before it reaches its usual atmospheric
destination, the carbon cycle becomes unbalanced and the CO2 in the air decreases via the continuing
photosynthesis. To avoid competing with the world's production and freshwater supplies however
most of an equestrian organic carbon must come from new biomass not existing and grown in new
places not existing and then kept out of the atmospheric circulation and I think that only
the oceans are going to out to be sufficiently big and secure enough to do this. Our emergency
repair then involves both efficiently creating new ocean biomass via fertilization or such
and efficiently sinking it into the thousand-year depths which turns out to be the big problem.
There is lots of sinking now. You're familiar with the hepatic smurdeal of returning current that
produces these two big sinks up here in the Labrador Sea in the Greenland Sea. There's also a couple
of sinks about only one-fourth the size down in the Antarctic. Now if you ask where the excess CO2
so far, it has accumulated in the North Atlantic Ocean. You just don't see a big hot spot like
this in the rest of the world. I've cropped off to the left. Now is that because there is more
life in the ocean there? No not really. I'm repeating it on the left here but here's the cross
section on the right so you can see the CO2 concentration as a function of depth as you go
north from the equator. And what you see above the dotted line at 500 meters depth is that there's
probably not a preponderance of CO2 in those near-surface layers. All of the hot spots excess
from the vertical inventory comes from the waters below 500 meters. That's where it's being stored.
And while some of this is from water, mixing and such, most of it really is from those
petties and whirlpools that sink to the surface. Largest nature downwelling is that 200 kilometer
wide central gyre of the Greenland Sea up at about 75 north. It rotates at high clockwise as you
might expect, sinking surface waters. But there's a series of smaller clockwise whirlpools that form
on its margin. The whirlpools are only about 30 kilometers across but they have cores of about
five kilometers that are really rotating like a solid object rather than a dissipative one.
They are much more effective than a gyre in sinking surface waters below 500 meters.
So let's look now at how to try to take advantage of this. I'm going to give you a quick look at
the oceans carbon cycle, ask what fertilization and settling out can do, and then I'll look at how
to better sink the new production we create. Here is a picture of the surface layers. It's
really defined by the thermal client that is to say the temperature starts dropping after
remaining flat through the depths until you get to about 100 meters. And then below that it quickly
cools because that's water that's not being carried up to the surface periodically to
partake of the air temperature. What we have here at the top are the anthropogenic additions,
two from deforestation, a good dense carbon year from fossil fuels and cement manufacture.
There are of course other things feeding it in out of the air from vegetation, soils, rocks that
I'm not going to discuss here. But the ocean is basically absorbing about 92 per year but
it's also releasing about 90. So the CO2 that gets absorbed, all those bubbles that the waves
produce and so forth, tend to help load up the water with dissolved CO2,
much of which then becomes bicarbonates. There's also carbonates and I'll come back to dissolve
carbon in a minute. The life forms of photosynthesis take up 48 of that 92
and they of course are respiring and rotting and that puts about 37 back into the water that's
going to equilibrate with the air and only about 11 manage to settle out of this layer before it
decomposes. And that's largely from fecal pellets, from something that's large, it's the larger
copepods. There's also the downwelling, those eddies and whirlpools that carry water, carry the carbon
from this carbon soup up the surface layers down into the depths. So these are the two inputs to
the slow ocean circulation. Very little of it settles out .01 is all. Then of course most of it
up wells again but there's a considerable time delay here. I'm just calling it a thousand years but
it's really between 406,000 is the figure you should remember.
Basically the dissolved organic carbon that you get from
fecal pellets decomposing and from cells breaking up
can survive in the mixed layer for a month before the bacteria in someone's coral
take it up and and convert into CO2 via respiration.
Now it's worth saying here that the dissolved organic carbon in mass is a hundred fold larger
than the living biomass. So the bulk flow into the depths is far more efficient than any settling out.
Now once it's into the depths it is going to turn into CO2, this dissolved organic carbon life,
the living biomass that's carried down. About half of it pretty quickly changes into
CO2. Total here means includes what goes into bicarbonates properly.
The rest has about a 6,000 year residence time and that's not because there are pockets
of poor circulation. This is a widely distributed load of resistant organic carbon and apparently
takes you know about four passes through the surface layers before it ever manages to get oxidized.
So that's the background and what can we do now to augment the amount that gets into the depths?
Well the first thing to consider here is augmenting this 11 gigatons a year that settles out
and we get our necessary 30 gigatons a year by effectively quadrupling the life form in the
carbons. With that I say we could fertilize the surface layers as an iron fertilization
but you can do this lots of places. The only trouble is is that in order to do it this way
you'd have to fertilize for four fold worldwide. That's an enormous amount if you're going to
rely only upon the settling out of heavy debris to do the job. So unless we quickly develop a
farm wear efficient method for sequestering the excess circulating carbon we're back into seeing
our escape routes closing off. So let's x that one out for the moment and now I ask whether we can do
something about downwelling. Well we could pipe it down or we could augment the whirlpools for the
moment just conserve both of them together and that of course is sinking not only the
living stuff but it's sinking that far more massive dissolved organic carbon.
Now this is very much like plowing under a crop that is to say if we fertilize via pumping up
and sink nearby via bulk flow we would essentially be bearing a carbon fixing crop
and as much as farmers plow under a nitrogen fixing covered crop. Instead of sinking only
the debris that is heavy enough we would be sinking the entire organic soup which currently
before fertilization is in the North Atlantic about a gram of carbon in a cubic meter.
The atlantic's radio overturning circulation these eddies and whirlpools and the Greenland
Sea and the Labrador Sea and a few other places currently sink about six tenths of a gigaton
of carbon per year because of that. We need to sink about 50 times as much and so we might
consider fertilizing in those areas to try to get the concentration up enough
but basically I think we need another method rather than just using the existing circulation
which also turns out to be very vulnerable as I'll come back to. The need at sunlight's better
at lower latitudes and so we also need an estimate now for plant and plantations that do their
own fertilizing and sinking. Now you can obviously do this with windmills pumping up
from one depth and with another set of windmill pumps that pump down to different depths.
You can also do it with a much cheaper affair which is just basically an open pipe that has a
trapdoor valve added and it's held up by a buoy and it's weighted down by some powist.
But what this does is on the upstroke of a wave carrying this up a few meters,
trapdoor valve opens and basically this causes the water that's inside the pipe to
sort of be left behind at the bottom as if it were extruded.
Then on the downstroke of the wave the trapdoor valve is going to close
and then on the next upstroke you're leaving behind surface water in the dumps again.
Put the trapdoor valve swinging the other way and you have an up pump.
As say on the downstroke of the wave the thing's going to fall with the trapdoor valve open and
that's going to leave behind deep water near the surface.
So let's get an estimate now for the fertilization needed.
We can use some figures from AlkaCulture. What advantage is that AlkaCulture minimizes
respiration CO2 from higher up the food chain and so it gives us, allows us to estimate what
the minimum size of a point in plantation would be. As a percent of the ocean total and we have
to hope this is not 150%. Suppose that a mid-range 50 grams of algae can be grown each day under a
square meter of some wet surface about half of that is carbon. That means it takes about 10
of the minus four square meters but grow about one gigaton of carbon each year.
So to think 30 gigatons of carbon yearly would require about eight tenths of one percent of the
ocean surface which is about the size of the Caribbean. So the Caribbean is not particularly
where you want to do this. Space requirement might be less because you're not done
fiddle with well-containing algal species that are very fussy about what concentrations you do
them at. You're going to do it with the existing indigenous algal species and you're going to
try to sink them just as quickly as possible to make room for more to be grown. The ocean pipes
spacing and the volume of pump down are going to depend upon the outflow that you need to optimize
the organic carbon production's sinkable fractures. This is what's called the dilution problem in
the lucid room. Only field trials are really likely to provide this estimate that you need
to find the needed size of the plantation to pump numbers and therefore what's going to cost.
I want to give you just one example of how you might do this. It's not so much a ready-to-roll
proposal as much as a challenge, something to improve or replace. While remembering the solution
space is constrained by the need to be big, quick, and secure. And what I think this quick example
shows is that a major recovery is probably still possible. So you can either pump down with wind
mills or you can pump down with these pipes that bounce up and down with the waves. And I'm using
wind mills here in my illustration just because they're a lot easier to see than buoys. What you
wind up doing is these are floating but they're tethered together and anchored to the bottom.
So the current that's flowing through this area is moving water away from us here.
And so if we pump up nutrients here towards the collectors, let's say this row of pumps would
be pumping point and down and you'll be repeating this. I've shown a fishing lane down through the
middle of this sort of a cable free area where traditional fishing could be practiced because
this is going to attract a lot of fish and that's respiration in CO2 that you can
do without. You want to keep this a decomposition CO2 matter.
Remember, these are a couple of sort of optional slides. They're really aimed at the pros.
One of the standard objections is the box ball nutrient story. And I just want to emphasize here
what these are going to do is to form plumes that go off. And the plumes are only 20 years long
and the loop time to come back you know is more like a thousand years and of course very dilute by
them. So you're not really having this this is no study state kind of model. This is a model of
plumes and the same is true for what you pump down. That is to say it too is not going to come
back and if you're not necessarily going to have these two plumes interacting with one another
all you have to do is change the the depths of their pipes so that what's pumped down doesn't
feed back into what's pumped up. So this is instead of box balls you basically need a
heron plantus model. That is to say you can't step in the same river twice. This is what's
so different about this kind of proposal compared to the usual box model inferences.
The fisheries bonus
fertilization is going to create a lot of fish and there's some good reasons to
try doing this fertilization in the major fisheries areas. They've declined an enormous
amount and even where sustainable harvesting is now practiced it still results in fish biomass
about 73 percent below natural levels. So there's a lot of room to improve this back up.
The outer part of the continental shelf is a particularly good place to do this because
first of all what you pump down is likely to be carried by the undertow
out over the lip of the continental shelf and it's much more likely to fall into the depths.
So
continental shelf sites for all this would include the Baltic and North Seas
and also the east the ocean that's east of the Americas and Asia.
You want to note from that that these are all relatively wealthy countries that can afford to
do something like this. While the way is into this if I need the appropriate designs
and would minimize getting into trouble there's a great place for field trials and that is there
about 4,000 oil and gas platforms in the Gulf of Mexico that are currently in operation.
There are another 3,000 that were built in the past but are out of commission now.
So there's a lot of room to just take an existing platform append a pipe to it and
run the pulp with whatever is handy. You could do it again some insight into what
this is doing with the ecosystems up top and below.
So here we have a candidate for removing all 600 gigatons of excess carbon by 2030.
It's the second on the spot plankton plantation that basically moves CO2 production into the
thousand year depths. It's a local vertical loop for fertilization and sequestration
that's relatively low-tech and it really mimics the natural upwelling and downlong processes.
There's nothing novel except the quantities and the seasons in which it's being done.
It has some unique advantages compared to the current climate strategies.
It's big quick and secure which you can't say about any of the others.
It's impervious to drought and to hold out governments. It does not compete for land,
freshwater, fuel, or electricity. It's why I like to call a cognitive carrot
an immediate payoff every year in terms of fish catch while growing the climate fix,
the 600 gigatons of carbon emergency drawdown. It does not rely upon improbable self-denial
by developing countries, treaties that take longer to negotiate than to ignore,
or on finding a solution to the tragedy of the commons.
Questions that I get on this, answers the few of them to get us started.
Is it expensive? Well, just to take the pipe pump,
the wave-powered pipe pumps, it's been estimated they may cost $1,000
installed in mass production. So even a million of them would only cost,
would cost no more than the billion dollars currently spent in a single month on dog food
in the U.S. As a policy aside, we can't afford to rely on any one method,
not even this one. So we must budget on the 1,000-fold larger scale of what an unbudgeted
bank bailout might cost. What are the operating costs once you get it installed?
Well, unlike fishing and farming, nothing about succulent spot plant implementations
will necessarily require handling, transport, processing, delivery, so on.
Continuing costs would primarily be for maintenance and monitoring, and licensing fishing boats.
Won't it pollute? Well, perhaps not as proposed here. I mean, you're using a local algae and
nutrients in a vertical loop. But the usual considerations would apply should we want to
introduce exotic or modified algal species to achieve even higher rates of sinking potential CO2.
What about dead zones forming from anoxia? You'd certainly have to avoid the shallow
continental shelf sites like off the Mississippi. Because the hypoxia that occurs when you have
all that biomass turning into CO2 using oxygen from the water, the fish that get trapped in
one of these walls developing, of course, get killed. And that's where their particularly
bad reputation comes from. What you really need here are the plumes, the Heraclitus situation,
where things are always being carried away. One advantage of windmill pumps is that compressed
air could be injected into the Archimedes screw chamber that forces the water down.
And to try to assure that there's sufficient oxygen available for the new CO2 production
in the depths, so as to avoid anoxia. There's the Sirius. We don't know what will happen,
objection. It's going to apply to anything we try, but let me try here. Fertilizing and sinking
surface waters barely mimics, although in new locations or new seasons, those natural processes
seen on a large scale in water mixing and in ocean upwelling and downwelling.
The Earth's recovery, I might note, from the last major greenhouse episode 55 million years ago,
also involves sinking the excess carbon into the ocean depths. Question, won't this just move the
ocean acidification problem into the depths? It's currently in a matter of surface waters.
While there are already massive downloads of surface waters with their 30% acidity increase,
since the depths are 98% of the ocean volume, this means there's a 50-fold dilution of this
acidity. Sinking 600 gigatons of carbon would only add one to two percent to the deep ocean
in our gang carbon concentration at what affects the acidity. But that also means we cannot keep
up a 30 gigaton per year sinking rate for a century without more serious impacts.
To reiterate, this climate fix is an emergency repair. It's not a model for how to do things in the
future. After 2013, we should be pumping only enough to offset any remaining out-of-control
emissions. As say, we'll go from pumping capacity of about 34 and we'll shut down about 30 of them,
so we're still pumping, say, for gigatons per year. But we're going to maintain those extra 30
so that we can turn them back on again to offset any bulk burps of CO2 that you get from
clathrates coming unstuck from the ocean bottom. We might want to pump an additional
two gigatons per year to offset continuing deforestation. An additional amounts could
be pumped to offset such CO2 heating equivalents as the methane leaks in the albedo loss.
Question, what side effects might the pumps have on the North Atlantic's overturning circulation?
Well, let me give you some background on this. Models suggest that flushing will decline about 30%
on average by 2100 and this is basically because global warming has increased
high latitude rainfall dilutes the surface water so that they don't sink as well.
However, just from observational stuff rather than models, the two major downwelling sites are
already wildly fluctuating, suggesting that a major component of current climate is quite unstable.
The largest flushing site, Greenland City, declined at least 80% in 1978, recovered in
1996. The next largest in the Labrador Sea failed in 1997 and recovered 10 years later in the winter
of 0708. Now, I can suggest a way of helping to stabilize this using the same kind of pumps.
Pumping up deep water in the right places might strengthen the whirlpools and pumping
up dense water that will then sink again. Such denser water would prime the surface
waters to spiral down and that would entrain a lot of less dense water with it so there'd be
enough gain from this. So, in summary, the three Rs here, relieve, reverse, restore.
Well, sufficiency O2 reduction should relieve heat waves and many of overheatings knock on
problems such as deluging, drought, and expansion of the tropics. In the case of the certification
and of the thermal expansion of the oceans, we can talk of reversal. But in many state-dependent
systems, history really matters. For example, the destabilized ice sheets that we are currently
are getting may continue to slide downhill even if you cool things off. Many ecosystems exhibit
regime shifts and some may prove difficult to restore. As, say, once the Amazon's rainforests
are destroyed, plants' secession may stay stuck at grasslands for a very long time.
Having squandered the 50 years since our climate problems were first discovered,
we may no longer have the luxury of proceeding in the cautious manner seen, for example,
with genetically modified crops. By now, it's really getting to be more like Ward,
the two figures in the background here, and the screaming, shrieking face.
The cartoonists have exploited this, and Subai sent me this. He does have a point.
Well, I actually have four points. What I've shown here are, first of all, abrupt climate shifts
are already here and frequent. Secondly, they are like heart attacks from aspirin overdose.
Dialysis is urgently needed to head off heart attacks.
Only oceans are likely to capture enough excess CO2 to do the job.
And finally, only bulk flow is likely to hide enough CO2.
The political leadership we need is in this voice from 300, 400 years ago.
The public interest requires doing today those things that men of intelligence and goodwill
would wish five or 10 years hence had been done. And that, I hope, is not the end. Questions, please.
This has been a talk by William Calvin at WilliamCalvin.org. You can find the
PDF and PowerPoint files, and also an audio version of this for a podcast.
