Although, most department building garages were designed long before electric vehicle
charging was initial and even in the 26-story building where I live, there are only a few
110-volt AC outlets in the entire garage.
So each EV that's been added, total of five or six by now, has had to pay for an installation
of 110 or 220 to their parking space.
We're entering a decade where there's going to be an enormous expansion in the number
of EVs, and the question is what adequate parking garages that was designed before the
EV era are going to do about it.
This is a report on making that kind of charging overnight at your own parking space a convenient
way to do it.
No more visits and waiting around at polling stations, electric or otherwise.
So this is a survey of the charging problems of EVs in general and in particular what to
do about the antiquated garages.
I'm going to start with a few little side, short subjects of range, anxiety, and history
of electric vehicles, and then I'll get around to the question of how do you retrofit your
pre-EV apartment building garage to make overnight EV charging routine and easy.
Our range anxiety, we all have with our gas vehicles.
We don't like to run out of gas or even drive on the fumes, and it's a similar problem with
EVs except the range would be shorter for big vehicles.
There's one simple thing to do if you're worried about running low on fuel, and this
is true for both gasoline and electric vehicles.
Just slow down.
That is to say there will be much less air resistance to overcome if you're going 50
miles an hour than if you're going 75 factor two.
That's because kinetic energy that you have to impart to the air to get it up to speed.
That goes to the square of the loss.
That's why slowing down from 70 to 50 can be so effective in extending range.
The numbers I'm giving here for Tesla Model S, which has been very good to look at aerodynamic
design.
So the percentages may not be quite the same, but here's the general rule.
Each 10 miles per hour decreases speed, gains you about 50 miles in full tank range on a
level road.
That's if you start driving 50 from the start of the tank, not the middle.
If you don't start until the middle of the tank, you can only gain 50 miles in dropping
from 70 to 50.
Similarly, if you're one of these people who doesn't worry about anything until it's down
to a corner tank, you can still pick up a little bit, 12 miles in range.
The second short subject is benefit of history of the first electric vehicles.
In Scotland, they were experimenting with electric carriages in the late 1830s.
But it really took Nikolai Tesla's 1887 invention of the AC motor to make he the successful
product.
Compared to DC motors, which we think would be logical given DC batteries, AC motors are
much wider and more controllable range of torque engines.
They're also less noisy, they're the sparks to fly, and the AC motors are much more trouble-free.
This led to a lot of car manufacturers becoming more successful, and while there were gasoline
and horseless carriages and electric, they were flooding the market for a while.
There was even advertising, as you can see here.
Here in Seattle, there was an electric car club back in those years.
These switch in the market.
There weren't many EVs after 1920.
That's because gas won the competition, which was, of course, disastrous for both for visible
air pollution and asthma and so on, and for the CO2 accumulation in the air and its effect
on global climate.
The reason behind the losing the competition is exactly the same as my topic today.
I've just localized it to my local garage here, and it'll apply I think to yours too.
There are two things, the range, how far you can go on a full charge, and the time it takes
to recharge the battery.
It's always longer than it would take to fill up a gas tank.
The early 20th century EVs were fine for a round town, provided there was an electrified
garage at home.
Having a range of only perhaps 10 miles limited any driving about or suburban commute, and
you couldn't just double up on the batteries very long because they were made of lead.
Even if there was an electrical output at your outer town destination, recharging took
too long.
The competing gas guzzlers had fuel that could be trucked around to filling stations out
there, and it only took 5 or 10 months to refill.
EVs lacking this circumflet ecosystem were outcompeted by the polluting internal combustion
engines ecosystem.
It's hard not to think that if only day's battery technology had arrived a century earlier,
we might have only half the climate problems that we do.
The speed of development can really matter.
Basically recharging comes in sort of three levels, as they're called, and they're basically
slow, medium, and fast, and they also correspond to the spy voltages from the building, 110,
220, and 440.
The fill times you get are days, say two or three days on 110, overnight on 220, and you
can get a half fill in about 15 minutes now on things like the test and superchargers
and the DC fast chargers.
So level one uses the familiar 110 bolt outlet.
Almost every EV comes with such a charging cable, and it is adequate for topping up the
tank, the charge, every night.
After having driven no more than 30 to 50 miles during the day, you'll still be able
to get full.
Your drive of 100, it won't be quite full, and you'll get the next morning.
Level two, which uses a 220 bolt outlet or a hardware charger, looks on the wall, it's
about eight tons faster, and you can get 200, even 300 miles of range in some situations
during that period of time.
But still, it's got to be localized to your assigned parking space, rather than something
that you were having to move all the time, and that's pretty much the problem.
I should say that there are 220 bolt outlets in places other than filling stations, superchargers.
For example, RV parks tend to have both 110 and 220 bolt hookups, like this, or here's
a more northwestern scene.
This is what the times and the number of miles per hour is not a speed.
This is the number of miles range gained in one hour of charge.
It's something like four or 110, it can be up to 30, say it's about eight times usually.
For some of the specialized wall connectors like Teslas, you can get even higher.
The time from a full charge, that is how you empty it, which you should never get near,
you can drop from 80 hours of time to far, far less.
Most lot of two-charging, other than pointing into 220 with your adapter, comes from these
kinds of devices that are used, forget, they have, the plot they have is 1772, is 1772,
it's nearly all things other than Tesla use that.
And Teslas can use it if they just use this adapter, which you'll see over here on the
right.
This is an installation in one of our buildings.
Superchargers work somewhat differently than the others.
They deliver DC stepped up to 440 volts directly to the car, bypassing the charger on the car
that normally does the job of changing the voltage and then rectify DC.
By bypassing that, many of EVs can charge much faster.
Level 3 is the Tesla superchargers and DC fast chargers that do this bypass with 440 volts.
It's what you tend to need if you're thinking in terms of your old filling station habits
of not going to the filling station anymore often than you have to, and therefore laying
the tank down to quarter full for you to begin thinking about it.
You need these level 3 chargers for road trips, unless you're planning extremely carefully.
Level 3 is also needed if you don't have an electrified garage or a daytime place to park
that has charging, which some employers are now beginning to provide.
The first level 3 chargers were indeed okay.
The superchargers, while there are some of them that have 20 or 30 parking spots on site,
road the I5 from Southern California to Northern California has some, generally there's maybe
10 superchargers on the site, sometimes only 4.
The Tesla superchargers are different from all the others in the, you just plug in and
walk away, just like you would a home charger.
There's no credit card or membership card, there's no phone call to make, convey that
information, and that's because the Tesla connectors, besides the power, the 440 volt
power here, there's also 3 or so connectors whose job is just communication, and that
enables the standalone chargers to read cars, then a number, a serial number, and to look
up in their database to see if there's a charge card associated with that car, and if so to
switch on the power.
So when you initially plug these in, there's no 440 volt on the thing to stick your finger
into, because it doesn't turn on until it's firmly seated in the socket, and a few seconds
have passed for all this hand shaking to take place.
There are now some gas stations that are beginning to provide for the charging, and I think we're
going to see a lot more of that, partly because the feds have got about five billion to start
giving away its grants to encourage level three charging, and I expect that much of that money
will be spent rather like this installation.
So, big garages in apartment buildings, they're going to need a lot more than they currently
have by 2030. That's when some states are proposing to stop non-easy new car sales,
and when some major car manufacturers, like Volvo, say they will stop making non-ease.
So what's an adequate new department building, even if it's only 15 years old like ours,
going to do about this? First we need to ask about driver psychology in terms of results,
and there are three different strategies for these, as opposed to your one strategy usually
for gasoline, which is minimize the number of times you have to go to that smelly place,
stand around filling a tank, and therefore waiting until it's down to a quarter of a
floor to do it. You have to substitute about three different mindsets for different situations
with units.
If you aren't driving that much every day, say 30 to 50 miles a day, you can fill,
you can top up your battery overnight if you've got a 110 volt output nearby.
Okay, this is the luxury of having a full charge every morning.
If you should need a quicker charge, there at the immediate solution is to park overnight
at a loading zone space that's kind of level two while not in charge. Trouble is that you
have to remember to move the car when you're done and it's often inconvenient.
Our building now has some though, takes about way to operate.
Secondly, we can suppose that you're using your EV for a long commute every day,
so the tank won't be completely filled, the battery won't be completely filled overnight,
and it'll drift down during the week, but you've also got to consider what to do
if there's no nearby output provided.
So you can use a level two charger for some hours, or you can spend 15-20 months on the
level three charger down the street.
Then there's the problem of departing on road trips without a full charge. That used to be
quite a problem in a lot of literature on the subject focuses on it still, but now the super
chargers and the level three fast chargers are getting to be common enough that within about
a mile of my apartment building there are three of them, and there's more coming.
So it is possible to do the standard gas station, spend 15-30 minutes.
Our problem, I think, is making it easy to top up every night. I mean that does
mean you have to provide an electrical outlet or at least an extension cord.
There are ones assigned to parking space. The second thing to consider as we design this
is keep those cables off the horse. It's just too easy to trip on them when you're backing out of the trunk,
packaging your hands, and you get your feet in tight with the cord that you can't see.
It's really best to suspend the connector from the charger overhead alongside,
say, the tail light of the park TV, and if you use a bungie cord you can then pull it down
to the correct elevation of the car. You also want to protect the connector from hitting
the floor and getting dead. They're built pretty heavily just because of this hazard,
but every single one of the systems on sale it seems. Still, our just running cables
cross the floor, and it means you can drop the connector onto the floor rather easily.
So, solving all those problems and using the 110-volt charger cable that came with
your TV, you want to do all these things to make it both easy and safe,
but if you want to continue to use that mobile connector on road trips you have to remove it
from whatever brackets you've installed, and that means you should be able to buy an extra
charger cable for a couple of hundred dollars.
Okay, these are some of the ways that machine shops and do-it-yourself shops and so on
use to bring electricity to a table in the middle of the room. They basically use the shower curtain
arrangement to get the extension cord over and plug in, but that's not really suitable for here,
and the reason is that here on the right you see what a charger cable often looks like,
and it's always got a short connector here to get to the power source, and a long connector here
to get from near the outlet all the way over to the car. 20-21 feet is pretty much the standard
distance. The portion that needs suspending waist high along the car is just the last four or five
feet of this cable. So here's one of the ways that I did it for demonstration purposes. Here's my
red Tesla here. Here's its connector dangling down from an overhead.
You don't really need a bumpy cord to do this if you just want to drop farther down
so that you can pick it up and move it over to the car. But the bumpy cord is nice if you want to
suspend the connector above, say, the rear deck instead. That means you can get out of the car
and just turn around, grab the handle here, plug it in to the socket right here, and walk away.
You should be careful to support the weight if this is sort of heavy back here,
and you can put in a bracket to hold it. But basically running the cable is now
a lot easier because there are stick-on connectors that are strong enough to hold a
flower pot. Each of them is rated about 22 pounds and you can always double up on them
in places where you might be pulling the water. I've done turning the corner here using a bumpy
cord here to allow the cable to curve and go square through the hook.
This is what the sky hook looks like. And this way you can, if you don't have a convenient overhead
pipe in just the right place to hang from, you can use a sky hook like this to precisely position
where the connector cable dines. That allows you to keep the aisle between adjacent cars
open and only dangle it over your space.
So here again is the mine sets that you have to have free of charge.
And let me just sort of go back about and look at gas vehicle
line sets. First of all, refilling requires a weekly visit to a special
oil stain parking spot, and you have to vacate immediately when you're done.
This is still true with EVs if you don't have an electrified parking space for eight hours
during the night or during the day.
Fill the tank to full is simply logical if you want to reduce the number of trips to the filling
station. But for EVs, there are occasions where there's an exception, it's really counterintuitive.
But filling up from three quarters to full with a gasoline tank doesn't take any longer than going
from half to three quarters. But in EVs, the battery charge rate slows way down for the last
quarter of the capacity. And so if you get in a hurry on a road trip and you want to get right back
on the road, the strategy is to stop recharging at three quarters full and then hit the road.
So you're refilling at a half tanks range, but that's basically about when you're going to take
rest stops anyway. But waiting until refilling until quarter down is only for highway trips.
In town, the philosophy is to just top up every night as you're a local friendly 110-volt hour.
Now let me say a few final words about other aspects of EVs.
How much does it cost my apartment building to supply my electricity? Well, I'm in Seattle and we
have some of the cheapest electric rates in the country, so now you may not relate to this.
But at least in Seattle to fill up an EV, even a Tesla, will cost about five dollars.
The electric rates are about twice that in residential situations, but large commercial
customers it's five. That's of course compared to a hundred dollars plus filling up a gas tank.
EVs pay usually a license fee of here it's 150 a year to make up for what you're not paying for
road repairs and so forth via the gasoline tanks. EVs also of course have many fewer items to break.
Their partial list is dramatically shorter than conventional cars. And there's not much for a
routine service except to fill up the windshield washer foot. That is the only way that's accessible.
There are no
secret one here. Okay. There are no
drive shafts. There are no mufflers, catalytic converters. There's no oil to change.
And all those things are not there on an electric vehicle and so there's really many fewer repairs.
It wasn't obvious that was going to be true at the beginning, but certainly for Teslas that's
how it's worked out. There are also some advantages for example the dual motor EVs, certainly Teslas.
Are excellent at automatically recovering from squatters and skids because there's independent
control of the wheels and speeds. So they have artificial intelligence computers
that have been trained to get you out of skids.
Teslas are also designed to be bottom heavy to put all the batteries under the floor of the
passenger compartment. And that's even below the level of the wheels actually. So you can see how
hard it might be to tip over Teslas compared to the ones that have a lot of heavy weight up above
wheels such as conventional gasoline motors.
And many other EV models have just taken the conventional successful style of passengers
and left off the gasoline engine and self the engine compartment with heavy batteries and such.
So there are some real advantages to looking at things like Teslas that have been designed
from the bottom up to be an electric vehicle. And of course EVs don't produce tail pipe
pollution. You want to try to drive behind anything, whatever it was. That's that. Thank you very much.
