Hello, I'm William Calvin, a medical school professor at the University of Washington
in Seattle, and here I'm going to talk about climate denial.
Psychological factors are now playing a key role in our failure to address the looming
climate crisis.
While analyzing what's going on with psychology, I'll summarize the climate science that's
being denied, including the knock on consequences of global overheating that we're already
suffering from.
Denial is sometimes woeful, it's a fine example of back in Galileo's time when he invited
other astronomers to look through the telescope, and they refused to do so.
He was describing imperfections to the heavenly bodies, and they said everyone knew they were
a perfect sphere, so there was no need to look.
So again, we have an example here of saying what you're expected to say rather than what
you might actually think.
The modern parallel, of course, is all the people who don't believe the IPCC 2007 climate
assessment, despite never having read it.
Well, practice is one.
Alison Wonderland says at one point, there's no use trying, she said, one can't believe
impossible things, said the queen.
I dare say you haven't had much practice, why sometimes I've believed as many as six
impossible things before breakfast.
Next I'm going to give you about a three-slide orientation to global warming and the proposed
treatments.
Climate is just the long-term view of weather.
It's the annual averages of temperature, precip, winds, as well as their annual highs
and lows.
When temperature sets a new high, that's just weather the first time it happens, but when
such new high type events repeat, only a few years later you start suspecting climate
change.
The 2003 European heat wave could have been mere weather, a once in 500 years event, but
then it repeated in 2010.
By now, most of us know that we're overheating, but that's been clear only since 1976.
There's a lack of trend from 1950 to 1976 that certainly confused things.
But since 1976, it's been going up exactly the way that you might expect from the greenhouse
effect, and the greenhouse effect is mostly from burning coal and oil and natural gas
to put CO2 in the air.
Most people know that it promises to get much worse sort of someday, unless of course we
reduce emissions, clean cars, clean energy, more efficient than that.
This is basically the 1970s greenhouse gas agenda, largely unchanged, trying to get
this across for 40 years now without much success.
But things have changed in that 40 years since then.
It's not only slowly overheating, but we now have taken into account that the extreme events
that do the damage, not just the air conditioning bills during the summertime, it promises to
get much worse, but because of the suddenness of the extreme events, it could be later this
year as well as the end of the century.
Once we reduce emissions, this list really is totally inadequate now.
It would have worked perhaps back in the 1970s.
But now unless you do a real fix that removes the CO2, all these things will be too little
as well as too late.
Now, a view of climate denial and its paid promotion.
First of all, we have to sort of separate skepticism from denial.
When climate scientists may be skeptical about a given line of data or argument, but there's
certainly no blanket skepticism amongst the scientists like there is amongst the so-called
climate skeptics.
We've heard climate science called a hoax by several presidential candidates.
It's very reminiscent of what was heard back in the Weimar Germany era just before Hitler.
Political right called Einstein's theory of relativity a hoax and said he was in it for
the money, much as climate deniers argue today.
Rick Perry, the Texas governor, said, climate change is unproven theory created by a substantial
number of scientists who have manipulated data so that they will have dollars rolling
into their projects.
These sort of ad hominem attacks on scientists and other things designed to get them to keep
their heads down politically has become, but there are also economic aspects of denial.
And let me go through the history of more efficient use of electricity.
This is the electricity consumption per person since 1960.
And what you see here is the US consumption went up from about four to about 12.
So we've tripled our per-person use of electricity over that period.
But you notice here there's this one state, California, and all of Western Europe is similar
to this, which after 1973 oil crisis times decreased their dependence and managed to
hold electricity consumption flat.
Now you might ask what that funny red line is up there.
Well, let's see another line first.
These are the so-called blue states that voted for the Democratic presidential candidate
in 2004.
Well those are the red states.
Indeed, in addition to climate denial, they probably like to engage in electricity consumption
denial because this shows them as the most profligate wasters of electricity in the country.
Next I want to suggest that denial is not so much about doubting the science as it is
about avoiding ostracism.
A couple of public opinion polls here.
Questions been asked every year in the last 10 is, have the effects of global warming
already begun?
And they also ask the people to describe themselves as either liberal, moderate, or conservative.
And you see here that while the people describing themselves as liberals thought global warming
had begun by about 70%, moderates by about 60%, there's a conservatist while they're
up at 50%, then dipped and then went back up to 50%, and that had this precipitous decline
after Tea Party politics came in down to 30%.
So you can see that at least two out of five of the conservatives, that would be four out
of ten conservatives rather, have changed their mind about the facts.
Now this isn't due to, I think, an ignorance of science or a lack of interest in science
if you take and ask what percent of Americans surveyed describe themselves as being interested
in science.
It's pretty high.
It's up around 90%.
Medical discovery is a bit more so, space exploration a bit less so, but it's pretty high.
And you've got to try to square that.
So it's not a matter that people aren't interested in science, it's that they make exceptions
for certain subjects.
And evolution, denying evolution is the classic, just ask evolution true or false.
Some countries will get 85%, 90% people saying it's true.
And in the U.S., if you ask that, you'll get an answer down about 40%.
U.S. is down with the Islamic countries in this regard.
It really has to be seen as a cultural phenomenon.
One of the best analyses for climate denial is the following.
We have a strong interest in mirroring the views of our own cultural group.
On issues like climate change, for most people, these cultural calculations trump any attempt
to make an objective assessment of the evidence.
This is Dodd Kehan from Yale speaking.
The climate denial, it seems to me, is trying to make climate taboo subject with ostracism
as the threat.
Now let's discuss denial and belief.
Scientists don't believe in global warming.
That's not a fair thing to say.
It's not a matter of belief anymore.
It's no longer a hunch or a hypothesis, because we can give you a dozen lines of evidence
for overeating.
And even if one of them had problems serious enough to make us distrust it, this wouldn't
make the other 11 go away.
So let's go through some of nature's thermometers.
Here's the instrumental record that I showed you before, except I've overlaid another four
data sets that show you basically the same thing.
And they're snipped from this illustration of the so-called hockey stick, going back
to 1800, the estimates of temperature.
Well, suppose for some reason this were all wrong, improbable, that seems, but suppose
it was.
Well, it wouldn't change anything about the climate prognosis.
Here's pictures of a glacier in Austria in 1985, and again, 15 years later, vastly reduced
in size.
This has been happening worldwide.
Here's South America, one of the big ice sheets in the Andes, spelling over into a valley.
And 20 years afterwards, it was reduced to very little.
Do you, in fact, know the story of the Arctic sea ice?
If we take a look at Greenland there, that is ice that is about two miles thick, and
over the Arctic Ocean, that's just floating ice.
Same as on a pond, except it might be one or two meters thick.
But the amount of it at the end of summer has diminished quite a lot.
And some of the models are now suggesting that another 30 years or so, nothing might
be left in summer.
Then there are indicators such as diseases that get out of control as the water isn't
cold enough, because too many beetle larvae survive the water, and when they start eating
everything in sight in the springtime, they damage the bark of the trees, so badly the
trees die.
This is up in British Columbia, and it's showing you the extent of the damage from the pine
beetle infestation.
This is producing a amount of CO2 from the trees rotting, and sometimes burning, about
a CO2 that is even greater than that produced by all the cars and trucks on Canada's highways.
Then you have wildfires, and they stay down at about a half million acres each year in
the western U.S. up until about 1976, when the temperature started going up, and then
you see that the wildfires have increased tenfold in just a 30 year period.
And America is really only catching up to the rest of the world's fire problems.
You see from these bar graphs of the 1950s, 60s, 70s, 80s, 90s, that the rest of the world
started having a lot more fire, long before we did.
Another of the indirect effects of overheating is you have more heavy rain events, and also
heavier snow events as well.
It's really nonsense saying that if you have a lot of snow in the winter that it's a disproof
of global warming.
In fact, it is one of the proofs, because what was predicted long ago just from thermodynamics
was that there was going to be a lot of additional evaporation from the tropics being caught
here, and that this would fall, some of it on land, creating floods.
There are consequences of that, it seemed local.
So let's discuss floods now.
Floods also have been going up, and this is just the bar chart for the Americans.
These are the number of floods in the 1950s, in the 60s, 70s, 80s, and what you say is
that in the 60s the number of floods doubled.
In the 70s they doubled the 60s, and in the 80s they doubled the 70s, and so on.
So the Americans have had a severe problem, and again it's a worldwide issue.
This has been happening all over the place.
In particular, let's look, going back to very heavy precipitation.
This is just the US, and what you notice here is New England up there has a 67% increase
over the few decades ago.
In the number of days with very heavy precipitation, the country is up in general, it's not down
anywhere, but New England, and even down into West Virginia, has really been getting.
This is the scientist's editorial comment in a news article.
The intellectual rot runs wide, 96 of 100 newly elected Republican members of Congress
either deny climate change is real, or have signed pledges, vowing not to spend a nickel
on it.
So how can people deny all of this very different kind of data on climate change getting us
into more and more trouble?
Well there's a bumper sticker that does summarize, and I've already made up my mind, don't confuse
me with the facts.
The question is still why.
So where are these people really coming from?
Are they stupid?
I think that sort of name calling is just an underestimate thing.
I think opportunists might be a bit closer, at least for the leadership.
There's the sole principle of follow the money, sort of a legal principle that somebody who
would gain something from an action or an event is probably responsible for it.
And follow the money in this case shows that just in an 18th month period, the energy industry
spent half a billion dollars fighting climate change legislation.
And according to scientists, much of the effort was to cast doubt on the findings of climate
science or to impune scientists' reputations and motives.
You have to imagine climate scientists raising a half billion dollars to counter this, and
it's very lopsided to fair.
Encouraging people to adopt a head and sand posture, in the case climate has some very
real consequences, and it's not just in providing fodder for the cartoonists.
There are very dangerous consequences to this.
Like making the earth uninhabitable, unable to feed most of its 7 billion humans, population
crashes are very cruel.
They're full of famine, pestilence, war, and jeffinset.
And that's the bottom line here, what we're facing in this climate crisis.
Far far efforts prove too little, too late.
And particularly when you know that it's sort of the equivalent of encouraging the town
drunkard to bury his head and sand at the railroad tracks, when you know there's a train
coming.
I mean, people who did that to the village drunkard, for example, would probably face
spurter charges, but nothing like that is available as remedy for the very concentrated
effort that the fossil fuel industry is making to continue its profits a little longer.
There's also quite a history to the big lie, because one of its early practitioners proved
so quotable.
The bigger the lie, the more people will leave in it, Hitler's minister of propaganda.
If you repeat a lie, often enough, it becomes the truth.
And Goebbels claims in his diary that he could make people believe the triangles and circles
were the same thing.
Well, now ignore all the paid orchestration, denial and delay.
What about honest differences explored for a while?
There's a number of things we sort of have to take on face sometimes.
But, for example, scientists have beliefs just as a businessman might have a belief
that opening a new restaurant on a particular street corner ought to be successful.
But scientists' beliefs like this are always tentative, they're sort of what leads you
to spend several years trying to get at the facts through clever experiments.
But when you could finally establish facts, say, when the corner restaurant never turns
to profit, facts trump beliefs.
In science, we like to say with Thomas Huxley that the great tragedy of science is the slaying
of the beautiful hypothesis by an ugly fact.
And it happens all the time, science is the way we make progress.
So there have been lots of facts that have developed since 1970.
There's no doubt now that most of the overheating is due to the now 40% excess of CO2 in the
air.
Nor is there any doubt that this excess largely comes from deforestation and about four times
larger fossil fuels.
Nor is there any doubt that humans cause most of the starting with pickaxle technologies.
Is the doubts now being raised about whether the global warming diagnosis is correct?
Were the questions raised by scientists themselves back in the 1970s?
But nearly all doubts have now been resolved by 40 years of hard work yielding new data.
But you wouldn't know that from listening to the usual commentators.
The public discussion has stayed stuck on the beginner's questions.
Well, just go into people that you might blame for this.
We could blame the loud mouse.
We could blame the media for not showing up the loud mouse.
We could blame the denying delay squad.
We could blame the scientists for ineffective communication and education for their failure
to try a different approach after years.
So let's discuss now the psychological defense mechanisms that lead into this.
I originally thought when I started researching this subject that it might be what in psychiatry
is called denial at work, but now I'd say that's not the case.
The medical meaning of denial is, goes like this.
Denial is perhaps the most primitive and best known of the psychological defense mechanisms.
People may simply ignore unpleasant facts.
They filter out stuff that conflicts with their self-image, their prejudices, their preconceived
notions of others, and of the world.
When something interferes with our self-image, or when we are afraid, or guilty, or confused,
we tend to deny it.
And climate involves all four of them, even without the blowing smoke campaigns aimed
confusing people.
What we now see are methods that were adopted from the earlier asbestos and tobacco campaigns
being used to confuse people now.
Which type denial are we talking about?
There are a number of connotations of which we'll find in the dictionary.
We may say deny when we really mean reject or refute, or when we merely disbelieve something.
There is a medical level, sort of a delusion type denial.
These patients really don't know they're doing it.
It can take years of psychoanalysis to finally convince them of it.
Or of course denial could really just be avoidance, or it could be a cop-out, for example.
Let's look at the cop-out.
Failure to engage with some aspects of climate science and geoengineering responses could
be a cop-out.
That's a delaying action because of fearing failure and wanting nothing to do with the
failure.
We medical school professors try to teach the medical students the dangers of delaying
action.
One of the sayings is that the doc who waits until dead certain is likely to wind up with
a dead patient.
The military teaches this to its generals.
But this is really part of the training of our political leaders and nor of our climate
doctors.
In fact, very few people are trained in thinking like this.
So let me give you an example now of when.
So you all remember the joke that everyone talks about the weather, but no one does something
about it.
Well, Steve Schneider decided to revise this to say everyone does something about the weather,
but no one talks about it.
That's avoidance.
Avoiders are not deniers.
They're aware of the climate threat, and they accept the science, unlike deniers.
They don't want to talk about it because it comes because their own ethics would then
require them to act, and action would be disruptive to their lives.
For example, they might get slandered as an alarmist, or as a chicken little.
They may not want to disturb the boss's good opinion of themselves.
They might fear the spotlight and stage fright, having all that tension focused upon them.
Then of course, there's that Japanese saying about conformity in their society.
The nail sticking up gets pounded back down.
Furthermore, avoidance can be what's behind some kinds of optimism.
And again, a medical school type example.
Once if you study the records of what they wrote in the chart versus when the patient
died, it turns out that physicians overestimate survival times for two-thirds of their stage
four cancer patients.
And if they know the patient well, let's say they're not just a consultant, but they're
the primary care provider, if they know the patient well, their overestimate is much worse,
like four in five cases they overestimate.
So it's pretty clear from this that there's some sort of unconscious optimism that can
sway judgment via avoidance to the darker side, wishing people well in effect.
There's also taboo topics.
Don't even mention it.
Tell recently a standard medical practice in Japan to avoid telling cancer patients about
their diagnosis to protect them from stress.
And we all know of families where something like this still operates.
Worse, talking about a run on the bank, for example, is sort of a taboo topic in public
because of worries that it might trigger a run on the bank.
But when this gets carried over into the planning, it's another matter.
I mean, it's evident now that the housing bubble bursting in 2008 was probably a taboo
topic amongst U.S. regulators back before then because they really had no plan for dealing
with it.
Now let me bring up a somewhat delicate topic, which is considering whether it's avoidance
even by climate scientists or some climate scientists.
And the one reason I really take this up is because of the following things.
First of all, the climate agenda has remained unchanged.
As say, the diagnosis, the prognosis, the recommended treatments really haven't changed
since the 70s.
However, we're now in a situation where emissions reduction isn't going to do the job.
It'll be too little, too late.
Then there's the matter that we had, in the meantime, discovered that there are abrupt
climate shifts.
And so the question of how long do we have is now not just a matter of what the computer
models predict about gradual warming.
Simply, there are abrupt events that we don't know how to predict.
So let's look at some of the talk about emissions reductions.
Emissions are defined as the extra CO2 emitted into the atmosphere where the carbon in the
CO2 is taken out of long-term storage.
For example, it's losing forests because they're not replanted or burning fossil fuels, coal,
oil, natural gas, and as it turns out, making concrete.
Reducing annual emissions is a perfectly sensible course of action had it been done 50 years
ago.
Back when the red flags were already flying, it might have survived, but it wasn't done.
It really isn't 50 or 60 years ago anymore.
For example, the computer models of how fast it's going to warm up show that with businesses'
usual emissions, with them continuing to grow at the current 3% per year, the year of the
two-degree fever is 2049.
Serious emissions reductions taking the most slowly rising scenario of all the economic
scenarios that the models ran.
So the top curve and the bottom curve of the spread of outcomes only delays this disastrous
two-degree overheating by about 19 years.
So in effect, all of the efforts that we're making and not succeeding at are really an
aid of buying no more than about 19 extra years.
I would suggest that something else in addition had better be done.
Well, this isn't really comic relief, but it reads, and when we look at the future given
to us by our elders, three words come to mind, we are toast.
But that's if we don't do anything about it.
But the talk, the goals that are so wimpy that I think that even the graduating seniors
might have noticed.
Many now think that achieving zero emissions later this century will do the job.
Or lacking that, stopping the 3% annual growth in CO2 emissions is an adequate goal for responding
to climate change.
But notice here, we're now talking at two removes from the real problem, which is excess
CO2 already in the air.
Reduced emissions will not get rid of the current excess quickly enough, or in a way
which avoids dangerous certification of the surface ocean.
So there's an interesting bit of word substitution, or at least meaning substitution, going on
here that should consist.
We're talking as if current emissions, as they this year's emissions, were the real
problem.
They are not.
The accumulation of excess CO2 is the real problem.
It's what sets off desert expansion, deluge and drought, heat waves, and all the rest.
But talking about emissions as the real problem leads to thinking that reducing them can solve
the problem.
That may have been true once, but not in a year.
So here's an example of changing the subject, which might be relevant here, to the extent
that the denying delay squad has gotten in the act.
Suppose you ask your prospective spouse, how much money do you have in the bank?
And he answers, I earn $5,000 a month.
And so you try again, and he answers.
And I've been getting a 3% raise each year.
You might be forgiven for wondering if he knows the difference between net worth, income,
and raises.
Or maybe he's trying to change the subject, say, because of a negative net worth.
Now a few climate scientists would do this.
That's not necessarily true of a number of the other actors in this drama.
The other thing that is surely discouraging to anybody that looks at this carefully is
that our current climate response, our prescription for how to solve the problem, is mostly just
a reemphasis of the old virtues of clean air, clean energy, sustainable agriculture,
reforestation, greater efficiency, less waste, and of course longer term thinking, which
unfortunately papers over the short term part of the problem.
Now looking at this list of good things to do, there'd be good things to do even without
a climate problem.
But the denying delay squad types suggest that all this is just green activism in new
clothing with climate as a new rationale.
So that we, since we reject, you know, green thinking, we can ignore a problem.
So emissions reductions, we should realize, only scale down to future CO2 additions.
They don't subtract from the CO2 that's already accumulated.
While emissions reduction is all that most people talk about doing in response, it neither
stops making things worse, nor does it rid us of the accumulated past emission.
While deforestation and fossil fuel emissions are what got us into trouble, it does not
follow that fixing them will get us out of trouble.
That's like thinking that stopping smoking is a sufficient treatment for lung cancer,
or that brushing your teeth more regularly will fix the cavity you've already got.
It's time to acknowledge that the current climate prescription is another such fallacy
and seek a real fix.
Next to 50 years of climate avoidance, we now need a short-term fix cleaning up the
air of CO2 to make the long-term redesigns viable.
So the next section I'm going to ask, why has the climate diagnosis, prognosis, and
suggested course treatment stayed stuck on what was obvious in the late 1970s?
Despite the growing evidence that all three must be changed.
So in the 1970s and still, the diagnosis is presented as CO2 poisoning.
The prognosis of is that we'll slowly overheat, start running a fever.
And the intervention needed is to reduce emissions.
So after 40 years, they changed, but the story hasn't.
The diagnosis, the way I would formulate it, would be now CO2 poisoning with climate instability
and ocean acidifications as complications that may kill us off sooner than the CO2 heat waves.
The prognosis, sudden climate shifts atop the global fever with the threat of population
crash.
The intervention needed is to reduce emissions, but also to remove the excess CO2 already
in the air.
So why have our climate doctors settled for such an outdated, inadequate framing of our
climate problem?
Well first of all, treating the patient is not something they trained for.
I mean, they didn't set out to become earth doctors, and in fact no one did.
Secondly, the climate science community is getting lots of, in retrospect I think, one
side advice on the matter, simply because it doesn't balance them against risk management.
To some extent, the climate scientists have to focus on those parts of the problem that
the public and policy makers can comprehend.
Knowledgeable politicians usually advise the climate scientists to tailor the climate message
to emphasize clean energy.
For them, where the psychologists have told the climate scientists that fear-based appeals,
especially those not coupled with a clear solution, can backfire.
For example, telling the climate story and ending with a list of emissions reductions
possibilities is more likely to make the person believe the underlying science than is an
explanation pointing to a catastrophe with no proposal for avoiding it.
Unfortunately, history shows us this can lead to further tailoring of the message to
emphasize what reluctant ears will listen to.
It could drive you into reporting smoke rather than the fire you actually observed.
And history is replete with this.
Climate scientists have mostly sobered up to their painful role as modern-day Cassandra's
living at a Trojan horse and no one listening to them.
But like those Japanese cancer physicians, might some be trying to spare us the worst
news.
I doubt this, but the matter is so important that we must keep asking questions.
We scientists, I think, have a responsibility to speak frankly, even about things that we
cannot back up yet with data.
Scientists often don't do this, and there are very substantial traditions about remaining
politically neutral, for example, on something and giving accurate advice to both sides.
But these rationales that scientists give for avoiding speculation are seldom applicable
to situations where time is short and informed opinions are wrong.
The real problem is not opinions, but informed opinions often are being withheld.
If we're forced to act on incomplete knowledge, and I think we are, then the people doing
the guessing should be the most knowledgeable though.
If they should remember what Apocrates said 2,500 years ago to physicians, life is short,
the art long, opportunity fleeting, experience treacherous, judgment difficult.
But in spite of all that, the physician must be ready not only to do his duty himself,
but also to secure the cooperation of the patient, of the attendants, and of externals.
In terms of what to do, I will cover a second opinion on what to do about climate in a subsequent
talk, also on YouTube.
Now to wrap up climate denial, and again, these are my opinions summarizing the subject.
Are the deniers stupid? No, I think follow the money is a much better possibility.
Are the deniers uninformed by choice? I think they often are.
Is there avoidance going on? My guess is there's lots and lots of them.
Is the denial at the level of real delusions, psychiatric level? My guess is not very many.
Why the scientists inadequate framing the climate diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment?
Well I think mostly they're just outdated and haven't undertaken a real reframing.
All these problems of climate denial were also true of Americans denial of evolution.
But there there was little economic interest, little paid obfuscation, making things worse.
For example, the climate problem is just liberal ideology is perhaps a cover story to obscure
the fact that vast amounts of money are being spent to manipulate and not by the scientists.
All this brings up humanity's fatal flaw of whether we're dealing with something here
and could really kill off the larger part of humans.
Aristotle said that a fatal flaw is an injury committed in ignorance with disastrous consequences.
So this was Greek Theatres overriding theme long before Aristotle coined the phrase about
2400 years ago. Is that going here? Well, it might truly be a delusion of believing
impossible things, some of which are dangerous. But my guess it's closer to an insufficient
wariness about the money and motives behind leading to dire.
I think that fear of being on the outs is much more the problem here, much more likely
to be the fatal flaw. Climate denials being sold as a part of the creed that you ought
to subscribe to if you want to remain a member of the party or a climate corporate ladder.
Fear of exclusion is much easier to orchestrate with money than encouraging delusions which
might require a much, much larger budget. Denial take-hones, avoidance is more likely
than true denial. Obfuscation, there's lots of money behind blowing smoke to confuse the
issues. The denial industry delay is their most important product. Third, reframing the
problem can hide the real problem. That is to say reframing as emissions rather than
as CO2 accumulation. Fourth, the creation of taboo topics now seems to include geoengineering,
and that's probably not a fault of the same people. Next time I'll discuss what to do
about climate and how quickly it has to be done. A good place to stop.
Thank you.
