Welcome to a Rice University podcast. For more information about us please visit our
website at www.rice.edu. Good evening! Welcome to this evening's version of the
Rice University President's lecture series. We're always pleased to welcome so many of
you, students, faculty, staff, people from the community in Houston. The President's
lecture series brings some of the world's greatest thinkers, innovators, and leaders
here to Rice to share their perspectives both with our own community and the wider Houston
community. Thank you very much for being here. Our lecturer this evening is a theoretical
neurobiologist and affiliate professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the
University of Washington in Seattle. William H. Calvin studies ape to human evolution
as opposed to the reverse, apparently, climate change and civilizations vulnerabilities to
abrupt shocks. Dr. Calvin began his education studying physics at Northwestern University
and then branched out into neurophysiology through studies at MIT, Harvard Medical School,
and the University of Washington, where he received his doctorate in physiology and biophysics
in 1966. He's the author of a dozen books, most for general readers, about the brain
and evolution. His book, A Brain for All Seasons, Human Evolution and Abrupt Climate Change,
won the 2002 Phi Beta Kappa Award in Science and the 2006 Walter B. Kistler Book Award.
The Kistler Award is given annually to authors of science-based books that significantly
increase the public's knowledge of subjects that will shape the future of our species.
His next book, Global Fever, How to Treat Climate Change, will be released in February
of next year. One journalist described Dr. Calvin as a soft-spoken man whose tone sharply
contrasts with the impact of his thoughts. Tonight we'll certainly see why. Dr. Calvin
will address the issue of global warming and how humans are responding to this potential
crisis and engaging in the search for solutions. He will praise the conventional methods we
are considering to reverse the trend of excess carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and discuss
the role of conservation, reduce emissions, and clean energy resources. Then we'll examine
the steps he believes we need to take next. Please join me in welcoming to Rice University
and to Houston Dr. William H. Calvin.
You may have wondered about the pictures. When I started about three years ago writing
a book on global warming, I decided I needed a parallel project to keep myself cheerful.
And so I undertook a portrait study of our closest relatives. So what you've been seeing
are mostly bonobos and orangutans and such. Climate change is a big part of human evolution
back, say, two and a half million years ago to present, because climate change is the
way that change occurs rapidly in evolution. There's a great deal of stasis in evolution
where you stay in the same place for 10 million years. But climate change comes along and
a batch of new species gets spawned off of standards and all sorts of new things begin
happening. And so as I began looking at how the organization of higher intellectual function
in the brain might have been added on to an eight brain, and particularly the issues
of enlargement of the brain, which I assumed had something to do with it, but that may
not be the case, it was natural to take a look at the climate changes that the people
that drill ice cores in Greenland were discovering. And what they were discovering is superimposed
on the more stately rhythms of the ice age. You had, in addition, a whole lot of glitches
that were very fast. And at first, they thought the glitches were experimental errors that
say that just as in geology, you can have a melt off come along and sort of sand off
the surface, then you add more on top of that. And sure, there's this continuity, but it's
because the core was interrupted. And so when these glitches were first seen, it was natural
to drill another core someplace else and see if they were there too, and they were. Now
what we know is that they occurred during our last ice age, which is what I show here,
every several thousand years. They're very rapid. In other words, you make the transition
between a cool, dry, windy, dusty kind of ice age climate. You pop up into a warm and
wet climate in about five years. But you also crash back down again. Not quite as fast,
but may take several steps. So these big swings that you're seeing here that have the numbers
on top of them represent what our ancestors were living through at the time that they
became behaviorally modern, which means that you see anatomically modern Homo sapiens
at 200,000 years, which is way off the screen here. But you don't see evidence in the archaeological
record that they thought like us until about 50,000 years ago. So it's that arrow that
says behaviorally modern, and it's also the time of the spread out of Africa into the rest
of the world. You see agriculture over there on the right in the period where our climate
stayed warm and wet for 10,000 years or more now. So climate has been a big part of our
evolution of intelligence. And as I began to realize, looking at global warming, we
were sort of coming up on a great use it or lose it intelligence test. That is to say,
unless we use our collective intelligence very effectively for action, we run a considerable
risk of plunging most societies around the world into tailspins. So I will try to show
you the urgency of the situation in this talk. As Yogi Berra once said, the future ain't
what it used to be. And I'm afraid that will become a lament of the songwriters of the
next generation. Do you see what happened there? Mount Rainier just turned dark. And
if we go backwards, that's what it looks like. All the glacial ice like this on all the volcanoes
of the world and ice, other ice that's on mountains rather than Antarctic or something,
are projected to be gone probably by the middle of the century. So are all the coral reefs
of the world by 2100. That's with, even if we start doing something about the problem.
So what I'm going to do to paint the picture for you is I'm going to spend the first part
of it just giving you a history. I'm not going to tell you much about greenhouse gases or
anything. I'm going to show you the things that determine the thermostat setting for
the earth and how humans regularly have changed it. And then I'll talk about the more familiar
perhaps to CO2 methane problems and how you substitute for the fossil fuels to take away
some of the adding to the problem that will go on. And then I'm going to talk about a
section called the tortoise and the hare, which is all about how quickly we must act.
So how bright is the earth? Well, it's called Albedo in technical terms, but it basically
means how much of the sunlight does the earth reflect right back out in space before it
can heat up anything? This occurs from clouds, an average amount of clouds on the earth.
If it changed a few percent, could do the same thing that all the greenhouse gases have
been doing. And we have no idea what controls the average amount of clouds on earth. The
other thing, of course, is there's ice and there are deserts that reflect a lot. Here,
for example, is a rock from space. You see the Tigris and Euphrates rivers coming
down into this very bright desert and then it gets dark. All the dark there are leaves.
It's agriculture making use of the irrigation that is achievable from those rivers. And this
of course is, this is one of the singular events back in the beginning of agriculture
about 9,000 years ago. So agriculture may darken what's otherwise light-colored land
and absorb more heat and warm the world. You can also see something the opposite. Here,
from space, is a picture, a national border that you can actually see from space. It's
the border between Egypt and Israel and Sinai. So that's the Mediterranean up there on the
upper corner. There is about 6 percent ground cover on the Egyptian side and about 13 percent
on the Israeli side. You might ask why this is so and why has it persisted for 40 years
and why there aren't exceptions. And basically, what you see on the Israeli side is the starts
of vegetation taking hold. You see these clumps of plants, their root structures are
aerodigitating and sort of holding everything in place. And you don't see as many of those
on the Egyptian side. And the difference is because the Israelis have treated this as
the nature preserve that not allowed grazing animals there. The goats on the Egyptian side
tend to break up these root clusters that are forming with their sharp hooves as they're
eating. And that simply means the next time a big wind comes along, a lot more sand gets
up and moves and you wind up with the active dune kind of situation you see. So that sand
that gets mobilized buries a lot of these starter soils. So this is a case, again, of
albedo change but in fact reflecting work back because the goats did it. Now here's
a familiar example. That's a leaf laying in snow and you see how much the snow is indented
under it. The leaf is darker, it absorbs more energy, the snow surface is reflecting
and fresh snow reflects about 90% of the light back into space. Put a dark object on it and
it heats up and melts what's underneath and it sinks. So that's why the sunken leaf.
You get a similar effect if you blow dust for something on top of the snow or ice. It
serves to heat up nicely in the sun and you get much faster melts. The picture here is
the Rockies in Colorado with dust blown in from Utah. But you get a similar effect from
wildfires that produce a lot of soot that falls out. This is one of the reasons perhaps
why the Arctic floating ice has been shrinking so badly. Much faster than any of the models
showed and the models didn't include things like soot blowing in. So that's not a solid
issue yet but I'm trying to show you here, these are all things that affect, in essence,
the thermostat setting of how warm the earth normally is. This is looking down on the North
Pole, which would be under the letter E in winter, and what you see on the left is here
is Canada and the U.S. over here. Here is Siberia wrapping around to Europe. Here is
Iceland down here. Now this is Greenland but all the stuff above here is floating pack
ice. Snow falls there and piles up but it causes the ice to sink and the bottom of the
ice actually just goes back into solutions water. So it never gets more than about three
years thick. If you dug a basement up there you would have a swimming pool. Now Greenland
on the other hand is a nice solid rock foundation and that's what it requires to build up a
big thickness of ice. In Greenland it's about two miles deep. But what I want to show you
here is all this green around the edge. The satellite measurement is looking for chlorophyll
and it's comparing over time. This is 1981 through recently. The light green areas are
regions that have been getting more and more chlorophyll over the years. This is mostly
not trees growing, this is just ground cover. But as you can see from what I said before
that's sure to absorb a lot more heat and generally cause more things to melt even faster.
So this is one of the feedbacks in the system that's working against us. While the others
is soot from fires. This is a monthly movie here of the number of agricultural fires
that you can see from space. Each dot represents about, it represents at least one fire within
a 10 day period. So you see this enormous wave in Africa for example between Sahel now
and then shifting down into the southern regions for agriculture. You can see it's spreading
across the US starting in the south and spreading up through the northwest after another month.
This is a background of fire which is far, far in excess of wildfires which have always
existed periodically. You know, burned down forests which then have to regrow. This is
an annual around the year addition to the Earth's atmosphere of a fair amount of black
carbon. And the black carbon gets heated up by the sunlight, it re-reads in the infrared
energy to the surrounding air, warms it up. Okay, now I'm going to talk about 50 years
worth of what's been going on with climate. This is a satellite picture of what the Pacific
looks like in terms of temperature. And the orange-eased waters are where the surface
temperature is above about 80 degrees Fahrenheit. That's a critical temperature because any
water that's cooler than that won't support a hurricane. So these are hurricane ready
waters. This is a picture of three hurricanes or typhoons, as they would be called in Asia,
at the same time. This is not a composite picture. This is one day in August last year.
Three at once. So I'm going to go through here some of the causes for a lot more high
winds and such. The projections for more high winds and the evidences we've had more high
winds, because when warming is going on, the land warms up more than the ocean does. And
the reason is pretty simple. There's evaporative cooling in the ocean, and on land evaporative
cooling sometimes runs out. I'd say hot and dry rather go together when you had a big
drought here last year. You were also a lot hotter. We've seen heat waves in Europe that
killed 35,000 people four years ago. And I'm going to go through floods and droughts and
wildfires now. Here's an example of high winds. There were 20 big trucks like that blown over
one night upon the Utah, Idaho border, 113 mile an hour wind gusts. Same year in Seattle,
this is what happened. This, in fact, is over near Bill Gates' house, and that is a garbage
truck that blew over on a rather nice Mercedes convertible. Now, if you ask the insurance
companies about high winds, you get a surprise. This is what's called non-linearity in the
world. You would think if the wind speed, the peak wind gust, went from 50 miles an hour
up to 60, that's a 20% increase, that maybe the damage would go up 20%. The answer is
they go up 500%, just with that little 20% increment. In other words, the insurance claims
are now six times what they are for 50 mile an hour wind. And this is just, this is not
a prediction, this is just the insurance company's experience. We've been seeing a lot more
floods and we tend to think these are, you know, when we don't have them, someone else
is having them and so forth and might average out. But one of the strengths of the IPCC reports
have been that they've collected the worldwide statistics on all this with the following
results. This is a graph of floods in the Americas. This is the number of major floods
in the 50s, in the 60s, 70s, 80s, 90s. And you can see an enormous increase in the Americas
for major floods. And the same thing is true on all the other continents. So we have been
living with pretty major climate change already for about 50 years. This is the drought map
for the U.S. a year ago. As you see, Texas has a major drought then. If you look over
into the deep south, there's not much drought there at all. You look over in Southern California,
there's only the beginnings. And this year, in fact, you had record rainfall. This is
what's meant by more extreme weather, okay? Even if you find a place in Europe, for example,
the prediction is more rainfall at the higher lab who's less near the Mediterranean. If
you found a place in between where it didn't change, there would still be greater extremes
at that site. And it's the extremes that do the damage. So here's the current drought
map, or at least the series that will walk you through the last six weeks. And this shows
you the trouble, for example, that the deep south has gotten into in just one year. And
similarly, you see over in Southern California, same kind of big problem. Now, I've barked
32 degrees north on these for a reason. The same story recurs at 32 degrees in other parts
of the world. So this graph shows you the percent of the land surface around the world,
the 30 percent of the surface that's land, the percentage of it that's in drought. And
back in the 70s, it was about 15 percent. During the 1980s, it took a jump up to 25 percent
and stayed there with excursions to 35 percent. Okay, so this is a real climate shift that
has happened to the earth. The best guess is this represents a expansion of the tropics,
though the issue really isn't subtle yet. But basically, all the areas that have Mediterranean
climates around the world are having the same problem. Some years, it goes away temporarily,
but a lot of it has been a chronic problem for decades. A Mediterranean climate is where
the rain falls in the winter, but it doesn't fall in the summer. And of course, it's ideal
for growing grain crops and things like that that could get bowled over and left to rot
if you had a rainfall at the wrong time of year. So obviously, the Mediterranean is a
Mediterranean climate, but so is Southern California. So is South Africa, the western
Cape region. And over in Australia, the area around Perth is also, this is where the westerly
winds finally develop. And the areas towards the equator from all these regions is desert.
So basically, a Mediterranean area has a desert climate during the summer, but during the
winter the low pressure systems sneak in and provide rain. So it sort of looks like what's
happening is the low pressure systems aren't sneaking in in the winter anymore. You get
a lot of fire danger and the Mediterranean had quite a lot of trouble. This is Perth,
Australia, back in that corner. And this is just a satellite picture of the chlorophyll
and such showing you the areas that are really parched versus the green areas that still
hold water in dry season. But the important information is down at the bottom. Perth has
a record of the river in flows to its reservoirs, and they go along until about 1975 and then
they drop by half and stay down. In 1997 it took a second drop down to one third and
stayed there. So you know, this is not, you don't say that Sahara is in drought, you
say it has a dry climate. This is a climate shift into a dry climate. This is what happened
a month ago in Southern California. All those little red dots are fires. I've seen from
space and marked the same way as before. This is the aftermath of the fires and this is
a false collar representation where the red areas like this one are regions that have
burned this year. There's some earlier fires shown here that, you know, don't show red.
So this is the last years, last half years burns. And there is an awful lot of red as
you get down to San Diego. So really substantial areas have been burning off here. And again
32 degrees is the Mexican border. Okay, this isn't the previous graph. This is one about
wildfires rather than floods. And again you see that major wildfires by decade have been
soaring in the Americas and in Europe and in Asia and in Africa and Australia. So that's
what's been going on. And the IPCC reports that pull these together. This is quite independent
of their projections about what's coming in the future. This shows you what's been happening
to us without us realizing how widespread and bad it is. As you might expect, this is
just a graph of the red bars, just the number of wildfires each year from 1970 and this is
just the western U.S. forest. But the black line is the temperature that year and as you
see there's a nice correlation. Say, years that are hotter also become dry out the forest
and they catch fire more readily. And with stronger winds you spread them a lot further.
All right, now let's discuss getting in the hot water by which I mean ocean surface temperature.
This is the oceans of the world, the six major ocean basins or the individual wands. And
the average is just that black one. And what you see is they've been warming steadily since
the 70s. So if anybody tells you it's a heat island effect, tell them that that hypothesis
was abandoned about 40 years ago. You see this one interesting dip in the middle. That
is due to this. Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines blew its top and injected a lot of material
up into the upper atmosphere, stratosphere, where there's not much weather. That's where
jet planes like to cruise in. Now what this does, the sulfates in it tend to attract water
and they just get a lot of water surrounding them, but that's shiny. And shiny creates
a ability to reflect sunlight back out into space. So that's the basic explanation given
for how you get this two-year hiatus in warming here. This has led to the proposal that maybe
we should just inject sulfate in the stratosphere ourselves. If you don't inject it into lower
atmosphere, you don't get acid rain. If you inject it into the upper atmosphere, it hangs
around for two years rather than two months. Two weeks is about a blast in the lower atmosphere.
So that's one of the things that are suggested for dealing with heat waves, but it doesn't
do anything about the basic problem because the CO2 has a second effect besides creating
an insulating blanket around the globe. That is ocean pH. The oceans have absorbed about
half of the excess CO2 that we have created in the atmosphere by burning coal and oil
and natural gas. Reducing the pH makes the ocean more corrosive of the shells of animals
of the shells of animals. The projection is, it's already fallen in the 20th century by
about a tenth of a pH unit. And the suggestion is there's another two or three tenths and
other models for what's in store for us. Now, the laboratory studies can be done with controlled
pH sea water to show you what the effects will be. And basically the shell forming plankton,
the cocalithophores and so forth that have little, I think I have a picture, no? I guess
I took that out, form calcium carbonate shells, limestone in other words. And when they die,
they fall down. And that's a major way of taking carbon out of circulation instead of putting
it into circulation. And that, the ocean acidification will start interfering with that. It will also
dissolve coral reefs. That is to say as you lower the pH, what happens is the coral reefs,
calcium carbonate starts going back into solution and sea water. So it's just like a cube of
sugar in the bottom of the ice tea. It starts crumbling. So that's one of the reasons the
coral reefs are in trouble. But there's another reason and that's literally hot water. To
remind you of two years ago when the Gulf, the pathways into the Gulf of Mexico were
particularly warm. And what warm water does is to distress coral. Coral is a combination
of an animal, the coral itself, and a symbiotic algae, sort of the scum on your aquarium basically
lines these coral appendages here. And the white one represents a coral which has ejected
all of its algae because it was distressed. I mean, we'll do this for other reasons like
sunlight that's too bright because they're too close to the surface. It's a distress
reaction of the coral. But if the temperature or sunlight doesn't go back down in a couple
of weeks, the coral dies. So it's well known from laboratory studies just how many days
of excess temperature it takes to do this. This is what's happened to the Caribbean in
2005 in the summer heat wave. The little orange squares are the temperature measured by satellite
during the nighttime. And the boxes are only where the number of degree days was sufficient
to kill coral. So that's an enormous area both in Central America and further out into
the islands where you go and look, sure enough, in the Virgin Islands National Park, for example,
the divers reported coral reefs even 70 meters down were killed.
Okay, this is the whole world temperature warming in just the last five years compared
to the temperature at the same place about 25, 35 years ago. So one two degree Celsius
warming, the red colors are the one to two degree range and that's three degrees Fahrenheit.
Okay, so a lot of high latitude in the North, regions and some in the South, we should say,
have warmed up quite a bit. And they have predictable effects on the pack ice that melts
during the summer. So this is the end of summer. This is again looking down the North Pole
where the dot is. And that's the boundary of the ice at the end of summer. It's our
middle of September before it starts growing again. That's such a... And if you can see
the little green line in between the two, that's two years ago. So major, major things
are going on. Now, there's no sea level rise from this because it's already floating ice.
But next door in Greenland down to the bottom, it's not floating ice. It's two miles high
piled on land. All the way around the edges of Greenland, the summer temperature gets
up above freezing. And so the surface starts melting and it certainly changes its albedo
and stops reflecting as much sunlight back and absorbs two or three times as much. But
the real way that Greenland loses ice is not by runoff. It's by exporting ice to the oceans
where they promptly raise sea level even without melting. It's called, you know, icebergs.
There's the biggest outlet glacier in Greenland. It's 69 North on the west side called Jakobshaven.
Try water. It advances 30, 40 meters every day in the summer, which is twice as fast
as it was doing 10 years ago. This particular one is five miles wide. And let's see, 30
to 40 meters, that's about eight to 10 parallel parking spaces in distance. So that's the
daily output that used to be half of that. Well, this gets us into sea level rise. That
is, that is out in the middle of the Indian Ocean. That's the Maldives. That's the capital
city and only city. A third of a million people live there. But the average elevation is one
and a half meters. Now, just from thermal expansion of the oceans for taking in heat,
the sea level rises. You know, the extra put in from Greenland and Antarctica and the mountain
glaciers like Mount Rainier, all their stored moisture, you know, are just adding to that
basic thermal problem. We know from about 125,000 years ago how much the sea level rises when
you lose about half of Greenland warming. Because we did lose about half of Greenland
warming 125,000 years ago. It was for a reason other than global warming, but we can extrapolate
very easily to what global warming would do to this. Basically, a global warming of only
1.6 degrees Celsius, 3 degrees Fahrenheit, would be sufficient to create this condition
again. It resulted in a six-meter sea level rise, about 20 feet, sort of a two-story beach
house. It's about the amount. This is what it does to the U.S. coastline for the Gulf
and the East Coast. If I zoom in here, I'll show you a more familiar coastline, and I'll
zoom in again, show you the local real estate situation. So, though there's a lot of people
here, there's no telling here exactly how fast this will occur. It's generally thought
that the sea level rise will lag behind the temperature by perhaps centuries, but in fact
it could go faster than that if you had a real collapse in either the West Antarctic or the
Greenland ice sheet. So, we know in Florida what a six-meter rise does. Most of the population
of Florida lives on that coastline, so this is 15 million climate refugees. That's the
East Coast. Down here at the bottom in North Carolina, that incursion is about 100 miles.
It doubles the width or more of Chesapeake Bay. It does quite a lot in Philadelphia,
New York, and in Boston, a six-meter rise covers up MIT, but spares part of Harvard.
There will be a new Harvard peninsula extending out to the new Boston Bay that will be Harvard
Square. So, one fourth of the U.S. population lives in the Strip, and around the world,
quite a lot of the population lives within the commuting distance of the coastline. So,
this is a particular piece of real estate. That's a view of Washington, D.C. And you
can see, I mean, my favorite collection of good museums is all along the mall here. If
they don't pay sufficient attention, this is what will happen. That is to say, the White
House lawn will be waterfront, and the Capitol steps will be where the tides go up and down.
It's a lot worse in Asia, because Asia has a whole lot of very productive river deltas
that a lot of people live on. So, the red here shows you the six-meter, five-meter rise.
And as you can see up here in Bangladesh, there's major incursions back in there. It
basically covers up half of Bangladesh. Bangladesh has 144 million people. So, there are 70 million
climate refugees right there, and the situation in these other deltas is of similar magnitude.
One of the Chinese deltas, 93 million people, live there. All right, let's go to the villains
here. This is the rise in CO2 since 1958, when they started measuring it, because the oceanographers
in the mid-50s, everybody had been discounting the calculations done by our hennees in the
late 19th century that showed that we would have this kind of global warming if we kept
putting fossil fuels in the air. People discounted it because they thought the oceans would take
it up, and the oceans have taken half of it up. But back then, they realized the oceans
weren't going to take it all up, and that would better get serious. And so, they started
measuring the CO2 on top of Manila and Hawaii to get away from industry. Then we discovered
using the ice cores, a technique for finding out ancient CO2 and methane levels, basically
little bubbles in the ice of ancient air. So, you take one of these ice cores, you slice
it to get a section half a million years ago, you put it in a jar, you evacuate all the
air in the jar, and then you heat it up, and the air from the bubbles comes out, you measure
their CO2 content, and that's what the plot is here. So, in the ice ages, the CO2 is
way down, about 180 parts per million, and then in the warm periods, it comes up to about
280, but basically, it's never got above 300 until now. We passed that point about 1950
or so. So, we're way over 100 parts per million over that previous maximum. So, that's what
we call excess CO2, and that's what we basically got to get rid of to restore the climate.
This is just a plot, again, of the same thing at the top. It shows you that the carbon dioxide's
gone up 37% in the last 150 years. That's the spread out on the white. And it shows you
that methane went up and down about the same time, but it's still going up and down about
the same time, but it has soared 130%. The bottom shows you the temperature in Antarctica
that accompanied all this, and you can see the temperature hasn't gone up anywhere as
much yet as you might expect it to from those. Now, one of the virtues, just as the rains
will clear out the solfates within several years from the atmosphere, from the upper
atmosphere, methane has a short residence time. It's about six years to a half, losing
half of it. And so, if you go tighten up all the leaks in the natural gas pipelines, like
the one from Russia to Great Britain and such, you ought to be able to make an immediate
impact. And indeed, the methane concentration has started to dip recently, probably for
exactly that reason. But CO2 doesn't go away. The half-life is at least a couple of centuries,
and even in a thousand years, about 25% of it would remain based on what we know.
So, these are the fossil fuel uses that have gotten us into the mess. I'm breaking it out
here just by what they go towards, like producing electricity, that power sector of 24% of the
pie. Transport is 14%. Buildings heating them and everything is 8%. Industry at 14 is things
like spelting aluminum and building cars and so on. There's this whole sector in the
other side of equivalence to CO2. And what that means is methane is 23 times as effective
at insulation as CO2. If you take its concentration multiplied by 23, you can sort of add it on
the CO2 to get a CO2 equivalent concentration. So, let me go through some of the things
you can do to change this picture. Let's talk about transport first. Basically, getting
commuters off of oil has become, is within sight, I think. This is Honda's car that will
go into production next year. And it uses a fuel cell powered by hydrogen. Fuel cells
are basically batteries where you produce electricity, but you have to keep pouring
in liquid fuel of some sort, in this case hydrogen. Trouble of hydrogen is you've got
a filling station for it, so only big fleets like governments and so forth will actually
have hydrogen-powered cars. You've all heard about plug-in hybrids, that is to say things
like the Prius, but with battery enough to power the daily commute entirely off of the
electrical grid that charged it the night before. There's a third possibility for using
electricity to make a portable fuel, and that's compressed air. And in India, they're going
to produce next year the first 6,000 toxicabs that will run entirely on compressed air, and
this is not a jet coming out of the tailpipe. This is compressed air used to run a piston
engine, so instead of exploding the fuel to push the piston down, they inject compressed
air. This will be very popular in the tropics because these engines start to ring hot, they
run cold, as you know from the can of compressed air when you're spraying it on, something
that gets very cold. These engines will get very cold and they'll provide free air conditioning
and dehumidification. Furthermore, these are simple enough, they don't require batteries
and fuel cells that you'd have to buy abroad. This is something that many countries could
produce with their own raw materials. So there are some promising things. Let's talk about
power, producing electricity basically, including all the extra power you'll need for the transport
sector that you're taking on. This is just the electricity growth in the U.S. since 1971,
and the various bands are just the various sources, coal at the bottom, then oil and
gas, so those are the fossil fuel parts of it, which at present is about 68% of the total,
and then nuclear and hydro. Now this may puzzle you because many of you will know that we
have not built a, we have not started a new nuclear reactor since 1978, and yet this is
getting fatter and fatter, it's about twice as big now. That is experience. As they, people
learned how to run them much more efficiently to minimize the downtime, and so they are
producing at full capacity, it's about 44% of the time, they're up in the 80% and some
of them are 97%. So that's a worldwide experience and the rest of the world didn't stop building
nuclear reactors, so this is the world's experience in making this better. So just remember that
68% of our electricity is dirty. Only 32% is clean. In France, 91% is clean. They get
only 9% of their electricity from fossil fuels, and it's because they have built all their
new capacity basically from nuclear. Next door in Switzerland, the electricity is 99%
clean. They get about half from nuclear, half from hydro. Next door in Germany, it's about
32% clean. UK is about 25% clean. China and India are about 20 to 15% clean. You might
ask about Texas, 9% clean. National average is 32% clean, but Texas is the biggest consumer
of all of this, and it shows up in the per capita use of electricity. This is since 1960
a chart, the upper one there, of the United States per capita consumption of electricity.
So back in 1960, we're using about 4,000 kilowatt hours per person year-round, and it's triple
that now. However, you notice the black line there, that's California. In the mid-70s,
they started doing something about the problem, and despite all the additional computers that
we now use, and Californians used a lot first, they have held per capita consumption down
to what it was in the 70s. Texas is twice California. It's well above the national average,
about 14.4. It's off the top of the graph here. You might say that's because you all
need a lot more air conditioning and a lot more heating in the winter and so on, but
New York State is almost as good as California, and they have all those same needs. I'm presenting
this to show you that government policy matters, that different countries, different states
have done things differently, and one of our jobs is to learn from that experience. Skip
that. Our problem, in order to put the growth into clean energy and not increase the emissions
anymore, is that you've got to add a couple of gigawatts capacity. One gigawatt is about
one nuclear power plant or one big coal plant. So it's sort of my standard unit for no solar
array. No solar array, even one of the Mojave Desert is even a tenth of a gigawatt, averaged
around the clock like the others. So there's this, China is building at least a gigawatt
every week. The US plans to build a new gigawatt every month of coal-fired capacity, although
things are changing, as you may know, certainly in Texas. But that's just for the new growth.
That's not doing a thing about the every year emissions. In other words, when people talk
about stabilizing emissions, it's really a misnomer. All it means is adding the same
amount every year rather than more the next year. Taking the growth out of it is the first
target to meet. And it's the one that we've got to do so quickly. I should say that wind
and solar are big favorites. They don't scale up very well. They're fine added to the grid
in small quantities, but they fluctuate. And the only way to avoid blackouts where
the grid gets tripped is to perfectly match load and sources so that they're always in
balance. And the operators of the plants are very good at this. They look at the weather
forecast and they know what time of day people turn on the air conditioners, and they guess
quite well. However, if you have elements in the grid like solar where a cloud goes by
and cuts it down or wind comes up and increases things too much, you can trip grids pretty
easily if a fair amount of the power in the grid is coming from those sources. So besides
not being large in capacity yet, you're also going to have to redesign the grids using
control systems theory that has yet to be developed. This shows you the pie chart for
all U.S. energy use. So it's got transportation industry and everything, not just electricity.
It shows you that 86% of our energy comes from fossil fuels. 8% comes from nuclear
and 6% comes from things that look renewable. That is to say burning biomass, corn stalks
and sawdust and so forth, or ethanol uses in vehicles, is up about 3% of the total.
Hydroelectric is about 3%, except we've maxed out hydro pretty much, and wind and solar
are those small quantities up top. So if you want to get a nuclear-sized slice, and we
need about 10 of them, to get even one nuclear-sized slice out of solar would be a 133-fold increase
in solar. Doing geothermal, which we could do a lot of, we haven't done that yet, but
done it anywhere as much as we could, 22-fold increase. So it's kind of hard to do this
in a big way, given that we're starting from 86% fossil fuel. The one bright thing on the
horizon here is what's called hot rock or deep geothermal. And this is just starting
to happen now in France, in Switzerland, in Australia, all hoping to have commercial
quantities of electrical power from this in a year or two. And this is a technique developed
with the oil industry for stimulating oil from deep shale and such, where they drill
way deep, they put, do a pressure injection to try to force open cracks in some of the
layers down there, and that makes it easier for the oil to flow to the pumps. For deep
geothermal, what you do is you open up some of the cracks in granite that is about oven
temperature, and granite is flexed and folded and so forth, it's got lots of layers to it,
and all you do is open up those layers, they're sort of mineralized together, and you then
sink a second well down, and you pump water down the first, and it flashes into steam
and shoots up the second, and it runs an old fashioned steam turbine up top that generates
electricity. This is exactly what you do in a nuclear power plant, a coal plant, and so
on. So it's an old fashioned technology up top, the only thing technical about it is
drilling that well. It currently costs about the cost of a coal fired plant to do that
to get a similar quantity of electricity, so it's in the same ballpark, but of course
it has no pollution, no runoff, no trucks going into the site all the time. It's a very
small footprint, it's just sort of a parking lot sized structure out somewhere. It wouldn't
even really be a security fence around it. So this, if you just look on, if you just
Google MIT Geothermal Report, you'll see some of the details of this, but the estimate of
the experts last year was that the potential capacity of this is at least a thousand times
the current U.S. electricity use, so this is not a small matter. This is something that
we actually could use in the long run to do even better than nuclear, and it's a method
that if ramped up in the short run might solve some of the immediate problems. Now this is
the other part of that pie of fossil fuel uses. These are equivalents to CO2. I told
you methane was an equivalent. You can make equivalents out of a series of other things
like the nitrous oxide, the greenhouse gas that you get from fertilizer. You also from
agriculture get speeded up decomposition of the organisms in the soil, which then release
CO2 to the atmosphere, just by plowing the earth. So the method of agriculture that does
a lot of plowing is itself causing global warming. These add up to 14 percent of the
total problem, which is equal to the transportation sector. So there's a lot of potential for
improvement in agriculture that would help us address the problem. But the sector down
here called land use at 18 percent shows you another problem. What this means is changes
in land use that serve to warm or cool the earth. When you extend the city out to the
suburbs and convert land that's light colored into a black top that's dark colored, you're
doing a land use change. But the primary land use change is converting forest into agricultural
fields. And the most countries are doing the opposite, but the biggies are Brazil and Indonesia
and Indonesia is 10 times the problem. Brazil, despite all the chopping of around the edges
of the Amazon rainforest, it's far, far worse than Indonesia. And that total is 18 percent.
So the problem is that reducing emissions is not enough. Reducing emissions only in
effect delays the agony. All that carbon you continue to put up there stays there for
long enough for a civilization not to outlive it. So the only way to basically get rid of
what we've put up there is to take it out of the atmosphere and put it into long-term
storage. Now sink it to the ocean floor is a method. Plant more trees is a method. There's
a batch of candidates here I won't be able to go through, but this is the problem with
doing it with trees. That is to say if you have a global warming forecast that says even
more hot, dry, windy conditions, you can bet that fires are going to destroy your project
sooner or later. And that it's just simply, there's a lot of good reasons to plant more
trees, but security against global warming is not one of them. Well, the oceans already
do about half of the photosynthesis, a little microalgae that our aquariums come and such,
do about half of the total photosynthesis. They feed the zooplankton that, and both of
these are things that the whales love to consume. Whale feces, which are rich in carbon, sink.
And they can sink far enough to be taken out of circulation. That is they'll be a thousand
years before that ever gets back to the surface and back into the air. So that shows you one
way and the shelled animals that die are the other because they sink. So those are major
candidates for doing this, but there are a few others. Let me finish the plankton. You
may have heard that one of the critical nutrients, you get these blooms of phytoplankton. And
when they exhaust the nutrients in the area, then they stop. And if you, but the critical
nutrient for most of the time is iron. And iron usually arrives either by stirring up
the bottom that's got a lot of iron on it, which happens in a few places, or mostly it
happens because dust from the deserts that are rusty, if you may notice, is carried into
the ocean, in this case the Mediterranean, but it happens all over the world on the
western coast of continents. So there are some proposals to study this process using
iron filings from ships and so forth to get a better handle on it. But that's one of our
possibilities. But it may just create more photosynthesis to support more metabolism
for the organisms in the ocean itself. I mean, it doesn't necessarily sink more except
in so far as the, this rain of debris from the surface. Here's cocalithophores. This
is a micro snail. Its wings are modified feet, in effect. Its shell is also calcium carbony.
These are salps. They have, they make heavy fecal pellets, rich in carbon. The circles
there show you the tail end of their digestive tract. It's dense. That's them in the manufacturing
line. And salps, which look like jellyfish but aren't, they're really tunicates, one
of them would fit in the palm of my hand. They're good sized so they make much bigger
fecal pellets than any of the zooplankton, which are teeny. So their feces also have
a chance to sink to the point where they're out of circulation. They don't have a chance
of getting back into the atmosphere for a very long time. Okay, that's the background
of things that we know we could get a handle on some parts of the problem with. We've got
a lot of good science. We've got a lot of good technology already for implementing major
fixes. We may get a handle on the sinking, taking out circulation problem, and we may
learn to bury our biofuels like sawdust and corn cobs in garbage dumps that are sealed.
I mean, there's a number of, takes solids from treated sewage, for example, very rich,
and you can isolate those as well. So there's Friday things we can do, but the real problem
is time. And I want to show you, this is the tortoise and hare fable from Aesop's Fables
and basically it's about the tortoise and the hare race, and of course the hare jumps
way ahead in its jerky fashion, and the tortoise plods along, but the hare gets bored and
takes a nap, you know, the tortoise passes him and gets there first. Well, there's a
lot of aspects of climate that are kind of jerky like that hare, and the aphorism amongst
people that study ancient climate, like Richard Alley, who was here recently. In fact, I think
this one's due to him, is, climate's like a drunk. If you leave it alone, it will set
there, but once you force it to move, it tends to lurch, stagger. And that's more or less,
now, here we go. The IPCC reports, we've had four major ones this year, the, that you
have all been reading about in papers, I suspect, tackle only the slow study tortoise-like part
of the problem. That is, say, they make predictions about what will happen if something doesn't
interrupt it and set back. And what I want to now cover in closing really is the, what's
not in the IPCC reports that are causing the governments that commissioned the reports
to really underestimate the scope of the situation. In effect, these IPCC scenarios that we rely
on so much really assume that the hare is going to take a long nap, and I think that's
not a safe assumption. This shows you the Amazon. I'm just going to show you one example
of abrupt things that could happen that could set us way, way back. This is the Amazon,
and the color coding is, green is rainforest that is wet enough not to burn. And we used
to think all rainforests must be like this. And until we discovered otherwise, first,
first big El Nino in 82, 83, we saw a lot of fires in rainforest. And this is the Amazon
at the end of this last big El Nino in 97, 98. All the red dots, like before, are agricultural
fires mostly or land clearing fires for converting forest into new lots. The tan color is very
flammable forest. The darker brown is just merely flammable in December of 98. So that's
the condition at the end of the last big El Nino, big meaning more than about two degrees
in the Central Pacific, which we've had about three episodes of. Here's the graph of Central
Pacific temperature, which is the basic El Nino, El Nino index. If you get over a half
a degree from the baseline, you call it El Nino in one direction, El Nino in the other.
The shaded areas show you how far they went and how long they lasted. So you see they
all lasted no more than a year above the threshold. Now suppose that one last big El
Nino lasted twice as long. I mean, mind you, you can see that they have lasted twice as
long like right here, but they weren't also big. So the chances of us getting another
big one given this history are pretty good. In fact, it's been 10 years since the last
one and the interval between the others is 10 and 15 years, but nobody knows if there's
any sort of cycle involved. And we certainly have no way of predicting the duration of
one from any of our science yet. But you would sure bet that one of our major risks in this
is a El Nino that did last long enough and was big enough to burn down the Borneo and
the Amazon rainforest. And some people have done some calculations as to what this would
do. Down at the bottom here, I'm just showing you what the progression without an El Nino
is. It goes up about two parts per million per year. So here's 10 years of progress.
Now, if you burn off those rainforests and substantial amounts, the rate at which CO2
goes up from the fire is instantly. And the rate at which dead wood rots is a bit slower.
But basically you pop up about 40% in that short five years, 10 years period of time.
So there's, we already have this 100 part per million excess CO2 and this would kick
it up another 40. So in terms of symptomatology that we're already getting, we would expect
a big jump from this event. It certainly would set back many years of progress that we might
make if one of these came along. But it's worse. Without all of those leaves, there's
not as much photosynthesis to take CO2 out of the air. And so the rate at which fossil
fuels change the air concentration is 50% faster. And it's safe. You know, we don't
know quite when, but we certainly, it's in the, I would not call this a fanciful area.
This is an area of major risk to us. Even if we can't put a number on it and be terribly
exact about the probabilities, this is not something any reasonable insurance executive
would ignore in setting the premium for the insurance policy.
Well, the Big Burn also causes a major loss of species. It's a mass extinction event.
Ed Wilson estimates that you'd lose about 50% of the species in the Amazon, at least,
that's probably similar in Borneo. So here's three of my favorite Amazon species seen recently.
And I've got a lot more, but I really have to figure that half of them might be gone.
And same thing. Here's Borneo, two of my favorite Borneo species, orangutan and simang. Same
problem. So now let me talk about the deed and the ability to turn on a dime. We tend
to assume this can't be done, but the IPCC reports show you that it really has to be
done. And let me show you the reasoning, because you hear that there's sort of a 10-year
window safe 2016. Jim Hansen says 2020 was the figure I was using, but it's soon.
And this is the graph that's in Sciences Week, news article, that shows you just the temperature
change above pre-industrial and the time on the axis. So this is progress so far, this
increase here, which is about 7-tenths of a degree Celsius. That's, we're already that
far into the scale. Two degrees is here, three degrees. Now, all the things listed on the
right about when things will happen, at what temperature, are predicated on the hare taking
a nap. They're what you get if you have the slow plodding tortoise like getting worse.
So, you look up here and you see a big loss of Amazon rainforest up at 2.5 degrees, but
I just showed you that this sort of thing could occur at current levels of warming. All it
takes is a big El Nino. Well, let's talk about there's between a two-degree warming and
a three-degree warming. Two-degree warming is the loss of all mountain glaciers, so mountain
air now is missing its ice and so are all the other ones. And all the coral reefs disappear
although the individual coral species don't necessarily go extinct. A three-degree warming
is so chaotic that there's climate refugees in the hundreds of millions trying to escape
wherever they are and go somewhere else. Save Bangladesh. Where are they going to go?
What country will add to its current burden of coping with the same problem? Basically
a major border crossings like this set off wars and in this case they'll price off genocides
in great many places. This is not a pretty prospect. This is a major downsizing in the
human population in circumstances where when it's over all the surviving groups will hate
one another for very good reasons. So those are the kinds of risks that we're playing
with and neither two degrees or three degrees is very nice, but it's what we do in the next
10 years that depends on us limiting it to two degrees. And that comes, well, there's
another choice and that is to remove CO2 from the atmosphere. And I've just sketched
that in as the sink into long-term storage, the CO2. That's the unmentioned that's not
in any of the scenarios. Nobody's talking about it, but it's the only reasonable thing
I can think that we can do is simply to do a reverse on putting carbon into the atmosphere
and take it out. So here is the critical curve. Now this is just a modeling exercise that's
part of the climate projections. And this is carbon emission that's being plotted and
currently the world is putting out about eight new gigatons every year of fossil carbon
into the atmosphere. So that's where we are. If we continue to grow the uses in what's
called the business's usual scenario, which is what was called the pessimistic scenario
in that color chart, we'll wind up with about a sixth degree warming at the end of the century.
So we really have to change our ways, you know, for that. But how fast we have to change
it comes from the Florida curves. There are both imaginary scenarios. We put the brakes
on fossil fuel use at different rates. And we start stopping, we stop the growth of it,
which would be the peak in the curves here. But we still continue putting the same amount
in every year, making the problem worse. But we bring the use down. And if we do this
reversal in direction by 2040, we still warm up by three degrees. If we bring it down a
bit faster, the lower curve here, so that turns over in 2016 or 2020, we should keep
on the tortoise scenario to two degrees. Not very nice, but that's how fast we have
to act to do it. Now there's a third way to act, which I showed you before, which is
literally start taking carbon out of the cycle that goes between air and plant and ocean
and stays in circulation, but taking things out of that circulation. And if you do that,
you will reduce the concentration in the air, which is what counts for both ocean and global
warming. So here's one scenario, here's the other. I would finish by saying there are
some reasons for optimism here. And I'll just list three. We have good longer term power
solutions for doing what coal and oil are currently doing for us. Even with current
technology, things like deep geothermal and nuclear and so forth are capable of taking
over the load if we do them fast enough. There will probably also be a third industrial
revolution in the process of doing this, who will give us even better ways of doing it.
So there's that. And we can do the near term part, taking the growth out of the system
by 2020, probably with nuclear and deep geothermal. The other optimistic point is we have a deed
turned on a dime before. And I'll show you that as soon as I go through the three existing
technologies. Plug in hybrid vehicles that recharge at night off the electrical grid
but give you enough for the complete commute, which is about 33 miles on average, the U.S.,
so that now you're taking the load off of using oil. Secondly, that you build enough
of nuclear and geothermal to retire a few of the old coal plants quickly. But finally,
because all countries have a lot of coal and they're going to want to modernize, and
if we don't want them to repeat all of our mistakes and undo all of our efforts, we need
to subsidize them to use clean energy. And the easiest way I can conceive of doing this,
I don't think we'll give them nuclear reactors, although 31 nations already have them. I think
something like offering to drill deep geothermal wells for them and set them up in operation
in exchange for a vow not to touch their coal might be a way we could proceed with it. But
it's got to be a global effort. It's not just us doing our part. We've got to think
ahead for others as well. So that's one of the ways you get there, but here's the optimistic
current of Dying Park. When World War II was looming, but we weren't in it yet, FDR put
a lot of effort into getting industry ready to convert over to war production. And that
was a little bit unpopular in many circles, and he had to pussyfoot around it quite a
bit. But he did indeed set things up so that after Pearl Harbor, industry really did turn
on a dime. That is to say, the automakers converted 1,000 automobile plants to war production
and built 1,000 of each of two kinds of aircraft. And they designed, tested, built and off the
assembly line, the GM DACA truck that's converted to be amphibious. All in 90 days. Ford turned
out one bomber every 63 minutes. I mean, this is the kind of, on the eve of a great war
you can do a lot of things that you might think would take decades, but we certainly
in the U.S. have a great deal of wherewithal to do this. So I just close with this quote
from a few centuries ago. Edmund Burke, the Irish English statesman said, the public interest
requires doing today those things that men of intelligence and goodwill would wish five
or 10 years hence had been done. Right time frame too. Thank you.
So we have time for a few questions. So please approach one of the microphones if you have
a question. So we'll, you won the race so we'll start on the right.
Am I right? And terrific. Thank you so much. The question is just up until recently our
own administration denied there was a problem and yet you're presenting years of evidence.
There are scientists, they've said, oh, this is all hogwash. How can this be? And what
are we missing today? Because, you know, we're still in that same mindset that they were
saying this isn't really a problem. Well, I mean, I suppose there are lots of answers
to that question. Scientists don't speak directly to people. I mean, that is to say, we don't
get particularly covered very often or well. That's part of it. Part of it is that he said,
she said, you know, notion of doing news about science where they call in anyone they can
find to say the opposite thing and give them equal time. That's common in our media. I would
add to that that the environmental reporters of the newspapers are a very sharp, well-informed
bunch. I was with a group of them a couple of months ago at the NRC's nuclear reactor
training facility where they put on a few days of how we train our inspectors. And the
questions those people were asking were two or three degrees more complicated than any
story they could have gotten past their editor. So they knew a great deal more than they were
actually able to report on. That's true, certainly, of the New York Times reporter, Matt Wald,
but it was also true of the St. Petersburg Tribune. I mean, it was this whole group of
about 20 astounded me by how well-informed about the situation they were, but it wasn't
getting out.
With regard to nuclear, you had it in one of your sidebars. Cloning existing plants,
I understand the French get one power plant model. It's kind of the Southwest Airlines
model of producing nuclear power. What do you see as the political, scientific, regulatory
chances of getting the U.S. to do that? One type of power plant over and over again.
Well, back about 97, the NRC changed its policy about reviewing in detail, I mean, so it didn't
get to be a five-year review for each power plant. They said that if you will stick to
the standard model design, which is the one that's likely to be built in Texas next year,
then you'll get expedited review as long as you don't change any detail. You'll still
have to have a site survey to show that it's environmentally sound to put it there and so
forth, but furthermore, a nuclear plant can be built in just two or three years, construction
time. So they can go much faster than they have gone in the past. I do despair about
changing national policy with all the fears fast enough to do that. It's one of the reasons
I'd prefer to go the deep geothermal route as fast as we can because we don't have the
fears of that and it doesn't take mining either. Go ahead.
Would you please comment about corn-based ethanol and its effect on the consumption of natural
resources and also the result of food supply?
You're right. It's a bad idea at all. I'll tell you another reason it's a bad idea than
the ones you already know. If your transportation and your food, you're not going to be able
to come from sources that are simultaneously likely to be hit by a drought. You crash your
economy a lot faster than if one continues and the other one goes down. In a drought
if you could stop eating beef and eat the corn directly, spread or something, and expand
the supply of it fourfold. But if the commuters can't get to work in the economy, then you
know, it shows it. It's just like planning your investment portfolio for old age. I mean
you want uncorrelated sources that when one goes up the other one might be going down
but they don't both go up or down together. Same problem with this. You don't want to
use a source like corn ethanol to do this.
I give a free lecture mostly for my own interest based on Peter Ward's Scientific America
in October 2006. It's fairly accessible to a non-science audience because PBS did a 13
minute video called Extinction and it's easy to present. I'm curious what you think of
his process, the non-step process, where it starts with a pulse of carbon dioxide, ends
with poisoning the atmosphere with hydrogen sulfide, and destroying the ozone layer and
evidently has happened repeatedly in our planet's history.
There's lots of things worse that can happen than what we've been covering so far. Peter,
who's a colleague of mine, is painting a picture based upon what we know particularly what
happened about 55 million years ago with the big greenhouse effect back then. Prospects
for things like if you have methane burps that you can get big fires lots of places
very quickly. There's a lot of other catastrophes that we're not covering here but amongst the
ones that we know are in store for us this century and which will produce a chaotic world
for the kids, the students in college now basically have to face a world where the time they're
45 or 50 we could have a world where that's so unsafe and unpredictable that nobody will
invest money to do anything.
One little addendum. You said not in store for us this century. It appears that this
is likely at six degrees centigrade or Celsius increase. This is a possibility.
All the figures are Celsius but I've been interpreting in Fahrenheit.
Okay. At six degrees Celsius. Anyway, the people out at UC Berkeley are saying we may
hit seven and a half degrees by the end of the century.
The results you see are average scenarios of a spread that does indeed include that.
We don't know that the climate sensitivity is three degrees for doubling the CO2. That's
just the average of ones that go from 1.5 up to 5.5 and so on and which one nature actually
uses we haven't found out yet.
We know from the way that the ice caps have melted in previous ice ages we can get a bit
of a calibration. It does look like about three degrees but that's not solved yet.
One of the first slides you showed was 50,000 years ago. What happened with the climate
and what was the connection with the human behavior relationship you had on that slide?
Basically climate was flipping back and forth on less than a decade timescales and then
sticking in the new mode for a century or two and crashing back.
It was basically a very unsold world and people were forced to move around a great deal there.
That's all from the time of the out of Africa as part of the movement.
It wasn't doing anything different at 50,000 and it was doing at 30,000 and we don't know
in the previous ice age whether things on this repeat occurred because we don't have
the time resolution and the cores that go back before about 120,000.
The thinking is that it's not a peculiarity of 50,000 years which is really a 70 to 40,000
year span in any way.
What got me into this in fact was I was trying to figure out why human brains evolve so quickly
and climate fluctuations were just the natural thing to look at because any evolutionary
biologist will tell you that if you see speciation pick up and produce a lot of variance the
big climate change probably happened.
Sir, your lecture is very good from a technocrat point of view.
But will the politicians of the world listen to you or do what you said?
You said four fire alarms we have to meet their requirements simultaneously.
If we had, I know there was shortage of time, what do you think these politicians of the
world will do anything or do nothing?
Well, I mean there's no lack of national politicians now except most of what the scientists are
saying for the tortoise scenario that many of them haven't heard of the hare jumpiness.
There is that problem but scientists don't speak to the people directly in this country
with very much success.
It has to be filtered through the media, through their hergimen, through other sources that
they more traditionally get their facts and values from.
Our immediate task I think is to persuade those leaders to take on part of the problem.
That's one of the reasons why the moral issues of you can't do this to other people.
This is really the developed world's doing it to people on the front lines and the tropics
that are going to get hit first.
But if that kind of reasoning can prevail, we might really get somewhere with it much
more quickly than scientists trying to systematically educate the population about what's basically
a complicated problem involving things like feedbacks that nobody, people think they're
about a suggestion box rather than a thermostat.
Dr. Halvin, you did not mention solar power or wind power or landfill gas as a generating
fuel. What do you think those will show up in percentages for power generation in the
future?
What was it, was solar power, wind power, what was the third?
Landfill gas, landfill gas.
Landfill gas is mostly, is methane and CO2 bubbling up from landfills.
In Europe, they're going to pretty much stop this from happening with digesters that actually
produce power as well as capturing.
There are a lot of opportunities with landfill projects to bury organic materials and take
the amount of circulation just like the way they fall on the ocean floor.
I've just begun thinking about that. I don't know how big a project it would have to be
to succeed, similarly trapping some of the soils that go down muddy rivers before they
get out into the Mississippi alluvial fan and turn into CO2.
There are things that produce settling tanks to take that and then store it.
There are ways of getting into it. I mean, there's a lot of thinking that's gone into
a few areas, but we're just beginning to think about how to do the others.
If you talk to, I've been to two meetings this year with the ocean scientists that study
the plankton part of the ocean acidification problem.
My overall experience from listening to them was to think that while very good work was
being done, that not much had been done earlier.
They were in the beginnings of coping with the problem.
That part isn't encouraging, but a lot of very good work is being done now.
The real problem is taking what we have now and convincing people to act on.
Are you familiar with the use of the Arnett shale to convert CO2 into CO2?
The tar sands in Alberta is a classic example.
There are ways to make use of marginal fossil fuel resources.
If you think coal is bad for putting CO2 in the atmosphere, they're worse.
Thank you very much. I know many of us have to get back to the fundamental mission of the
university, which is, of course, evolving human brains rapidly.
I want to thank Dr. Calvin for an extraordinary talk this evening that has enlightened all of us.
I think shed a great deal of light on what our collective mission needs to be.
I just want to thank you, at least on behalf of myself, if not everyone else here, for finding a bit of optimism
to end the evening on. Please join me once more, and thank you Dr. Calvin.
This program is protected by copyright and may not be redistributed in whole or in part
without the express written consent of Rice University Digital Media Services.
This program is protected by copyright and may not be redistributed in whole or in part
without the express written consent of Rice University Digital Media Services.
