Hello, I'm William Calvin, a professor at the University of Washington in Seattle.
Our kind of language is the fourth in a series of lectures on human evolution.
Our kind of language helps you gossip about who did what to whom, where, when, and with
what means.
But how do you enable someone else to read your mind, to reconstruct all of your model
of the action inside their head?
To help that person guess well while mind reading you, you use the syntax of long sentence
language.
To review what we talked about last time, we were concentrating on a recipe for the
big brain that had six essential parts in it.
Number one was having grazing animals as meat supply, rather than just herbivores in general,
and large grazers, not small body grazers.
So what limits the numbers of grazers of the population size during a boom and bust?
We discussed that brush fires are frequent, and it entails plant succession after a fire.
We discussed traditional Darwinism, particularly the excess reproduction, that's so wasteful,
but provides the means of changing the relative portions of traits in the population.
We discussed in the context of the brush surrounding a grassland, the assortment of
mating genetics.
We discussed versatility, things like tool making, food preparation and such, would tend
to concentrate in the brushing shape.
Finally, we discussed how all this leads to trait to chitin, how traits get more or less
a free ride without the usual constraints imposed by selective survival, which normally
is what drives most evolutionary change.
All this, all six traits, enable a bush, a boom and bust feedback loop that improves versatility,
but does it via enlarging the brain first.
We expect omnivores to need bigger brains than grazers, just to house all the additional
brain specializations needed for acquiring each food.
Creativity is a good part of what we call intelligence, as is creativity, as are quick,
high quality decisions, discussed more next time.
So why is shade important for human evolution?
There are tasks that use both hands, which require long periods of close attention, best
done in the shade, creating sharp edges, food preparation, pounding, soaking, cooking,
fire starting.
So some individuals hang out in the brush to chase into a grassland, more than others
do.
That means the associated mating occurs amongst those practicing these shady arts, tool making
food fire starting.
This works just like mating amongst the more versatile, as among those who can pass the
college entrance exams.
Here's what a brushy tree area looks like after a fire, and this is only two months,
and you already see all this new grass growing.
The theory made some predictions that less effective loops, once you get outside of the
Rift Valley, where the feedback loop works very well, that less effective loops may influence
non-ancestral homo-species, like neanderthal, as they immigrated into environments where
there were fewer suitable sites for the feedback loop.
The prediction was that you'd expect slower brain enlargement when they spread into the
European forests, where there are no brush fires to operate next to grassland, or when
they spread into the steppes of Central Asia, where there are certainly grass fires, but
there's very little brush compared to the great volume of grassland, and that makes
the increment from a feedback loop very small.
So here's the result of that prediction.
On the left, we see brain size increasing, starting at about 2.3 million years ago, just
after grazers evolved, and grazers evolving as what's needed to start feedback loop running.
To stay, unlike the urban forests in general, you get a big population boom each time there
is a brush flare.
So on the left, we're plotting brain size only for homo sapiens and our ancestors, our
direct ancestors.
So it's leaving out neanderthals, and it's leaving out the Asian homo erectus.
On the right, you see what we left out, over on the left, and we see Asian homo erectus.
This is just plotting for reference with that dotted line.
So you can see how far below the trend line Asian homo erectus is.
Right then, here shows sort of the offset, they're delayed by a good 3.5 million years.
There are neanderthals, and they're mostly below the line, except for those light ones
above the line.
Now the ones above the line are a special case.
That's interbreeding with homo sapiens.
We got a lot of neanderthal genes that way, and it appears that they got some big brain
genes from homo sapiens.
So all of those large brain points for neanderthal are in the neanderthals final 31,000 years.
So the setup for the creative explosion is sort of odd.
Sharp edge tool technique, which other than javelins is just about the only thing they
did.
This technique improved only twice, about every one and a half million years, and between
there wasn't much change.
So why so slow, so conservative?
Second night, by 200,000 years ago, people looking like us were around, homo sapiens
at last, complete with our big brain, but they weren't doing much different until 100,000
years ago.
The creative explosion that occurs then is just before the out of Africa of homo sapiens
at about 70,000 years.
This is the out of Africa that spread modern homo sapiens in the East African population
into Asia with a few into Europe.
These lower set of lines here, I doubt really they crossed the Red Sea, but they certainly
did follow coastlines once you get across India, all the way down into Indonesia, and
in periods when the sea level was particularly low.
Once they got across the strait, where the wall is flying is, they made it all the way
into Australia, certainly by 45,000 years, maybe 50.
The out of Africa into Europe, which you see on the left part, the black line going up
into Europe, that was more like 40,000 to 50,000 years ago.
During all this period, climate was flipping back between two basic modes.
Up to warm and wet like today, and then back down into a cool and dry, often a few centuries
later, these flips could be very fast, and there are two dozen of these cycles in the
last 75,000 years.
Such instability probably happened during prior laciations as well.
So here's the period of anatomically modern humans, and then behaviorally modern coming
in here.
Here's the out of Africa into Asia, the out of Africa into Europe, and at about that time
40,000 years, this is when the endothelial is going extinct, but it's also about when
a representational art in Europe gets going, from 50 to wall art, about 40.
So before this 70,000 year out of Africa into Asia, there were one half million year long
periods when the rulemaking didn't improve.
Now were they just overly conservative, you know, this is against their religion or something.
But constant cultural loss, then somebody having to reinvent it, I mean if your expert
dies before training or replacement, it's lost to everybody.
And Tasmanian appears to be an example of this 13,000 years ago when it got cut off from
Australia, they happened to lose their fire-starting ability, and there was no way to regain it
by somebody walking down from Australia.
But of course, number three here was imitation and teaching unlikely to spread and elevation
over a larger region.
One has to assume that all these advances occurred many times, they were invented many
times, they were just lost many times until they spread over a wide enough area to escape
some of the inevitable loss that you get with small numbers.
They rate how this worked out, or these are really unanswered questions for now.
Well, 80 to 90,000 years ago, the first signs of all this, one started seeing barbs made,
they were sort of carved out of bone.
This is a decorated version, undated, where some lines have been engraved in things.
And again, about 77,000 years ago, near the southernmost tip of Africa, Lumbos Cave, are
two interesting findings.
One is this piece of red ochre, red ochre is a favorite substance for decorating your
cheeks, it's rouge basically, make a paste of it and you can get lipstick.
Looks like this seemed to have gotten started back then.
And Lumbos Cave also has necklaces made of shells, the holes in them were probably made
by a boring predator and they were simply utilized by being strong on something.
So right here you see an example of not just shells, but here's the tooth, the hole in
it.
These are drilled holes.
Now, representational art seems to have gotten started about 50,000 years ago, this particular
mammoth tusk is undated, but this sort of thing began to be seen back at 50,000.
Now what you see here, if you haven't figured out yet, there is the head of a mammoth here
and his tusk, you can see the eye of the mammoth and you can trace it all the way back now.
So carrying your ark around with you as you moved was the first thing.
Here's a more advanced form at 25,000 years along the Danube.
And by 37,000 years ago, art began to be seen carved or painted on the walls of caves.
Now cave art as a term was earlier applied to those figurines I showed you, simply because
people were digging into the floor of caves in order to find them or they got lost.
But then somebody looked up at the walls and noticed that there are things like this on
the wall too.
So most of what we call cave art now, we're really talking about the parietal art so-called.
Europe's wall art sites are mostly from about 37,000 down to 15,000 years ago and they're
mostly down in the Basque country or up in the lower part of France or going across the
coast towards Italy.
There's the Chauvet cave site.
Here's Lascaux up here in the Dordogne Valley and Altamira caves down there in Spain.
The behavior way modern tools get rather fancy by the time you get to 25,000 years ago.
I mean take a look at some of these really fine points that have been made by chipping
away at surrounding rock.
I mean this one for example has got a good surface for your thumb and of course it looks
like it ought to be very good at boring holes and indeed holes were bored.
There's a sliver of bone that has been made into a needle.
Here's another example of art.
This is from Africa, it's from Tanzania.
This in fact shows a story.
I mean we have a damsel in distress here being rescued by her brothers against the invaders
whose tensions are fairly clear if you consider the erect penis.
But so within the 70,000 years you see these behaviorally modern four bees.
Bees, blush for self-accompaniment, bare rails and bone tools.
And now with a real story depicted we can finally say they probably thought a lot like
we do now.
So here's an art history quiz from what century is the sculpture.
Now I look at it, I initially think late 19th or early 20th century something like that
but then I sort of look and see that this is pot shards that have been pasted back together
and I began to wonder, well it's from 3800 years ago.
Now 1800 BCE is contemporary with Middle Minoan on Crete, those bullfighting acrobats
and so on.
I first saw them and I thought there was almost modern looking kinds of artistic exaggeration.
But here you have something at the same time and really Europe, I mean Minoan is Europe's
oldest civilization that's got nothing like the sticker.
So there's one more bit of stage setting that I'd like to do before considering phonemes,
words, sentences and stories.
Focus for a minute on what size of a group are you communicating with.
This is just your family, an extended family, a band of a few dozen of the tribe, Shiftoom
state.
Throughout nearly all of human evolution the largest group was a band of several dozen
people, often extended family groups that merged.
That's also the size of the foraging bands, the inchopensis and in bonobos.
Basically there was a bit of making those smaller and re-merging as the food supply
became scarce.
When you think about it in the 10,000 years when agriculture has now supplemented how
to gather limitations, that 10,000 years isn't very much time to change our genetics enough
so we have inborn instincts that are focused on living in larger groups.
Just to show you a little bit of what this transition occurred, you got agriculture by
at least 11,000 maybe a bit further back, but it's not agriculture that's sufficient
to completely replace hunter-gathering so population size is still limited pretty much
by the hunter-gathering lifestyle, providing you with sufficient vitamins.
It takes a while to get three essential food groups that you can survive on without hunter
-gathering and that occurred by about 9,500 years ago in China.
They domesticated by then rice, millet, pigs and so on.
In the Lovato it was a different mix, occurred by about 9,000 years ago and in the Americas
different groups were domesticated but they did by about 5,500 years ago.
Hunting turns out to be difficult because so many species turn out to be unsuitable
for domestication.
By 5,400 years ago the Sahara was losing its monsoon rainfall in the summers and so they
could, Sahara couldn't even support grass anymore, therefore no grazing animals, no
lions and no humans.
Such rainfall reductions were not limited to the Sahara margin, she saw it all the way
across Tigershire, Freddie's Valley in Iraq and in the northern part of ancient China.
So the great irrigation civilizations developed then and they had a need for taxes to do
all this and the administrative core for it.
Thank you tax collectors and tax receipts so that people could show that already paid
the correct number of bushels of leader sheep.
And the need for tax records is how writing began about 3,200 BCE and that enabled history
to occur and that changed everything.
Dead people can now speak to us as in the great edifice of well-tested scientific understanding
still building.
Language.
Vervet monkeys have cries that specify danger, there's one cry that means danger above such
as eagles, other cries really direct attention down below such as the threat of snakes.
Hundreds of downs can be taught to animals as well as verbs like fetch and indeed some
categories can be taught.
African great-parents are actually the best so far but like having to teach reading and
writing in humans there's no real instincts that help you there.
They must be patiently taught all these nouns.
This is nothing like the staged christendomeness that you see in young humans.
So we sort of assume that proto-language came first.
Proto-language are the two word sentences that give me this, give me that.
None of the long sentences yet.
It's the language of two-year-olds.
It's also the language of the pigeon languages, the traders use as they make various stops
going down the river that keep speaking to pigeon in each place.
They always have a lot of pointing gestures.
Pointing gestures mean absolutely nothing to great-aims.
They just do not pay attention to that nor do they pay attention to the direction that
you're looking, the important kind of gesture.
Can I ask what were the payoffs for short sentence language?
First descriptions were that of hunting but then turns out the chimps are already good
army patrol tactics, you don't need language to coordinate that.
The best of animal language learning as they would dedicated teachers really trying to
get them to do not only hundreds of words but sentences.
Well Conzi, shown here of a bonobo, especially on hundreds of nouns and he can produce short
sentences that give me this, give me that variety.
But he can understand human language either pointing to different symbols for the different
words or actually you can follow human speech better than anyone had thought possible.
So Conzi can comprehend a novel sentence he's never heard before such as go to the office
and bring back the red ball.
And Conzi knows that there's an office and how to get there.
He knows what red balls are, he's distinguished from blue balls and so on.
And indeed the lab room where the sentence is spoken to him is full of balls of all colors
and normally the office doesn't have balls on.
Not Conzi, nor is all the nearby balls asked to be let out of the room and then once he's
outdoors he's asked to be let into the office where he's been many times before.
And today the office is full of all sorts of many colored balls.
Conzi finds the red ball amongst them and then asked to be let out, asked to let be
back into the test room and delivers the ball.
So he's understood a complicated sentence and it makes about the number of errors that
a two-in-a-half-year-old child would make when they tested some of the graduate students'
children in the same way on the same test and they made about ten percent errors on the
test and so did Conzi.
So the way by which quiz it goes is the first stage of quiz is just tuning up to the speech
sounds in the dialect that you're listening to.
This starts at maybe five or six months, quite intense up to ten months and basically they
are forming categories so that minor variations in the way you say got, you know, are all
standardized one meaning, which we call phonemes.
And they've learned all the ones that are in the stockpile of that particular dialect.
So they stop responding, you can test them as to whether they can hear the differences
or not, which you do in the months before, five months, and they in fact can hear all
sorts of variation that you and I can't hear at all.
But then once they start making these categories, they can't hear the small changes anymore
because they think it's all the same thing.
It's one of the things that makes it so hard for us to learn foreign languages because
we will claim that.
But I did say it exactly the way you said it, though you can't hear the difference.
So like in the first year armed with these phonemes, they start learning combinations
of phonemes, things that we call words, and they become very acquisitive of new words.
Because they can even pick one up on a one try, this is not the sort of repetitive learning
play.
They are really tuned up to get phoneme combinations down.
And they average in the preschool years about six to nine new words every day.
So there's nothing like this obviously in animal learning.
And certainly not in the great apes that are tested who really have no acquisitiveness
at all.
And it's really a repeat exercise to get them to have a vocabulary of several hundred.
Now by the second year, they're constructing two word sentences, what we call proto-language.
In the third year, they construct longer sentences using syntax to disambiguate the meanings.
But like Kanzli, they were tuning in.
They could understand longer sentences back in the second year.
They just were not producing longer sentences.
In the fourth and the fifth year, bedtime stories are now required to have a proper
beginning, middle, and end.
They have sort of got a template for what a good story is.
And if the story is incomplete and concurrent, the child starts complaining about it.
So the overarching theme here seems to be keep making combinations of the latest set of combinations.
So the instrument makes a category, combines phonemes into a word, combines words into
a short phrase, combines phrases into a longer sentence using syntax, double-illustre guess
the meaning, combines sentences into a proper story.
And all of this, and much of this is learned by the youngster saying in the conversation
of people who are gossiping.
So they are hearing complicated sentences and they're tuning up to it.
They're softwiring their brain to do that particular language.
All of this helps you think in greater depth and to juggle multiple things inside your
head at once.
So what did language start affecting this grand story about human evolution up from
the apes to our kind of consciousness?
This is a topic that linguist Derek Bickerton and I addressed in our book, Linguics Machina.
We said that vocabulary and short sentence language could easily have been building up
for several million years.
But long sentence utterances that needs syntax and grammar to disambiguate a long string
could be part of the creative explosion over the last 80,000 years.
Now that I've thought longer about social organization and group size, syntax and stories
ought to flourish at the time of the transition from bands of dozens to tribes of several
hundred villages.
In other words, more recently than 9,500 years ago.
So the usual estimate of how many people you can keep track of, recognize readily, ask
a question related to the last time you met, how many people can you do that for?
And the usual estimate of several hundred individuals served village size, the amalgamation
of bands.
In other words, you can feel comfortable meeting these individuals, not much worried that they
will attack you or take advantage of your unguarded approach, because they did such
news would get around.
We encounter many strangers daily in urban setting, yet we have even less violent crime
per capita than in the suburbs and the countryside.
That's really quite remarkable.
The social evolution since about 5,000 years ago has created this greater urban stability.
What is probably not yet backstopped by inherited instinct in the manner of cheaters action,
which need even back in dozen size bands.
More than several hundred that one is often associated with individuals who are strangers
here today and gone tomorrow, these misdeeds may not affect their reputation.
They are the cheaters among them will not worry that their misdeeds will catch up with
them as they surely do within a hundred sized village.
Yet bands of dozens were the rule until agriculture came along, allowing for higher population
density and those villages of hundreds.
So let us look back to the original group of several million years ago, the band of
several extended family groups able to move out of Africa and get half way to the North
Pole.
Swalcules from clubbing with a long pole, such as birds and hares, are scarcely enough for
a family to share.
These bands were also eating a lot of meat from large herbivores.
Ever since about two and a half million years ago, you can see it in the isotope record.
And these are primarily grazers that they are eating, but kill that size is far too
much to eat yourself.
Food sharing beyond your own offspring is rare in primates.
But here a small group of hunters brings home an entire hind quarter of a big grazing animal.
It's the perfect sub for sharing amongst an extended family or even a band sized group
of several dozen.
But when sharing is required, you don't have to share small ones to share big ones or
big of a share.
Everything.
These are going to vary between groups and half of the adults in any one group are going
to be from other bands.
They are the females that moved as teenagers.
They have been brought to different standards and so there's always going to be a little
tension in the group about whether somebody should have shared or not.
So this better estimate that's always going on is called cheater detection because cheaters
can really swap the whole cooperative structure if they get to be too many of them.
One of the hazards of cities and basically dealing with strangers and reputation is not
really at stake with what they do to you.
The possible origins of such widespread cooperation are of interest.
Besides keeping track of how exchanges balance out, individuals in a group of this size would
be interested in alliances between individuals.
I mean even chimpanzees do this that you see in grooming pairs, gifting, support during
a fight.
So even at the chimpanzee level, one is not only keeping track of one of its own exchanges,
but that of all the other possible pairings in the group.
The direction of exchange and its value are what go into balancing estimates for each pair.
This allows one to identify better partners and not waste time on individuals with a whole
history of reciprocity, those that are seen to be unhelpful.
Now this is kind of interesting from the standpoint of language.
So once keeping track of all these pairs, possible pairings in the group, the direction
of the exchange and its value are what go into one's balancing estimates is the exchange
symmetrical on balance, whatever.
But it turns out that this mental bookkeeping method needed for detecting cheaters might
also serve as a foundation for long sentence language.
Sharing involves three noun verbs, give, bring.
These are unusual verbs in that they have three nouns that have to be there.
You utter a sentence that just says, give me, while you may be able to guess that the speaker
is one of the nouns, you still got to have an object given.
Same thing for bring.
You've got to have these three nouns.
They're not optional.
If you miss any one of the three, somebody will look at you and say, what?
Now see billboard advertisements and say, give me, and then there's a picture of what's
supposed to be given that's certainly hidden somewhere in the rest of the billboard.
This is the analogous to the mental bookkeeping needed for keeping track of gifts and debits,
which pair, direction of the change, and value.
The big step up from total language is that long sentences are ambiguous unless you have
some way of keeping track of which nouns go with which verbs.
I think I saw him leave to go home, he has four verbs.
By the third year, kids have started to figure this out.
Just listening to all that adult conversation, especially gossip, which always has sort of
a little story in it, and of course, listening to gossip in the shade where people pounding
and soaking plants is taking a lot of time and toolmaking is taking a lot of time and
somebody's concentrating to get a fire started.
This is what the shady environment that those kids aren't better than.
Their brains may not have come tuned up to speak Swahili, but if Swahili is being spoken,
they will tune up to it, learn its words, learn its conventions that we call grammar
and syntax.
So gossip in the shade is sort of the perfect setting here.
So as far as I can see, you need vocal mimicry, which may come rather late.
Much mimicry can be seen in even in bird brains.
So I mean, it is that difficult to do.
However, great apes don't do it very well.
And for most of our history in a band-sized social group, we may not have done it very
well either.
But I can describe for your transition that would bring you into most people being able
to do long sentences.
You need some to get it started.
So imagine some adults or maybe just older children slowly managed to consistently speak
long sentences.
Now you have got some conventions that they have either invented themselves or learned
elsewhere.
You've got to remember that their groups are always exchanging numbers in the way of teenage
females.
So if there are some conventions, I mean, for example, you develop a case-marking convention
that identifies who's an actor, who's an actor-debaun.
I mean, we use he and him, for example, in that manner.
So now small children hear stuff with structures like that.
They figure out the syntax and are better as adults because earlier experience and soft
wiring around it works better as an adult.
So before you may have words and short sentences, but after early exercise from things like
gossip, you might not only have more long sentences, but more complex thoughts, more
contingent plans, the ability to play games and exercise logic, music beyond melody, polyphonic
music.
And most of all, since all of this involves a problem of quality, of finding a coherent
combination before you speak it out loud, this kind of coherence finding and creativity
is very rewarding in this sense.
So all of these things I'll discuss next time, but they all seem to be the stuff of
higher intellectual function.
There are three of my books that have more depth you might want to take a look at.
So here's where we are in the series.
These are the things that we did before.
Here's the current lecture and the next one will be our kind of looking ahead.
Creativity and planning and the higher intellectual functions.
Thank you.
