Hello, I am William Calvin, a professor at the University of Washington, Seattle, and
this is the fifth lecture in the series, Our Kind of Looking Ahead, The Evolution of Higher
Intellectual Function.
The philosopher Daniel Dunnett said, there is no step more uplifting, more momentous
in the history of mind design than the invention of language.
When Homo sapiens became the beneficiary of this invention, the species stepped into
a slingshot that has launched it far beyond all other earthly species in the power to
look ahead and reflect.
So this time I'm going to cover six major topics.
I'm going to start with groups as the setting for increasing cooperation and some of the
effects of group selection, some groups prosper and others die out.
Our mental life far exceeds that of the great apes and going better another
So some of the major chefs that we've gotten from great ape behaviors might be listed as
it this way, first of all there's the change to upright two-legged stride, but the others
are much more puzzling why we get a threefold brain enlargement in the start until 2.3 million
years ago.
So our idea of those major new traits prerequisites for other species is that we're going to
Well certainly high on the psychologist list would be pointing and shared attention that
the great apes don't have them and they are really needed for the development of many
kinds of personal interaction that we have.
Memcary abilities, certainly without it you don't get widespread tool use and a particular
difficulty is tool making.
Then there's the acquisitiveness that you see particularly with learning nine new words
every day in the preschool years.
One other possibility as a prerequisite is being able to detect the direction of another's
gaze, not just the direction their head's pointing, which jokes can do, but the direction
they're actually looking at.
All primates eyes are brown, muddy brown usually, whereas ours are white surrounding the corny
anarchists.
Do any of those traits on the list move together?
Well certainly we know that tool making and brain enlargement do not move together.
Brain enlargement is study after 2.3 million years, tool making goes for one half million
years out changing, that changes another million and a half years essentially.
Then there's the matter that in primates generally, bigger group size is associated with bigger
brains, as if it took space in the brain to keep track of so many additional individuals.
So that was a good count.
Here's what happened to it.
It was turned out to be an exception to the rule.
During all the time the brain was enlarging three times, group size remained at the band level
of several dozen.
When brain size stopped growing with agriculture, that's when group size began to shoot up.
That's two major poses shot down by the patient accumulation of data by the archeologists.
Well so much for group size as such.
Now let's talk about groups as the setting for developing all the increased cooperation.
And take it we'll say something about group selection where one group succeeds at the
presence of another going to extent.
And we're going to start off with cooperation.
Human beings are astonishingly good at cooperation.
The International Space Station shows how far we've come.
At here it lies a profound puzzle because according to the standard evolutionary science that
we emphasize individual competition between individuals.
We shouldn't be able to cooperate very much at all.
So the dichotomy between acting as an individual and competing with other individuals
and the group perspective where a group is stronger if they cooperate quite a bit
and therefore can compete with other groups better.
This Dobert cartoon, why do I keep taking on more work while you do nothing?
That's because you optimize for group productivity while I optimize for my happiness.
That makes you a freeloader.
I prefer the label happy winner.
There does seem to be an instinct to create groups even ad hoc groups.
You know they're done on the fly like pick up basketball games is over.
As Ed Wilson put it we are compulsively driven to belong to groups or to create them as needed
which are variously destined groups overlapping groups.
In addition they can be very large or very small.
The original group is the band of several dozen individuals, often a few extended families
that move around together.
It can't be much larger than that unless the resources are really dense too.
So it really looks as though their lifestyle involved groups no larger than a few dozen most of the time.
It's about the same size as the Great Eight Foraging Bands.
One of the things that goes with this is that the extended families include adult females
that have come from other bands and may have different standards about food sharing because of that
but you certainly have the band of brothers all related grew up together acting politically together
leaving the unrelated females politically weak.
There's a notable exception of the nobis.
With power scavenging, meat became available in large packages, whole Highland quarters, the zebra, wildebeest
but there was no way to keep it and it was also too much for one family to eat.
So the only sensible thing to do was to give away most of it and expect reciprocity when others next had excess meat.
This setup is the major driver for food sharing probably since 3.3 million years ago.
At Wilson again, all normal humans are geniuses at reading the intentions of others
whereby they evaluate proselytized bond, cooperate, gossip and control.
Each person working his way back and forth through a social network daily
always continuously reviews past experiences while imagining the consequences of future scenarios.
So there's lots of social mimicry in humans and nothing in Great Apes.
We even have unconscious versions of mimicry.
We will do things called mirroring or echoing or matching where somebody else crosses their leg and you're talking to them.
You may cross your leg in the next 30 seconds.
You tend to synchronize breathing with the conversational partner mimic their postures to the nation
even when you're dealing with a stranger.
Waitresses can use this to quickly establish rapport with a group by mimicking their accent and such.
It's a good way to promote bigger tips as one studies.
However, people prefer to be with others who look like them, speak the same dialect and hold the same beliefs.
An amplification of this evidently inborn predisposition leads with frightening ease to racism and religious bigotry.
Then also with frightening ease, good people do bad things.
So there's an interesting food growth curve from sharing.
You can always share with more individuals.
You can share more objects.
You can share for longer periods of time.
You can just keep increasing this.
But sharing has the cheater problem at every step up.
You have to combat the freeloaders by shutting, excluding from the band, and in the situation of the hunter-gatherer band being excluded.
Certainly, it means your genes don't have a chance to reproduce themselves, and it also means leopards can find you in the middle of the night with no warning from others.
So people come with a fear of being shunned.
I mean, even the Bible encourages it.
The targets of shunning, said Ed Wilson, can include persons who have been labeled as apostates, and it's fatal in the Muslim world.
Whistleblowers, dissidents, strikebreakers, or anyone the group perceives as a threat or source of conflict.
So chimpanzees already have the group moves for hunting small monkeys.
They'll spread out to cover escape routes.
And I've already described for you all the army patrol behaviors of walking in single file, stopping, listening carefully, and then moving on, keeping the youngsters shushed, and so forth.
This is a very interesting thing to see.
The nobles don't do this.
Chimps will patrol territorial boundaries, attacking solitary chimps from other groups, if they find them there.
Now, even if that individual happens to be a former member of their own group, it's a real gang warfare.
All the rules are off, five on one attacks, rip skin, and usually kill.
There are deep, instinctive fears of being otherized and forced out of a group.
A lone free human would have to sleep without anyone to warn of nocturnal prouders.
Oh, Savannah, one often sees a male lion alone, rib showing.
He is likely injured somewhat, but his big problem is that he got chased out of the pride, and so is slowly starving.
Highness can take prey away, even from three lions guarding it.
So fear of dire consequences should one depart from the group's practices.
It's often part of the glue that holds a group together.
This doesn't take a policy for excluding people, as in excommunication.
It only requires those instincts to punish obvious deviance, to treat them as other.
Conformity is safer.
Instincts can often be overridden by cultural practices, such as education, but it is a job that is never done because of the instinct which can resurface.
Cooperation basically is unstable.
It can be overwhelmed by cheaters who take, but fail to get back.
Keeping track of and punishing cheaters, even at risk to oneself, seems to be a deeply embedded instinct and probably arose well before homo sapiens at 200,000 years ago.
And it's not just over food.
I mean, consider those road rage responses for someone cutting into a line.
So building up cooperative systems requires at least three things.
One is moral goodness, a tendency to the empathy to feel concerned for and to help others.
Moral evaluation, the ability to identify and dislike those who are uncooperative or unempathetic or unhelpful.
I mean, even pre-verbal infants monitor for fairness while watching others.
And third, moral retribution, punishment of those who misbehave, even risking energy to punish them as in road rage.
So these instincts for monitoring fairness and others come about because basically everyone loves the freebie,
but everyone even infants monitoring for sharing helpfulness when observing others interact.
This is not learned. It's instinctual. You can see it even in the Confucian monkeys.
So food sharing on the savannah built atop this earlier instinct to monitor fairness.
There's egalitarian emphatically so before them.
So the further compounding of groups, the year round farming villages, what's called tribes,
when you realize that they only currently had culturally been calling them farming villages,
of several hundred band members, chiefdoms of several thousand, these may have had to wait for agriculture.
Human bands are mostly egalitarian.
Leadership in the early villages is also weak without community building projects.
It takes about the nations of farming villages, chiefdoms so called, before a real organization scene.
Monuments are built a hereditary leader who has assistance and so on.
This sort of thing is probably the last 10,000 years.
So here you see it.
On the left here, we see brain size starting at eight size down here, about one pint.
And then it triples.
And during all that period, group size is not changing a bit.
You get to agriculture in between about 12,000 and 6,000 years ago.
Brain size drops by 10 to 17%.
This is group size.
Over here on the right, foraging bands that are the primal condition.
Then comes the amalgamations of those that govern the hundreds.
We tend to call these farming villages now rather than tribes because they occur only after agriculture.
Simple chiefdoms and complex chiefdoms that get you up in the tens of thousands.
Our presence before irrigation and before writing at five thousand.
After that grows in the tenfold in only 500 years.
And another factor of 10 by serve ancient Greek history time 2,500 years ago.
2,500 years ago would be Pythagoras in Greece.
I know.
And once again, within groups, selfish individuals beat altruistic individuals.
But groups of altruists beat groups of selfish individuals.
Say group selection favors altruists or risking individual selection.
Individual selection promoted sin while group selection promoted virtue.
Our mental life you can identify three stages of thinking.
We can replay experiences offline.
We can simulate and make inferences about causes, intentions and logic.
We can self monitor and evaluate how these simulated experiences might lead to specific behavioral outcomes.
And see if they violate community standards before acting to generate alternatives.
Compare, try again.
So let's discuss levels of organization and building them up another level.
A level of organization is a concept that you see just how chemistry builds on physics and biochemistry builds on chemistry and so on.
A four level example that you all will understand.
Combed fleece is spun into yarn, which is woven into cloth, which can be sewn into clothing.
Now, each of these levels of organization has been stabilized with ratchet like mechanisms that prevent backsliding.
Help really to define a level.
Clothing is sewn, stabilizing the 3D configuration.
The fabric is woven, that's two dimensional stabilization to plane to prevent its disorganization into yarn.
The yarn has been spun linear stabilization to keep it from backsliding into fleece.
So I've already seen from last time a series of levels of organization.
See it in the infants grading categories for speech sounds, then compounding those fun names into words, combining words into a short phrase,
combining phrases into a longer sentence using syntax to help us to guess the meaning, combining sentences into a proper story.
I mean, all of this helps you think in greater depth.
So let's start with all these categories for dozens, usually phonemes.
So the Polynesian languages might stick to a dozen.
There are other languages that have up to 50 phonemes.
But those could be combined into a word.
Do lots of words.
You can combine words into sentences and, of course, an infinite number of sentences.
But sometimes you combine sentences into a story.
Okay, basically the theme here is you're making a meta by combining your most recent set of combinations.
So you're meta going meta again, going meta again.
All of these accomplish in the first three years usually.
And in the fourth, fifth year, the bedtime stories are really required to have a proper beginning, middle, and end to fit the child's mental template of what a good story consists of.
Of course, by the seventh year, you have another aspect.
In the immortal words of my mother, well, you should have thought about that before you did it.
As to say, seven year olds usually are held responsible for first evaluating the consequences and comparing it to alternatives and restrictions.
So our mental life is much more than the notion of consciousness as just attention or awareness.
Attention and awareness are what neurologists use usually.
At least consciousness usually only in trying to explain something to the family.
The higher intellectual functions all add structure.
Beginning forms that we might share with apes or early prehumans.
But all of them need quality improvements before acting upon them.
There's a rather simple form of creativity, which is just fiddling around, just keeping it until you finally get it.
But a lot of things have to be done a lot faster than that.
And much of what we call creativity is having just the right answer to a question and doing it very quickly, even though it's perfectly novel.
But as you mull things over in the split seconds you might have, how do you get the assemblage good enough to be right?
So on the first time out, it's correct.
When you're starting with an assemblage of pretty random things.
Well, obviously once you get good at this you can make several plans, contingent plans.
But you can also create stories in this fashion of offline thinking until you get it right.
Stories.
There is however this problem of stability every time you build a new level.
You gotta spend some time shoring it up so it doesn't just collapse on you.
This brings us to higher intellectual functions.
So syntax is the higher intellectual function that we've been talking about so far.
Makes long sentences possible of you can even nest sentences inside sentences.
Something like the Russian dolls.
I think I saw him leave to go home.
Has a total of four verbs.
Not very long, but it's very structured.
Planning. This multi-stage contingent planning.
Have in-plan be a chain or web of logic that when they all hang together we say we understand.
In other words we've successfully made a coherent mental model of the actors of the action.
Other higher intellectual functions are things like games that have arbitrary changeable rules that you have to check your time of moves against.
There's music, not the simple rhythm and melody so much as using multiple voices where things have to fit together.
And of course, coherence finding in general.
We certainly use that and enjoy polyphonic music.
But it's in general whenever we discover hidden patterns amidst seeming chaos.
It's very reinforcing all those little Eureka repeatedly as you saw of course crossword and chigsaw puzzles.
But finally complex thought, figurative speech, analogies, parables, those mappings between two sorrows.
These are all examples of structured thought and they all separate humans from the great apes.
So to me consciousness is an overarching word meaning the higher intellectual functions.
Which are themselves all about doing novelty, structured novelty that is shaped up to high quality.
In other words, creativity.
Analogies are stretched comparisons.
There are two ways to speak of them.
The similarly where we say A is like B.
And the metaphor where we insist that A is B.
Final week is hell.
What makes human cognition so different from that of other primates is thinking in terms of relations.
Particularly some new underlying order as in that crossword puzzle.
A dinner biologist Horace Barlow suggested that intelligence is about making a guess that discovers some new underlying order.
And guess who well neatly covers the water ground relevant to the higher intellectual functions.
Finding the solution of a problem or the logic of an argument happening upon a appropriate analogy.
Creating a pleasing harmony or a witty reply.
Or guessing what's likely to happen next.
Now I know some of you are probably harboring the question of how do you know they're not just thinking silently and thinking complex thoughts.
Well, the science has answered that is usually a version of if you're so clever why aren't you rich.
Okay.
What we would tend to think is that if they had complex thought would see them doing things to their advantage.
Even if they didn't talk about.
They already gang up on lone neighbors.
Five on one mayhem is usually fatal.
And I remind you of this to just show that they are certainly violent enough towards other chimpanzees to make these other stages possible.
If they could plan a little after all that advanced the stage raids in the middle of the night.
With more planning that stock power materials and practice maneuvers.
They would advance to warfare.
Now I might insert at this point that warfare of this sort really wasn't possible apparently.
Until the crops were in during the agricultural season and there was excess manpower available for seasonal looting expedition next door.
So this little sign of chips having complex thought.
We simply cannot detect any sign of our ancestors using complex thought in your archaeological record until behaviorally modern in the last hundred.
So let me speculate a bit about the mental life of the pre modern humans.
That is to say those that were earlier than perhaps 100,000 years ago.
Now we know that that metal life is not equivalent to that of Schumpzer binoculars right.
I mean food sharing those staying guard overnight awake.
I mean those have developed along the line up to 100,000 years.
The sensitive cooperation suggests that mentally being able to keep track of who is what to whom building on top of something that monkeys have was surely there.
Vickerton and I estimate the proto language could easily extend back one or two million years.
But the question is this pre modern human probably had a more complex mental life.
It just wasn't very complex.
The best we can do is some of the neurologist stories about what happens when children don't have an opportunity to learn.
Why would you have any sort until late and they have to try to pick it up them.
So let me show you all of our sac story.
Joseph was thought to be retarded when he was very placed in the home for the retarded.
And it wasn't until he was about 10 years old that somebody discovered he wasn't retarded.
He was barely deaf.
So speech therapy started teaching him sign language.
And by the time he was 11 he could actually be interviewed.
So that's what all of our sacs.
Here's what he described.
Joseph saw distinguished categorized used.
He had no problems with perceptual categorization or generalization.
This is common with great apes and the most monkeys.
But Joseph could not have seen go much beyond this.
Old abstract ideas in mind reflect play plan.
He seemed completely literal.
Unable to chuckle images or hypotheses or possibilities.
Unable to enter an imaginative or figurative realm.
He seemed like an animal or an infant to be stuck in the present.
To be confined to literal and immediate perception.
In my opinion that's what premodern homo sapiens was like.
Sort of stuck in the present tense.
Similar cases also illustrate that any intrinsic aptitude for language
must be developed by exposure during early childhood to complex examples.
Because his deafness remained undiagnosed Joseph didn't have the opportunity
to encounter phonemes, words, syntax, analogies.
During the critical years of early childhood.
So far enough back our ancestors were much like Joseph at 11.
The short sentences of proto-language might not have given them very much
in the way the complex thought.
So the premodern mind likely had thought in Freud's elementary sense of trial action.
But without thought structure, what's the bootstrapping of coherence?
You cannot create novel sentences of any length or complexity.
And you might not be able to think such thoughts either.
So the question is really one of when things advance to complex thought and long sentences.
It's not really a question of the bone tools or beads that sort of mark the beginnings.
So complex thought is sort of what Victor and I think came in at 50 to 100,000 years ago.
If the six million years of ape to human evolution were made into a two hour movie,
people thinking like us would only appear during the last minute of that movie.
So unable to juggle images or hypotheses or possibilities.
Unable to enter an imaginative figurative from maybe what premodern homo sapiens was like.
Now there are some minor advantages to that limited state of mind.
Wouldn't have worry, for example.
I mean you might dread another repetition once you saw it coming.
But you couldn't worry about novel threats without a structure of imagination.
So just as what our ancestors, even the ones that looked like us,
might have been like until real creativity appeared in the archeology.
Of course the question is how and what's stepped up.
But let's just go back to the basics.
Gossip is a prevailing subject of conversation.
This is at Wilson again.
Everywhere from hunter-gatherer campsites to royal courts.
The bind is a kaleidoscopically shifting map of others inside the group and a few outside.
Each of whom is evaluated emotionally in terms of shades of trust, love, hatred,
suspicion, admiration, envy, and such ability.
So my model for the transition is that when a few exceptional adults in a band
provided enough examples of structured gossip who did what to whom it's effort
to be overheard by two-year-olds nearby,
these two-year-olds grew up able to surpass even their role models for complex speech
and for planning and creativity as well.
That I suspect is when things pick up, picked up in full.
So before this outbreak of structured stuff, you'd have so much short sentences and tensions.
But after this early childhood exercise of listening to who did what to whom gossip,
you might start producing more long sentences, more complex thoughts,
contingent plans, games and logic, music, coherence finding, creativity.
At Wilson again, it required the ability to invent and inwardly rehearse
competing scenarios of future interactions.
The social intelligence of the campsite anchored for humans
evolved as a kind of non-stop game of chess.
We evaluate the prospects and the consequences of appliances, bonding,
social contact, rivalries, domination, deception, loyalty, and betrayal.
We instinctively delight in the telling of countless stories about others,
cast as players upon our own inner stage.
Today, after this transition, we tend to see ourselves as the derorator of a life story,
always situated in the crossroads between past and future.
Looking ahead, we imagine various paths
because our less imaginative ancestors couldn't think about the future in much detail.
They were trapped in a here and now existence, much of it in the first person only.
Alternatives may float around in your subconscious, but they are poorly assembled.
They need variation, evaluation, then more variation and evaluation,
until you finally rate them as good enough to go with.
So let's address the incoherence that comes before coherence.
We know this from our nighttime dreams.
Things often don't hang together properly.
They are full of people, places, occasions that don't fit together very well.
That is to say, they are incoherent.
I mean, think of those dreams where, say, you've seen Aristotle and Einstein riding a tandem bicycle on the deck,
or sailing ship listening to rock and roll.
Rock and roll, of course, describes sailing ships.
They are just a mix of players and places without a script or enough verification tags.
So let me take you through some stages of incoherence.
Start out by just just a position.
I'm going to use art history examples here.
So this is sort of a competition between two possible realities that you get from this sculpture from George Segal.
Real incoherence.
I mean, here's Salvador Dali trying to depict a dream caused by the flight of a bee around the pomegranate,
which is down here at the bottom, illustrated one second before awakening.
And you see not only this impossible elephant water walking back here,
but you see a couple of tigers, one of which is chewing the tail of the others,
but they seem to have emerged from a fish that emerged from another pomegranate.
Here's Max Ernst's version of incoherence, 1920.
You have to look at the subplot before you realize these are rafter beams up at the top.
And this is flooring down here with some moss to accumulate through.
And hacking from the ceiling are birds, dead birds.
Except this one on the right strangely develops into below this line a man on horseback waving.
And the woman without a head here still has her hair,
but it's being shaped into the stock of a gun, which her left arm seems to have become
complete with a little bayonet on the end or cleaning rod, heavens knows what some of the other stuff is.
But the suggestion here is that your mental life is subconsciously like this.
I may not be able to record on this when you're awake,
but assumedly you have these dreamlike things.
They're always circulating in fragments that bump together, sometimes fitting and binding and becoming more coherent.
So if you get things that are almost coherent, and this Greek is lovely,
I mean it's coherent until you notice that the arm is being painted here.
And of course you can finally get to almost coherent where it's just in Congress.
I mean that is to say the male here is not responding to the e-mail's advances,
possibly because he is inanimate.
So true coherence would look like this.
That is to say everything hangs together.
The male and the female are correctly oriented.
Sufficient notice is taken of gravity.
I mean everything fits together just like a photograph.
Indeed, given that painters ask models to hold pose for many hours on end,
this probably was painted from a photograph.
So we're now down to creativity's problem of assembling all this into something of real quality.
And you need structuring for all the higher intellectual function.
Regular exercise from gossip perhaps, the creative explosion at 70,000 years ago,
could have been the long sentence language being picked up
but it was more flexible youngsters who didn't excel because it becomes further softwiring.
But the hard part is that you need creativity for novel situations,
something to bootstrap quality and coherence as you get set,
perhaps just to speak a sentence you've never spoken before.
Well there are mechanisms that bootstrap nonsense into coherence.
Darwin's machine is such a mechanism as it was ago.
So the problem with creativity lies in shaping up these initially incoherent fragments
to yield high enough quality to act upon.
A sentence that's good enough to speak out loud.
So you need a process, something like Darwin's,
that transforms the random beginning assemblage into something of quality
that systematically weeds out the not good enough incoherence.
So what sort of on-the-fly process that can operate the secondary sound
does it take to convert such an incoherent mix into a coherent compound,
whether it be a non-target movement program or a novel sentence to speak aloud.
The only quality enhancing process we understand is that of Darwin's process for species evolution.
As Darwin and Wall showed for new species, random beginnings can slowly yield quality improvements
using competitive process that judges the gene's suitability to the relevant environment.
And so the question is whether the brain can use a Darwinian process
to improve a plan in just a second or so using a memorized environment to judge it.
Now there are six essentials for Darwinian process
and I'd love to go through them all for you in the abstract
but I'm going to have to settle for just giving you an example.
And it's our brother, Altrey, an example.
That is to say, I'm going to tell you how history comes about
and that it represents the Darwinian process at work.
As I suspect other cultural examples would have the same analysis.
But I'm going to use what we think of as currently as history, out of textbooks, etc.
I'm going to discuss history qua history.
I mean what history includes and leaves out, how these change over time.
These standards of historians provide us with an example of these six essential Darwinian ingredients at work.
Number one, of the many happenings, some are captured in pattern substances
that describe who did what to whom, why, and what means.
Two, some of these patterns are not only captured but they're retold, they're copied.
Conversation.
Number three, this often occurs with little confusions.
You substitute one thing for another, or there are conflations where you start a superposition of two stories
and you get confused.
Four, alternative versions of a story about a happening
compete for the limited time of campfire storytelling,
or the limited space of bookstore shows.
Fifth, there is a multifaceted environment that affects their success.
The association has described events to those of instincts and memories of everyday life.
So good stories fare much better in the memorized environment.
Good stories have a beginning, middle, and end, of course.
But finally, and I say that this is Darwin's natural selection, this number five.
Gotta have all the others in the Darwinian process, but this is what people are usually speaking of.
The environment's multifaceted, it's got the right resources, it's got the right setting for reduction,
it's got the right defenses against predators, all those things.
It's sort of like grass growing in your backyard, and what's the ratio of bluegrass to crabgrass?
And is the crabgrass taking over the lawn?
It depends on how often it's been cut, how often rain falls, how often you get dry periods, all those things.
It's a need to more crabgrass, less bluegrass, and so on.
Absolutely good stories fare much better in the memorized environment.
Especially those conveyed by historical novels that strengthen the narrative aspects.
Give it proper beginning, middle, and end.
It's so much easier to memorize these than we call them.
Finally, you have to have the sixth essential.
If you want to see evolution because of this, gotta have this one.
Finally, because historians rewrite earlier historians, we see Darwin's inheritance principle in action.
New variations for the next generation are preferentially based on the more frequently copied of the current generation of historical stories.
It's simply because they're more of, so you do the variations primarily on the crabgrass and less on the bluegrass and so on.
This is the final page, just out of beta, and our problem with limited rationality.
We have a status quo bias.
A tendency to keep doing what you've always done is often stronger than the rational arguments for changing course.
We get stuck in a rut.
Secondly, people endow their possessions and paychecks with an inordinately high value.
Simply because they possess them.
This is related to the fact that people feel the pain of a loss of one of these three times more acutely than the joy of a game.
One reason why future gains are hard to balance against the loss of present-day spending money.
The haves turn conservative with age.
So people have a tendency, also when faced with too many choices, to decide not to decide.
There's a great deal of trying to sort of confuse, for example, about climate change to make it so complex in people's minds that they'll just decide not to decide what to do about it.
So another way that human rationality is biased can be seen in the results of some interesting experiments.
They're setting up groups and then asking them to answer questions about what they would do in the situation.
Group membership means you judge your fellow members of the group by a different standard than others.
Some people act as if they want to be on the winning side.
If it looks like you're going to win, you'll ignore unethical behavior in order to stay part of the winning group.
So to what others as you would have them do unto you, it sure depends on contemplating the novel course of action.
Imagine how others might feel about it and then deciding whether to cancel or pursue.
You can't have a long list of rules about these things.
You don't have to imagine all the rules, but just judging the situation means that most ethical behavior depends on imagination regarding awful situations.
We are clearly in new territory.
These abilities that are most unique to humans haven't been around very long.
Probably only the last 1% of up from the evolution, or the last 30% maybe of the times of homo sapiens.
They aren't certainly gene-encoded instincts yet.
And we now live in circumstances unlike that of the dozen space bands of our pre-agricultural ancestors.
I mean, if there's another societal collapse, reversion would be all too easy.
Just out of beta is a term from computer programming that says your program isn't really finished yet, but we're going to let you try it out anyway.
And usually there's still hang-ups where you can't get out of a trap or something.
And you have to reboot your computer maybe.
I mean, beta test is put up with a lot.
But I'm afraid that's what humans are like.
The imperfections, the hot button kinds of things that may completely bypass our rationality, encourages us to ignore facts.
Those are all sort of facts of life at this point.
100,000 years really isn't much time for natural selection to get the bugs out, particularly if something that operates at such a high level within those levels of organization.
The bugs that certainly provide backdoors allow political marketing experts to exploit us via hot buttons that bypass our rationality.
I'm not going to say more about this now, but I will hope in some future lectures, after I've written most of the book, to try out on you my assessment of the, and down again, aspects of Up from the Apes.
And at the moment it looks like this.
Looking ahead at our two existential crises.
One is the threat of autocratic government.
As to say, democracy in name only.
These sort of governments restrict freedom, abandon the 99% of people who aren't rich, and ignores the climate threat, or anything else that might interfere with profits.
Number two is the threat of a large, large population crash of the human population.
It's not something that will wipe us out and make us extinct so much as it would dig a very big hole for the 10% to climb back out of.
And it's so easy for something like this to happen because we have not invested.
No other society has either passed in really shoring up the system so that we can take big perturbations.
The reason it's so easy is we now have so many people living in cities that depend upon food grown out in the country.
And cities just don't keep a stockpile of anything around.
It's certainly not the seven years of grain that the Pharaoh kept around in case there was another drought.
So with only about a two-day food supply, anything that disrupts transportation into the city.
Fear of contamination, another part of the truck driver's, for example.
Any of those things can make the cities collapse.
People flee into the country and things only get worse.
Societies have collapsed at least 22 times in the past, take a look at Jared Diamond's book.
So this is not a trivial concern, but no one really seems to talk about.
They'll just argue about emissions, controls, making things a bit better, and so forth.
The real threat here is an instability that causes our civilization to go away.
So to end on a more cheerful note, here is Paul Gugan's 1897 painting that hangs in Boston.
And that little orange blob up in the left corner of it has those three questions.
Where do we come from? What are we? And where are we going?
My first three lectures will address the where do we come from aspects.
These last two lectures will address what are we and where are we going?
To close, I'd like to quote Dan Dunlop again.
We human beings, unlike all other species on the planet, are doers.
We are the only ones who have figured out what we are and where we are in this great universe.
And we're even beginning to figure out how we got here.
So thank you very much.
