Good evening, everyone.
Can you hear me well?
Sierra Club welcomes you to this event,
and it's really timely and beneficial
that we have a specialist here who
has studied the human mind and human behavior,
and has also become an influential voice
in the climate debate.
Dr. William Calvin, our guest today,
is a professor at the University of Washington School
of Medicine, and he's affiliated with its program
Climate Change.
He's most recently the author of a book, Global Fever,
How to Treat Climate Change, and he's
written at least 13 other books for general audiences.
Average is one every two years.
Think of that.
His studies have included brain circuitry,
ape to human evolution, climate change,
and civilization's susceptibility to abrupt shocks.
And he brings with him a lifetime of reflection
on the great problems, the great questions of our time.
He's worked on the leading edge of interdisciplinary practice.
But most importantly, Bill brings some substance
to what we've all come to realize,
and that is that the behavioral challenge in meeting
climate change is equal, if not greater,
than the technical challenge of implementing
the solutions that we've developed.
If we don't really want to do what has to be done,
and if we can't properly manage our motivation,
then we surely will not succeed.
Now, a great proportion of Dr. Calvin's research and writing
has served to inform us about our neurophysiology, our brain,
and our minds, and this is information that we need.
I know from my own experience as a paleontologist
that any interest in biological evolution immediately
leads to an interesting climate, especially the climate
history and the mechanisms of climate change.
Because climate, more than anything else,
routinely shifts the environment that all species
must evolve to match.
And it could be said from the point of view that species,
well, let's say it this way, that the climate
is the question to which species are the answer.
And the species that's best answered
the call of abrupt climate change is the human species.
And Professor Calvin has really fully developed
this simple notion in his really wonderful book
called A Brain for All Seasons.
And I think their copy is here tonight,
Human Evolution and Abrupt Climate Change.
This is an engaging account at many levels,
but none more so than in recognizing
that the conditions which brought about the evolution
of humanity are similar to the kind of stresses
that we're imposing on the planet ourselves right now.
And it adds extra meaning, I suppose,
to our notion of meeting our maker.
Beyond his scientific skills, there's
another virtue this fine scholar brings to his work.
And for me, it's beautifully represented
in his little story about Aschulian hand axes.
These are stone tools that had more than a million years
of application.
And they're sort of disc shaped with a sharp edge
and a blunt point.
Now, if you're just going to crush things or scrape things
or break things, they're over engineered.
And they're too sharp around the edges to hold comfortably.
You do yourself some damage if you hit things with it.
So what are they?
And he came up with a terrific idea.
He says they're aerodynamic.
They really throw very nicely.
And if there's animals concentrated around a water hole,
you can probably do enough damage to knock one down
and potentially capture dinner.
So this kind of lateral thinking is admirable.
And we'll see, see it on a much larger scale
in his presentation tonight.
In his reflections on our present dilemma,
Dr. Calvin reminds us that humanity is massively stressed.
And at the same time, we're actually not
the perfect psychological vehicle for our own journey.
And the vagaries of evolution have thrust us somewhat
unprepared into our present circumstances.
Now, everybody knows by now how high the stakes are
for humanity, a big collapse in the food supply,
flooding due to sea level rise, loss of fresh water,
are likely to be attended by behaviors and practices
so bad that our civil life would suffer
for a very, very long time.
So he reminds us that foresight and preparation and planning
have become more important than ever.
And practicing them is best done in the manner
of a caring parent.
We need to do this, live this awakened, intentional,
and caring kind of life.
Bringing creative minds and inspirational voices
like Dr. Calvin's bring towards us to help,
because he brings precisely the kind of motivation
we need to pursue this path.
Bill Calvin's a mature voice.
Brings a sharp eye of an elder to the climate table.
He's not reluctant to remind us that time is short
and shortening, that we have only one planet to lose,
and that we cannot, no matter what,
our ages leave this to any next generation.
The next 12 years are of the proving ground of action,
and he has some specific ideas for us
to get it right the first try,
and we'll hear about that tonight, I'm sure.
And yes, indeed, he does acknowledge that we could fail
and we should think about what we might leave
to our successes in that event.
Success, on the other hand, in this great quest
would be on the scale of establishing a new country
or winning a great war, which gives us solid hope, really,
because these things have been done before,
they've been understood, they've been studied,
and they can be done again.
Those of us committed to this cause
draw significant comfort from colleagues like Bill Calvin
that see things with his kind of clarity.
The Sierra Club and Dr. Calvin too, I'm sure,
would both be pleased if his words strengthened our conviction
and motivated our resolve, for it is our duty
and our challenge and our privilege
to attend to this focal matter of our time.
Dr. Calvin, on behalf of the Sierra Club,
the University of Victoria, and our audience tonight, welcome.
Thank you.
This is not going to be a beginning talk on climate change.
My object tonight really is to go beyond things
that you've mostly heard about
and try to tell you some of the rest of it.
There's two major take-home messages.
One is that there are big, sudden problems
that tend to do the damage before the gradual changes
start doing the damage.
And that just like physicians in emergency rooms,
we have to deal with those things.
You can't just send a patient with an aspirin overdose home
with directions not to take so much aspirin.
If they've suffered a ingested a lot of it,
those people have heart attacks
and you have to put them on dialysis
to try to detoxify them quickly.
We're in something of that position now with CarbonDocs said.
The second point here is that, in fact,
our climate situation is hopeless as we've heard
in a lot of stories from the scientific community
from the last year.
None of them really address the issue
of cleaning things up.
They simply address the issue of what will happen
if we continue going the way we're going.
However, zero emissions doesn't get us out of the problem.
Only getting rid of the CO2 that we've very put in the air
will get us out of most of the problem.
Okay, so many know by now that we're overheating.
Around here you know that that leads to lots of wildfires.
This is just the western states in the US,
but I assume it applies up here,
because it applies to the entire rest of the world,
except they got hit before we did by about 10 years
by this kind of exponential increase in fire.
I could show you a plot of major floods
around the world on all continents
and it would look just the same.
Doubling in the 60s from what it was in the 50s,
doubling in the 70s from what it was in the 60s,
all the way up to the 90s
where it fortunately didn't double it only went up 30%.
Those are major changes that have already been happening.
We don't really need climate models
to tell us that we're in big trouble.
All you have to do is to extrapolate that trend
a little bit further,
and you can see the kinds of difficulty
that we're going to be in.
Around here, you may have noticed that Mount Baker
looks a little different these days.
That blue line shows you where the ice came down to
at the end of summer in 1985.
And this has happened to all the major glaciers in the world
and the models say that all of the ice
that's on glaciers, like this mountain glaciers,
will probably be gone by the middle of the century.
Of course, that's what we said about the Arctic sea ice too
and it's happening far quicker.
You also know what warm water times do up here.
This is that mountain pine beetle that the larvae
tend to live over the winter in the bark
and then they wake up in the spring
and they start chewing away.
But in most winters, the cold kills off most of them.
If the cold doesn't kill off most of them,
they erupt so much, bark so much
that the tree dries out and dies.
And that picture at the bottom,
in case you haven't seen it locally,
that russet color is the color of trees
that died just in the last year.
By the second year, it will be entirely gray.
The emissions of CO2 that you get from that happening
just in BC overwhelm the emissions actually
that you get from all the highway traffic.
So there are really major consequences of this as we,
now the other thing that everyone sort of knows by now
is that it promises to get much worse
but the timescales always serve someday,
mid-century, wherever it is.
In loss, of course, we reduce emissions,
clean cars, clean energy, or efficient uses of things,
less waste, and reforming agriculture and forestry,
which accounts for about one third of the emissions
between them.
The problem with that is that it doesn't get rid
of the CO2 that's already in the air
and that doesn't go away by itself very nicely.
So let's go through some exceptions here.
It's the extreme events that tend to do the damage.
Promises to get much worse.
I mean, how would you like next year?
I'll show you in a minute why I mean.
And this list of what to do about it
is totally inadequate, except as a way to speed up
a real fix that actually removes CO2.
I mean, our plans for climate action
look to me more like one of these buying time therapies
for late stage cancer.
Compare that to a physiological fix,
the kind of dialysis for kidney failure
that makes possible a near normal patient for decades.
I think we've been failing to ask what a climate fix
like that would look like,
one that relieves many of the ocean acidification
and climate problems,
and makes possible a near normal planet.
So I'll outline a bit for you what I have in mind.
Let's go through a few examples of gradual
and abrupt climate change.
Let's take the heat wave in Europe
that killed about 35,000 people.
There are two ways that you get more extreme temperatures.
If you've got a Gaussian curve like this of temperatures,
say the peak summer temperature
being plotted for different years,
there'll be cold years and hot years,
and you could have a increase in the mean,
which is sort of what you'd predict off
of greenhouse effects and such.
Gives you less cold weather and winter
and less of our communal problem, go on.
The other thing that could happen
is that you get an increase in the variability.
As say, more record cold weather
as well as more record hot weather.
Or of course, you can have both.
It's this increase in the variability
that has worried, comes straight out of the climate models.
If you see that, it's one of the predictions.
But there's also changes that are really
in the mode of operation systems
that the climate models basically don't handle yet
because they're not detailed enough.
I mean, for example, if you have a river
that finds a new shortcut,
say it cuts across a meander, shortcuts it.
That's the kind of change in circulation
that you can also have in the atmosphere
except that you don't have river banks
to remember what last year's was like.
And if you've got sort of two alternative paths
for the winds to blow and it sort of switches over
to one it doesn't normally use very often,
you can get very dramatic changes
in terms of how much rain falls where.
This is what the European heat wave looks like
on a gouse curve of summer temperatures in northern Switzerland.
This happens here.
The coolest summer in 140 year period was 1909.
My father was born.
And the warmest summer was 1947
until the year 2003 when things really jumped off the chart.
That's five degrees, more than five degrees
above the main 17.
That's about six standard deviations.
And if that is a normal distribution
that's something that might happen by chance
every 4,000 years or so.
My guess is this is not just that kind of extreme
of the gouse curve.
My guess is that it's a change in the circulation pattern
where it's demonstrated to us
that there's another way the system can work
and how often it will revisit that will be finding out.
But just from the standard modeling of gradual creep up,
you can go through and calculate
how many days are there going to be heat waves each year?
Now each place has a different number of them.
If you just define a heat wave as 5C above normal locally
and then plot a map,
what shows here is the number of excess days of heat wave
that you would get at each location.
And there are areas like where we live here
where it's a week or maybe two weeks
per year of days of heat wave.
Compared to what they were back in 1990.
But you can see certainly in the American Midwest
and up above Hudson Bay, so forth.
There are places they're gonna have more
than three weeks additional heat wave days.
Now heat waves are also killing coral.
This is bleached coral that you see here.
As I say, coral is a symbiotic thing with a plant part
and an animal part and the white part is the animal part
with the algae sloughed off.
And they do that when they're in stress usually
from temperature increase.
And if the algae and the coral get back together
within a couple of weeks and the coral survives,
if it goes on for too long, the coral dies.
It's just a primitive system that has unfortunate consequences.
And it turns out that the heat wave in 2005
in the Caribbean, which I will be coming back to,
caused the Caribbean to lose at least half of its corals.
And 25% of all marine species need coral reefs
to live and grow and about 40% of the fish caught
commercially use reefs to breed.
So this is already a very substantial effect.
Major coral reefs in the world, that's a big reefs.
We're not talking about individual coral
clumps here and there.
Those are expected just from the climate models
to be like the mountain glaciers,
mostly gone by 2050.
Now let's talk about another kind of fairly sudden
change in things that usually persists for years.
And that's drought.
You can have an onset of a big drought
within just a year or a little more.
And it can persist for years.
Well, all sorts of areas are getting droughts now
that didn't used to get them like this.
Now I'm gonna try to show you why here.
In the tropics where the heating of the ocean is greatest,
there are of course a lot of updrafts of the warm air rising
and that brings in air from the sides and goes up.
And of course it's very humid going up
and so it promptly starts precipitating out its rain.
Now, all that air that goes up has to come back down
someplace and it tends to come back down maybe 20 degrees
or 30 degrees of longitude,
further north or south of the equator
and so you get these dry bands
such as where the Sahara is and Calhari Desert is
and so forth.
That's just the average.
All those red areas that are on the map
like around the Mediterranean and California, Australia
are regions of where it's called Mediterranean climate.
And what that means is that they get rainfall
only in the winter time, but not in the summer.
Very long growing season and there's no rainstorm
that's likely to come along and ruin the wheat crop
and so forth.
Now, that's only because they're right adjacent
to a desert and in summertime, the deserts,
that sort of pushes a bit further north
and that's why they don't get any rain
just like the rest of the desert.
But in the winter time, the westerly winds
can now sneak along the top of the zone
and get in and produce the rain.
As you expand the tropics, you push the dry zones
further away from the equator, both north and south.
This is why southern Australia's Mediterranean climate zones
are getting into big trouble at the moment.
It is why North Africa is getting into big trouble.
It is why southern California is getting into big trouble.
Now, all these are basically consequences
of the heating of the tropics.
Now, furthermore, the global drought,
not just tropical, subtropical areas,
but all areas like up here and such.
If you look at the world and ask what percentage
of the world land surface is in drought at any one time,
the answer used to be 15% from 1950 through 1982.
What you basically has about 15%
of the land surface in drought.
In 1982, 83, it jumped up to 24%.
And it stayed that way for the next 15 years.
So it's a stop-wise change in the amount of drought
in the world.
And then in 1997, it did that, jumped another 9%.
So for those six years, we had drought that was up
in the 33% territory.
Now, fortunately, it came back down into the 20s,
but this is the sort of sudden change
that the system seems to be capable of.
The computer models predict the expansion of the tropics
and the training areas getting in trouble,
but they generally don't have features like this.
And it's only a matter of time
before we'll be able to do that kind of dynamic modeling
with the resolution that it takes to get these things.
But basically, the observational record is telling us
that the climate can take abrupt changes
that are maintained for long periods.
And this is the kind of danger zone that we are now in.
This is the amount of CO2 put into the air each year.
Normally, it's down around,
well, this is in gigatons,
if you put parts per million, it's about half that.
But what the point I wanted to make here
is that during the El Nino fires of 98,
the we were putting about two or three times
the average into the air that year.
Now, I'm calling it El Nino here for the reason
that those two big steps took place during big El Ninos.
Here's the El Nino record from 1970 to now.
And what you see is several things, first of all.
Starting about 1976, you don't see it as well in this record,
El Nino start getting much larger and much more frequent.
But the big ones, 82 there and 97,
have been the ones that were associated
with the big drought steps that maintained themselves.
Well, what you gotta realize is that each of these
lasted only about a year or a bit more.
And plenty of other El Ninos like that one in the late 80s
last for two years, even longer.
So you have to ask yourself what would a double duration
and big El Nino do to the drought situation?
Well, first of all, a lot of Amazon in Southeast Asia
did burn in 97, that's why all that carbon
went up in the air either as smoke
or as decomposition CO2, rotting.
But if you really wiped out much,
if you did have a really bad fire and rotting season,
Amazonia at least would not regrow as rainforest,
it would regrow as grassland.
And because of that, because that permanent lack
and photosynthesis capacity are standard,
there are two parts per million per year increment
would go up to about three,
even if we didn't increase emissions.
So something like this gets us in trouble in two ways.
First of all, there's a big jump in CO2
if you burn off that much at once.
And back in 97, it would have been about a 50% increase
in the excess CO2, the anthropogenic CO2,
just from that one event.
And so worldwide, you would have had big climate problems
developing from that.
It's why I call the burn locally crash globally scenario.
And I wanted to illustrate why that is a present danger
and not merely a century one.
And I checked my mail yesterday,
I discovered that it's closer than I thought.
It's just, while imagine yourself during a future on Inyo,
watching the form of the flammability index
and worrying about a big burn,
the 50% increase in excess CO2
and the 50% speed up and others.
Jumping all the problems.
Certainly for Amazonia, a mass extinction of species.
And all of the worldwide problems
of collapsing governments, mass migrations,
and amongst all those people trying to flee areas
where there was nothing for them,
you would get a lot of famine,
pestilence, war and genocide.
This is not a pretty prospect of sort of struggling
along and trying to adapt to climate change.
If you can have things that big happen,
a lot of the human reaction to it
is going to be even worse.
This is the forecast from Noah's El Nino forecast center
that came out last week.
And it's basically showing us going into
an El Nino next month.
It will look, the graph on the left there
is for basically October,
but it looks pretty much like that for July forecast.
And then over on the right,
you see the January forecast
where that heated area in central Pacific
is much larger when twice as large.
Now they're pretty sure in their forecast
that there's going to be an El Nino.
They don't know how big it's going to be
from the forecast method.
But the outlier amongst the various models
that have made does have it being as big
as the 1982 El Nino.
So we'll see as this develops.
Now it turns out you don't need a big El Nino
to do the damage.
It turns out that the 2005 tropical heat wave
that killed all this coral
also did a job on the Amazon.
This is the Amazon rainfall over the years.
And you see that at the second arrow there in the middle
of the 1997 rainfall deficit.
And over on the right edge, you see 2005,
about 50% greater deficit rainfall.
I'm told that two souths and seven was very bad too.
So even without the El Ninos
parking a big high pressure system over the Amazon basin
in Southeast Asia at the same time,
there's big damage like this possible.
Even if it doesn't burn, a lot of stuff dies
and it quats and the CO2 goes in the air
just a bit more slowly.
So I've shown you actually six different things
that constitute my major worries.
From 76 through 2005, we had four abrupt climate shifts.
We had a 1976 shift to El Nino dominance out of,
instead of El Nino dominance, you see there at the top.
You see the ramp up in land temperature starting in 76.
You see the drought steps in 82 and 97.
And then we had these two near miss episodes
for burn locally crash globally.
That's six in 30 years.
So that's the chances of getting a couple of more
in the next decade, I would say would be pretty high.
And you have to remember that the excess CO2
was a lot lower back then
than it's gonna be in the next decade.
It's gonna be about twice as high in the next decade
as what it was in 76.
Now there are likely a lot of other threats,
climate surprises, as fever rises.
I'm only listing the recent surprises
that I discovered in the literature.
And I'm listing only one of the many possible
abrupt change threats that have been identified.
There's various papers in the literature now
on the dozen and more such things around the world
that could make a big change in world climate.
So trouble is with the ones so far we have survived,
but it's sort of like heart attacks.
They can range unpredictably
from being minor to being catastrophic.
And I think we really must reframe our climate policy
to focus on a quickly implemented climate fix
and have the longer range plans follow from it
rather than overshadowing it as it does even today
and amongst climate scientists.
We've already had two near misses
separated by only six or seven years.
And I think we now must back out of the danger zone
in a manner that is both swift and sure.
Now when you hear the words that brought climate change
in most science stories of the last year,
it actually is referring to the situation
without engaging in this carbon removal from the atmosphere.
Partly it's the way that modelers work.
You don't want to throw in a fudge factor
like taking carbon out of the system
that you don't know whether it will be implemented or not.
You just go on the physics of what will surely happen
if you continue the trend.
But there really are things that one can do
in the way of large-scale carbon removal
that would actually be a possibility
for putting the genie back in the bottle.
Essentially removing, for the sake of argument,
all of the excess CO2 and put it back into long-term storage
and do it in about the next 20 years.
The total debt by 2030, extrapolating from what we're already
putting into the era, means that we're gonna have
to take about 600 gigatons out.
Now a pile of coal as high as Mount Rainier
would have been at about 150 gigatons of carbon.
So it's about four Mount Rainier units.
We have to sequester.
This is where that comes from,
just integrating the area of the emissions curve,
going back to 1750.
I'm just showing you 1950 on.
The extrapolation for the next 20 years
is just based upon the last 10 years of emissions,
which are, of course, four times steeper
than they were back before then.
As to say reducing emissions has not only been a failure,
but it's gone fourfold the other direction.
So 600 total, and this is the same thing
on a different reduced scale,
but it's showing you all the drawdown that you have to do.
As to say you have to take out, on average,
30 gigatons each year.
Now emissions are currently eight or nine gigatons adding.
So the first part of that well there
is just cancelling out the continuing emissions,
and the rest of it is actually drawing down
what's in the air and in the surface layers of the ocean
and to some extent, the soil.
Now, how are you gonna get this much carbon?
Freeman Dyson is fond of saying something to the effect
of, well, you just grow a lot more trees.
And since the trees take out about 40 gigatons
a year of carbon, in terms of putting it into storage
in the form of wood, you could probably double the force
and get what we need.
The only trouble is, is that it's really a non-starter.
The climate forecast, I mean, first of all,
you have time and space and the water to grow all that.
And secondly, the climate forecast happens to be
for more drought and high wind,
just the thing to burn down all your new trees quickly.
So we really, as scientists, we tend to focus
on one thing at a time, if we can,
you just can't go around ignoring all the other dimensions
of climate problem and planning a retreat.
So there are schemes for taking CO2 directly
out of the air, they're basically like the systems
are used in submarines for scrubbing CO2.
But finding the power to run such a giant new industry,
I don't think it's in the cards for the next 20 years.
But it's really not necessary to remove CO2
directly from the air in order to reduce its concentration.
That's because of the carbon cycle.
Photosynthesis, every year is taking about 210 gigatons
of carbon out of the air and it's creating
organic carbon miles out.
Starches, sugars, all the things that cells
then make from it, so on.
And at the other end of the carbon cycle,
a lot of CO2 is put back into the air via respiration
and secondly, decomposition of cells as they die
through burning or rotting.
And if that totaled 210,
then the atmospheric concentration
wouldn't change very much.
If you intercept some of the decomposition carbon
before it reaches its usual destination,
then, let's try it again,
then what you're doing is drawing down the CO2
in the atmosphere, what we want.
So basically, I'm gonna focus on ocean.
Because it's the only place that has
the needed growing space and doesn't conflict
with growing crops and uses of water for people.
The problem is growing that much algae
and then sequestering it in the deep ocean.
Here's a brief diagram of what the ocean part
of the carbon cycle looks like.
There's a land part and a rock part as well.
But in the air, we're currently adding through
deforestation, the rotting and burning of the timber,
take down, about two gigatons of carbon per year.
And about eight or so from fossil fuels and making cement,
which is limestone to serve an honorary fossil fuel.
Into the ocean, the ocean's absorbing about 92 gigatons.
And the respiration and decomposition processes
are releasing back about 90.
So the oceans are absorbing a net of about two from this.
Now, the oceans are divided into some,
to simplify it, two layers.
There's a surface layer called the wind mixed layer.
And at the bottom of it is the thermocline.
And basically, the winds drive the waves
to churn all this water.
So as you sink a probe down through it,
the temperature stays pretty constant,
the oxygenation stays pretty constant.
Then you start getting down to the bottom
where it starts getting colder
and other characteristics start changing.
And you start getting into the depths
that slowly circulate.
And that's where a lot of organic carbon descends to.
VCs that are big enough, fecal pellets
that are big enough to sink.
They can make it through that surface layer
in a couple of days without decomposing,
wind up being in the sequestered carbon.
The depths, however, are about 98% of ocean volume.
So this is sort of like the rim of the orange
or maybe the apple peel in terms.
Okay.
Basically, 48 gigatons are being photosynthesized.
I get 37 going back out for respiration and rotting.
And the difference between them, 11,
sinks either as fecal pellets
or as the larger cell debris.
But a great deal of it really becomes dissolved
organic carbon that just won't sink.
But these wind mixed surface layers
contain a lot of this organic carbon
just waiting for the bacteria to use it for food.
And within 40 days or so,
it's carbon dioxide back in the air.
So our goal, as you see in that box up there in the quarter,
is to take that 90 gigatons and reduce it by 30.
So we're only putting 60 back.
And basically, there's not much hope
of getting at the respiration part of it,
but the composition part of it is interesting.
For one thing, besides the fecal pellets
and so forth dropping down,
the carbon in the surface layers
is carried down into the deep layers
at a few places on the globe.
This so-called bulk flow.
I suppose the oceanography
is probably called vertical advection.
But in physiology, it's called bulk flow.
This carries down really quite a lot.
Go back here, well, let's show there.
Here we go.
Okay, here's the complete diagram.
And what you see here is I've added over here
this bulk flow downwards
that basically takes some of everything
in the surface layer and moves it down.
So it's moving down a lot,
that's all the organic carbon,
of which counts for most of the carbon
that's in the mixed layer.
That's to say it's about 100 to 1,000 times more
than the living matter of plankton and so forth.
But you're moving the whole thing down.
And one of the interventions would be
intervention B there to simply pump more down
and get your 30 additional gigatons that way.
The other is to increase the number of equal pellets
and salt debris that sink down.
Intervention A over on the left
shows you that you would need four times
as much sinking to do that.
As to say the current 11,
you'd really have to triple to get into the right territory
and that's worldwide.
So that may not work
and that's probably why the iron fertilization
kinds of strategies won't work
even if you could get them working better than they are now.
It's simply too small to do the job
as is most everything else.
But the prospect of sinking a lot here
is aided by the fact that that's what sunk
most of the anthropogenic CO2 already.
This is a map of showing you the North Atlantic
and that just shows you the inventory of the excess CO2
so-called anthropogenic CO2
that has already been deeply sunk in the North Atlantic.
That's why there's such a hotspot up here.
Now if you look in cross-section down here,
so this is sea level going clear down to the sea floor
in the North Atlantic
from the equator up to about 30 degrees
is what I'm showing you here.
And you see that the thermocline would be here
at about a hundred meters, this would be a thousand.
So just below the thermocline is where a lot of it's residing
in the rest of the world
and in the southern part of the North Atlantic.
But what you get in the North Atlantic
that you don't get anywhere else
is there's this enormous amount right here
and that's what's causing all this up here.
So this perennial overturning current
that carries so much of it down
just sort of an all about flushing mechanism
is of course the thing that everybody talks
about the Gulf Stream failing.
This is what they really mean.
The major sinks are up in the Greenland Sea above Iceland
and also in the Labrador Sea down here
and together they account for about 20 times
the flow of all the rivers in the world.
So it's a lot.
And if you were fertilizing anywhere near the whirlpools
that sink this, you could in fact get a lot of additional
carbon carried down to the depths
as dissolved organic matter
and as the plankton themselves.
So that's one thing we could think of.
Now, one way you can fertilize
besides going around and like a grass seeder
and throwing out nutrients,
which I don't think will work,
you can always pump up nutrients from below
because 100 meters down there are lots of nutrients
just hanging there.
And if you pump them up to the surface,
you will presumably give it what it needs.
Now, you could do that with windmills
that float like this same sort of thing
they're planning offshore here
for doing electrical power generation.
Or you can use a very simple kind of pump
that's shown on the part B of the figure here,
which is just basically a big open tube
that hangs say 1,000 meters down into the depths.
And it bobs up and down with the waves.
And it's got a trapdoor valve at the top.
So that while it's sinking,
nothing moves in and out of the pipe very much.
But when it's hauled back up, the trapdoor opens
and you basically extrude surface water into the depths.
Don't literally extrude it,
just move the pipe away from it and leave it there.
So this is the sort of very simple kind of pump
that you could imagine making and deploying
for $1,000 a piece or something
that you could try to use to manipulate some of these things
both for hauling up nutrients
to just make the trapdoor go the other way
or for pushing water down.
Now you're not limited to using the North Atlantic
of down dwellings to get down.
You can always pump surface water down.
And there's lots of places in the world
that you could do that.
Basically you'd pump nutrients up
and then down wind, down current,
you would put the pumps to pump down plankton.
And since a lot of the nutrients will produce plankton
that fish will consume and so forth,
this will be a great boon for fishing.
And one can imagine plantations
like this designed to maximize what you sink,
but also providing the fishing industry
with a chance to improve upon the situation
they're currently in.
The natural fish populations,
even in the areas where the catch is managed
so it doesn't sink any further,
it still sinks 70% down.
So any area that's being managed for a sustainable catch
has also reduced the fish biomass by 70%.
So there's a lot that you can make back up
to get back to normal.
Now in terms of calculations
about how big this operation has to be,
I can only show you if you treated it
like an agriculture problem
the way the biodiesel folk would do it.
You might estimate that you can get about 55 grams
per square meter of algae every day, dry weight.
And if half of that's carbon,
it would take about 10 to the minus four
square meters of ocean surface
to sequester a gram of carbon every year.
So to sink our 30 gigatons of carbon yearly
would require about eight tenths
of a percent of the total ocean surface
about the size of the Caribbean.
So, but in the open ocean,
it's not like agriculture.
The algae are quickly consumed by zooplankton
before you get at them.
And so this can't really be directly compared.
However, we'd be sinking the entire carbon soup.
Now the algae and zooplankton
and the debris and the feces,
but that enormous amount of dissolved organic carbon.
And that's what makes the whole thing look like
it's even more feasible than the size of the Caribbean.
It could be much smaller.
Now, the question to me is whether we could do this in time
and there's a lot of concerns for that.
My first reactions was,
would never get international agreement fast enough.
Law of the sea considerations and such,
but in fact, continental shelves
are within the exclusive economic zone
of all the adjacent nations,
which will have a strong interest in new fisheries.
And shelves, continental shelves
in the most productive latitudes currently
for photosynthesis,
belong to relatively wealthy nations.
I mean, their independent initiatives
could quickly establish a lot of plankton ventilations.
And in fact, the first mover advantage
might even encourage them to compete in creating.
What about operating costs?
Well, first of all, we're not having to harvest anything.
We're sinking it on the spot.
And the continuing costs be mostly for maintenance,
which could prove substantial monitoring
perhaps for adding some micronutrients to a fish.
But you have commercial fishing fees
that might in fact keep it running.
Concerns about how expensive it is.
I can't tell you how expensive it is
because I don't know how many pumps you need.
It's really going to take trial field demonstration projects
to work this out.
But bank bailouts have been extremely expensive
and it's probably on the order of something like that
spread out over the years.
There's a question of you put CO2 down there
but it comes back up when the circulation of the oceans
carries down a lot of water from that sinking stuff.
That's what carries oxygen down to the bottom of the ocean.
Bottom of the ocean's got as much oxygen as the surface.
And then it also comes back up in a number of places
around the world, best known for being good fishing grounds
because they carry up nutrients and stimulate growth.
Well, it takes 400 to 1600 years basically to make the loop.
And so what you're gonna have is you're not gonna have,
we might inject all this CO2 in 20 years
but it's gonna come out, smear it out in time
over 1200 years at very much lower peak levels because of that.
So there is a chance of reducing the harm greatly
so that the people of that century,
that millennium are not hit as bad.
There are lots of objections about this
but let me really sort of finish with this one.
Why the 2030 rush?
Well, the current 350 gigaton accumulation of excess carbon
could double by then.
I mean, 250 is what I was showing
but in fact there's methane from Siberia and Alaska
from the permafrost melting
that I was not included in that figure
and there's lots of reasons to think
that just 20 years is gonna get us into double trouble.
With six sudden shifts or near misses in only 30 years
it would be prudent to expect even more surprises
even as we're doing this.
Just reminds me of the way the US finally got into World War II.
FDR used the metaphor of a four alarm fire up the street
that needed to be extinguished immediately,
whatever the cost.
In contrast, our current climate response
is mostly a re-emphasis of the old virtues.
Clean air, clean energy, sustainable agriculture,
better efficiency, less waste, longer term thinking
which I've been preaching forever
all those things that might have kept us
from painting ourselves into the corner
that we are already in the corner
and all those things without a big removal project
are not gonna get us out.
They don't really constitute adequate treatment
for climate disease.
I think I told you that before.
Undertaking such a large project
is said to require an easily understood goal.
Say, go to the moon, a definite timeframe,
in this decade, just said JFK,
suggesting a slogan, something like clean up CO2 before 2030
if you don't like, put the genie back in the ball.
But I think acquiescing in a slower approach
is really like playing Russian roulette with a climate gun.
This is a politician of 400 years ago.
Public interest requires doing today
those things that men of intelligence, goodwill,
would wish five or 10 years hence had been done.
I think we've got substantial prospects.
We have the intellectual and industrial wherewithal
to do a great deal of this
and I just sort of leave this running for you
to show you basically the power
of what's going on every day.
This is just airplane flights over a 24-hour period.
You see the sunrise creeping through Europe at the moment,
it's gonna explode into flight activity.
And when it reaches New York, you'll see the same thing.
I mean, this is the kind of business as usual
atmosphere we're operating in.
As we saw in World War II,
we've changed to a war of footing to do something.
Projects whose development wouldn't ordinarily take
30 years can be done in two years.
So thank you very much, and I'll be happy
to take some questions.
Thank you.
ะตั
.
