This is a fireside chat, literally, on what to do about our climate problem.
It's not really my favorite subject.
My favorite subject could be how human evolution was affected by abrupt climate shifts in the past,
in the ice ages, when we were requiring our abilities for things like language and climate head.
But paying attention to this for the last 30 years has also given me a ringside seat
for the developments in climate science that show us what's likely to happen to our civilization
unless we act swiftly to counter global warming.
I'm a great fan of the climate scientists.
We've done a magnificent scientific job, but they didn't aspire to be climate doctors.
No one did.
They, like the rest of us, are just winging it when it comes to anticipating climate-generated emergencies.
For physicians, the window of opportunity for intervening successfully in a disease has become part of their training.
They know how fleeting an opportunity can be that the clock is always running.
Though I'm not a physician, you can't hang around the medical school for 50 years now,
absorbing some of that way of thinking, and noticing its almost complete absence
from our climate agenda without the climate scientists and the public discussion.
So, I'm going to offer you a second opinion about the climate diagnosis,
the prognosis if left untreated,
and what treatments might actually fix the climate problem rather than merely delaying civilization's collapse by a few more decades.
It's over in stuff, but our situation turns out not to be hopeless at all.
We may still retrieve the climate that we used to have, the cost of the economy we can afford.
That's Mount Rainier, the way it currently appears in Seattle, the Lake Union,
and this shows what it will look like after a few more decades.
All the glaciers in the world, the mountain glaciers, are predicted to lose their permanent ice,
so at the end of the summer, they're going to look a bit like this.
So, let me review briefly the cause and effects of our global warming problem.
First of all, fossil fuel burning, cutting out forests without replanting,
and letting peat bogs roth and the permafrost melt and roth.
All those are amongst the things that increase the greenhouse gases in the air, primarily CO2.
Now, the effects of this increased CO2 in the air, we currently have about a 40% excess,
our ocean acidification, and the greenhouse effect produces a global overheating.
Global warming sounds altogether too warm and fuzzy.
Overheating or fever would be a much more appropriate term.
But that in turn causes, of course, our warmer winters and all the insect infestations that will come with it,
without a good freeze to kill off of RV.
We'll have more extreme weather of various sorts, higher winds, heat waves, of course.
Deluge and drought, which often go together when the currents of moist air that come off the oceans
change direction, the region that they were headed for originally gets drought,
and the region they go to gets deluge.
Of course, deluge and drought tend to lead to flood and to famine.
The third general category is that you get a permanent drought, if you like, as the tropics expand,
because the deserts start marching away from the equator.
For example, Sahara's climate winds up impinging upon the Mediterranean of southern European countries,
like Spain, Italy, Greece, are already having significant problems with drought.
And finally, the effect of global overheating is that we're getting more and more climate instability.
We'll talk about quite a bit more in a minute.
Now let's discuss what the climate agenda was back in the 1970s when we first started talking about this.
So this is the 1970s version of the climate diagnosis, CO2 poisoning.
The prognosis is going to slowly come up, and the intervention needed to reduce emissions.
Nothing's changed. That's still what the public discussion is.
And the climate science position and policy wants position.
And by now, it's quite inadequate. There were some important questions that had been answered, however,
since the 1970s. Questions back there is it really warming.
And back in the 1970s, that was not so clear.
It turns out that there was not really much of a trend between 1950 and 1976.
Apparently something was countering the greenhouse effect back then,
something that would go for the bear condition, countering the warming in this room from the fireplace
when the air conditioning effect reaches its maximum because that's only how powerful the air conditioner is.
Then temperature starts going up, and something like that may well have happened back in 1976.
The other important questions won't warm me and more so to be good for agriculture.
And the answer to that hasn't been clear until the last decade or so.
There have been good experiments showing that whatever good there is for certain crops and certain climates,
it turns into a negative by one degree warming.
And there are questions like, are you really, really sure?
Well, you know, climate scientists have to admit like all scientists of course that,
oh, you can't be really sure. Something might happen to change your view of things.
That's the position that scientists all feel this is going to take.
And so if your lobby is trying to slow down this whole business of doing something about climate change,
that's one of the things they keep parking over there.
And of course the physician that would have to point out to a patient who keeps asking that
is that, you know, the physician who waits until dead certain about diagnosis
is likely to wind up with a dead patient.
Then there is the question, oh, but that's so the next century.
That's what they said back in the 20th century.
And that's what we're saying in the 21st century about it's the 22nd century.
Something's going to happen.
Well, you know, lots of things have changed since the 70s.
We're all about 40 years older now.
Technology, of course, has changed quite a lot.
Slide rules used to rule today until the HP35 scientific calculator came out about 1972 or so.
It has certainly been improved over, you know, the last 40 years or so.
It now has a better display, a much better keyboard, things like that.
It's almost got to be one of those fetishes that you can't go from your virtual mirror.
But of course that's really because it's also a video phone.
You've got face-to-face conversations with people now while you're crossing the street and not watching traffic.
If you are not sure where you're going, it's got a built-in compass.
And if that's not good enough for you, it's got a built-in GPS too.
It will send short messages.
It will guide you to your destination.
If you're driving in circles, it will help you to indicate disputes about whether you're driving in a circle or not.
I'm sure you can track it.
Well, climate has changed quite a bit since the 1970s.
The way I would formulate the diagnosis, prognosis, and so forth, now would look like this.
Yes, it's CO2 poisoning with secondary effects of climate instability and ocean acidification.
Prognosis, yeah, there's a warming trend, but sudden climate shifts atop it.
Sometimes big enough to cause the famine and population movements that are associated with the big population crisis.
9 billion people.
The intervention needed is not just reducing emissions, it is now removing the excess CO2 from the air.
So here's just a reminder of what high winds can do, but I want to remind you about what the insurance companies know about.
There's a 50-mile-an-hour windstorm and a 60-mile-an-hour windstorm.
That's why a 20% increase in wind speed, but the damage doesn't go up 20%.
It doesn't even go up 50%.
It goes up about 500%.
And that's just the insurance companies' lost records that tell you this.
So there's a lot of very nonlinear stuff in this.
And a lot of it is because of cascading damage.
That is to say, something that's blown off a building for a 50-mile-an-hour wind.
It may hit the ground and bounce along before it ever runs into another building.
But 60 miles-an-hour, some of it will manage to hit another building and knock something loose from it before it hits the ground.
So cascading damage is something that is hard to estimate, but is certainly.
Even if it's hard to estimate, you have to figure there's going to be a lot of cascading damage.
So let's now talk about emissions.
My first caution to you is that a lot of people think emissions are all that excess CO2 in the atmosphere,
40% increase in CO2 concentration.
But once things are plotted, it's always plotted as an annual rate of addition to that accumulation.
That is to say, there's sort of a double standard in using the word emissions,
and this has confused quite a lot of people, I think.
What's shown here is sort of the way the annual CO2 production has been going.
We were down around 1.6 gigatons of carbon in 1950, being emitted in the fossil fuels.
Then it grew about three-fold in the 70s and 80s.
Here we are now at about 9 gigatons.
And during all this period, going back to 1750 at the beginning of the Industrial Revolution,
about 350 gigatons were emitted.
But during the next two decades, the next 20 years here,
we expect another 250 to be emitted if we continue having a 3% annual growth in emissions rate.
So our overall problem, assuming we can try to fix it in 20 years,
is getting rid of 600 gigatons of carbon out of the atmospheric circulation.
Stabilizing emissions, stabilizing the terrible word,
because there's no implications about stabilizing climate to it at all.
It just means flattening the curve.
That does not reduce the accumulation.
Zeroing the emissions still doesn't reduce the accumulation.
So basically, all of this should have been pretty obvious,
even back in the mid-1990s, time in the Kyoto courts.
It was pretty clear then that developing countries are even less likely to control their used fossil fuels
than the developed countries that have mostly failed to do so.
So we really ought to expect them to continue to burn their own fossil fuels
in order to generate electricity that water dies like us.
We have to do something to counter those emissions rather than just trying to get them to not be emitted.
The other thing that's been pretty obvious for the last five years is that
from the climate models that have been done of how much it will warm up,
it's pretty clear that even our most ambitious scenarios for reducing emissions
and slowing economic growth don't serve to delay a two-degree overheating very much.
From 2049 to 2068, a mere 19 years is all you're getting this way.
So it should be pretty obvious that if we continue playing this game
of pretending that we're going to reduce emissions, that we are in for a disaster.
Furthermore, if we were to achieve zero emissions,
even a thousand years later, about one fourth of the excess CO2 would still be up in the air.
Reducing emissions doesn't reduce the ocean's certification any time soon,
nor does it reduce the chance of an abrupt climate shift.
The other thing is that we're getting into the area of vicious cycles.
Things that take off and rot on their own no matter what we do.
We're beginning to uncork the CO2 and the methane that can be produced
by the Arctic tundra as it thaws.
The Arctic tundra is very compact, organic matter that is never decomposed yet.
Being frozen, it doesn't do so.
Once it thaws, you get CO2 and as the oxygen runs out of the depths,
you get methane produced primarily instead.
That is a vicious cycle.
The overheating yields more CO2 and methane, therefore even more overheating.
If you haven't seen permafrost, here's an example of what it looks like in Siberia.
These are basically frozen peat bogs.
It is a very potent greenhouse gas.
All of your methane is 25 times stronger than yours.
Methane is formed in billions of lakes around the Arctic,
across the spine.
Each year, these lakes are getting ready for the next generation.
When we look at how much carbon is in permafrost, it's frozen.
Potentials for that from across the pond in the future.
We estimate that more than 10 times the amount of methane that's right now in the atmosphere will come out of these lakes.
So if that's our situation, what are we going to do about it?
The usual response to this is change the topic because it's not clear what we can do about it.
But I think it's important to analyze a worst case scenario so that you can discover how to head it off in time.
We're not very good at this.
Banking and Wall Street regulators should have been planning for how to act if a housing bubble burst and et cetera.
And it turns out they were relying on crossed fingers instead.
We can't foredo that for climate.
The anthropologists show that most societies in the past have collapsed.
And prolonged drought was really their leading cause of death.
Jared Diamond analyzed 22 societies that fought with collapse.
Some stayed off.
Most did not.
We, on the other hand, have a lot of science and we have a lot of technology.
And hopefully we have a bit more wisdom from learning from history.
But our current agenda, based on that 1970s view of the situation,
really looks more like a buying time therapy for late stage cancer.
Certainly it's not looking like a physiological fix that makes possible a near normal patient,
such as the dialysis for kidney failure, which gives those patients a near normal life.
Our current climate response is really mostly a re-emphasis of the old virtues of clean air, clean energy,
sustainable agriculture, reforestation, greater efficiency, less waste, longer term thinking.
How can you disagree with this?
But few of those will help us quickly recover from our current 40% excess of CO2.
Furthermore, this agenda has not gone unnoticed.
The denying to the lay squad, magnificently funded by the fossil fuel industry,
suggests that all of this is just green activism and new clothing.
So they are suggesting to us we can really ignore the problem if we don't agree with the green agenda.
Unfortunately it's not going to make anything go away.
The problem is that we need, in addition to all of this, we need to quickly recover the 40% excess of CO2.
So our current situation looks a lot like locking the barn door after the horse is gone.
It's not likely to recover the horse, though giving your parents the taking action.
Even zeroing emissions has only gone to lay collapse, I think, by a couple of decades.
You have to actually remove the excess CO2 to fix the climate problems and get back to normal.
We really don't have time left after 60 years fiddling around to do things like major social engineering or major research breakthroughs.
But what's reasonable in the 1970s is not enough now, given the interim CO2 accumulation and the climate problems that have already appeared.
So analogies, if you like, brushing your teeth more regularly is not a fix for a cavity that is already developed.
To speak only of the emissions reduction these days is like preaching fire prevention to the forearm fire down the block already burning.
So why would coyote does represent a situation that we are in?
Now looks like we have already ventured beyond terra firma and that our climate agenda won't support us.
Now compare this to what a serious solution to the climate problem would do.
Putting past emissions back in secure storage would reduce the global temperature, relieve deluge and drought, reverse ocean acidification,
reverse half of the sea level rise apart through the thermal expansion as the oceans cool, and reduce the chance of the rough climate shifts.
What's the time frame we have to do this in? Well it depends on how long you're willing to wait, how long until the economy collapses, how long until life becomes cheap.
Climate refugees everywhere trying to go places where there's no room and no food for them.
And how long of course is it until an abrupt climate shift that speeds up both of them.
I can't predict that future for you but I can tell you the time scale of other abrupt climate shifts that have been like minor heart attacks.
Here are some major heart attack versions of it.
During the last ice age, let me, here is our warm period. This is the last 10,000 years in which agricultural civilizations have been around.
Homo sapiens, our species, has been around for about twice the length of this back 200,000 years.
The last warm period in the ice age is back around 120,000 years ago.
And what you see here is this is a temperature proxy, but basically this is our current average temperature.
And it's what's called a warm and wet climate. Ice age climates are cool, dry, windy, dusty.
And what this graph shows you is that the ice ages were not some gradual roller coaster of warming and cooling.
Once you look at the high resolution records you get from Greenland and Antarctic ice cores, you see that there were really fast excursions.
For example, here's a fast excursion goes down in 10 or 20 years and the fast excursions up in some cases are less than one or two years.
So these are abrupt climate changes in temperature.
They are also just as abrupt if you measure other things. If you measure rainfall, if you measure the amount of dust in the atmosphere, if you measure how windy it is, all of those things change suddenly as temperature changes as well.
Now, it turns out that we in our current time, this last generation or two of us, have been experiencing some abrupt climate shifts.
They're not in this classic time involving temperature, but they certainly appear using drought.
Since 1976, we've had quite a few of them. And the importance here is that even though they might be smaller than the classic ones in the past, civilization is now pretty overextended at 9 billion, and half of us now live in big cities at the end of a long supply line.
And in a famine, the food will disappear for whatever reaches the city. So the result of a modern and abrupt shift could be catastrophic, even with much smaller abrupt climate shifts.
So the overall total since 1976 had been about six abrupt climate shifts, global and extended, a lot more that are regional. But the global ones number six, and at least six near misses, now six plus six, 12 years in 35 as a track record.
Not computer forecasts, but that record is why we now need CO2 cleanup that is big and is quick. So let me show you three of the abrupt shifts. This shows you a plot in time of world drought.
Here's 1950, 60, 70, 80. So during this period about 14% of the world's land surface was in the kind of severe drought that Texas has been in.
That is to say, about one acre in every seven around the world has been in severe drought, and that's just the normal baseline kind of activity. What's in drought, particular regions move around from year to year, but overall it's been about one in seven acres.
In 1982, it changed. That's to say, it doubled all within one year. Now that year 1982, a couple of other significant things happened and there's a tendency to think they were the cause of it.
There was big volcanic eruption and there was also a big El Nino, biggest one ever seen at that time. Now both of those were sort of over and done with within a year or two, but the drought did not come back down.
So during this next 15 years when there are various El Ninos and La Ninos coming and going, drought stayed up and doubled. So we are now in an area where it's sort of like flicking a light switch and popping into a new mode of operation, or like a gear shift for a car if you like.
Because shifting from first to second and then into high gear with the 1997 eruption, popped up from double to triple for about eight years and then shifted back down into the range of double in 2005.
So that's the kind of thing that you have to keep in mind when you're looking at the climate of the future. It's not necessarily going to gradually change. In fact, if anything, climate tends to take leaps rather than just shuffle along.
Now one thing to note here is that CO2 accumulation wasn't doing this. It was gradual. Yet the climate mechanisms responded with sudden shifts.
The other three sudden shifts take a lot of time to describe because they're for motionography. But let's take a look at three and a half dozen near-missits that I've identified in the period following 1976.
Back before 1997, we assumed that rainforests couldn't burn. After all, they were salt and grain. How on earth could you ever get a forest fire going?
Then the rainforest in both Amazonia and Southeast Asia dried enough during the really big downy new that year so that large areas burned.
And the areas that didn't burn were surrounded by areas that were so dry they killed a lot of trees.
And so those trees rot. But CO2 in the atmosphere is just as sure as fire does, just more slowly.
So the question you've got to ask, which I frankly have never seen anyone ask, is what is the biggest oninio had lasted two years rather than just one?
They certainly can last longer. They just haven't been that big. There is no oninio had lasted from 2001 through 2005.
But this caution of mine is coming over superseded now because even without a big oninio since 1997, the Amazon has become extremely dry.
This is the western Amazon with a drought just as bad as Texas.
2005 and again in 2010, Amazonia was even more flammable than it was during that one year big oninio in 1997.
And once we lose this particular rainforest, the Amazon, it doesn't grow back.
Plants succession stays stuck at grass for a very long time.
That is to say it won't recover much of the CO2 that was vented into the air but the fire and the product.
So essentially this is an irreversible addition of CO2 to the atmospheric circulation.
So thanks to rainforest burning you could also have jumps in the excess CO2 causing jumps in climate with all the same CO2 mixes in just a couple of years worldwide.
And so worldwide you would expect a sudden intensification of those standard consequences of overheating heat waves, outbreaks of disease, deluged drought, tropics and deserts expanding.
And of course it would also be a mass extinction event.
That is to say I asked Ed Wilson what he thought how many species would be killed off the extinct if we had an event like this and he said that within 100 years he really expected about half of them would go extinct.
If it's the rainforest of Southeast Asia it will also take three of our closest relatives in the animal kingdom with it.
So if climate creep, what we have been discussing before now, is like a slow-motion framework.
And the climate leap is like currently. It comes as a surprise and says you don't know in advance if it's going to be minor or catastrophic.
The imperative is to prevent it.
As those draft steps show fast is a totally inadequate way of framing our climate problem in the past.
This is a business about climate creep and emissions.
The broad climate shifts are most sudden and they are like part of hacks in three ways.
You can't predict when, you can't predict.
The next one is going to be minor, catastrophic.
Catastrophic put me into human population depression.
And three only prevention orders.
Well the 1970s version of what to do about it is still pretty much the public agenda.
The action poses focus on mitigation.
Now that's a bureaucratic word for softening the blood of knowledge.
If you fall out of windows somebody puts a mattress underneath where you're going to land and try to soften the blood.
This may not keep you from getting killed by the movement of extra time.
Besides mitigation, there's also adaptation.
I like to joke this will literally make us traumatized to try to live in caves where it's cool.
But the most common way of living where it's cool is to be moved to a higher latitude.
So flee the tropical countries for the temperature.
The story beginning, the Europeans are already concerned about the wave of immigration from the Sahara countries.
Solom mentioned even to the climate scientists these days is the third obvious action.
Actually repairing the climate itself and thereby backing out the dangers.
So in addition to the low carbon diet we need emergency repairs.
And that's an intervention by the white dialysis.
It quickly cleans out the toxic substances.
Judging from the rate at which climate surprises have been occurring.
We may only have several decades remaining for an effective solution.
That's the time for completing repairs.
Not that for chemistry.
Because we would expect about six abrupt shifts or near misses in the next 20 years.
If the previous 30 years is anything to judge from.
Yet, top climate scientists at least two of them have said almost exactly these words.
Techniques for extracting atmospheric CO2 might eventually improve the message.
As if there were no real urges about re-bearing the process of CO2.
Now admittedly our task is dawning.
It's really a matter of putting the genie back in the bottom.
Removing nearly all of that excess CO2 and putting it back in the long-term storage where it can't circulate in the air anymore.
Here is the emissions circuit.
And let me start by cautioning you that emissions, when you get right down to it, usually means a break.
It's like miles per hour.
It's the amount of carbon emitted, the amount of excess carbon dioxide emitted into the air in a one year period.
A lot of people confuse this with the accumulation in the atmosphere.
It's certainly the result of the emissions, but it's like confusing miles with months per hour.
So here's what we need to do in order to remove stuff on the time scale, talking about.
We want to bring to counter all of that CO2 emissions.
We have to do things like this.
We have to, first of all, capture enough CO2 so that we cancel out the continuing emissions that 3% growth.
And we have to go beyond that and sink all the past emissions.
That will take about 34 gigatons per year, over 20 years.
And it will just get worse in this additional way.
So what are the ways of taking CO2 out of the air?
The long-term one is weather and rock.
It's essentially acid rain.
Carbonic acid goes and furic acid.
And it's far too slow for us to consider.
There are, of course, scrubber machines, like submarines,
when they're recirculating air, they take CO2 out of them with a cost of chemical change.
Doing that on an atmosphere-wide scale, of course, would need enormous amount of new electrical power
to do it, and it had to be clean electrical power to do it.
While we perhaps could get there eventually, this is not the quick.
Or more photosynthesis, as to say, beyond the amount we have now
of having a lot more photosynthesis for 20 years.
Now, how do you do that?
Tramodison pointed out back in 1977 that grow more forests, obviously.
And it is convenient that forests in the world are about 600 kilotons,
and that's the amount we have to take out, so doubling forests would do the job.
But even if space and water found for this doubling of forests,
the climate forecast is for more drought and more high wind,
making new forests insufficiently secure against fire and water.
We can't even keep rainforests from burning now.
So this solution, I think, has become a non-starter.
To avoid competing towards food production,
you'd better stay away from things that involve land and water on land.
And that pretty well says you've got to grow your new biomass in new places if you're going to do it quickly.
For example, sinking an additional cell or into the ocean depths,
be it for plants in the algae.
So let's look at that.
Only algae has the need to grow in space anymore.
But the requirement is not only growing it, but then sinking enough of the new algae
and being sure into the ocean depths to equal the 34 when it comes to the year.
So I'm going to have to tell you a little bit about how CO2 has been taken out of the oceans,
taken out of the year already out of the oceans.
About 100 gigatonnes so far, and 350 cumulative emissions since 1750.
The method I'm going to propose involves ocean pipes, but we'll get to that in a second.
So here's just a schematic diagram down here.
The bottom is the bottom of the ocean, where sediment piles up very slowly.
Here's the surface, and here's just a box diagram of the atmosphere.
It's having carbon added to it by deforestation without replacement,
about 2 gigatonnes a year, and fossil fuels in the cement are currently adding about 9.
It interacts, of course, with the vegetation and soils to walk on land, and with that in the oceans.
The oceans is currently absorbing about 92 gigatonnes of CO2,
but it's emitting back into the atmosphere about 90, so it's only about a 2 gigatonne gain.
Now, the ocean is subdivided into a bottom, the depths of the ocean,
and a surface layer, which is defined by being well mixed.
Let's say the winds cause waves, and the waves cause mixing into us,
depths, a certain distance, depending on how strong the winds are.
The winds are really strong, you can go down a lot further than 100 meters,
but it's about 30 meters over the top, which helps 100 is sort of a nice route.
However, the ocean depths now contain 98% of the ocean volume, and this is a slow circulation.
This does come back up to the surface eventually, but eventually it's like 1,000 years,
and the carbon dioxide may come up even more slowly.
So, the black boxes in the middle of this just show you the plankton production.
Plankton is algae and phytoplankton, and then zooplankton is all the little animals that eat,
they graze algae, and they're mostly microscopic.
Of course, it's one of these big fish, little fish type things,
and the whole food chain really runs on what at the bottom is photosynthesis by the algae.
Okay, now about this product here, Plankton take in about 48,
and put out about 37 by rotting when they die, by respiration.
Respiration is the whole point of photosynthesis,
because algae have to live through the night when there's no sunlight to soak them,
and we get a nice part of the bargain that way because they, as they photo-synthesize,
they leave off the oxygen from the carbon dioxide, and it goes back into the air as oxygen.
Now, the difference between these 11 gigatons is what manages to settle into the slow-moving ocean depths.
And it mostly settles down because it's big enough to fall rapidly.
It doesn't stay suspended from the surface ocean, it falls.
And only the bigger fecal pellets and some of the bigger cell debris can fall that far without coming apart
and becoming so small that they don't sink anymore, and becoming part of this 90 gigatons a year that's released back.
So that's the general scale of what's called the carbon cycle.
Now, let's look at how we could augment.
If we were to fertilize the Plankton production by providing additional nutrients,
it's by no means operating at its highest rate.
So you can jazz this up, but you have to jazz it up three-fold, the four-fold total,
by fertilization in order to get an amount sufficient to do that 34 or so gigatons a year.
Fertilizing the subdepressant of the Earth's surface that is ocean to four-fold production and doing it quickly without complications,
this is not going to be the way we do it.
So let's look at other ways.
In addition to settling out debris in fecal pellets, there is the carbon that's carried along by currents,
by bulk flows, we say, and physiology, by convection, as the oceanographers call it.
Whirlpools move both inorganic and organic carbon into the more secure depths.
The estimates for them resurfacing range from four to 1600 years or so.
So let's think about pumps.
If we put a pump in and took the surface water, not just the Plankton, but all the surface water,
and pump it down into the deep ocean, and pump it in a quantity that would suffice.
So we want to sink at least 30 gigatons.
It's 31 to start with, so we're talking about doubling it overall.
Now, pumping the walling water back up to the surface and having to go down in Whirlpools,
the way it normally does, that's where this descending current comes from is typically big Whirlpools.
They're up here at Greenland, either in the northeast ocean off to the northeast of Greenland and the Greenland Sea,
or off the southwest corner of Greenland down in the Labrador Sea.
That's where most of the sinking is done.
There's about 10% of it that's done near Antarctica by a different mechanism.
But those areas are the critical ones for maintaining this downward flow.
So overall, it looks like this.
And I would point out that this is analogous to the farmer's cover crop.
Back in the old days, you know, without fertilizer, what farmers used to do is to leave the field unproductive for a year,
but to cover it with a crop of beans over something that takes a lot of nitrogen out of the air and buries it in the soil,
so that plant growth the next year of the crop that you want will have it to work out.
So in this case, what we're doing is we're plowing under the production of the deep-up surface ocean that's been stimulated,
and we're burying it in the deep ocean.
Now, there are several ways to run these long pipe pumps.
I mean, all schemes like this are going to have a pipe that goes down below the thermocline.
So it's going to be, if this is 30 meters on a continental shelf, this would be a 50-meter pipe,
or a 100-meter pipe, a 100-meter pipe, it's about like a 30-story building.
The question is how you power these pipes.
Obviously, with a windmill type arrangement, the old-fashioned farmer's windmill, mind you, but with modern new rotor blades,
you could either pump up or down, depending on how you set the pump.
There's some cheaper ways of doing this with wind power secondarily in the form of waves.
Wind generates waves that go up and down, and they can be used to pull water up from the depths or push it down.
Here's a push-it-down thing.
You have an open pipe, except it's got a flap door, a trap door valve.
And as the boy is pulling the pipe up from the depths, it extrudes water that used to be up at the surface.
And then when the crust of the wave develops and it goes down, the trap door closes and it goes down, and then it goes up again.
That's how this pump gets primed and how it continues to work as long as there are waves to run it.
So that's a very cheap way of creating these pumps.
What I like to implantation is that I like to call them what-like.
I'll illustrate with the windmills, simply because they're more visually attractive than boys.
Here would be pumps that were set to pump nutrients up, and the current carries these nutrients across the space here,
where there's a big bloom of plankton going on.
And then down here, you have a row of pumps that are basically pumped downwards.
So in contrast to ocean pipes just for bringing nutrients up, we now have what's called a push-pull pump.
I mean, there is this common in physiology labs as vacuum pumps are in physics labs.
So this is what I'm suggesting is the great unexplored opportunity for climate.
I'm throwing a fishing line in here because, of course, we won't succeed in sinking all of the new plankton production.
The fish will come in, eat it, and so we may as well let the fishermen try to harvest this excess of fish.
The world's oceans have had their fish supply reduced 73%, even if with sustainable harvest.
I mean, that's what sustainable means, is keeping it from going lower than 27%.
So that also means I'm showing additional rows back here.
The question is now, how much of the ocean surface do you have to do this in?
Is it the whole ocean again?
Well, here's the back of the envelope calculation that I've done on this,
using figures for alcohol-stimulated growth that come from basically the biodiesel efforts of the 1990s,
show that you need about 1% of the world's ocean surface as plankton plantations.
You know, it's an area about, the Caribbean is about 0.8%, and that's about what you need,
but you wouldn't want to do it in the Caribbean, you'd want to do it probably on the continental shelves,
well out from shore near the drop-off and depths.
The least expensive pumps are these wave-powered ones that bob up and down,
and the inventors for other purposes I might note, are about $1,000 each deployed.
A million of them would therefore cost about $1 billion US.
Well, can we afford it?
I mean, $1 billion is what Americans spent on dog food, and it only one month.
We're talking about $1 billion over 20 years.
But it's of course best to figure it's going to cost more than that,
10 times, 100 times, well it's a thousand times more than that.
A trillion dollars is the price tag for that unbudgeted back bailout back in 2008.
So I think that these kinds of fixes are probably well within our economic means.
But let me close by saying that the climate prospects are not good
if we don't do something that big by some means that will probably look something like what I've sketched out for you.
All it takes is a big climate leap that cripples agriculture long enough for the big cities to crash.
And before someone objects that big cities have survived big droughts before,
note that this hypothetical famine is global in extent.
The usual remedies of the past, importing food or immigrating to some place where there is food,
are not going to work in a global case.
So a serious jolt would cause catastrophic crop failures and food rights,
certainly within a year or probably within a month,
creating global waves, climate refugees with all the attendant, famine, best ones, war and genocide.
Political scene currently, and this is just my personal opinion,
but current political scene makes you wonder if human wisdom is mature enough yet to avoid committing collective suicide.
Even though we're still capable clearly with technologically and economically of repairing the rock we have caused from the foundations,
the problem is the political will power to do it quickly enough.
So like the terminal kidney patients that I saw back before dialysis became more widely available,
our civilization started to look like a goner, apt to trip into a vicious downsizing cycle.
But we can fix it.
The take home message is here, there's three.
One, we need to reframe the problem.
It's not just emissions reductions and CO2 accumulation.
It's climate instability with potential for climate crash.
It's not just a matter of more expensive air conditioning during the summer time.
Big, sudden problems do the damage before gradual changes can get around to it.
Three, it's not hopeless.
There are ways to clean up the excess CO2 in 20 years if we light up big in a fire under our politicians.
We have the simple technology and currently the economic base to repair climate.
The end, well I hope that's not the end, but it's a good time to stop.
Thank you.
