Hello, I'm William Calvin, I'm Professor at the University of Washington in Seattle.
This is the second in a series of lectures on human evolution, covering the period between
2.3 million years ago and when our species first paired about 200,000 years ago.
This period is when the brain enlarged 3.3 tons, social complexity and language developed,
and our ancestors spread from Africa's tropics into Asia starting at 1.8 million years ago.
Last time we covered great apes are almost us.
This time it's the lifestyle that led to humans.
Then we'll go next time into boom and bust, producing an amplifying feedback loop.
Then we'll move on to our kind of language, and in particular our kind of looking ahead
gives rise to creativity and to serious planning.
These lectures are an aid of helping me write a book called Up From the Apes and Down Again.
This depiction of the cover is because the theme of the book closely follows Gokhan's
famous questions.
They're seen in the little marginale up in the corners and translated it reads, where
do we come from?
What are we?
Where are we going?
We covered last time the properties of the great apes, and we covered a little bit of
the beginning of hominins, the upright posture phase, which if you remember looks something
like this.
These bipedal animals shift their weight from left to right, perhaps waddling as the hips
rotate left and right.
Humans are unusual in that a walking stride is a controlled fall forward, catching yourself
with a free leg.
Momentum from the fall is what then carries the body forward to being a top foot.
You don't pull yourself forward or raise yourself back up this small loss distance.
You just utilize the philosophy from falling forward.
You might call the stance the lamb stance, but I rather prefer to call it the ear committee
stride.
So what else do we have that the great apes are locking?
One is imitation, so innovations do not die within the thought of it.
The orangutan is the only one of the four great apes, as we discussed last time, that
shows much sign of imitation, and some individuals are actually quite good at it.
But in general, our closest relatives aren't very good at imitation.
Secondly, our social life is much more complex, and we have things like language, so that
you can say, who did what to whom with what means in gossip?
Creativity, we have some look ahead abilities, and the creativity is so good that we can
make plans and get it right the first time, something we've never done before.
Toolmaking, which show we're going to cover in this lecture, Grazer's meat added to the
usual diet, and of course, the guhr brains, which we'll cover mostly next time.
Other trends described in the period between two and a half million years ago and the agricultural
era of the last 10,000 years, childhood has been extended by a factor of two, as has the
generation time period between generations.
In preparation, pounding, soaking, cooking, such things.
A short of the interval between births for a mother from six down to four, and then with
agriculture down to two years.
Mothers are now provisioned, and this might have something to do with concealed ovulation.
That is to say, there's no signal announcing ovulation as in estrus behaviors in the apes,
even the woman herself often doesn't know when she is fertile.
That means you must have much more frequent under a course to succeed, and it probably
was one of the things that promoted parabonding.
So here are some of the famous astrolophus.
The Taun child discovered an aquarii in South Africa on near Johannesburg.
That's, you can see, it's a juvenile, skull is barely bigger than the palm of the hand.
As the late folk to bias demonstrate it to me in Johannesburg, his predecessor identified
it in 1924, but a few other experts agreed that it was real, a potential human ancestor
they thought it was late.
The skull was even left behind once in a London taxi cab, though fortunately the cabbie managed
to track his passenger down and return it.
The other famous find was that of Dodger Hansen's team in 1974, nicknamed Lucy, which showed
us what much of the rest of an astrolophus seemed like.
This is a closer up view of the original Lucy bones, so not the ones on display in the
museum for the school kids.
Lucy's age, now estimated at 3.3 million years, is also about the time when at other
fossil sites there is evidence of cutting tools, animal bones scored by a sharp cutting
edge, presumably during butchering.
The resumed tool making technique back then is what I call smash and select.
You basically take a cobble, you toss it up into the air or throw it against a rock face
and try to shatter it.
You sometimes get sharp edges out of this.
And by holding cobbles in both hands using one pound the other, you can knock off flakes
that are also sharp.
So there's now a sharp edge in the cobble and a sharp edge in the smaller piece.
These now can be used to get through skin, amputate limbs, and carry them away from
the other scavengers.
I call this the Glen Isaac technique from whom I learned it.
Smash randomly without much design and then select the pieces that have sharp edges.
This is Louis Leakey demonstrating use of the broken stone edge for butchering about 1970.
But the important use is for getting through the skin and for opening up joints.
But dissection suffices for butchering.
Louis and Murray Leakey, both after finding stone tools of Old Levi Gorge, got there to
discover early Homo in Australia this since.
This is their granddaughter Louise Leakey at Old Levi describing recent finds, some
of the famous fossil sites are just below her here.
Next comes the misnamed Julian Handax, seen here on top and side, I'll come back to it.
It's unusual shape after I describe its logical successor, repaired platform for shearing off
sharp blades of some length.
To start go back to smashing two cobbles together until you can get a half cobble with a fairly
flat split surface.
Then you try to shave off a blade from the cliffs.
Hitting the top edge with the other stone works, but it results in small sharp flakes
instead of the single edge razor blades that you can get by spreading out the stone's impact
along a straight line using a pusher stick.
You can make one from shattered ostrich egg shells, quite common in the Red Valley as
our ostriches, often with straight edges from where they cracked.
This found object's straight edge can be used as a pusher stick, so the blows force is
spread out fairly evenly.
Here's the action, that's a real piece of ostrich egg shell that I have on my shelf.
So you prepare by splitting and then you shave off the edge.
It pretty well results in a blade factory, as say you can just sit there doing this over
and over until you use up the raw material.
And none of the other things like the stuff in the bill, the chelion, pandax, is anywhere
that efficient.
You might ask what's missing from the story of girly tools, and what's missing is tools
made of bone.
At any campsite, bones are found, very common, even more than ostrich eggs.
Most rocks can serve to sand bone down into points, yet tools made of bone are not seen
until halfway through Homo sapiens times.
So I don't know the reason for this, it may have been that imitation was still insufficient
to spread to practice culturally.
That's say it may have been invented, but it tied with the inventor.
Besides the late use of bone for tools, the other oddity about tool making is it seems
to me all about sort of proto-scalples and the efficiencies in making them.
Furthermore, there are 1.3 million year long periods of stasis and technique, distance
between those arrows.
There are not gradual improvements along the way that were widely indicated.
Well the important ideas in human evolution, going back to Darwin, is that more complex
tools, tool use was what required bigger and bigger brains.
But that's backward, given the emerging facts.
Other genesis and tools are steps, those orange arrows.
So much for the how of making sharp edges.
What is the accept to win time back to 2.5 million years?
That's the start of the ice ages, where snow turns to ice building up on land and mountains.
So water doesn't return to the oceans right away and sea level keeps falling because
of the continuing evaporations.
There is of course a lot of back and forth in climate, producing boom and bust for lots
of species, and particularly for grazers and their hominid predators which have even additional
sources of fluctuation.
Okay, here is the rift valley.
And certainly by 2.5 million years, it was largely grasslands in the bottom of this valley
and its sides, all the way from Serengeti and even further south, all the way up through
Kenya and Ethiopia to the Afar Triangle there, which includes Samaritria and Djibouti.
So that means that there is both grass and water for grazing.
Now with the ice ages, sea level goes down, exposing Red Sea continental shelf, which has
sprints that can create oases for the grazing animals, so they too can now expand northward
up through Red Sea shoreline, as can their brothers.
At 2.4 million years, something interesting happens.
The grass seniors become specialized into grazers.
There can be mixed feeders, eat both leaves and grass.
There can be browser-onlys that forego the grass in favor of leaves that have a lot of
water in them.
But an interesting effect at 2.4 million years is that you get grazing animals that are susceptible
to an interesting kind of boom and bust feedback, which I will come to mostly the next time.
And right at that time, where the grazing animals evolved, at least to the west of Kenya,
this is the time when the brain size starts its trip up to trouble.
Homo erectus, and the first out of Africa, all the way halfway up to the Arctic, has
occurred before 1.8 million years.
Homo erectus is brain-sized by anxious to double over this trip that it seems, at 1.4
million years.
Homo erectus is pretty modern below the waist.
And Homo erectus has a shoulder that has already been adapted for throwing.
And of course, they make these ischulian-style tools, which are a combination of both a serrated
edge knife and a source for sharp flakes.
So it is at this time, 1.8 million years, that there's a substantial spread north out
of the tropics of Africa and out into the rest of, out into Eurasia.
By 1.77 million years, they're at Dominice, Yucca, and Georgia.
And very shortly thereafter, they are in China and all the way down into Java.
Let me say a few brief words about what makes for the winds that deliver water off of the
Indian Ocean.
North and south of the equator, the ocean, the atmospheric circulation, differs quite
a lot.
Near the equator, you have the trade winds that come out of the east.
They come out of the northeast and converge on the equator.
And if you're in the southern hemisphere, they come up out of the southeast and converge
on the equator, or tens of degrees, sometimes either side.
The winds that come off the Indian Ocean are, therefore, delivering water inland into the
valley.
The deserts that you get are because the air that rises in the hot tropics, which tends
to be saturated with water vapor very often, comes off the ocean.
This air heated up is rising, just like in monsoon circulation.
But it loses, as it cools going up, it starts losing the water that it contains.
It falls out of the rain.
So at the time this rising air reaches the stratosphere, it's pretty dry.
Now where does it come back down?
The places are about 25 degrees north and south of the equator.
You get the Sahara up in the north, the Kalahari in the mid-deserts down south.
But again, with this sort of wet-ish band all along the eastern shoreline because of
trade winds.
What happens after this period where the air that rose comes down over the Sahara and is
dry, and if there's no other source of water like monsoon circulation, which doesn't work
very well up in Sahara at the moment, it gets to be pretty dry.
Now 8,000 years ago, and many other occasions in the past, there was enough monsoon in the
Sahara to grow grass, and there are hominid archeological sites 40,000 years ago up in
the middle of the Sahara that were obviously ponds, and there were elephants, and grazing
animals, and lions, and so forth, all through the Sahara.
Down here in the south, it too is changed with clung.
Okay, so here's what the Rift Valley often looks like.
This is on the eastern escarpment of the Rift, where the road north from Nairobi goes,
I'd like to bash him once more, and far across the valley you can see the western escarpment.
So here's a view from space showing the probable path that was taken
by Homo erectus in about 1.8 million years. It's a 6,000 kilometer long path,
halfway to the north pole after all, and just from following grazing animals.
Now how does the Rift Valley come about?
Basically, it's sort of hot in the Rift Valley, causing the molten
metals down there to expand and dome up the earth on top of it.
This causes cracks in the surfaces. A couple of parallel cracks will enable the land between them
to drop down into the gap that's being produced, and may fall several times as shown here.
So this makes for the Rift Valley. It's also the source of the Red Seas, we'll see in a minute.
This is looking across the Rift Valley from the Autism of the Airport,
and it's certainly looking across the Grand Canyon.
Okay, once the Rift Valley hits the Red Seas, the spreading center continues all the way up the Red Seas.
That's what produces the Red Seas is one of these drop-down faults, which
went below sea level and got filled up by salt water.
Here you can see the Nile over here on the left, going north. The blue line on the horizon here
is about where the Mediterranean is, and you can see the Sinai Peninsula here,
with one side of it going up to the Densei, and the other side going up to the Suez Canal.
Okay, this is again the satellite view from up to the North End. So here's the spreading center
fault line in the middle here, coming up the Red Sea, and it jogs up the Gulf of Al-Aqaba,
known to the Israelis as the Gulf of Al-Aqabah, both named after the towns that are right at the
head of the Gulf here. That Rift Valley goes all the way up to the Densei, goes through it up to
the Galle, goes past it up into the Bekaw Valley in Lebanon and further.
The picture on the left shows you a model of the elevations around there. So you can see the
Densei, which you see as broken into two halves, because the water level has been getting lower
and lower as more water is captured through irrigation. Now I have stretched a dashed wine
between Jerusalem over there on the west and this big wadi over here in Jordan, and on the picture
at the right that you're taking from Jerusalem looking east of Jordan, you can see what just
what a deep ditch it is. I mean, it's 1400 feet below sea level. Jerusalem itself is at about
about 3000 feet since it's so commonly passed.
So it is indeed a deep trench.
So these valleys continue up to the Bekaw Valley in Turkey and then on up to Georgia near where
the European plate collides with the Asian plate. Homo erectus is found at Dominici as early as 1.77
years ago. That circle is where the dex scene is located. This is the dig at Dominici with
a summer's worth of students learning archaeology helping out.
That's the museum building over there on the top left,
and there's a giant canopy covering this whole site, something that African archaeologists
would have loved to have had.
These are among the five skulls found so far from Homo erectus all dated at about 1.77 million years ago.
So much for what and where. How did they make a living that took them so far away from tropical
fruit trees and the big leaves? The short answer is meat. Back in the tropics there are important
alternatives to meat from gathering, but regularly eating meat is what took them out of Africa
and around the world. So the methods for meat are evolutionary speaking, something like this.
There's a baseline of monkey-style stash and grab of
nolly eggs but the defenseless young of other species that sort of hide in the grass
and great many private species do this.
When you get to apes you see some army patrol style tactics involved added on to snatch and grab
and woodland hominids are thought to add power scavenging. This requires intimidating
the original hotters at a kill site, the lions, the hyenas, etc. Intimidating them
so that they let you take away their kill.
Here is one of the techniques mostly suitable for small packages with meat.
Logsticks serve to club small animals in the undergrowth, the original action in the distance.
The animals had never in evolution been subjected to predation,
comes whistling down from above where they would tend to freeze and therefore get clubbed.
So our frontier capable ancestors might have been able to deal with lions via mobbing tactics
when scavenging the carcass. Something the way the hyenas would try to take away
a kill from the lions.
However, beating large packages is another matter. I'm going to show you a movie of this in a minute
but for now just note those long sticks the three guys are carrying.
These are about six feet long. I'd say eight feet is a distance that you find in one of the
other tribes that still does a lot of hunting carrying long balls around. These are even handy,
I think, to fend off lions that get too close to you. In other words, if one of the lions
should come up towards these guys, two of them can poke in this direction which, again,
evolution did not exactly carry lions for. A third can always whistle down that pole on top
of the lion's head promoting serious injury, promoting retreat. Lions, big cats, are fairly
cautious in situations that they haven't encountered before.
So you can see that scavenging here can start by just taking the leftovers,
ones that the lions and those fierce hyenas leave behind. Unfortunately, this is a very poor yield
and it's likely to be contaminated so it's infectious.
The war you can advance to power scavenging, taking the kill away and trouble is with that
is the lions tend to follow you home, following their dinner that's disappearing.
A third choice is to amputate behind them quickly and carry it away, leaving the belly behind.
Lions love the fat in the abdomen, but this means the lions return to the kill and they
don't follow you home. So is this amputation why hominids needed sharp edges back at 3.3
million years, I think so.
For decades, I have been suggesting that our hominid ancestors could have mobbed the lions in
possession of carcass, so they retreated to a safe distance. Then the object is not to steal
the carcass but just quickly amputate one lion. The lions will still be there not very far away
in a circle waiting to come back in to their kill.
So you get meat this way and for your board it's meat that's not yet contaminated by the lions
rummaging around in the belly.
So if you don't have a steel machete like this guys, how do you detach anilum?
Throw a cobble against another rock until it splits.
Smash it again until you can select some sharp pipes from the debris.
A found object no less, smash and select. Even a bonobo can manage this with a little teaching,
using a sharp plate to cut a rope to open the box containing the bono.
Our ancestral ancestors, however, could use it to amputate behind them with lions as near your
audience. You can improve on this found object by smashing selectively, aiming your blows near
edges. There is a high value rate, you may waste a lot of raw material, but occasionally you will
get something like a knife edge, but don't think of using it like a surgeon's scalp, it will become
dull in a simple stroke. I can suggest an alternative from my limited experiences as a surgeon.
Here is what I imagine is the beginner's method. Make a hole in the skin if a lion has a bone
so, and attempt a poop force rip in the skin. Here is where you need a couple of surgical
assistants. Each of them to grip a fold of skin and haul back to try to widen the hole.
You nick away at the exposed rip edge as when opening up a seam and sewing. This nick-assisted
rip requires very little sharp edge, minimizes both wear and the grip pressure needed. It's an
obvious use for what the archaeologists call a sharp flake. The major problem with using small
flakes is that pinch grip. With such a delicate teacup kind of grip, you cannot do a long straight
incision as a surgeon would do with a scalpel blade, and even if you could, your sharp edge would be
dull after the first inch. Using it to nick away, however, is compatible with a pinch grip.
There is a way to get lots of sharp flakes, and as a byproduct, a serrated knife edge as this
animation shows. Serrated edges involve pushing on a ledge in the rock to shear off a flake.
You get small sharp flakes for that neck-assisted rip,
and you get some long serrated edges as the byproduct.
This serrated knife edge could be used even more profitably in that neck-assisted rip.
If you're doing edges like this, and they're not perfectly parallel, they will eventually intersect,
and that may be the reason for the pseudo point in the so-called hand axe. This hand axe is basically
a core for flakes, and in addition, it's awfully handy as a serrated edge knife. I think it's also
handy for throwing an owl's pack together and herds to inch through one, but we'll save that for another day.
So you first see the soft hammer technique. I've been talking about hard hammer so far,
stones striking one stone at just at a point on the stone surface, not distributed along an edge.
But you first see the soft hammer technique, visually and coarsely. The advance to blades
requires only splitting a cobble to yield a flat platform, and then shaving off vertically.
The pusher is either a stick or even butters that you want a really straight edge.
You can pick up straight edges from cracked ostrich egg shells, which are scattered all over the
savannas, there being a pletitude of ostriches. And then you hammer on top of it like this.
So this serves to shove a whole region of cliff edge off, and you get some very good blades up
or right corner out of this. The pusher spreads out the impact over some width, sort of like
you have a whole line of people standing on a cliff edge and jumping together at the same time.
Now for all this, let me say that sharp edges are not essential. That is to say butchery can be done
with brute force, pulling in opposite directions to rip open skin and seams. Blunt sections
serves to open up seams between muscles. The blunt end of the scalpel blade is often used by modern
surges to do this kind of work in seams and stick a finger in and try to slide it along.
Even joint ligaments can be ruptured with enough force. So you can't say that sharp is really
essential for many of the things, but there are situations that make a sharp edge pretty much
essential if you need to be quick about it. In order to amputate a limb while the lion is
watching patiently, quicker is better. A sharp speeds up skin incision, sharp speeds up exposing
the hip joint, sharp speeds up cutting through the joint ligaments. Shattered rock edges will
dull quickly and so it's best to bring flakes or a serrated edge along.
So that's how I view the essential methods for acquiring meat from the large herbivores that
the lion's killed. Now we need to discuss the landscape and some aspects of how it provides
a perfect setup for causing evolution to speed up with processes right there again
to the compounding of interest. The environmental backdrop to hominid evolution includes these kinds
of landscapes. Now the picture here is from the from the Serengeti or properly Kenya's
edge of it called the Saimara. You can see in this picture a gallery forest. You can see that stream
in the middle ground going through and so the trees are clustering in an area where they can
reach down to get enough water. You can see some woodland in the foreground that say mixed grass
and trees. It's also following the stream. It's an underground stream in this case.
Elephants can hear them where there's turbulence and they tend to burrow with their feet dig down
to try to get a butt bath and if they keep going they'll get a water hole. The Masai dairy farmers
love them elephants just because they will produce water holes for their cattle.
See grasslands. Savannah properly speaking is grassland
with scattered trees. The brush not shown here I'll show you in a minute.
Now the reason you get one kind of vegetation and not another can be seen in the process of forest
session. Initially after a fire for example you will get some grasses.
If there's not enough underground water in the dry season for anything except grass then grass is
all you'll get. You may get volunteers of leafy plants in the middle of the grass but if they
can't reach down to enough water to do all that leaf style of operation then they'll die out during
the dry season. So it sort of goes grasses, shrubs, short-lived pioneer trees in the climax
forest and they mostly depend upon soil thickness to hold water but it depends of course on how
forest soil is. The fringe of a forest tends to be woodland as grass intrus
into the drier areas of the forest. As African forests fragmented six to two million years ago
more and more woodland became available because of the fragmentation of forests.
Our ancestors specialized in woodland and so they had a booming habitat for their population.
This picture looks like it's all grass but that bird of wildebeest tells you that there is water
downhill here. They have to visit a waterhole at least every second day unlike browsers who get
much of their water from eating water filled leaves water pulled up from the ground.
An area of bushes and shrubs tends to be called brush or scrub.
They use many shady places from lion to hide here of course for ambushes
to keep cool until the opportunity presents itself.
Grazing animals do not tend to like brush very well because of that reason.
Why an area of bushes and shrubs should be called brush or scrub always bothered me until I
finally realized something.
Perhaps these names are for the actions needed upon your return from a walk.
That is to say if you wear long pants you brush them. If we're in British hiking shorts you scrub
your legs and said. I mean brush and scrub are verbs. Bush and shrub are nouns.
So I took me 10 years at least to figure this out.
Now you have the ecological basis to appreciate
how our ancestors fit into the landscape 3.3 million years ago.
But you know there's no balance in nature.
Climate changes all the time but there's even more frequent events such as wildfires
that transform forests and brush into grassland for a while.
That creates a population boom for those herbivores that specialize in grass.
They can't utilize the brush area very well unless they're mixed feeders going after leaves
because they're grass eaters only. They get a population boom whenever a brush fire occurs.
And that means a boom for their predators including our ancestors.
So that's about the end of this lecture we have covered.
Lifestyle that led to humans. Next time comes the feedback loop
that makes human boom and bust so interesting. I will move on then to our kind of language
and our kind of looking ahead the creativity and planning that makes us able to do so many new things.
