Hello, I'm William Calvin, a professor at the University of Washington in Seattle.
The lectures in this Up From the Apes series are not really our long stand-up performances.
They are videos designed for individuals to be able to pause and think about the current
subject on the slide before proceeding to try it out.
This lecture is called the Fast Track to a Bigger Brain.
It's the third series of lectures on human evolution.
This would cover a period between about two and a half million years ago, the beginning
of the Homo genus, and agriculture about 12,000 years ago.
In that period, the brain tripled in size.
Humans was likely made possible by a brush fire or boom and bust in their meat supply
that created an amplifying feedback loop.
Last time I took you through the evolution from living in a forest, to living in a woodland,
to doing well out on a treeless island.
Humans are unusual in that our bipedal walk can be a walking stride.
That's really a controlled fall forward where it captures off this swinging leg.
Then I discussed the first out-of-Africa journey of early Homo erectus 1.8 million years ago.
Journey spanning some 4,000 out of 3200 miles halfway to the North Pole.
From following the grazing herds from Waterpool to the next.
I then discussed how they acquired their meat.
Amputating a hind limb from a lion kill and carrying it away, leaving the lions to the
beltlet, could have been the big payoff for the sharp edge.
I discussed then the sharp edges needed for amputating hind limbs.
The easiest way to make sharp edges is to throw one cobble-sized rock against a bigger
one.
They sometimes split in half neatly like you see here on the left.
Add this method suffice for about 1.5 billion years until the middle stage here where there
is a pusher stick and an ostrich shell in this case where you press the linear edge up
against the linear edge in the rock, tap on it with a rock hammer, and shave off a sharp
flake.
It also creates a sharp serrated edge all the way around.
There are plenty of ostrich shells on the savanna.
You can combine the techniques of splitting the rock and shaving off an edge, which occurs
another million years down the pike.
By having a cliff edge, basically, you can just shave off one blade after another going
around the top.
There's also an evolution in wooden tools.
The first javelins we see in the archaeological record are in a German coal mine about 400,000
years ago.
But they were surely using long poles, the way African children still do, to go out hunting
for small mammals in the case of taking a kill away from the lions.
Long poles are handy for fending off the lions who get impatient and want you to leave.
It's very easy to convert them into a spear if you just sand down the point on a convenient
rock outcrop.
Afternoon's work will give you a perfectly good spear.
But stealing from lions has a limited payoff really.
At some point, do-it-yourself hunting will develop by passing the middleman.
And the easiest targets, if you wish to throw a spear, are when the animals come down to
the waterhole.
The shoulder of a mole rectus shows signs of improvement for throwing spears at 1.9 million
years.
And the swine of prey is the ideal target.
If you miss the one you were aiming at, your spear will just hit its neighbor.
It's a sight of the barn throw.
It really doesn't require that demand very much in the way of skill.
So from scavenging to spear throwers, you go through this stage of power scavenging that
depends on shark wedges and long poles.
Do-it-yourself hunting, throwing pointed poles, eventually weighted tavelins, and then comes
accurate throwing, the sort of thing that we normally think in terms of a single target,
a single hunter creeping up flatly and throwing from a distance.
Once you master this, of course, the targets will stand a little bit further away from
you the next time.
And so it keeps selecting for better and better get set planning.
When a herd is never encountered too late at hunters before, they are relatively easy
prey as you can slowly walk up to them and then throw.
After being hunted a while, a herd becomes wary.
Let's move on to the next dye herd.
But in what direction are they going?
Well, if they're starting out from Africa going north in the Rift Valley, they really
cannot go backwards down the Rift Valley because back there are these depleted or wary herds.
So they continue going forward north up the rift itself to the Red Sea, up the Red Sea
rift to the Dead Sea rift that goes up through Lebanon's back valley to Turkey, and it's
just the country north of Turkey is Georgia.
And that appears to have happened by 1.8 million years ago.
To aim at a single animal rather than a cluster of animals, as I said, is a bit more difficult.
But you can develop standards, sort of like basketball free throw that you always do the
same way each time out, sort of like dart throwing.
But if the target is not at one of your practice locations or if it's moving, then you usually
have to improvise.
A muscle command sequence is not one of your standards.
Feel it get set just right and then you throw.
So this get set planning is the time for improvisation.
It's much more demanding and there's no just throw again, throw again until you hit because
dinner runs away if you miss the first time.
Because herd retreats sooner as subsequent hunters approach, hunters aim must keep getting
better and better in order to throw from farther and farther away.
In terms of how the brain is timing the muscle movements, a simple model of it says that
twice as far is eight times more difficult for the brain to get the right timing for
the novel activation sequence.
But there will always be a reward for getting better at throwing more meat per month.
Okay, now we're up to the more difficult part of the story.
The fast track to the bigger brain.
I've addressed a lot of what, where, when questions about human evolution, but today
we focus on how and why.
And why is just the evolutionary timescale version of how the physiological timescale
was in this lifetime.
We seek a process when it transforms the size brain of the Australopus into one 3.3 times
larger.
So what was the process that transforms?
The great discovery made by Charles Darwin in 1937 was not that evolution occurred.
In other words, that today's species had ancestor species in the past with fewer simple features.
That notion was circulating among scientists when Darwin was born in 1809.
His grandfather, or Rasmus Darwin, had even written a rather poetic book about it, poetry
being a clever way of spreading scientific ideas to the general public.
It was after all the age of the romantic poet William Blake, who said, to see the world
in the grain of sand and to see heaven in a wild flower, hold infinity in the palm of
your hands and eternity within the hour.
And where are the scientific poets of yesteryear?
But no one knew then how the crank was turned for the process which transformed the species
into a new one.
So let me define a process for you.
This is a little story, a little set of actions, about how you transform one thing into a different
thing and what turns the crank.
And that was the process of making blades, I've discussed, the process of increasing
approach distance I've discussed.
The most fairer analogy, however, will probably be a recipe.
The recipe describes a standardized process for achieving a specific end product.
It's not only just a list of ingredients, but it's a story about the order and manner
in which they are combined, specifying the heat and the influence to be used and so on.
Darwin discussed a mindless process for concentrating favorable genes, as we would say today, calling
it natural selection, the contrast being made to the artificial selection practiced by
mindful readers.
Natural selection is the process that serves to fit the species to its environment, sometimes
making a new species along the way, sometimes just back and forth selection.
That was the crank that Darwin inferred.
He discovered the mindless process that underlies most of evolution.
Let's call it the recipe for evolution.
Many scientists have used traditional Darwinian thinking, that is to say, selective survival
retains mutations that were more useful in surviving childhood.
They've used this kind of usefulness reasoning to approach human brain enlargement.
They have looked for useful behaviors that might be improved via selective survival.
But suppose useful is backwards in this case, that it was enlargement first, thus making
added cortical space for a new behavior that might or might not prove useful someday for
Darwin.
My goal here is similar to Darwin's.
For brain enlargement to show how the crank was subtly turned, starting 2.3 million years
ago, ending with agriculture a recipe we need for three times bigger brains.
Human acceptions has long appeared to be sort of some exception to this usual Darwinian
way of doing things.
In the 1860s, both Darwin and Alfred Russell Wallace, who discovered natural selection
independently, suspected that human evolution was not a good fit to natural selection in
some ways.
But then selective survival for usefulness was the only aspect they understood them.
Here I'm going to show you an additional path, selective opportunity, also known since
the 1930s as another possibility, how selective survival yields more grandchildren via a kind
of amplifying feedback.
The amplifying feedback is what I've added to this story.
The type of natural selection, just like requires a special setup.
It's not a general across the board kind of thing like selection for usefulness.
So this recipe brings together six ingredients.
I'm going to work through them and then summarize for you the complete operation of the loop.
Of the first ingredient, one would never normally think of in sensitive brain enlargement, it's
not grazers as the meat supply.
Asking what limits grazer numbers over the time course of climate changes.
The original large herbivores ate both leaves and grass.
Colleges call them mixed feeders.
But some specialized in leaves, we call them browsers.
They eat mostly grass and you become a grazer.
Since you're what you eat, the calcium in your bones reflects the calcium in your favorite food.
Same for carbon atoms.
Most carbon atoms have an atomic weight of 12, but some have two extra nutrons making carbon 14.
It kicks out the extra neutron sometime in the next 50,000 years.
If you're dating organic materials.
But if there's only one extra neutron, it's pretty stable.
That's carbon 13.
For some reason, the metabolic processes in grass favor carbon 13 a little.
And so the bones of grass eaters have a little bit more carbon 13 than new grasses.
So you are what you eat and prehuman teeth preserve this isotope ratio of grass.
Starting at about two and a half million years ago, we saw Australopithecis had this shifted ratio for grass.
Implying they were sure eating a lot of grass compared to chumps.
And it was probably not because they were baking bread or making soups.
Grass in Africa has more carbon 13 than the leaves do and thus the bones of grazers and their prehuman predators are also rich in C13.
Racers evolved from mixed feeders in West Guinea, South Africa.
About 2.4 million years ago.
This allowed brush fire booms to commence.
Racers have a population boom when brush fires create a temporary grassland and auxiliary grassland to their usual.
Browsers and mixed feeders do not boom.
The burn scar diminishes resources for broughs.
For mixed feeders, the burn scar was already part of their range.
They were eating its leaves there.
Now they switch to eating grass there.
It's not really an expansion of resources for you.
But for the specialized grazers that cannot utilize leaves and brush in any large amount.
The burn scar constitutes a range expansion.
I don't expect a boom time over a decade for those prehumans able to acquire meat in large packages.
Leaves are full of water, so brosters may not need to drink, not visit a water hole.
But if you're specialized in grass, you really have to visit a water hole every other day, the ecologists tell us.
Before 2.4 million years ago and specialized grazers, water hole predation would have been unreliable.
The evolution of grazers should have created a boom time for ambush predators such as lions.
The brain size increase goes like this.
It brightened size doesn't much change.
It's a little bit uphill, but not much.
From the chimpanzees through the israeli species.
The brain enlargement really starts uphill at what appears to be 2.3 million years ago, right after grazers evolved to about 2.4, essentially simultaneously.
There was a drop in brain size with the gang of agriculture.
As they started about 12,000 years ago, down to 6, brain size dropped 10 to 17%.
It's a matter of individuals becoming busily built, bigger people having somewhat bigger brains.
This isn't a regression in how the brain is organized.
It's just a matter of the maintaining selection or keeping people really big and robust, faded as agriculture supplied more and more of their diet.
Okay, now we're getting up to the second ingredient.
Brush fires create temporary grasslands because a month after these fires, there's enough new grass growing to attract grazing animals.
There's a picture two months after a brush fire that was set by the wildfire ecologists.
These guys here are water bucks. They're really a mixed feeder.
They're not going to have a population boom because of this fire.
Before they're eating the leaves in this patch of burned scarcer dowels, which eat the new grass that's out.
The brush returning several days, decades later, won't cut their numbers since they just go back to eating leaves.
But suppose these guys were grazers instead. Before the fire, this patch is not in their territory.
It's not part of their research space.
But afterwards, we now get to what happens with boom and bust to the grazers.
And this is going to be a dozen slides of works that I'm basically going to have to take you through all the much of the standard genetics.
And particularly the population demography.
So here is the population pyramid, as it's called, that shows you death rates.
This happens to be from Mexico. It looked different for US and Canada.
But what you see here is that there aren't very many people left of age 80.
But down here at the base, birth to four years, we see that males on the left are 7.9% of the population.
And then over at the right side showing females, there are also another 7.9% of the population.
So 15.8%.
This whole population is under four years of age.
But then as time marches on here, assuming birth rates will change, what you see is that by age 20, we have a situation where about half of the population are immature below the line.
And half the population is adult.
Now, the other thing that you see from this, say, let's take the left side for males, you see that by age 20, half of the males are dead.
Well, nutrition, injury, infection, predation, all the usual.
This means that a mother has to have four children in order to get two that survive become adults.
You know, therefore being able to replace their parents in the population total.
Producing more helps the population size to grow when resources expand.
The extras are called the surplus to replacement offspring.
And I suppose the more children you have, the more chances you have of if a population expansion can occur, of them getting a bigger share of the chain pool.
So, let's discuss selective survival analysis through the traditional Darwinian argument.
This is basically a sculpturing process.
Let's say you're creating a pattern by removing stuff.
In this case, the patterns are the behavioral characteristics and the bone size and the length and so on.
Natural selectionist mindless design operates on the overproduction, shaping the population to better cope with the local environment.
The individuals better able to find sufficient food, avoid injury, escape predators, and fight off infection are the ones that last long enough to become adults.
So, the next generation is enriched in genes that are useful for getting food childhood.
And this repeats over and over one generation after the next.
You can make very small changes in one generation and still have it accumulate nicely.
So, if you have a mutation, where I focus on a single gene, I won't specify what for.
Basically, this gene could be called allele A, and if a mutation comes along, we'll call that allele B.
The question is, is when the mutated allele B might take over the market and retire allele A?
Most survivalist fetus is directed at the young because they are the most of the population.
Youth is where the action is, at least for most of the evolutionary process.
Now, let's discuss expansion.
Natural selection does not shift the gene pool market share solely by selective survival of childhood.
The gene pool can also be shifted by selective reproductive success.
The example is selective range expansion.
There's a fair literature on this, but you can see how it would work.
Because some of the surplus to replacement population of offspring will now be able to grow up because of the range expansion.
It decreases malnutrition, death, and so on.
All this is standard.
The Fisher wave range expansion where mutations survive the fixation much better than the main population that isn't moving somewhere.
So let's consider a brazier presented with a boom option.
It has a gene that has two alleles, the standard A, and then mutated B.
He's going to be blue on the next slide.
A is the most common, but it has a mutated form allele B that is on its way up because of an interesting mechanism.
Woman bust has a new twist to this.
The expansion, of course, emphasizes the genes on the frontier.
It's 30 different from those in the main population if it's not well mixed.
This can produce a founder effect.
The new grassland will have the genes that helps you be in the right place at the right time to get the opportunity for extra surviving children with those genes.
I'm not going to lead you through this derivation of why boom and bust is like the compounding interest.
It's nice to say that the species range as boundaries.
In the days before range fences is usually a matter of diminishing resources such as grass and water.
But sometimes when a shift deliver extra rain, expanding the range of the species, a population boom in the cities.
Who gets the extra offspring surviving the territory?
It's the frontier type.
The ones that normally would tend to cluster up the frontier, they'd linger there longer in their circulation back and forth would be the ones that primarily get the expansion.
Okay, now this goes through the fringe of brush and grassland.
On the left we have pasture and two types of individuals in the species, the A's and the blue bees.
Circulating around, as you see up in the fringes, the blues tend to linger a bit longer.
There's A's up there too.
The blues are going to dominate.
Now this grassland gets hit by a lightning strike.
And it causes a burn scar.
And a month or two later there's a lot of grass in the burn scar, but none of the animals have discovered it.
There are some grassy pathways in the brush, but they don't happen to connect over.
But these fellows that are exploring the fringe and let's get a path that opens up.
And now those that happen to like being way back in the grass leaves, going back to the brush, those guys are the ones more likely to find their way in.
Yeah, there'll be some type A's and so forth, but the ratio of A and B will be different in the burn scar than it is in the grassland.
So it's a proven time not only for grazing animals, but for the hunters that follow grazing animals.
So they, the ones that happen to like going into these brush fringes, will also get a boom time that will make their population, after a couple of generations, somewhat different from the main grassland.
Okay, now I'm going to describe the part that is amplifying feedback.
After this, a couple of years, a couple of decades of this nice auxiliary grassland comes the bus as the brush returns to it.
And so the hunters have to follow the grazers back to the current population.
A selective expansion that emphasizes B, coupled with this return migration, can quickly produce a substantial shift in the main populations out of portions, but would otherwise take many millennia selective survival
on the fringe fraction of population.
This applies even to the grazers' providers, say for humans, let's assume this is a gene that promotes seeking out shade, not just staying out in the midday sun, but a real preference for spending more hours than the others in shade.
Okay, so let's go through this one.
Those with the blue shade trait spend more time than the others in the shady fringe, and they are skinned off as the path opens into the burn scar.
So the burn scar population has shade.
Now, here's decades later when brush takes over and starts squeezing this population back out.
It squeezes out both the grazing animals and the grazers' predators.
So numerous shade-bearing children and grandchildren now are following their meat supply back into the main grassland.
The next, that changes the ratio between A and B in the main grassland a little bit, but it's that altered proportion that is used in the next such brushfire human bust.
So shade's markets share keeps growing, and as in the compounding of interest, the next increment, the next boom, produces an even bigger increment after its bust occurs.
This is the standard setup for an exponential rise.
It enriches the shade proportion used for the subsequent interest calculation, if you will, and tell shade completely takes over the market becoming fixed.
I mean, this being a portion, it can't go to infinity, and it has to stop at one.
Okay, now let's discuss the physical setup for these booming bust octones.
So here's how rift valleys are created in geology.
There are hotspots for these plants across the Colorado Plateau.
It's one of them.
It's our Phoenix flagstaff in North up to St. Moab, Utah. It's such a blister.
And at least in Africa, sometimes you get two parallel cracks in the surface, and the surface is expanding.
Now, when you have two parallel cracks close enough, they can allow the crust in between to drop down as a block deeper into the earth.
Okay, just remove the friction on the side that held it up.
The archaeologists are very grateful for this because both walls of the rift valley have fossils exposed and otherwise required enormous deep trench to discover.
And archaeologists have never had and still don't the money to do such things.
Now, the rift valley is an excellent geometry for this amplifying feedback loop in grazers and their produce.
Let me walk you through it here.
The water that falls up here on the plateau tends to drain through fairly quickly.
There isn't much left to grow grass.
And it tends to sort of come out on the walls of the rift, the escarpment here.
Sometimes this water falls in the springs, but let's just look at this water hole at the bottom.
And the bottom here has enough water in the soil so that brush can survive the dry season.
Okay, so we have a quarter here now between grass growing area and brush.
Just set up by the geometry.
You've got to have water holes to ground grazing animals.
So you can have grass up here on the plateau, but if there's no water source up there, it's not going to be utilized except by the mixed feeders or the browsers.
Okay, so now lightning strikes the bottom.
You get a burn scar, and the path eventually opens up, giving this boom time opportunity to the grazing animals and their produce.
Okay, so the rift valley is kind of handy for doing this in a way that many other physical situations are not.
So here's just a little reminder that brain enlargement seems to have begun at about the same time as grazers.
And the brush fire feedback loops are one of the candidates for the ramp up.
But how might all of this enlarge the brain?
Well, that's been fun to discover this last year.
Now I have to leave you through a fourth ingredient, which is sort of this mating.
I mean, so far in conventional evolutionary theory, this is a recipe for making frontier verches.
It says on the frontier of the species range, you get the expansion opportunity, more common in the general population.
But what comes next is a new process that emerges from this sub.
Traits can hitchhike.
I will use the case of assortative mating.
Those who hang out in the shade more than others tend to mate with those that prefer shade for some reason, not certainly same reason.
So let's go through assortative mating.
It's defined as the reproductive pairing of individuals that have more traits in common than when mate selection is random.
It's sort of like artificial selection goes wrong, but without a breeder doing the selection.
Mate selection in humans is most intense in college years.
The mating pool is usually high school friends and one's neighbors and so on.
You know, it's sort of local sometimes regional, it's your pool of choices.
Now, I'm going to give you a couple of examples of choice being broadened or narrowed.
Just by the way the culture works.
First example, in Israel, there's a draft. It's called National Service.
And both men and women are in the army after high school.
Then they do college or vocational training a few years later.
The pool of mate choices is thereby widened by mixing ethnically and educationally with these high school graduates.
It becomes a melted pot that prevents mating choice from operating the same way in the next generation because things mix again.
For both male and female comprised colleges rate requirements, the pool of choices is narrowed after high school rather than widened.
College students have all been selected for such traits as sustained attention, abstract thinking, versatility, being able to make quick decisions that are nonetheless pretty good.
This means that the next generation will have a greater proportion of those traits.
Since college educated parents tend to send their own offspring to college as well, this is quite unlike the armies rescrambling of the mate choice pool.
I mean, the odds of error barriers between college graduates and high school graduates decline by 25% over a 50 year period in 1990.
While spousal educational similarities, it's called literature.
There's probably not the way that brain enlargement occurred in the past.
There were two entry requirements.
But these two extreme examples, army and college, served to remind us how associative mating works.
Versatility concentrates in the branch of shade.
Okay, so we've gone through four ingredients, none of which have anything obvious about them that says bigger brain.
But you know, in recipes, the finished product, say a pastry, doesn't look anything like, you know, the flour, the butter, the egg.
Bicarbonate, white ad, baking soda, none of those things look anything like finished pastry.
We're talking here about transformative processes that make these things.
And the first hint here is going to be the fifth ingredient.
Versatility concentrates in the branch of shade.
So there is a need for sun.
You can see these three cheetahs shading up here.
This is one of the copchies, the rocky upcrops on the savannah.
I mean, our free human ancestors was probably acting the same way.
Only mad dogs in English want to stay out in the midday suns, no colored sun.
Give them a choice, most shaded up on occasions throughout the day.
The question is how many hours of shade, many or a few, and do some people do it more than others?
Shows you that even Seattle style rain hats are perfectly good in the savannah.
So there are grassy paths that lead back into the brush along this fringe.
So this is grassland in the upper right here.
And here's a couple of paths that these antelope are starting to explore.
They don't really like to explore them usually, because predators can hide easily in the cantilever grass.
But what I'm going to be looking for here are proto-occupations that might keep free humans in the shade most of the time.
Not just the hours, it was too hot.
The first thing is that you've got to protect infants from overheating.
I mean, if it's 100 degrees out there, infants are going to overheat if left to themselves.
They just don't have enough surface area to sweat on to bring it down.
So they really have to be held against the mother's skin so that her evaporative cooling keeps the infant cool as well.
Well, we normally think of this the other way that mother is keeping the infant warm, because it's cold outside.
But it works the opposite way, too.
If there's tendency for the infant to overheat, then holding it against skin of an adult will do the job quite nicely.
So if mother needs to park an infant on the ground in order to work with both hands for something,
she needs to stay in the shade.
Also, there are tasks that use both hands, which require long periods of close attention best done in the shade.
For example, creating the sharp edges we talked about last time.
Food preparation that must have started back about two million years ago.
Pounding, soaking, and of course, cooking.
Some people think the cooking started about 1.8 million years ago.
And fire starting.
The ability to get the fire going requires often a lot of time and concentration.
Okay, those are some of the reasons that some people will spend more time in the shade than others.
Now the question is, how does this sort of baby affect all of us?
And it's going to show that there is a new process here that I've identified, which I call trait hitchhiking.
The laws, things like bringing large ones are sort of a free escalator ride up.
It enabling that boom and bust feedback loop to extend versatility and view that in the large brain.
So by hanging out in the catchment zone, the brush friend is for the boom of a major food source, trait hitchhiking is enabled.
For traits that tend to concentrate there, often for traits other than predation, say seeking shade.
So some hang out in the brush adjacent to a grass line more than others do.
But that means associated meeting occurs among those cracks and tool making, food preparation, fire starting.
That is to say meeting among the more versatile in the population, sort of like college.
The boom in the meat supply can enhance the shade related traits in predators.
The boom and its feedback loop would then amplifies the traits of the main population once the bust occurs and you're led back.
Because brush fires are so frequent, even weak hitchhiking traits can be enhanced during dry season.
There are lots of lightning strikes and usually the burns, scars are maybe no more than three or two.
There's a little area around it perhaps that some of them really get going and involve a great many, a great deal of area, a whole hillside and such.
Because brain size is strongly heritable by which I mean easily passing parents to offspring.
Big brain parents tend to have more big brain offspring than usual.
Bootstrapping to a new normal via associated meeting can be done by the more versatile hanging out in the catchroom zone.
First Tony, however, tends to need a bigger brain, not always, but you now have the possibility that the next generation will have a somewhat bigger brain and what is it going to do with it?
So this is why you may have a patch of new cortical space that's filled in by trial specializations, some of which are useful, some not.
So let me show you the case for vision.
Back when I look at my textbooks from 50 some years ago, I would see that there are two maps in the brain, the cerebral cortex, of the visual.
They were called V1 and V2. They're very right in the back of the brain.
The pictures I'm going to be showing you here on the left is taking the cortical surface and in the computer, sort of inflating the cortical surface to be a two-dimensional map that we can reach.
There's a lot of cortex hidden down in the folds of the brain here.
And if we are rotating it to sort of show you the brain folds, there's temporal lobes sticking out of both of them.
So the two visual areas were right in the very back. You can see orange there, which is V2.
And I'll show you here.
If we look at the half brain from the middle one, and there's the corpus callus and you can see there, but there's this whole stack of maps.
Each one of them goes from basically the nose out to the periphery and from the top to the bottom.
And so it's just one map after another, but the cells in them behave somewhat differently.
They're all organized topographically to match up with the outside world, but they start doing different things.
So as of last year, there were 23 additional maps about the size of a posty stamp or bigger.
And actually, there are even more than that. Some of them are no larger than a pinhead, just a millimeter or so.
So they're just reusing the genetic instructions for ordering a map out of this.
The various axons come in, but then they specialize.
So you may, one of these areas is specialized for movement in a visual field.
Another one is specialized for the character features a face reading, distinguishing individuals that way and reading facial expressions.
The other side of the brain has a similar arrangement, not entirely, but pretty close.
The importance of all this for explaining brain enlargement is with extra space like this, there's no need to keep proving the worth of a slightly bigger brain via selective survival.
It's just sort of arriving automatically because it's made in the context of a boom and bust system.
It also means that one of the main ways that people thought about for selective survival enlarging the brain is this part of some sort of evolutionary arms race.
You can see in Beatles, more and more armor and so on.
So this kind of boom and bust social mating argument does get us out of the ordinary way of thinking.
And in that we normally speak of selection, pressure, changing things, but this current aspect of natural selection,
seems better able to account for rapid machine expansion, though expensive.
You also enhance detrimental traits that tend to concentrate in the brush, say myopia, which is also strongly charitable.
Okay, now we've got the ingredients on.
Let's go back and discuss our original problem, which is why is the brain enlarge three times and then stop.
So now I'm going to switch to function and ask of all the important things the brain is doing.
What might some interesting consequences be?
There's several cortexes involved, as is some of the sub-core players, in creating muscle command sequences that not only once you use for walking,
which the spinal cord pretty much does, but for arm movements of various sorts that we use.
And if it's a novel move, I mean when you haven't done before, it's not part of your standard set, cortex is particularly involved.
So it's easy to man that for the things that require, get set, planted, so you've got to think of how to do it for something that's not a standard.
Movements in particular that are too quick for sensory corrections to guide.
Often it's just a novel movement, slow.
If you're doing it a bit wrong, you'll get feedback that comes in from your arm to the brain, commands come back out to correct it.
But if the action is like a dart throw, the latency of the information coming back in and going back out to correct it,
that reaction time loop, it's about one-eighth of a second for arm movements, the dart throw takes one-eighth of a second.
So from the very beginning of the movement, feedback, sensory information doesn't get there soon enough.
So this means you have a perfect plan before you start to move.
Now with set pieces like dart throws, it may just be able to memorize things, but hunting involves unique opportunities.
The prey is not at one of your standard locations.
They may be moving and so on.
There are various ballistic movements, just sort of ones that can't be guided by sensory feedback.
Throwing, hammering, clubbing, kicking, spitting, and speech might all utilize a workspace in the brain for these novel movements.
There's just starting to be some information coming in about, and we flock of working memory for sensations coming in.
There's also a now identified for planned movements going back out that there is a working memory.
But what this means, if they all utilize this novel workspace for ballistic movements,
as you specialize more and more, and they never tend,
areas will tend to sort of develop specializations.
As you won't be able to use the area for hammering, you might take root in this flexible workspace,
and perhaps at the expense of losing some of the working memory space for planning a throw, thereby decreasing the throwing actress.
Okay, hold that idea.
But since there is a considerable spread in brain size within a given generation, 10 or 15%,
those individuals with the brains sufficiently larger than the current average will possess the original average amount of flexible workspace,
despite their space commitment to the new hammering specialization.
So this larger than average is serving as a pre-adaptation, it's called,
making it easier to map yet another mere cortical innovation in those individuals with the current charge with sufficiently larger brains.
Now I want to discuss the migration situation and get into the question of how does geography affect this argument
about bigger brains?
First of all, the feedback loop itself really depends upon having a brush area that can develop secondary grassland,
next to a grassland that isn't too big, because then the change in genes per cycle will be very small.
So the rift valley path that goes up through East Africa to the Red Sea, then up to the Dead Sea at Sinai,
then on north to 42 degree north plate boundary at Dominici in Georgia,
this would have allowed feedback loops all along that path to repeatedly enrich migrants with brush roll of an alleles en route.
Now, the feedback loop works best, as I said, if the main population is kept small,
the water for the grazers is only found in a valley down in the plateau,
so it's really just a population that stays within a day of the water supply that's being affected.
What's effective loops?
Well, the predictions to this theory is that what's effective loops may have influenced the non-ancestral versions of Homo,
the genus Homo, the anortholization Homo rectus, as they immigrated into environments where there were fewer suitable sites for the feedback loop.
So you really expect slower brain enlargement when the prehumans are spreading into European forests,
or they're spreading into the steppes of Central Asia where the parent grassland is enormous compared to the size of any whole
rice-alert grassland that might happen on the fringes.
Alright, let's come back to the data now on brain cells.
This plot is showing 175 fossil skulls from which that are good enough for us to estimate brain cells.
This is a collection created over nearly 160 years, represents an enormous effort of people clearing away things in the hot sun, dusty environments.
Okay, let's look at brain size.
Alright, now the first time here, let's back up a second.
What you see here is the line, the piecewise linear line that people have been fitting to the state.
That is to say, starting in about a half million years ago, things were rising up twice as fast as they were before.
However, as I re-analyzed all this data and looked at it during the past year, I discovered some interesting things.
The correct line would be this blue one, because you have to get rid of the non-analysts, the Anderthals and the Asian homo,
and this in the next slide shows you how it works.
Here on the left, I'm plotting only Ancestors, homo sapiens and homo sapiens ancestors.
Okay, so here's Homo erectus back here in Africa, mostly.
And at about 0.8 million years ago, it changes into the species Homo pyrobergensis, purple spots.
And then homo sapiens after 200,000 years ago, those blue dots.
Okay.
What you see on the right are the ones in gray that we left out of the plot.
So what you see here, first of all, there's the same homo erectus that we had in the other plot.
But at 0.8 million years, we no longer plotting the Ancestors we had, but rather the ones that took a different path.
So here is that line that we have just copied over from the left one.
And what you see is there's the brain of Asian homo erectus that they really enlarge much more slowly than our ancestors.
So here's a gap of 400,000 years that before they catch up.
And as I showed you before, if you have too much grassland, it dilutes the lupine crown.
So the stups of Central Asia may have well slowed down brain evolution.
And here's Neanderthals.
Neanderthals were also slowed, particularly if you don't consider these really big ones.
And that big ones are a little problem, and that is there's hybridization.
There's mixing, crossbreeding between homo sapiens and homo neanderthals.
During the most recent period before the Neanderthals disappeared of 40,000 years ago.
Neanderthals are slowed for a different reason.
That is to say the forests in Europe mean there's not all that much grassland and not all that much brush.
You just can't continue the lupine that got started down in Africa, but if your population does increase in brain size,
it may just because of a continuing trickle coming in from Africa.
But say once they get there, there's just not the setup to keep this mechanism going.
Now a few words, and this is really for the people that already understand a bit about DNA to RNA protein synthesis.
And I'll be brief about it before I come back to the main story.
The ramp up in brain size is linear. It isn't exponential, like you might expect.
But the linear rise can be explained by the accumulation rate for these enlargement related mutations over time.
The way mutation works in this case is a neutron from the sun usually or outer space comes in, gets slowed down by the atmosphere and manages to hit a oven in the mother's body or the sperm production predecessors in male body.
It manages to knock out a single DNA nucleotide.
Now if it came in faster than that, it just destroyed the whole thing and the whole thing would never reproduce itself.
But if you make a very minor change, it will reproduce itself.
Now most of these knocked out nucleotides get reinserted properly by a gene repair mechanism with opids.
However, it makes mistakes, and that's what results in a so-called step.
It means single nucleotide probably mortisimum.
Sometimes this results in coding for a different amino acid.
So here's an RNA sequence that's going to be used in sequencing the amino acids to make a protein.
So I'm just taking a sequence here.
It's a triplet of three of them that specifies the amino acid, and the next triplet of three specifies the next amino acid and so on.
So the mutation I've shown here is just in the second one.
Now does that make any difference?
Some of these triplets that are different still specify the same amino acid.
There's only about 20 or so amino acids possible here, but there's something like 64 possibilities.
If you're doing triplets, each of which can be one of four.
Now here is the table that shows you what amino acid you get.
It could be valium, ataline, aspartic acid, glutamic acid, glycine here on the bottom.
Well, what is the original sequence, C-G-C-A?
Well, here it is over here that specifies alanine past a number of other combinations.
And what's the mutated one?
Well, it's over here C-G-G-A, and that specifies glycine.
So we're not constructing a protein that's got one amino acid block.
That's how you get an allele that is actually functionally changed.
Now with just one wrong amino acid, the protein may fold up differently,
changing its physiological properties in the functioning organism.
Often this slows or speeds up the developmental process.
A mutated recipe, as you know, might lengthen the time you bake it.
Or the changed protein may make the process stronger or weaker.
Okay, so I'd like to change it by using two eggs instead of one.
So this is the kind of thing that's going on,
and it really has, you have to make changes in probably dozens of different processes in this manner
in order to get the right enlargement.
The feedback loop is important here in that most of these mutations,
when they're relatively low number in the whole population, just disappear.
Okay, just by chance fluctuations.
But the feedback loop can make them more and more and more numerous
and drive them to fixation pretty quickly.
Maybe on the order of a thousand years.
So you might ask, as people recently have,
how many mutations occur in the time between one generation and the next.
I think each baby born has about 60 SNPs that neither parent had.
So you're looking at all these SNPs in three billion base pairs and identifying SNPs.
And most of them were present in either mother or father.
But there are about 60 of them that either parent had,
reflecting cosmic ray strikes during the parent's lifetime prior inception.
That's about two to three each year in the parents that spread over the entire genome of three billion base pairs.
The important part of the genome, the genes coding for structural proteins and the genes that regulate them,
are perhaps about three percent of the total.
So mutations affecting enlargement are some subset that is far less than 0.07 SNPs each year,
or one new SNP every 14 years.
But that's just fine in terms of accumulation.
It means that most of the time it's not waiting for the next mutation.
And once it occurs, it doesn't disappear the way most mutations do, but it gets driven to fixation.
A doing theory like this requires that I test each of the components to see if they are really essential.
And that's easy to do for the grazers.
I mean, suppose what if the grazers had been hunted to extinction?
Well, you know our ancestors could continue eating the meat of large animals,
because there would still be browsers and spheres around.
You know, the first one would still cluster in the shade and benefit from associated mating, sort of mating.
Cosmic rays would keep producing mutations, but there would no longer be a boom and bust in the meat supply.
So no hitchhiking traits, either, such as a brand larger man.
While there would have been mixed feeders along the rift of democracy past, most would not bunch up at water holes, so there's no easy hunting.
So that's one process which might have powered the evolutionarily rapid rise in pre-human brain size.
It fits with quite a number of facts that constrain anyone's theory for enlargement.
Explaining why it started, why it stopped, why just humans and not apes in general,
why the rift valley, why sharp edges were so important that didn't give rise to a more general tool yet for so long.
So, brains aside, what of this is a more general interest in evolutionary theory?
Well, first of all, it does add to selective opportunity the feedback that makes it such a fast alternative to the usual selective survival path.
I mean, basically by amplifying alleles to fixation quickly, ones that would otherwise disappear by chance,
because of low numbers, you can get a fairly study accumulation of shade-related traits, for example.
But the other thing that adds to evolutionary theory is hitchhiking.
Let's say any trait, say myopia, that concentrates to the booms catchment zone is also enhanced.
It's not just about bigger brains.
It could also enhance the genes for childcare, for example, in the shade.
The childcare where one may nurse another's infant, and so forth, would tend to be in the shade as well.
So this looks like it may provide a way into the problem of this sort of community childcare,
which is called eusocial behavior, is very rare in animals.
That is to say, there is only about one other in the mammals, one of the groundhogs that also has this.
There are 18 examples, mostly in the insects doing this.
It's originally studied in ants, for example.
But that is possibly another place where this general feedback loop theory may prove applicable.
I also think it's applicable to the common bedsore problem,
causing, perhaps, is a setup for increasing antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
The whole process of filtering out because of the long, slow blood supply to a bedsore.
The ones that survive that path without being knocked off by antibiotics or antibodies
means that the resistant ones will accumulate in the pus,
and with turning over in bed to relieve, try to head off more of this,
you would then have released into the bloodstreams.
Blood supply comes back, pressure taking on it.
You would now have the possibility of releasing into the general bloodstream
more antibiotic-resistant bacteria than it had before.
And so, again, you get the compounding of interest type feedback loop.
Well, we've just gone through the third lecture of the series.
The next one is about our kind of language,
and now lead us into our kind of consciousness,
our ability to look ahead, speculate, grasp new plans.
Thank you very much, and remember to tune in for the fourth and fifth lectures.
Thank you.
You
You
You
You
You
You
