Hello, I am William Calvin. I was Chuck's first graduate student. I am having a rough voice today,
so I'm going to have a robot voice read this. Do forgive the way that it pronounces the Polish
surname of Mark Cox.
Oh, I will have a robot voice read this. Do forgive the way the Polish surname of Mark
Cat is pronounced. I arrived in Seattle in the summer of 1962 as a graduate student at the
University of Washington's Department of Physiology and Biophysics. Chuck arrived in the summer of
1963, a year before finishing his PhD in 1964 at the Rockefeller. Chuck soon recruited me to work
with him on the stochastic processes underlying synaptic noise and their effects on the interspike
interval variability of Cat's final motor neuron's rhythmic firing. Chuck and I had many long
conversations in his office almost every day. So did Catherine Graubard after 1964. She too
became an early PhD student of Chuck's. He had started working on invertebrate neurons prospecting
with day trips up to the University of Washington's Marine Lab in the San Juan Islands near Victoria.
Each time he chartered a float plane to go from the dock near the med school and fly 70 miles
to the Friday Harbor Labs floating dock. Chuck invited Catherine to tag along when there was
an extra seat on the plane. Soon she went up for a summer to take the Marine invertebrates course.
She eventually did the neurophysiology part of her PhD thesis up there. The second part involved
electron microscopy and the third part was modeling those epligia neurons whose capacitance was
greatly augmented by all of the membrane infoldings. Dan Gardner showed you his good picture of Chuck
from the 1970s. Note the dial telephone on his desk. It's a much better portrait than I was going
to show you. I think that the best thing for me to emphasize for this audience is how and where
Chuck's scientific mind matured. He didn't talk much about it so this is mostly inference from
conversations between 1963 and 1974 aided by his CV. Chuck must have started at Harvard in 1952
just as President Truman was finishing the second term and Ike was being elected.
Chuck's Harvard major was experimental psychology. One must recall that this was the era of the
F. Skinner at Harvard and so Chuck operated on white rats in the mid 1950s. Something about
lesioning hypothalamus I seem to recall. Then from 1956 to 1960 Chuck was off to Yale for his MD.
He spent the summer of 1959 recording from Squid Axon at NBL. He was looking at the variability
of the spike threshold no less. I never heard Chuck relate any stories from either Harvard or Yale.
Nothing about Skinner or other famous professors. Nothing about Woods Hole. Why did he go to med school?
I never learned. But somewhere during the 1950s a passion for harder science came to dominate
overlying any Skinnerian psychology. I sell them soft traces of Chuck's medical school education
say in conversation Chuck's suggesting a differential diagnosis to be considered.
By 1963 his persona was already that of a creative enthusiastic yet carefully spoken
basic scientist. He seemed equally at ease with physics, math and biology.
That probably came from his time at the Rockefeller. 1960 was the year that JFK was elected president
and Chuck went to the Rockefeller for his PhD. Chuck worked with Keffer Heartline on
self inhibition in the limelus I. His thesis title was a quantitative theory of neural
interactions, theoretical and experimental investigations. It laid out a mathematical
theory of computation in the nervous system. Heartline in his 1967 Nobel Prize lecture
explained, quote, before we can understand fully the dynamics of inhibitory interaction,
we must consider a new feature of the inhibitory process in the limelus I,
the inhibition of a receptor unit by its own discharge. This was first analyzed by Stevens
and has recently been studied by Purple and Dodge. They present evidence that this soft inhibition
may be a synaptic process like lateral inhibition. The intellectual history that Chuck did frequently
mention to me usually concerned the probability theory and relevant physics that he had learned
from Mark Keck at the Rockefeller. Chuck's 1966 book Neurothysiology, a primer,
seemed straight out of the Keck and Heartline years at the Rockefeller. Chuck had not been
teaching the subject in such depth except via one-on-ones at the large blackboard in his office.
Catherine Graubard and I were among the early beneficiaries.
Keffer Heartline, you likely know already as a pioneer in single-year on reporting,
using it to analyze lateral inhibition circuitry in horseshoe crabs.
I read his papers as an undergraduate. Lateral inhibition was the core of my
undergraduate honors thesis in physics in 1960. But if I am to convey what helped to form Chuck's
approach to science, I also need to equate you with Mark Keck. A widely quoted quote of Keckass
was his distinction between an ordinary genius like Hans Bethe and a magician like Richard Feynman.
All three were on the Cornell faculty in the late 1950s. In 1961, Keck left for the Rockefeller
Institute in New York City. Keck wrote an autobiography, Enigmas of Chance, published
posthumously in 1987. When Catherine Graubard and I were at Wood's home that summer, the new book
exhibit in MBL's main lobby had Keck his book. I took it back to Seattle and read it.
In its preface, John Carlo Rota said, Mark Keck was one of the founders of probability theory.
But more than a theory, probability was, to him, a new way to the truth of science.
He inspired the first generation of scientists who learned to think probabilistically.
That's starting to sound like the Chuck Stevens we knew. It took me until the 1980s to master
the mind shift needed to think probabilistically about Darwin's evolutionary process, about
allopatric and sympatric speciation, as population sizes boomed and crashed, about genes going to
fixation. I didn't realize that Chuck had also began thinking about evolving the neoparticle
wiring patterns. Then in 1988, we ran into one another in some hallway somewhere.
Chuck asked me how I was coming with my review of Jerry Edelman's book,
Mule Darwinism, that science had asked me to write. Chuck advised me not to hesitate to straighten
out Jerry on evolutionary process as applied to neoportex. I doubt that my book review changed
Jerry's thinking about what was truly Darwinian. But for me, my invited piece for nature,
The Brain as a Darling Machine in 1987, and then Chuck said him straight challenge. Together,
they started up a dozen years of thinking about the later two neoparticle circuitry,
which offered the possibility of making copies of spatiotemporal firing patterns,
thanks to exciting triangular mosaics about a half millimeter wide.
It could, I thought, serve to define a heavy incel assembly that cloned itself.
While I began with the connectionist Darwinism that Jerry and Chuck were imagining,
I soon switched from an anatomical to a physiological Darwinism. I began using my
evolutionary biology to ask what it would take for a cortical circuit to be suitable for running a
true Darwinian process, say, on the time scale of shaping up a novel sentence to speak. The
immune response had already provided a Darwinian example of how to improve quality within weeks
with differential reproduction of the more successful antibodies. How about a Darwin machine
in a patch of cortex capable of producing high quality physiological function and on the time
scale of thought and action? One-off plans for novel actions, not just selecting a learned action
to repeat. That turned into my 1996 monograph, The Cerebral Code, from MIT Press. I tried to
make Darwin's process more abstract, stripping into biological specifics such as DNA and recombination
and haplotypes. I identified six essentials for a Darwinian process. A pattern that copies
with occasional variation where populations of the variants compete for a limited workspace
biased by a multifaceted environment and where most of the next round of variations come from
the more successful of the current generation, heredity. All six are essential if the recursion
is to keep improving quality. You cannot, as many do, leave out copying or heredity.
Otherwise, your process will dead end. What people were calling Darwinian was usually just
competition for a limited workspace with synaptic printing biased by a multifaceted environment.
It is often remarked that Chuck, while running an experimental research lab,
was really a theoretical scientist at heart. That was certainly my impression even in the 1960s.
Yet in the early 1970s, when noise theory alerted him to how marginal even field effect
transistors would be for recording ion channels opening and closing, he dug into designing
electronics circuits for recording such buried in the noise events. His occasional postdoc
at the University of Washington, Irwin Mayer, went with Chuck to Yale Med School in 1975.
Irwin further developed Chuck's techniques and went on to co-create with Bert Sockman,
the patch clamp method which after 1982 created a revolution in many branches of electrophysiology.
Chuck's 1996 book on theoretical physics did not come as a surprise to us as his sabbatical
leaves always seemed to feature math and physics. He consistently wandered off the neuroscience
reservation. Catherine recalls Chuck wandering a lab once about weather where I stranded on a
desert island without a library. Could I reproduce modern physics? I like to imagine Chuck would
have done this with a long stick sketching curves and writing equations in the sand.
That is, of course, much like he gave his lectures with no slides.
Chuck's deadpan humor would have led to saying how convenient it was to have his
blackboard wiped clean by the next high tide. I, too, have had such a wandering off the
reservation experience. I will omit the paleoclimate and paleoanthropology stepping stones,
but where I ended up, well, it has proved to be in a territory from which I cannot return,
except for brief interludes such as this one. My 2019 book cover shows that I have been
captured by the climate problem. I have been camping out with the climate scientists part-time
since 1980, initially because our ancestors' brain size tripled during the back and forth of
the ice ages. One organ tripling in 2.5 million years without enlarging the rest of the body
is very fast in the annals of evolutionary biology. Evolutionary speed-ups usually happen
when climate change keeps repeating. I wanted to know what there was in our ancestors' environment
and ecology that could promote brain enlargement. Gradually, I learned a lot of atmospheric science
and oceanography. Like Chuck with the physics core, I kept asking myself if I understood their
subject well enough intellectually so that I could explain it to a more general audience,
sketching in the sand if necessary. I got the chance in 1997 when the editor of the Atlantic
phoned me repeatedly, trying to persuade me to undertake the history of Gulfstream failures.
But in the aftermath of my 1998 cover story, I discovered that climate scientists simply did
not think like those of us teaching in medical schools, especially when watching the clock and
collapse were concerned. They were thinking like most basic scientists. There is a gap in the basic
science mindset, rather like the one and probabilistic thinking that Mark Keck addressed. I started out
with it myself, but during my 20 years on the neurosurgery faculty, I absorbed the medical
mindset for heading off collapse. That is what I am trying to put on the climate agenda.
So here I am at age 84, writing about how to stay away from slippery slopes and then back
out of the danger zone for more climate flips. I emphasize its urgency, given the lead time needed
for big projects to have an effect. Between 2002 and 2010, five sudden surges in extreme weather
occurred. It was Surgeon's Day. For example, in 2008, the number of billion-dollar windstorms jumped
to six times the 1980 to 2007 baseline. Now they are occurring at nine or ten times baseline.
This is no longer gradual change. Climate has become unstable. Neurophysiologists certainly
checks people are familiar with gradual change, becoming unstable and going pop. But the rest
of the world doesn't think that way, except perhaps those who have fallen off an unstable ladder.
In closing, last October, Chuck demonstrated another model we might all hope to emulate someday,
but not soon. Chuck died, both unexpectedly and in the middle of the night. That's far better than
the alternatives. You have no idea what a treat it is to be hanging out with so many others who
absorb some of Chuck's way of thinking. May we all prosper, despite no longer being able to try
out our ideas on Chuck? Thank you.
