There's something on a different level here that I'm trying to do.
And that's why I'm perhaps belaboring some points about our own particular point of view.
So let me transition to what I call broad generalizations about bacteria, some of which are going to seem so obvious that they don't need to be stated.
And yet, sometimes it is the most obvious that should be stated so that we don't overlook it and take it for granted.
So these are going to be some very broad generalizations, and then I will elaborate a bit on them and try to use those to help us to see bacteria in the context of biodiversity.
One way that I sometimes think about this is that bacteria are hidden in plain sight, which is a phrase that I've stolen from the cryptographers,
who might use a phrase like that to refer to some text that can be seen as long as you know the way to decode it, as long as you can use cryptoanalysis to decode it.
So the text, the encoded text is in plain sight, you just need to decipher it.
And I think that is the way that the bacterial world can be taken as well.
So here's the first generality about bacteria. They are the most numerous of all organisms on Earth.
How numerous? Well, some scientists at University of Georgia undertook the calculation to figure out how numerous they are, and they came up with an amazing number, which is 5 times 10 to the 30th power, 3-0, 5 times 10 to the 30th power.
And when I talk to my students about a number that large, I say this number is really beyond what we can easily imagine as large.
When we say large, we might be thinking in terms of billions or trillions or multi-trillions, but even those numbers start to go out of sight of what our usual understanding of large numbers is like.
So that's how many organisms there are on Earth that are bacteria, and they far, far outnumber any other organisms.
And I'll actually give you the logic for why they far outnumber them.
First of all, though, let's think about what those folks at University of Georgia had to do to get this estimate of 5 times 10 to the 30th as the number of living bacteria on Earth.
Well, for starters, they had to consider every single cubic centimeter of all of the water on Earth.
For example, they would take a cubic centimeter of water, and I don't necessarily always mean literally take that cubic centimeter.
And consider a cubic centimeter of water in the surface of the ocean, in the tropics, for example.
Count every single bacterium in that cubic centimeter, and then multiply by the surface area of the ocean in that particular area, tropical ocean, presumably either near shore or not near shore.
And then do that again and again and again for the entire depth of the ocean, for the entire surface of the ocean.
And remember, the oceans are the greatest part of the biodiversity on Earth.
And get a number from that.
