Now, how we figure out a family tree like that today is we use DNA sequences.
So folks that have organized all of the bacteria on a family tree and organized the other organisms on that same family tree have gotten sequences for all of them.
And it's the differences in the DNA sequence that allow us to say this or that organism is closely related, less closely related, distantly related, scarcely related at all on the family tree.
And so this is a DNA based family tree that I'm talking about, but it represents the diversity of what those organisms look like and what they do.
And so again, I will say on the family tree of all organisms, bacteria show the most diversity in respect to what they are all about, what they can do.
So that was the second generality about bacteria.
Third generality about bacteria, they are the most ancient of organisms on earth.
Their roots go back close to four billion years ago.
So if you're thinking of that family tree, the base of that family tree is at around four billion years ago.
And the other organisms, animals, plants, fungi, protos or protozoans branch off early, but they don't branch off with such enormous exuberance as the bacteria do covering essentially all of the diverse possibilities of the family tree.
So pretty much all of the major groups are starting back as early as four billion, but it's the bacteria that really diversify early and often at that point and from then on.
So let's say I'm at a party or let's say I'm talking to a group of students and I want to talk about the antiquity of bacteria and all other organisms and I want to put four billion into some sort of context.
I will sometimes pace it off across the room. I will start at one end of the room and I'll say that's four billion and then I will pace forward a little bit and say this is the three billion point.
And then about halfway across the room I'll say this is the two billion point, then one billion and then the other side of the room is the present.
So I've got a timeline essentially that goes from zero to one to two to three to four across the room.
Or try this if you're in your car listening to this tape. You've got a dashboard in front of you.
If you look at the midpoint of that dashboard, call that two billion years.
Call the extreme left hand corner of your dashboard four billion years and call the extreme right hand corner of your dashboard the present and you've got an entire timeline arrayed out in front of you.
So if you can visualize that let me tell you when various things were happening along that timeline.
Four billion years ago that's the extreme left hand side of the dashboard or it's the extreme left hand perhaps side of the room four billion years ago.
That's the origin of life and in a subsequent lecture I'll tell you a little bit more about why that seems to be a reasonable date for the origin of life.
But right now except that that that is the origin of life at four billion years ago and right away bacteria began to diversify.
So when I say bacteria are ancient, I mean their diversification began around four billion years ago.
