Then they would need to take every single fractal surface of everything on Earth down into the depths of the soil where there are all these little cracks and crevices and passageways,
every single surface in and out of every organism on Earth, every animal, every plant.
And by the way, that's the logic behind my saying that they fire out number every single other organism on Earth, because they cover every single other organism on Earth.
Take all of those numbers together, and they came up with this amazing number of 5 times 10 to the 30th power.
By the way, there is another enormous amount of bacteria apparently circulating the Earth at all times in the atmosphere as tiny, tiny particulates, along with all the other particulates up there.
I don't count those, and they did not count those into this calculation of 5 times 10 to the 30th, because it's not entirely clear whether those bacteria are doing anything active.
They may be in a dormant state and may become active if they drop down onto Earth and get into a situation where there's something that they can do.
So there's another dormant, huge population circulating the Earth at any time.
This is a good time for me to say most of them aren't pathogens.
5 times 10 to the 30th, the vast majority are not pathogens.
And again, there'll be a lecture entirely about that to really reinforce that particular point.
So that was generality number one, most numerous on Earth.
Generality number two, they are the most diverse of all organisms on Earth.
And you could do this exercise yourself, either think it in your head or actually literally do it.
What I do when I'm talking in front of a class is I stretch my arms up over my head and then to either side as though we're doing a great big stretching exercise.
And I say, imagine this to be the family tree of all organisms with my arms and fingers representing all of the branches of all of the organisms that live on Earth.
And when I say all, I mean all of the animals, all of the plants, all of the fungi, all of the protists or protozoans, all of the bacteria.
Imagine all of the organisms represented that way.
The vast majority of that diversity is bacteria.
And if you were to look for the fungi and the animals and the plants and the protozoans or protists, the other groups of organisms,
they would be essentially off on their own branch.
Oh, stick it off to the right side.
It doesn't really matter where it is, but if you're trying to envision it, shoot your right arm out to the side and imagine that to be the branch that comprises all the rest of the organisms that are not bacterial.
