It isn't till about two and a half billion years ago.
So that's a little bit to the left of the midpoint of your timeline about two and a half billion years ago.
That more complicated cells began to evolve the kind of complicated cells that are our cells in the plant cells and fungi cells and in protozoan cells.
But it isn't till about one billion years ago.
Now we're way over on the right hand side of the timeline.
We're over to the right hand side of the room or the right hand side of your dashboard.
It isn't till one billion years ago that multicellular organisms began to evolve.
And if we want to put ourselves humans on this timeline, well, we're essentially not on this timeline.
This is a billion year timeline in every billion year increment are a thousand millions and humans as a species started evolving about a million years ago.
Therefore, if you pressed your hand flat up against the wall or flat up against the glass next to your dashboard, that might represent that tiny, tiny space might represent the amount of time that we humans have been evolving.
Rest of the organisms, the various animals and plants started evolving about one to a half billion years ago.
So again, way over on the right hand side of that timeline.
So that was generality number three bacteria are the most ancient of all organisms on earth.
But there is something else about them that makes them, I think, especially intriguing.
And that is, you might be tempted to think of them as being a scaled down version of all the other organisms, almost as though you could put organisms on a continuum from enormous to large to medium size to small to tiny.
And see it all as an almost unbroken spectrum or continuum of sizes.
And actually that doesn't work with bacteria for some reasons that I think are actually quite profound and are helpful in our understanding of bacteria in general.
And so I will continue that in the second lecture and begin with that point, which will be also a continuation of these broad generalizations about bacteria.
This ends lecture one.
