They lacked morphology, which is obvious.
And they were not as interesting as other things that I might see under the microscope.
Some classic things that you know from introductory biology classes, perhaps, paramecium scarring around under the microscope or a mebe and other things that are really on a larger scale, nonetheless microscopic.
So up to that point, up till 1980, in this field trip that I got to take, I was not especially enamored of bacteria.
And I certainly did not see them as being especially accessible.
There on that field trip, I saw field microbiologists, specialists in all different aspects of looking for bacteria out in the field, out in the wild, picking up bits of scum and slime and flocks and sniffing them and feeling the textures of them and examining the colors of them.
In some cases, even taking little tastes, there was absolutely no danger of pathogens out there.
Some of these field microbiologists were European and accustomed to doing a bit of tasting in their field studies on some circumstances.
And at that point, I had this vision of a field guide to bacteria.
Now, I was a graduate student amongst other graduate students.
I had no thought that I would be writing a field guide to bacteria or that I would ever become involved with this sort of topic as I am now.
At that point, as a graduate student, I whispered to one of my fellow graduate students, one of these people should write a field guide to the bacteria because I could see it as being possible.
They were picking up bits of scum and slime and sniffing them and tasting them and examining the colors and saying, I know what group of bacteria this is and I know what the relationships of these bacteria are to the other bacteria in this environment.
By the way, Baja, California, Mexico, the particular place that we were in was almost entirely bacterial.
The area we were in was a very deserty, salty area where larger organisms do not thrive, especially in the midst of the highest salt area.
And it was a real microbial paradise.
And so we were standing out in the middle of this in the blazing hot sun surrounded by bacteria, none of them pathogens, absolutely none of them pathogens.
I never thought about that, essentially identifying them in the field macroscopically without the use of microscopes.
Well, years later, got my PhD, got a job, got a family and found myself with some time to do some writing and ended up writing a field guide to bacteria.
And it came out of essentially notes from experts in the field, experts who have spent their lives trying to identify bacteria in the field.
And all I did was compile those together, essentially from notes and thus came the field guide to bacteria.
So that's how I come to be with this particular point of view about this.
But also with a real understanding of the challenges of this whole field, that I'm not simply giving a lecture on how to go and identify birds or how to look at flowers.
