What happens, for example, when a leaf falls to the forest floor or when a bird dies and begins to decay on the forest floor?
That whole topic called decomposition, and they will be given partial credit for their role in that.
Certainly fungi are important and all sorts of detritus feeders are important in decomposition.
But that will be it.
Those will be the mentions in the ecology textbook. So where are the bacteria?
So I have something to prove here, I think, in these lectures.
I need to show you that bacteria are accessible.
They are the unseen majority of organisms on Earth, yet they are recognizable if you know what to recognize, if you can decipher them in the environment.
So those are the challenges ahead for me as the lecturer for this course.
And to summarize my goals, I want to add a bacterial dimension to your nature studies.
I want to show them off, actually.
I want to not tell you about all possible bacteria.
There are probably millions of species.
I have to be selective here in a lecture series of just 14.
So I want to show off some of the most versatile and interesting bacteria that have stories to them and that are at the same time ones that you might be able to see yourself if you were looking for them.
And I want to place the pathogens in context again.
I also want to say something about my own background in this and how I came to be interested in the topic of bacteria, particularly from this point of view of seeing them as a major aspect of nature studies and something that is more accessible than is obvious at first.
Back in 1980, when I was a graduate student in biology, I had the privilege to be on a field trip to Baja, California, Mexico with a group of some of the best field microbiologists in the world.
It was part of a field microbiology course.
And up to that point, I was respectful of bacteria.
I certainly encountered bacteria in my PhD studies and in my master's degree studies and even before that and some work that I did as an undergraduate in college.
I was not especially interested in them.
They seemed tiny, which is obvious.
