And that also has an effect on our appreciation for biodiversity as a whole.
I don't think we have the full appreciation that we could ever have of what's going on in the aquatic part of the world, which is most of the world.
Bacteria, by the way, are entirely aquatic.
I want to add bacteria to your nature studies, and I realize it's a challenge for me as well as you.
I'm a great appreciator of birds, of flowers, of mammals, of trees, of insects.
I have field guides for all of those.
And what I want to do is to make the bacterial world seem maybe not as accessible as those things, but something approaching as accessible as those larger organisms that we tend to appreciate.
I want to say that the microbial world is not optional for understanding and appreciating biodiversity.
If we want to understand what the biodiversity of Earth is all about, we have to include the bacteria.
Yet, I challenge you to take an ecology textbook, maybe of the sort that you used in college or maybe one that you can find in a library.
Nice, thick ecology textbook of the sort that an ecology course is taught from.
Look up whatever keywords pertaining to bacteria or microorganisms or microbes that you want in the index, and find most likely in that entire book there are maybe only three or four mentions of bacteria or microbes or microorganisms.
And that ecology textbook purports to be about all of the ecosystem, presumably the biodiversity of Earth and all of the interactions of the various organisms.
Where are the bacteria in that?
Notice if you do this, if you actually take a book and take a look at the index, notice how the bacteria are mentioned.
There will be a couple of pages on the methanogens.
Those are bacteria that produce methane.
So that's important. Where is the methane on Earth coming from?
It's only coming from bacteria.
So bacteria have to be given credit for that, and therefore you find them in an ecology textbook in the index.
You will also find bacteria in the context of something called fixing nitrogen.
And I will go into much more detail about what that means in subsequent lectures, but only bacteria can do this thing called fixing nitrogen, and therefore they get credit for that in the ecology textbook.
And they will also be part of a chapter on decomposition.
