It's part of the training of someone who is going to be a PhD in field microbiology,
but not necessarily what they're going to officially write down.
I don't know quite why that is, but a lot of what I've tried to collect together about
this topic and to present really is being passed down in that particular way.
And therefore, I think bacteria continue to have that inaccessible feel to them, because
if you read about them, they continue to seem tiny and featureless and not necessarily
something that you could simply walk out into the environment and take a look at.
Now, in the next couple of lectures, I want to turn to the history of microbiology.
I want to turn to the deep history of microbiology at first, all the way back to the 17th century,
and then on into the 19th century and the early 20th century to really set the scene for how
our understanding of bacteria has come about.
And this might be a good point also for me to say something about microorganisms versus bacteria.
When people first began to use microscopes, they were looking at microorganisms and not making
any particular distinction between one or another group.
It was all amazing.
It was all tiny and it all required microscopes.
And microorganism continues to be a good general way to talk about things that are tiny,
things that we see under the microscope that can be shortened to microbes also.
And I sometimes use those interchangeably, microbes or microorganisms.
The more that was understood about microorganisms and microbes, the more it was realized that there
was different types of them.
So think of bacteria and think of archaea.
And now I'm using bacteria and archaea separately as those two sort of parallel universe groups
of tiny organisms.
Think of bacteria and archaea as types of microorganisms or types of microbes, but also
think of certain tiny fungi and protozoans or protists as also other types of microorganisms.
So there's a huge world of microorganisms and we're only really touching on one particular
aspect of that, the world of the bacteria and the world of the archaea.
But the early microscopists, and I'm going to begin with Anton Van de Winhoek in the next
lecture, we're looking at microorganisms.
They did not make serious differentiations between bacteria and between the others that
are actually a little larger than the bacteria.
I will try to make that clear in particular places in these lectures coming up, especially
where it's important and where I want to distinguish the microbial world in that way.
This ends lecture two.
If you borrow this course from a public library and would like your own copy of the course
guide for future reference, call Recorded Books at 1-800-636-3399 and we'll send you a free
copy.
A shipping charge will apply.
