Let me remind you or tell you what that first experience is typically like.
You have a microscope.
You put a slide with bacteria presumably on it, although you cannot see those bacteria
and you set that slide under a microscope and you put the lowest power lens on it.
You see nothing.
You merely try to focus as best you can on some debris.
Then you put your next most powerful lens in place.
Again, you see nothing.
And then you put your next most powerful lens in place and at this point you're probably
magnifying things 400 times.
You probably see nothing.
You focus a little bit.
If you're in a classroom, your professor comes over and looks in.
You say, is that it?
Piece of debris.
No, that's not it.
Your professor focuses a little bit for you and at 400x, you see tiny, tiny dots and dashes.
Maybe if the lighting is just so and if the focus has been done just so and it's disappointing.
That's your first view of bacteria.
Perhaps you go to the next higher lens after that, which will magnify things a thousand
times and they're still disappointing.
They're still tiny dots and dashes and in fact, they're like little bits of punctuation.
You could take the top register of keys on your keyboard, which are mostly your punctuation
marks and you could put little squiggles and dashes of various sorts and use the comma in
the period to make some more punctuation and you'd end up with the full range of morphologies
of bacterial shapes.
There's not much to look at.
So they're not about what they look like.
They are about what they do.
And that's one of the reasons for the drop in the continuum, the drop off the cliff
into a completely different world.
It's a world of doing and not a world of morphology.
So it means that we have to understand bacteria from the point of view of what they're doing.
Now this next generality about them relates to that.
Here's the generality that probably does not need to be said or at least it will sound
as though it doesn't need to be said.
Bacteria are tiny.
Do I need to say that?
Yes, because tininess has its own profound connotations that I think we can only imagine
