about what they look like.
So we're usually, if we're using an ordinary field guide to bacteria, or if we're doing
ordinary nature studies of things that have morphologies and have various activities that
we can identify, we're using our sense of sight quite a bit.
In the case of bacteria, I like to bring out all five of my senses.
I like to say I also want to smell what's going on in an environment.
There are plenty of environments in which there are telltale smells of bacteria.
I'm going to try to give you some examples of those in subsequent lectures.
Touch.
I'm not afraid to touch things.
I'm going to try to convince you later that the vast majority of bacteria are not pathogens
and that if you're doing nature studies under normal circumstances, there is absolutely
nothing wrong with touching a bit of slime or scum or flock, and there can be a lot of
information in doing that.
There are circumstances in which even taste could come into play.
There are bacteria that are very much involved with making the great fermented cuisines of
the world, and certainly you could go to a delicatessen or to a place that's making
food in traditional manners and do some tasting and actually get field marks of bacteria that way.
And even sense of hearing can be employed in the sense that many, many bacterial activities
result in making bubbles, sort of an effervescent sound, and I'll try to give you some examples
of that as well.
And finally, I want to say something about these field marks in general, the sort of
field marks that I'm going to try to put into subsequent lectures, the kind of field marks
that I hope will make you recognize bacteria as being surprisingly accessible.
I want to say that the ideas for these field marks are for the most part, from what I could
see from my research, not necessarily written down clearly in any particular places.
I gathered them together and put them together into a field guide to bacteria, but they were
really passed down in a sort of medieval guild style that is typical of academia, especially
academia when folks are getting their higher degrees.
Think about how medieval the gowns are that we put on at graduation, strange medieval hats,
the strange medieval gowns, the diplomas rolled up, sometimes written partly or entirely
in Latin.
There's a whole kind of medieval tradition there.
And if you've ever gotten a master's degree or PhD or some other advanced degree, you
know also that you train under someone almost in a master-to-apprenticeship kind of relationship.
And one of the things that I've noticed over the years is that when I have learned something
about field identifications of bacteria, and when I see other people learning things about
field identifications of bacteria, they tend to be passed down almost as though they were
guild secrets, medieval guild secrets, so that it's a word-of-mouth thing.
