And I will tell you that the terminology for these two new groups is challenging, continues
to be challenging.
There have been a number of other ways of referring to them that have been tried out
and essentially dropped for a little while.
The bacteria were going to be called the U-bacteria, that's E-U, U-bacteria, and the archaea were
going to be called the archaebacteria, and that seems to have not been favored recently.
Right now it's the bacteria in the archaea.
We don't really have at this point a good unifying name that is accepted by microbiologists
everywhere for what we would call the bacteria plus the archaea together, these two enormous
groups that used to be the bacteria.
And so I am going to not deal with that very much in these lectures, except as needed.
I am going to continue to use bacteria in the older way, in the older sense, to encompass
these two new enormous groups, the bacteria and the archaea.
And every now and then I will say I am specifically talking about the archaea.
Now who are these archaea?
Why are they so different?
Why are we stumbling over the terminology?
Why are we in such transition over the terminology for them?
The archaea are also tiny, single-celled organisms, very, very bacteria-like, also lacking in much
of any morphology at all.
Also you could represent these with tiny punctuation marks if you wanted to represent them, also
very intimate with the environment, also rapidly dividing, and so of course they were lumped
together with the bacteria.
It's only their DNA sequences that help people to realize that they were really a very different
group.
Their DNA sequences are really quite different.
So a way to think about this, it's four billion years ago two enormous groups of tiny, featureless
organisms began to diverge separately.
And the archaea were almost in a sort of parallel universe with the bacteria.
So while the bacteria were evolving, all of their various fascinating things that they
do with the environment, the archaea were also evolving their own versions of all of
those intimate activities with the environment.
So I think of it as a sort of parallel universe.
They have many bacteria-like properties, the archaea do, but I think some of that is partly
because we human observers are looking for that sort of thing.
And we say, okay, there they are, tiny, featureless, they're bacteria-like.
Based on their DNA and based on some of the things that they do in the environment, they
really are a strikingly different group.
So with that, I'm going to continue to misuse the word bacteria through most of these lectures
