you that in fact users of field guides to birds will do this as well.
And there is an acronym that ornithologists have used for years in which they have borrowed
from the United States military that I'm going to evoke here and that is JIS, J-I-Z-Z, and
it comes from a military acronym.
Actually, the acronym itself is G-I-S-S, but it's been converted for pronounceability
through J-I-Z-Z, JIS, and as used by ornithologists, it refers to the total of all of the characteristics
of a bird that can be seen briefly, perhaps on the fly, along with its particular habitat,
all put together as one sort of total holistic observation of that bird that allows you to
make the field identification.
Now, what was the U.S. military doing with this particular acronym?
It stands for General Impression of Shape and Size, G-I-S-S, General Impression of Shape
and Size, and it was used by plane spotters in World War II who were scanning the horizon,
trying to decide in a split second whether an incoming aircraft was an enemy aircraft
or one of our aircrafts, presumably, and they were doing it on the basis of whatever sound
they could hear, whatever color they could glimpse, even from far away, whatever shape
they could see, and they were getting a general impression of it, thus general impression
of shape and size, converted to J-I-Z-Z for JIS.
That's what ornithologists are doing.
If you've ever been on a field trip with an ornithologist or a good bird watcher, you
know that at no particular point do you have the bird in your hand, unless you're misnetting,
but you're typically not netting birds and holding them in your hand.
What you're typically doing is seeing a little fleeting glimpse, a flash of white, a particular
way of flying, a particular way of getting into the underbrush, and in that complete picture,
maybe a little squawk or a little sound, and that complete picture tells you what bird
it is that you're seeing.
That's the jizz of a bird.
For example, if you saw a little flash of pink in a hedgerow at the edge of a field,
and it was New England, and it was in the springtime, you might say, well, there's a
male house bench.
What you would not do is run through a list of all the pink birds in the world one at
a time.
Is it a flamingo?
No.
Is it a spoonbill?
No.
You would not do that exercise.
You would immediately zero in on male house bench because you're not just looking at the
field marks, you're also looking at the habitat.
I will contend that even in a regular field guide, field marks and habitat are mixed together
