in a way that doesn't typically get acknowledged, and that it matters very, very much where
you are seeing the particular organism in the time of year that you're seeing the particular
organism for you to narrow down the choice very precisely.
Therefore, I'm not going to make much of a difference in these rules of thumb for field
identifications of bacteria between field mark and habitat, especially since the subjects
are so intimate with their environment.
An environment is so important, and habitat is so important to who they are and what they're
doing, and it's what they're doing that will allow us to identify them.
That said, here are some of the rules of thumb.
Look to extremes when you're looking for bacteria, and that's easier than you might think because
I mean extremes from our point of view, and we have a very limited range of habitat on
earth.
For example, we can't go into the ocean, we're very superficial in our understanding of water.
We understand the shoreline, we understand the surface waters, but we understand very,
very little deep in the ocean, so pretty much anything aquatic is beyond our typical point
of view.
Pretty much anything deep into the surface of the earth, and we don't have to go too
deep to be deep before we're beyond what we can really easily understand, digging down
into the soil, for example, and we're very, very quickly away from our typical point of
view and into an extreme environment.
Or even the black, smelly mud in the depths of a koi pond in the backyard, or in the depths
of the compost heap that you might have in your backyard could be considered extreme from
our particular point of view.
So it doesn't take much to go to an extreme environment, they're surrounding us all the
time.
Remember how superficial our own environment is on earth.
That would be my first recommendation for looking for bacteria.
Look for places where larger organisms like ourselves cannot easily live.
So I'm going to elaborate in later lectures on what you might be able to find in your
compost heap, or what you might be able to find deep in your koi pond, or a goldfish
pond, or what you might be able to find if you look in other extreme environments.
And that will be one of the major features of some of the suggestions that I make in
subsequent lectures.
Second rule of thumb for looking for bacteria in the field is to see other organisms as
surfaces for bacteria, or as containers for bacteria, essentially in some case, fermentation
vats for bacteria, and I'll also be giving you some suggestions about that as well in
subsequent lectures about necessarily looking past other organisms in order to see the bacteria.
And I'm also going to recommend as a third rule of thumb is to remember to use all of
your senses, especially since bacteria are all about what they do and not necessarily
