because we ourselves are nowhere near in the position of being able to directly experience
what it must be like to be as tiny and therefore as intimate with the environment as bacteria
are because that's one of the major consequences of being tiny.
Bacteria are in a very intimate relationship with their surrounding environment so that
any little nuance, any little change of acidity or alkalinity or temperature or salt or moisture
levels, any input or output from a bacterium that's right next to them because after all
their environment is not just the physical environment but it's also the other bacteria
that are in the environment.
They have an immediate and nuanced response to that.
They're very quick to respond to any changes whatsoever and that has great connotations
for their relationships with the physical world.
It's all about those responses and it's all about putting chemicals out into the environment,
taking chemicals in and being responsive to whatever is going on in the environment mostly
in respect to chemicals.
In fact, sensing chemicals is their major sense.
It's their primary sense.
It's very little of any other kind of sense that is in the bacterial world.
We remember we're anomalously large.
We anomalously large organisms can only imagine what that might be like and in fact try this
little thought experiment.
If there were some sugar sprinkled out on the table top and if you accidentally rested
your hand in it, nothing would happen.
Absolutely nothing.
You might feel a little bit of granularity but none of your skin cells would respond
in any way whatsoever to that being sugar.
They wouldn't taste it as sugar.
They wouldn't smell it as sugar.
They would not immediately leap into action and begin to digest that sugar for you and
it would be bizarre to think that they would.
We are insulated from the environment for the most part compared to bacteria and the
only way that I can tell if that sugar or sweet is to take it into my mouth and to have
very specialized cells of mine, taste them as sweet, taste the sugar granules as sweet
and the only way I can begin to digest it is to take that sugar in and put it into contact
with very specific digestive cells.
It's just one of the things about being multicellular and huge as we are and it's a very, very different
thing.
The entire bacterium has these responses, hair trigger responses to whatever is going
on in the environment.
Another thing about being tiny is you can reproduce much, much more quickly.
