Unseen Diversity, Lecture 2 Hidden in Plain Sight, Part 1
So we left the previous lecture with me beginning to explain what I mean when I say that we
really cannot consider bacteria to be on a smooth continuum or a smooth spectrum of
very large organisms, to large organisms, to medium size organisms, to small, to the
tiny, to the very tiniest which are the bacteria, that it's not actually a simple continuum.
Bacteria are really quite, quite different.
They are not just tiny versions of large organisms or perhaps the other way around.
We are not necessarily large versions of those tiny organisms.
I think of the continuum or the spectrum as a broken continuum.
It's almost as if we're sliding along the continuum from large organisms to medium
organisms to small sized organisms and suddenly we fall off the edge of a cliff and we're
into a completely different world of the truly tiny organisms.
We're really doing things very, very differently.
Here's another analogy that I think of mainly because I love dollhouses and I have dollhouses
at home and I sometimes think of the continuum of tiny things that you have in a dollhouse.
In fact, you could even have a dollhouse within a dollhouse, one of the dollhouse.
Children might have a dollhouse.
So imagine all of the things in a regular house and then have them scale down to the
size of what you might find in a doll's house and then have a tiny doll's house within that
doll's house which in turn has tiny furniture scaling down on a relatively smooth continuum
and what I'm saying is you can't do that with bacteria.
I say that you're scaling down and there comes to be a point where the continuum breaks
in your own different world, a world where things are not simply smaller versions of
whatever came higher in the continuum.
That makes bacteria very intriguing and it makes them a challenge, one of the many things
that makes them a challenge, an interesting challenge I think for naturalists who want
to incorporate them into their nature studies.
In the last lecture, we were in the middle of a series of broad generalizations about
bacteria.
I had told you that they were the most numerous, I had said that they were the most diverse
of all organisms on earth and that they were the most ancient of all organisms on earth.
Continuing with those broad generalities, bacteria are also the most featureless of
all organisms on earth, especially from our human point of view when we are so oriented
to other organisms that have morphologies and colors and activities.
Bacteria are featureless and I will even go so far as to say they are disappointing.
Not necessarily disappointing to me now, but they certainly were disappointing to me the
first time I ever saw them as a future biologist, as an undergraduate in college.
If you have ever tried to see bacteria under the microscope, you might know exactly what
I mean.
