in a colloquial way.
I'm going to use it as sort of the old umbrella term for the two of them.
And again, I'm just going to use the word archaea in particular circumstances where
I think it could really help our understanding of things, especially when I talk about some
of the really different things that the archaea are up to.
In order to make the bacteria, and now I'm using it in that over umbrella generic way,
in order to bring the bacteria into your nature studies, into anyone's nature studies, I need
to make them seem accessible in spite of their invisibility and in spite of their very, very
different existence, so different that they're not even on a continuum with us, in spite
of their aquatic existence, which is a challenge for us as terrestrial organisms.
Here's how I think about it.
They are hidden in plain sight, but they can be deciphered.
And there are plenty of field microbiologists who can lead you to their favorite bacteria
in the field.
If you say, I'm looking for a sulfate reducer, they can say, aha, I know exactly where to
find a sulfate reducing bacterium, and I know exactly what it's going to smell like and what
it's going to look like, and I can lead you straight to that organism, and I can even pick
up a little slimy bit of it and show it to you.
So there are a huge collection of observations from nature by individual field microbiologists,
and all we need to do is incorporate those.
I call them rules of thumb for identifying bacteria in the field.
So what I want to do right now is tell you some of my favorite rules of thumb for identifying
bacteria in the field, and I want to begin that with a disclaimer.
These are not rules of thumb that I have come up with by myself.
These are coming from all of the specialists all over the world who have as their specialty
field microbiology and who can lead you to their favorite bacteria in the field, who can
pick up a bit of slime or scum and examine the color of it and examine the smell of it
and the texture of it and tell you what bacteria they're holding or what is the majority of
bacteria in that particular little bit of scum or slime or flock.
So this is really the rules of thumb for field identification of bacteria gleaned from specialists
from all different subspecialties of field microbiology, all put together and made to
seem like rules of thumb.
And one other disclaimer that I want to make about this is that I am going to mix together
the concept of field marks and the concept of habitats in a way that might at first seem
a little disconcerting, especially if you are a field guide user.
And I'm going to take birds as an example of the typical field guide use.
It's going to seem a little disconcerting at first, if you're a field guide user, that I'm
not going to make a great difference between the habitat of a bacterium and a particular
field mark, but I'm going to try to convince you otherwise and I'm going to try to convince
