There's just less material to make a copy of.
It's maybe one way to think about it and bacteria indeed do reproduce extremely quickly so
that their whole timeline is sped up in a way that again is hard for us to understand.
There are some bacteria that can make copies of themselves in an hour or less and others
along the order of hours to days.
If a bacterium is not reproducing quickly, it's probably because it is dormant.
There's not enough nutrients around, in which case it's waiting for nutrients to show up,
in which case it will start reproducing again fairly quickly.
We are anomalously slow in our reproduction.
We are not sensitive at all in the way that bacteria are to our immediate environment and
therefore we need to understand these things about bacteria in order to really get a feeling
for who they are and in to start to recognize them in the environment.
By the way, I keep calling ourselves anomalously large.
We are even anomalously large in respect to our fellow animals.
Try this little exercise.
Most animals are not vertebrates like ourselves, they are invertebrates.
The vast majority of animals are invertebrates.
By the way, probably marine invertebrates, so invertebrates that are completely beyond
what our usual venue is.
The vast majority of invertebrates are arthropods.
Those are the jointed-legged animals, including the spiders and the crabs and the insects.
Vast majority of the invertebrates are arthropods.
The vast majority of arthropods are insects and most insects are beetles.
Most beetles are tiny.
Most of a major group of organisms, the beetles, are much, much tinier.
They are the ones that are lumbering around in our terrestrial way, in our huge multicellular
way, completely out of touch through most of ourselves with our environment.
We're the ones that are anomalous in this.
So again, the real challenge is to overcome that, at least mentally, and to try to see
the world in a bacterial way.
Right now, I would like to make a point about the way I've been using the word bacteria
as a term.
I have been using it in a colloquial way, although it might not have been obvious.
One of the interesting recent developments of the last 20 years, especially since so
much DNA sequence is now available for us to sort out organisms of all sorts, one of
the really exciting developments in the last 20 years is that all of the organisms that
we used to consider to be just the bacteria are now divided into two enormous groups.
So one of these groups continues to be called the bacteria, and the other group gets called
the archaea, A-R-C-H-A-E-A, the archaea.
