Dutch and so he was a guest at one of the parties and got to have demonstrations by
Van Lewenhoek. Wonderful place to read about and actually
read from some of the letters of Van Lewenhoek is Clifford Doebell's Anthony Van Lewenhoek
and his Little Animals. Wonderful book and influential for many generations of microbiologists.
Some people have wondered, and I've wondered too, was he as much of a heretic from the
point of view of the Catholic Church at the time in 17th century Europe as Galileo was?
I mean after all Galileo was getting into some serious trouble from pointing out that
some of the planets had their own moons around them and that the earth might not be at the
center of the universe, but rather we might be simply going around one of many stars and
that was considered to be a serious charge that the Catholic Church could not overlook
and consequently Galileo get into enormous trouble over that.
How about Van Lewenhoek's observations, which point to a very different world that is very
different from a human centered world. As he said, there were more bacteria between his
teeth or more living animals as he said, between his teeth than there were in the entire population
of the United Netherlands. Well I've thought about this a little bit and so have plenty
of historians of science. One of the things that was going on was he was in the Netherlands
and the Netherlands were one of the most progressive, was one of the most progressive parts of
Europe at that time and in fact some other fairly controversial philosophers found the
Netherlands to be a good place to live for parts of their lives. Rene Descartes spent
quite a bit of time in the Netherlands in the 17th century. Baruch Spinoza spent quite
a bit of time in the Netherlands in the 17th century, not necessarily their whole lives
but some of their writing was done there. It was a good place to be if you had some radical
points of view on things. The other thing is that perhaps Van Lewenhoek's observations
really were flying under the radar of the Catholic Church at that time. Catholic Church
already had a great deal to say about celestial bodies. Catholic Church didn't have much to
say at all about whether there were any much tinier worlds on a microscopic level so I
think there could also have been that aspect too, that it wasn't recognized as being as
