One idea is that Van Lewenhoek was the subject for those two paintings, the astronomer and
the geographer. Vermeer really didn't do any other portraits of men, and he really didn't
do any other portraits that are known anyway of men identified in particular professions.
Second tantalizing bit of evidence is that one of the many side jobs that Van Lewenhoek
had to support himself presumably was that he had some municipal positions that included
helping people with their estates, helping families with the estates of their deceased.
And when Vermeer died, Van Lewenhoek was one of the people that helped to catalog Vermeer's
estate. And they actually have the list of what was left of Vermeer's estate. He was
bankrupt at that time, and Van Lewenhoek is certainly connected in that way. So it's very
tantalizing. Art historians hypothesize that Vermeer was using something called a camera
obscura, which is a set of lenses that produce the kind of effect that Vermeer is famous for
in his 35 existing paintings. And that is this amazing depth of field such that things
in the foreground and things in the background have this almost sparkly, perfectly in focus
quality, almost as though something special had gone on in the way that he set up his
scenes. And that special thing art historians think may have been this lens system called
the camera obscura. I wish there was more time for me to develop why they think so and
what exactly the camera obscura is, but that would be too much of a digression for this
course. I do suggest though that it's a very interesting area to look into and one that
there's quite a bit of information about and it will make you relook at Vermeer's paintings
in a different way. So those are tantalizing connections between these two contemporaries
Vermeer and Van Luenhoek. And it would be lovely if some letter or other document was
unearthed at some point that would connect them even more firmly. Finally, for this lecture
on very early microscopy, not only were artists and essayists influenced by the wonderful
developments of these new worlds being seen under the microscope, but also poets. And although
Alexander Pope is not an exact contemporary, he comes later in the 18th century, early 18th
century. Nonetheless, he is one of many poets who was, I think, strongly influenced by all
the wonderful developments in science. And I want to recommend to you one of his very
