And he was using a different sort of microscope than Anton Van Lillen Hook. He was looking at something more like what it would be like to look through a telescope backwards, or what you can do with a pair of binoculars.
You could actually turn them around, look through them backwards. It's not terribly satisfying to do that, but you can see that you get a very different sort of image if you look through telescopes or binoculars backwards.
And it's a fairly logical thing that you might say, well, why not try this out as a way to look at tiny things. That's the kind of microscope that Robert Hook was using, this kind that looks more like a modern microscope.
But as I said, lens grinding techniques were such that Robert Hook was not seeing things as tiny as Van Lillen Hook, just because that style of microscope with the lens on either end that's like a telescope turned around
was not able to resolve those kinds of images in the 17th century.
So that's why Robert Hook is famous for seeing things like the eye of a fly, or for fleas in enormous and beautiful detail.
But nonetheless, things that you can see with your naked eye, you can see the eye of a fly with your naked eye, you can see a flea with your naked eye.
So what he was doing was getting wonderful, wonderful detail on those things that are still macroscopic. They're not really microscopic.
They're things that require a magnifying glass, but not necessarily a microscope.
What Van Lillen Hook was doing was orders of magnitude tinier. What he was looking at was orders of magnitude tinier.
He was the first to see all sorts of little micro organisms that we now know as protozoans or protists.
The sort of thing that if you've ever been in an introductory biology class in which microscopy was being done, you may have seen these organisms, little euclina, little paramecium, tiny amoeba,
all sorts of little crustaceans of the sort that you might be able to see as tiny dots with your naked eye, but which are wonderfully resolved under the microscope.
The whole world of micro organisms, he called these the little animals.
He was also the first to see all sorts of cells from animals and plants, and he was the first to see red blood cells, and he was the first to see bacteria.
This is a bit tricky for historians of science who, of course, need evidence for the fact that we're saying that he saw bacteria.
What's our evidence that he saw something as tiny as bacteria?
We have drawings that are, of course, looking like little bits of punctuation, dots and dashes, and squiggles, so there's not much there to go by.
But we also have his elaborate calculations as to how tiny these little dots and dashes were.
I won't go into all the calculations.
I'll just tell you about one particular version of calculation that he did.
He looked at red blood cells extensively.
Red blood cells are about seven micrometers in diameter, and in fact are fairly regular in their size, and for many years were used as a sort of standard for sizing things under the microscope.
Bacteria tend to be about one micrometer, so about the seventh of the length of a red blood cell.
Some of Van Luen Hook's calculations are in respect to the size of a typical red blood cell.
He will talk about things that are bacteria in their shape, granted limited shapes, bacteria like in their activities, and in the right order of magnitude.
That is about a seventh the size of red blood cells.
