a tube with a lens at either end and we put the object under the microscope and peer down the tube at it. Rather, he was using tiny glass beads that were pressed between two pieces of metal so that you could peer in one side of the glass bead
and look at a specimen that was close to the glass bead on the other side. You were essentially looking through a tiny glass bead like a tiny, tiny droplet of water.
And at the time, that was the best type of lens that could be used for looking at tiny things.
Lens grinding as an art form had not developed to the point where a perfectly ground lens of the conventional type that you think of when you think of a lens would magnify the sorts of things that Anton Van Luenhoek was magnifying.
At that time, you could make a perfect or nearly perfect lens if you could blow a perfect or nearly perfect glass sphere, tiny glass sphere. And that was the type of microscope that he was using, a little glass bead.
A little digression here. I occasionally teach a course on 17th century microscopy and I have my students make glass bead lens microscopes because as I said, it's nothing more than a tiny glass bead clamp between two pieces of metal.
They can be made to look very fancy, but that's all they are and you hold them in your hand. And it's relatively easy to blow a tiny glass bead from the right sort of glass and using a nice hot flame of the sort that you can usually find in a laboratory.
So the blowing of a tiny glass bead lens, as I said, is relatively easy. Getting one to be perfect can be done with practice and I keep using the word perfect, but I mean nearly perfect or getting one that's good enough to look through and actually see microorganisms can be done with some practice.
And one of the things that's amazing about what Anton Van Leeuwenhoek did is he not only become became very, very good at blowing tiny glass bead lenses, but he also made hundreds and hundreds of microscopes because to his mind, the way to go about this was to have dedicated microscopes for each specimen.
So if he was looking at the leg of a flea, he would build a tiny microscope just for that particular specimen and have the leg of the flea permanently mounted on that microscope.
For some of his watery specimens, he was obviously not making permanent mounts for those, but nonetheless he had hundreds of microscopes that he was using, not just one, which is contrary to what people usually think of when they're doing microscopy.
Bacteria were not the only thing that Van Leeuwenhoek looked at under his many microscopes, many of them dedicated for particular specimens. Bacteria will be the focus here, but let me just digress for a moment on some of the other things that he observed so that you can get an idea of just what a passion this was for him.
First of all, since microscopy was so new, Van Leeuwenhoek had no way of knowing what he could and couldn't see. Therefore, he looked at everything. He wanted to know why foods tasted the way they did.
For example, why pepper tasted sharp and biting in the mouth, and he wanted to know whether it had sharp biting edges to it. So he looked at many, many food items looking for evidence of the way they tasted, of course finding nothing because that's not how it works, but he didn't know that and he looked.
He looked at all different parts of his body and other peoples, not only his own red blood cells, so obviously he was taking some blood from himself, but also his own sperm in the interest of finding out what was going on with that.
He looked at all different parts of other animals and plants. He even looked at explosions under the microscope, and remember he had to look very, very closely through these tiny glass beads and the specimen on the other side had to be very, very close.
So when he set off one small explosion under the microscope in an effort to try to understand how explosions work, he burned his eyebrows.
So he was very inventive in his use of the microscope, doing things far beyond what we do today with microscopy.
I'll also say that he was tireless in his observations. It can be tiring to look under an ordinary microscope nowadays. People can do it for hours, but sometimes their eyes get tired.
I am very impressed when I read some of the accounts of Van Lillen Hook, knowing that he must have looked hours and hours to see what he did.
One example is the case of his own sperm. He apparently looked at sperm morphology for so many hours that he even saw mutant sperm, sperm with two tails, sperm with two heads, and other sorts,
which you should be able to find in a sperm sample, but only after hours. The vast majority are going to be normal looking sperm.
So if I were to have a class examine that particular specimen, I probably couldn't get a class to look for as many hours as are needed to see mutant sperm.
And that's just one example of the kind of tireless observation that Van Lillen Hook would make.
Meanwhile, and this is a little digression away from Van Lillen Hook, but then I'll bring it back to Van Lillen Hook, was Robert Hook, who is also a 17th century scientist or developer of science that was also using microscopes
and who also gets a great deal of credit for being an early and extensive user of microscopes, and in fact is the author of Micrographia and was one of the early members of the first future scientific society, the Royal Society of London,
extremely influential polymath who was not just doing microscopy, but was doing all sorts of what was going to be later called as science at that time it was called natural philosophy.
