their teeth versus ones who cleaned their teeth on some kind of regular basis.
In those days it would have been by brushing with cloth or wiping with cloth and using
toothpicks.
Here's another quote from him.
All the people living in our United Netherlands are not so many as the living animals that
I carry in my own mouth.
True and good observation.
So the total population of the United Netherlands at that time, not as many as the bacteria
that Van Lewenhoek could scrape from between his teeth.
So even though he was just the linen draper, he was becoming well known through his publications
in the Royal Society of London, well enough known that he began to be invited to wealthy,
well-educated people's homes and even became sort of a feature guest because he would bring
along little microscopes with him and would, as one of the entertainments at the party,
scrape from between guests' teeth and would show them things under the microscope.
One of the remarkable things that was noted by a particular essayist that I'll read from
in a couple of minutes is that at first people did not see what Van Lewenhoek saw and then
when they did, they exclaimed and were delighted and were amazed, perhaps even horrified.
It was a transition of perception is the way this was described.
But if you don't know what you're seeing, if you don't have any particular reality in
seeing something, it needs to be pointed out to you for the first time and then suddenly
you see it. There it was before you the entire time.
One of the most famous party guests to ever be at a party with Van Lewenhoek, getting
his teeth scraped for microbes, was Peter the Great of Russia, who was traveling supposedly
incognito but with a huge entourage and he himself was apparently a fairly large stature.
He was traveling all the way from Russia to the Netherlands at that time to learn the
art of shipbuilding and he was a very hands-on czar, so not only was he there with all of
his shipbuilders, but he himself wanted to learn how to do that and also was learning
