Unseen Diversity, Lecture 3, The Discovery of Bacteria, Part 2
This lecture is about 17th century microscopy and the discovery of bacteria by one person, Anton van Luwenhoek, a Dutch microscopist of the 17th century.
And he was not the inventor of microscopes, as is sometimes thought. It's not clear who invented the microscope.
But he was the first extensive user of microscopes and I think most people would say the only extensive user of microscopes in his particular time.
And for years and years after his death, I think he can still continue to be the major extensive user.
There was no one who saw as many different things as well as Anton van Luwenhoek until maybe sometime in the 19th century when microscopy changed in ways that I'll describe a little later.
So we don't know who invented the microscope. We don't know who invented lenses. We do know that they were being used, lenses were being used in many different ways.
Previous to the 17th century, there are portraits of people wearing eyeglasses, for example, dating from the 16th century, wearing eyeglasses that we would recognize today as eyeglasses.
Presumably there was something before that, maybe individual lenses held up to the eye that might enhance vision.
The idea of a lens must have been very early and perhaps obvious in a number of different ways. You can look through a water droplet and see that things are magnified a little bit in different ways.
So perhaps it was just so obvious that there's not one particular inventor, but it's the users of lenses that are maybe more interesting.
So whoever it was that got the first idea of putting lenses together in such a way that things could be magnified, invented the microscope.
But we don't know who that person is. And whoever it was that decided that we would put lenses together in a particular way to see great long distances
was inventing a telescope of some sort. And it's not clear exactly how that line of inventions went as well.
What we do know is that in Delft, Holland, in the 17th century, lived a man, Anton van Luhlenhoek, and that is not the correct Dutch pronunciation of his name.
I'm doing an American pronunciation of his name. I've heard the correct Dutch pronunciation and I'm not going to try to reproduce that.
So I will say Anton van Luhlenhoek. And he was a linen draper in Delft in 17th century.
And that means that he was dealing in linen cloth. And one of the tools of that particular trade was a lens for the purpose of examining the weave of the cloth
and making sure that it was as fine as the weaver had said it was, et cetera, and looking for any sorts of flaws in the weaving.
So this was a man who was accustomed to using lenses in his own trade.
How he became a microscopist is not clear. And part of the reason for that is that he spoke Dutch his entire life.
He was not an educated person in the sense that certain other people were educated.
Some people that he later became associated with who while we don't call them scientists were becoming the developers of what would be known as science.
There was no word science at this particular time, but there was a burgeoning field that was going to become science.
He wasn't educated in the way those people were. He had been an apprentice to a linen draper. That was his education after some other failed apprentices, apprenticeships, by the way.
And so it's not clear how he came to be a microscopist, but it occurred in his middle ages, his middle age, we think, only because that's the first record of any sort of microscopy occurring.
It did not seem to happen when he was a younger man. And the particular type of microscope that he was using was not the one that we usually envision if we're thinking of a microscope,
