controversial as Galileo's observations. But I think it was. And here's a Dutch essayist
who I think also believes that these were really challenging new viewpoints. The Dutch essayist
was a contemporary of Van Lewenhoek. His name is Constantine Huygens. Again, I'm not
doing the correct Dutch pronunciation. The last name is H-U-Y-G-E-N-S. Has written many
wonderful essays about Van Lewenhoek and other developments in science of that time. And
here are some quotes from one of the Huygens essays. He described what was seen under Van
Lewenhoek's microscopes as, quote, a new theater of nature, another world. And here's
another quote from this essayist. It is impossible to call anything literal or a gauge except
by comparison. And finally, another quote, the multiplying of bodies is infinite. And
that is you can get tinier and tinier and tinier, larger and larger and larger. I think that
if the Catholic Church had interpreted those the right way, those would have just been just
as controversial as Galileo's observations were. Of course, it helped enormously if the
Netherlands was not a place where someone like Van Lewenhoek would have been persecuted
for his beliefs and writings. Nonetheless, I think this was really a discovery of a new,
non-human centered world. It was a huge change in our perceptions of nature that was just
beginning at that point. Meanwhile, and here's something really amazing, an exact contemporary
of Van Lewenhoek was living in Delft. He was born in 1632, just as was Van Lewenhoek, and
that is the painter Vermeer. And one of the interesting things about Vermeer and Van Lewenhoek
is that they must have known each other. And historians of science and historians of art
have tried mightily to connect the two of them together to say, here's Vermeer and here's
Van Lewenhoek both born at the exact same time in this little Dutch village of Delft.
It was city like in its proportions, but nonetheless small because we're still in the 1600s. And
they must have known each other, especially since Van Lewenhoek was so well known. And
here is the evidence for that. There are two pieces of evidence as far as I can read about
it. One is that there are a couple of famous paintings or paintings of Vermeer called the
astronomer and the geographer that are a little anomalous compared to the rest of his work,
the rest of his existing work, and there are only about 35 paintings remaining of Vermeer's.
