Now, his work came to the attention of Robert Hook through the Royal Society of London and became published in the first scientific journal ever, the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London.
And notice the word science doesn't appear in that title, and it still does not appear in that title.
That's an extant journal. You can still get that journal today.
Philosophical was the phrase that was being used for what the activities of this journal were about, and the publications in this first scientific journal were as letters.
So Van Luen Hook wrote over the years many, many letters to the Philosophical Transactions and had them published as letters, describing what he saw through the microscope.
Van Luen Hook was Dutch, spoke only Dutch. His letters had to be translated in order to appear in this English journal.
And the members of the Royal Society of London were extremely well educated men, not linen drapers, as was Anton Van Luen Hook, not with just an apprenticeship as education.
And so he was looked at as sort of an interesting anomaly by them. Sometimes they didn't quite believe what he wrote in his letters.
Sometimes they tried to reproduce what he had seen as best they could with their own microscopes, which were apparently not as good as Van Luen Hook's.
Sometimes they were successful, sometimes not. And Van Luen Hook's sightings of bacteria are one particular case in point.
Robert Hook tried to see bacteria in the same way that Van Luen Hook had and was not successful.
In fact, was barely successful seeing just ordinary protozoans and protists, which are larger than bacteria.
One of the things that may explain this is that in addition to building exquisite tiny microscopes, Van Luen Hook also played around with lighting.
And he did it in such a way that he may have invented something called dark field microscopy, although he certainly didn't name it as such.
And I will describe it in this way. You know the phenomenon of having a light beam coming in through a window of a dusty room and being able to see with your naked eye the individual particles of dust in the light beam.
Partly because light is being reflected off each one of those tiny particles of dust, our eyes are very sensitive to light and each little particle of dust is acting almost as though it were its own tiny light source.
I think, or historians of science think that Van Lewenhoek observed this and tried to set
up his lighting in such a way that what he was seeing under the microscope would be reflecting
the light back in such a way that each tiny object was its own light source-like entity.
One of his descriptions of red blood cells described as looking like sparkling white
sand grains against black velvet, which certainly doesn't sound like ordinary red blood cells
under a microscope, but it does sound like dark field microscopy of the sort that gets
used for resolving really tiny things like that.
Now nobody ever was able to quite reproduce Van Lewenhoek's lighting system, and that
may have been part of the problem and the reason that Robert Hoek's fellow Royal Society
members and Robert Hoek himself were not able to completely reproduce these things.
And an interesting thing about Van Lewenhoek is because he had been educated as an apprentice.
