dyes at that time, not just for textiles, but experimenting with dyes for all sorts of things.
And many of those were people interested in making biology more visible under the microscope,
not just bacteria, but other microorganisms, parts of organisms, tissues. There was a great
sort of alternative use of dyes that were being developed in biology labs at this time.
And so when Dr. Hans Christian Graham, who was a Danish physician,
set about to experiment with dyes for his own purposes, he probably didn't know that he was
doing something really extraordinary, accidentally, I think, with the particular dye that he chose
that came to be called Graham stain, in which came to be called the first step for many
identifications of bacteria. So here's what Dr. Hans Christian Graham wanted to do. He wanted to
do something like what Koch was doing. He wanted to show unequivocally that bacteria could be seen
in lung tissue of deceased patients who had died of pneumonia. He wanted to connect bacteria with
pneumonia in lung tissue. And it's difficult to see bacteria against a background of lung tissue.
The cells of animals are bigger than the cells of bacteria. They're about the same color as the
cells of bacteria. It'll be extremely difficult to have a tissue sample and be able to distinguish
the bacteria in it. So he was adding all sorts of dyes. And one of the dyes that he added was
something called crystal violet. It was a synthetic dye that had been developed for the textile
industry. And he went through a particular procedure that I would like to go through
here with you so that you can get a real feel for what happened and what didn't happen.
In a nutshell, some of the bacteria in his lung tissue were able to retain the stain. They were
able to become died. And some did not. And by the way, when he first noticed that he was dismayed
because he wanted all of them to be died. And it wasn't till a little later that he realized
that this was a very interesting thing. Some of his bacteria did take up the dye and hold onto it
and become stain. And some did not. Some were therefore gram positive or positive for this
dying procedure. And some were negative for this dying procedure. What we now call gram positive.
And gram negative because that crystal violet stain is now called gram stain.
Here's what happened. If you were dying cloth at home with a dye, you would first prepare the cloth,
then you would add the dye. Then you might do something to fix the dye in place to make sure
that it attached to the fabric correctly. And then you would wash away all the excess dye. So those
are some typical steps in any dying process. Those are the typical steps that occur in a
microbiology lab when we're dying bacteria. We get the bacteria prepared to be dyed,
then we add the dye itself, then we add some additional chemicals to make sure that the dye
