depending on how you prepare it and how old it is and all different things that make it
an undefined medium, a medium that has really got too much going on with it to really understand
what's going on. And so the next innovation was something called a defined medium that comes
straight from the shelf of the chemistry lab. You go to the chemistry lab and you take a source of
protein, measure it out exactly, put that into your mixture. You take a source of calcium,
measure it out exactly, put it into your mixture. A defined medium is a list of sometimes dozens
of different things that need to go into a complete nutrient mixture, but you know exactly what went
in and in what proportions. So to reiterate that, we've got two kinds of medium. And this is true
to this day. You can go into a microbiology lab and sort it out in this particular dichotomy.
We have defined medium, which is right off the chemistry stock room shelf, a list of ingredients
precisely measured so we know exactly what's there. And then undefined, which is something
like beef broth or something like another mixture that we don't really understand exactly everything
that is in there. The benefit of using a defined medium is then you can, in a very precise way,
remove things one at a time, each time asking the question, okay, can you grow without calcium?
Yes, no. Can you grow without this source of protein? Yes or no. How about if I give you a
slightly different source of protein? Can you still grow? Yes or no. So a great many really
useful yes or no questions could be asked with a defined medium. Okay, now there's one other
component here. So far we've got two components. We've got a brand new surface on which to grow
microorganisms. We have the medium, which could be defined or undefined, that the organisms
are using as they're growing on the surface. And finally, we have another coworker of Coke,
and that is Julius Richard Petrie, inventor of the Petrie dish. Okay, that's the third component
we need. We want this solid defined medium on a Petrie dish. And I think what was brilliant
about Julius Richard Petrie's invention was the idea that you don't need much of this. You do not
need a great big jar of solidified medium to grow bacteria. All you need is a thin layer
in a small dish. And you don't even need to have a tight seal on that dish. You just need to have
an easy to remove lid for many of the bacteria that they were looking at. And there you have
set up in Coke's lab, pretty much everything that took us into 20th century microbiology.
Pretty much all the techniques are right there with one exception that I'll be talking about next.
All of the techniques are there for getting bacteria growing in an isolated manner.
Now, the other thing that happened that also took us into 20th century microscopy that also became a
major part of any microbiology lab was the whole technique of using dyes. Many people were using
