in particular wine, but you could extrapolate this out to fermented foods and to other fermented
beverages such as beer, and he helped to develop a much firmer understanding of the role of micro
organisms in making all sorts of fermented foods and beverages. And here I'm using the word micro
organism as an umbrella term for not just bacteria, but also to include microscopic fungi,
including yeast. So yeast are not bacteria, they are in the group called the fungi, their cells are
bigger, they're related to mushrooms, they're related to other things that we think of as fungi,
but in this whole rubric of the microbial world, they along with bacteria are producing various
fermented foods, and Pester sorted out a great deal of that. The other thing Pester did was to
begin the whole field of immunology with a growing understanding of vaccinations,
and while it's a bit of a digression from this topic of bacteria, Pester was also looking at
viruses or what would later be understood as viruses. Very often in a traditional study of
bacteria, the immune system is a topic in that course. It will be a minor topic in this course,
but I want to acknowledge that there's been a long tradition since bacteria were traditionally
thought of as being primarily pathogens, there's been a long tradition of thinking about them in
relation to how our immune system works with them. So Pester's contribution at this time
was a greater understanding of our immune system reactions to microbes of all kinds,
antiviruses, and a greater understanding of how to use vaccines in that context.
Meanwhile, in a completely different part of Europe, culturally as well as physically,
was a Russian scientist, very interesting person, Sergei Nikolayevich Winogradsky,
and he was developing, along with other Russian microbiologists, a really completely different
take on microbiology, really a strikingly different paradigm, and one that did not come back together
or did not come together at all with Western European microbiology for many years, and to
some extent is still considered to be a really separate way of thinking about about bacteriology.
Let me try this set of dichotomies to differentiate the two.
Whereas Robert Koch and his fellow workers were trying to set up bacteria in solitary, isolated
colonies on Petri dishes. Winogradsky was letting them be all mixed together and nonetheless still
understanding things about them. So it's really a very different take. On one hand, we have them
growing all by themselves, almost as though they were in solitary confinement and were asked to do
just the specific things that they could do by themselves, whereas Winogradsky was saying,
let's see what bacteria do when they're interacting with each other in communities.
So it's single versus communities. Sergei Nikolayevich Winogradsky's other innovations were to say,
