Unseen Diversity. Lecture 4. A Brief History of Bacteriology. Part 3.
The last lecture was about 17th century microscopy, and we are now jumping ahead
to the end of the 19th century. Through the time between microscopes were developed,
and by the end of the 19th century, microscopes looked more like the sort of contraption that
we consider a microscope today, a tube with lenses on either end and some sort of a lighting system,
and very different from what Van Luenhoek was looking through in the 17th century.
But that wasn't necessarily the most important innovation in the reason that we're jumping
to the last part of the 19th century. The most important innovation was the German
synthetic dye industry, which was just beginning to become important, and by which many, many new
synthetic dyes, versions of what had been dyes from plants and dyes from animals that had been
traditionally used to dye cloth, were now being manufactured on a large scale, and slight chemical
adjustments were being made such that all sorts of new colors with new chemical properties
were being developed, and the Germans were foremost in this. It was a major aspect of the
practical part of chemistry, and it turns out that some of these dyes would dye bacteria,
would color bacteria. Whoever thought of it first was brilliant. It was a wonderful idea,
and it turned out to be much more important maybe than they even anticipated. At first,
I think the motivation must have been just to make them a little bit more visible under the
microscope, but as I said, the chemistry of dyes was developing along with their use for bacteria,
and very often bacteria would respond in very particular ways to particular dyes, such that
some aspect of the bacterial activities could actually be deciphered from their reactions
to the dyes. So that was a very important new innovation that was occurring. So let me begin
this lecture by telling you about the first of four scientists that I will be discussing. First
will be Robert Koch, K-O-C-H. Next will be Louis Pasteur, then Christian Graham, and then Sergei
Nikolayevich Wenogradzky. So first, Robert Koch, he was a German physician of the late 19th century,
and he wanted very much to understand the relationship of bacteria with diseases that
he was seeing. It was the real beginning of putting bacteria together with pathogenicities,
and it was the beginning of a long history of understanding bacteria from the point of view
of their being pathogens, or at least some of them being pathogens. And in particular, Koch
wanted to establish completely and unequivocally the bacterial connection that was needed at this
particular point, at this particular point that that connection had not yet been made. And what
developed from Koch's work was something that became known as Koch's postulate, that microbiology
