Unseen Diversity. Lecture 4. A Brief History of Bacteriology. Part 3.
The last lecture was about 17th century microscopy, and we are now jumping ahead
to the end of the 19th century. Through the time between microscopes were developed,
and by the end of the 19th century, microscopes looked more like the sort of contraption that
we consider a microscope today, a tube with lenses on either end and some sort of a lighting system,
and very different from what Van Luenhoek was looking through in the 17th century.
But that wasn't necessarily the most important innovation in the reason that we're jumping
to the last part of the 19th century. The most important innovation was the German
synthetic dye industry, which was just beginning to become important, and by which many, many new
synthetic dyes, versions of what had been dyes from plants and dyes from animals that had been
traditionally used to dye cloth, were now being manufactured on a large scale, and slight chemical
adjustments were being made such that all sorts of new colors with new chemical properties
were being developed, and the Germans were foremost in this. It was a major aspect of the
practical part of chemistry, and it turns out that some of these dyes would dye bacteria,
would color bacteria. Whoever thought of it first was brilliant. It was a wonderful idea,
and it turned out to be much more important maybe than they even anticipated. At first,
I think the motivation must have been just to make them a little bit more visible under the
microscope, but as I said, the chemistry of dyes was developing along with their use for bacteria,
and very often bacteria would respond in very particular ways to particular dyes, such that
some aspect of the bacterial activities could actually be deciphered from their reactions
to the dyes. So that was a very important new innovation that was occurring. So let me begin
this lecture by telling you about the first of four scientists that I will be discussing. First
will be Robert Koch, K-O-C-H. Next will be Louis Pasteur, then Christian Graham, and then Sergei
Nikolayevich Wenogradzky. So first, Robert Koch, he was a German physician of the late 19th century,
and he wanted very much to understand the relationship of bacteria with diseases that
he was seeing. It was the real beginning of putting bacteria together with pathogenicities,
and it was the beginning of a long history of understanding bacteria from the point of view
of their being pathogens, or at least some of them being pathogens. And in particular, Koch
wanted to establish completely and unequivocally the bacterial connection that was needed at this
particular point, at this particular point that that connection had not yet been made. And what
developed from Koch's work was something that became known as Koch's postulate, that microbiology
students in some classes still memorize, goes like this. First step of Koch's postulate, get some
diseased tissue, like maybe a tissue sample from a patient who has died of pneumonia or tuberculosis,
and look for bacteria in that tissue, look under the microscope for bacteria, and make sure that
you find it in all cases of that disease. That is, there should be no disease tissue that does not
have bacteria. That was the first thing that Koch said. So for example, he was looking for the source
of tuberculosis, and he said he needed to find the bacterium called mycobacterium tuberculosis
in all disease tissues from tubercular patients, and he did. So that was step number one. Step
number two, you should be able to isolate that bacteria from tissue and get it growing
by itself in the correct nutrients on a petri dish. Okay, so that was the second step.
Third step, and here's where he starts to get innovative, because the first two steps are
perhaps somewhat obvious. Third step, you should be able to take those bacteria off the petri dish
and reintroduce them into an experimental animal. You're not going to reintroduce them
into a patient, of course, but you should be able to reintroduce them into some appropriate
experimental animal, some rodent or something. And that experimental animal should then get
whatever the disease was. And then to make absolutely sure, and this gives you a little
bit of an idea of what Koch was up against in trying to prove this, to be absolutely sure,
step four of Koch's postulate is then you should be able to go into that experimental animal,
remove the bacteria and get them back onto the petri dish. Okay, and then you could be absolutely
sure that you would connect the bacteria with a particular disease. Maybe it sounds obvious,
but at the time it was a major innovation. It was not clear up to that point exactly how some
diseases came about, how probably most diseases came about, and certainly there was not a strong
connection between bacteria and disease or bacteria as pathogens. Here's what else Koch did,
and he did this in conjunction with some of his coworkers, one of which was Walter Hess,
and his wife, Angelina Hess, and I'm going to give quite a bit of credit to Walter Hess's
wife for this for reasons that will seem obvious in just a moment. Angelina was not herself working
with Koch, but I think this idea came straight from Angelina, and it goes something like this,
and it may be something that you have observed yourself. If you have food in the refrigerator
that is starting to go bad and is starting to get a little growth of bacteria or fungi
or some such microbe on it, and if that food that is starting to get the growth is a sort of a
gelatin or jelly or aspic or some other moist surface type food, maybe even the surface of
a potato, for example, a cooked potato that is still moist, you might notice that individual
colors and slimes grow distinctly as different colonies on that surface,
and it's so easy to observe this, it's so obvious that you could observe it and then not take it
any further. What happened was that Walter and Angelina Hess observed this and realized that it
could be a useful part of a technique for isolating individual bacteria and other microbes.
So they took this into the lab and said, what if we were to deliberately set up moist, firm,
nutrient-rich surfaces on which we could grow bacteria and other microbes, and it was just a
question of what sort of moist surface they would bring into the laboratory, and here were the
obvious choices at the time. They could have used pectin, which is a plant material that is used for
gelling jams and jellies, and certainly you've probably seen on an old jammer jelly a little
bit of fuzz from a mold or a little bit of bacteria, so that's an obvious moist surface on which you
could grow some microbes. They could have used gelatin from which we get gelatin desserts now,
which is an animal product that would be another surface on which you might be able to grow some
things, or they could have used and in fact did use agar, which is a seaweed product. Now it turns
out that agar, the seaweed product, was the best of the three, partly because the organisms that
they were most interested in isolating could themselves digest and eat and actually liquefy
pectin and gelatin, and agar was apparently more foreign to these organisms coming from seaweed,
and therefore was a sort of an inert surface, a surface that was not likely to be dissolved and
digested and disrupted in any particular way, so you ended up with these bacteria sitting nicely on
the surface and growing in these nice discrete colonies that could be distinguished from other
colonies, as long as they didn't grow together, as long as you had them far enough apart from each
other. And then what you could do is you could make a particular nutrient broth solidify by this,
the agar or gelatin or pectin, and you could provide whatever nutrients through the broth
to your organisms that you wished. Now the first obvious thing to try was beef broth,
and for many, many years beef broth was the standard nutrient medium that would be solidified
for the purpose of growing organisms. Dilute beef broth or some version of it with extra nutrients
added or certain nutrients taken away. And to this day we have something in the microbiology lab
called nutrient agar, which is really nothing much more than a beef broth that can be solidified
with agar from seaweed. It really dates right from this particular research at the turn of the
19th century. The next innovation was to do something a little more refined than just simple
beef broth, because in fact, beef broth is not especially simple. It's a mixture of hundreds
of different chemicals and all different proportions and slightly different proportions
depending on how you prepare it and how old it is and all different things that make it
an undefined medium, a medium that has really got too much going on with it to really understand
what's going on. And so the next innovation was something called a defined medium that comes
straight from the shelf of the chemistry lab. You go to the chemistry lab and you take a source of
protein, measure it out exactly, put that into your mixture. You take a source of calcium,
measure it out exactly, put it into your mixture. A defined medium is a list of sometimes dozens
of different things that need to go into a complete nutrient mixture, but you know exactly what went
in and in what proportions. So to reiterate that, we've got two kinds of medium. And this is true
to this day. You can go into a microbiology lab and sort it out in this particular dichotomy.
We have defined medium, which is right off the chemistry stock room shelf, a list of ingredients
precisely measured so we know exactly what's there. And then undefined, which is something
like beef broth or something like another mixture that we don't really understand exactly everything
that is in there. The benefit of using a defined medium is then you can, in a very precise way,
remove things one at a time, each time asking the question, okay, can you grow without calcium?
Yes, no. Can you grow without this source of protein? Yes or no. How about if I give you a
slightly different source of protein? Can you still grow? Yes or no. So a great many really
useful yes or no questions could be asked with a defined medium. Okay, now there's one other
component here. So far we've got two components. We've got a brand new surface on which to grow
microorganisms. We have the medium, which could be defined or undefined, that the organisms
are using as they're growing on the surface. And finally, we have another coworker of Coke,
and that is Julius Richard Petrie, inventor of the Petrie dish. Okay, that's the third component
we need. We want this solid defined medium on a Petrie dish. And I think what was brilliant
about Julius Richard Petrie's invention was the idea that you don't need much of this. You do not
need a great big jar of solidified medium to grow bacteria. All you need is a thin layer
in a small dish. And you don't even need to have a tight seal on that dish. You just need to have
an easy to remove lid for many of the bacteria that they were looking at. And there you have
set up in Coke's lab, pretty much everything that took us into 20th century microbiology.
Pretty much all the techniques are right there with one exception that I'll be talking about next.
All of the techniques are there for getting bacteria growing in an isolated manner.
Now, the other thing that happened that also took us into 20th century microscopy that also became a
major part of any microbiology lab was the whole technique of using dyes. Many people were using
dyes at that time, not just for textiles, but experimenting with dyes for all sorts of things.
And many of those were people interested in making biology more visible under the microscope,
not just bacteria, but other microorganisms, parts of organisms, tissues. There was a great
sort of alternative use of dyes that were being developed in biology labs at this time.
And so when Dr. Hans Christian Graham, who was a Danish physician,
set about to experiment with dyes for his own purposes, he probably didn't know that he was
doing something really extraordinary, accidentally, I think, with the particular dye that he chose
that came to be called Graham stain, in which came to be called the first step for many
identifications of bacteria. So here's what Dr. Hans Christian Graham wanted to do. He wanted to
do something like what Koch was doing. He wanted to show unequivocally that bacteria could be seen
in lung tissue of deceased patients who had died of pneumonia. He wanted to connect bacteria with
pneumonia in lung tissue. And it's difficult to see bacteria against a background of lung tissue.
The cells of animals are bigger than the cells of bacteria. They're about the same color as the
cells of bacteria. It'll be extremely difficult to have a tissue sample and be able to distinguish
the bacteria in it. So he was adding all sorts of dyes. And one of the dyes that he added was
something called crystal violet. It was a synthetic dye that had been developed for the textile
industry. And he went through a particular procedure that I would like to go through
here with you so that you can get a real feel for what happened and what didn't happen.
In a nutshell, some of the bacteria in his lung tissue were able to retain the stain. They were
able to become died. And some did not. And by the way, when he first noticed that he was dismayed
because he wanted all of them to be died. And it wasn't till a little later that he realized
that this was a very interesting thing. Some of his bacteria did take up the dye and hold onto it
and become stain. And some did not. Some were therefore gram positive or positive for this
dying procedure. And some were negative for this dying procedure. What we now call gram positive.
And gram negative because that crystal violet stain is now called gram stain.
Here's what happened. If you were dying cloth at home with a dye, you would first prepare the cloth,
then you would add the dye. Then you might do something to fix the dye in place to make sure
that it attached to the fabric correctly. And then you would wash away all the excess dye. So those
are some typical steps in any dying process. Those are the typical steps that occur in a
microbiology lab when we're dying bacteria. We get the bacteria prepared to be dyed,
then we add the dye itself, then we add some additional chemicals to make sure that the dye
stays in place. And then we wash away all the excess dye. And that washing step is extremely
important. Well, here's what happened. Some of the bacteria would take the dye up and hold onto it
for other bacteria the dye would wash away. And as I said, those are gram positive versus
gram negative bacteria. Big thrill, right? So what? It turns out that gram positive bacteria
are a major taxonomic group unto themselves on the family tree. So if you recall the big family
tree of organisms that I described a few lectures back, the huge diversity of all the bacteria,
the huge diversity of organisms, most of which are bacteria, one really big branch consists of all
the gram positive bacteria. So to this day, that's considered to be a good cohesive taxonomic group
of bacteria essentially discovered by Hans Christian Graham. Now it turns out that identifying bacteria
in a traditional way that occurred all the way through the 20th century was with a dichotomous key,
a sort of set of yes or no questions, almost like playing the game 20 questions where you'd
start with, is it an animal or a plant? Is it colored or not colored? Is it active or not
active? Well, there are a whole set of questions that were traditionally asked to identify bacteria,
and they almost always began with, is it gram positive or gram negative? So from this one
particular observation of Hans Christian Graham came the whole revolution of using dyes as one of
the parts of the dichotomous set of questions that would be used for identifying bacteria.
That was his contribution. By the way, I am now going to differentiate bacteria and archaea
in a way that I said I would do on occasion. Generally, I'm using bacteria in kind of a
colloquial way to include the archaea with them, but sometimes I'm going to separate them out.
And what I want to say is one of the really strange things about archaea is that they don't
gram stain in any kind of reliable way so that you don't call archaea either gram positive or
gram negative. It's one of the things that makes them really very different, and it was a puzzling
thing about them until we understood that their DNA is very, very different and that they were
essentially evolving along in their own parallel universe. They look superficially like bacteria,
they do some things as bacteria do, but they are not in the realm of things that get stained
either positively or negatively with anything like gram stain. They've got their own repertoire of
staining characteristics that are really quite different. So there's a good example of a striking
difference between those two groups. Now, the third important person from late 19th century
into early 20th century microbiology was Louis Pester, a French scientist, a French chemist
primarily, and he gets an enormous amount of credit for a wide variety of observations that
I'll just touch on a bit, one of which was a greater understanding of fermented beverages,
in particular wine, but you could extrapolate this out to fermented foods and to other fermented
beverages such as beer, and he helped to develop a much firmer understanding of the role of micro
organisms in making all sorts of fermented foods and beverages. And here I'm using the word micro
organism as an umbrella term for not just bacteria, but also to include microscopic fungi,
including yeast. So yeast are not bacteria, they are in the group called the fungi, their cells are
bigger, they're related to mushrooms, they're related to other things that we think of as fungi,
but in this whole rubric of the microbial world, they along with bacteria are producing various
fermented foods, and Pester sorted out a great deal of that. The other thing Pester did was to
begin the whole field of immunology with a growing understanding of vaccinations,
and while it's a bit of a digression from this topic of bacteria, Pester was also looking at
viruses or what would later be understood as viruses. Very often in a traditional study of
bacteria, the immune system is a topic in that course. It will be a minor topic in this course,
but I want to acknowledge that there's been a long tradition since bacteria were traditionally
thought of as being primarily pathogens, there's been a long tradition of thinking about them in
relation to how our immune system works with them. So Pester's contribution at this time
was a greater understanding of our immune system reactions to microbes of all kinds,
antiviruses, and a greater understanding of how to use vaccines in that context.
Meanwhile, in a completely different part of Europe, culturally as well as physically,
was a Russian scientist, very interesting person, Sergei Nikolayevich Winogradsky,
and he was developing, along with other Russian microbiologists, a really completely different
take on microbiology, really a strikingly different paradigm, and one that did not come back together
or did not come together at all with Western European microbiology for many years, and to
some extent is still considered to be a really separate way of thinking about about bacteriology.
Let me try this set of dichotomies to differentiate the two.
Whereas Robert Koch and his fellow workers were trying to set up bacteria in solitary, isolated
colonies on Petri dishes. Winogradsky was letting them be all mixed together and nonetheless still
understanding things about them. So it's really a very different take. On one hand, we have them
growing all by themselves, almost as though they were in solitary confinement and were asked to do
just the specific things that they could do by themselves, whereas Winogradsky was saying,
let's see what bacteria do when they're interacting with each other in communities.
So it's single versus communities. Sergei Nikolayevich Winogradsky's other innovations were to say,
let's look at them in their wild format. Let's look at them in something approximating what
they would look like in the environment, almost as though we were contrasting two different
ways of presenting animals in zoos. You can have animals that are by themselves in cages versus
in some sort of wild habitat. He said, why not put them together in some kind of situation where we
can really see what they do in a natural habitat, nonetheless brought into the lab. And I'll actually
tell you what that habitat was. It's something that you can reproduce at home if you want to.
And finally, the word contamination probably got used quite a bit in Koch's lab,
along with Walter Hess and Julius Petri. That is, if you have bacteria that are growing together on
a plate and interacting with each other, you say, oh dear, my plate is contaminated. I didn't keep
those colonies separate enough. Whereas the word contamination probably didn't exist in Winogradsky's
lab. It was just ordinary interactions of the sort that you expect from bacteria.
So here's how we set things up. Here's an example of a wild habitat for a mixed group of interacting
bacteria. It's called a Winogradsky column. And if I were to set one up at home, I might take a
mason jar, a large mason jar, or a large mayonnaise jar, or perhaps the empty plastic tube from tennis
balls. And I would take a bit of paper towel, crumble it up and stuff it into the bottom,
not very much, maybe a half sheet. That would represent some plant material because after all
paper towel comes from wood pulp, which ultimately comes from plants. So that would represent some
easy to get and fairly neutral form of plant material crumbled in the bottom of my column.
I would sprinkle in a little bit of epsom salts, which can be purchased at the drug store, and
which are sometimes used as bath salts. And when I say sprinkle in a bit, maybe a teaspoon or so,
and then I would fill the rest of the column with the blackest marine mud that I could find.
Or if I were in inland and not able to get to a marine environment, nice black swamp mud would
work here. You want something that is going to even be a little bit smelly. And then I would top
the whole thing off with a little water. And then I would wrap the entire column with some foil,
leaving just a little bit at the top that I would call my photic zone, where the light would be allowed
to come in. And the rest of it would be dark beneath the foil. And I would set the whole thing on a
windowsill. This is what Winogradzky did. It's called a Winogradzky column. And after a few weeks to
months, I might peek under the foil and see what was going on. And if I was lucky, I would be seeing
different colors, representing different bacteria that were interacting with each other, but also
maintaining their own particular part of the habitat that is this column of black mud, which by the
way is full of bacteria, none of them pathogens. This is perfectly safe on a windowsill. And I will
say some more in a subsequent lecture about what sorts of bacteria and interactions can be seen in
a Winogradzky column or can be seen in nature. But this was really the beginning of understanding
bacteria as major doers out in the environment with major sorts of interactions going on.
One of the really amazing things that Winogradzky discovered was a new type of metabolism
that was just so exotic that it was not even on anyone's radar of what we might be looking at for
metabolisms. Up to that point, metabolisms fell into two categories. What we're doing, we're animals,
and we eat food. And that's how we get our energy. And that's how we get materials to build our bodies
versus what plants are doing. They make their own food. They manufacture their own food out of
carbon dioxide and water. And I'll describe that more in a subsequent lecture. Winogradzky
discovered something completely different from those two called chemo-autotrophy. And now is not
the place for me to develop that, but I will in a subsequent lecture. So watch for it when I start
to talk about different sorts of bacterial metabolisms and how really different and exotic
to our point of view. Some of them are watch for chemo-autotrophy and realize that it was
discovered by Winogradzky, not by having the bacteria separate on individual colonies on a
petri dish, but by putting them together in a Winogradzky column, as he did. After the Russian
Revolution of 1917, Winogradzky went into exile to Paris and ended up at the Institute Pestor.
So there's a little connection between Pestor and Winogradzky after the Russian Revolution.
By the way, I can suggest some things to read about this, two in particular that have been a
great influence on generations of microbiologists, great influence on me and many microbiologists
that I know. One is called The Microbe Hunters by Paul DeCroof. And this is an absolutely
passionate book on the subject of microbiology. And you can read biographies of Van Luenhoek,
of Koch, of Pestor, of Graham. He doesn't say much about Winogradzky because this is mostly
about Western microbiology. One thing I notice about this book that you might enjoy too is
his repeated, Paul DeCroof's repeated use of the word gorgeous when describing the sites
under the microscope. So this is not just an ordinary objective study of the development of
microbiology. It's an absolutely passionate study of the development of microbiology and
well worth reading and really inspiring. And right around the same time that that book was being
written, The Microbe Hunters, Sinclair Lewis was writing Arrow Smith, which is a novel in which
was very much influenced by what was going on in microbiology at the time. And which is a wonderful
story, also very influential of the politics and ethics and emotions that are associated with
microbiology. Well worth reading. And in fact, Sinclair Lewis said later that he owed a great
debt to Paul DeCroof for getting together all the information that Sinclair Lewis needed to
put together his novel, Arrow Smith. And by the way, the last thing I want to do here before going
on to the next lecture is to reiterate briefly what is microbiology versus what is bacteriology.
And again, I think it's a problem that the terminology has not kept pace with the science.
We're stuck with a lot of terminology that was developed at a time when things were being
lumped together into categories that we don't use so much anymore. So the overall term microbiology
refers to not only the bacteria and the archaea, but also to the microscopic fungi and sometimes to
the protozoans like paramecium and amoeba. And sometimes in a course that calls itself microbiology,
there will be included viruses, which are really a very completely different entity that I'll be
talking about briefly later. And there'll be also some mention of the immune system and its reactions
to all of these. So microbiology is really a big catchall topic. And the word microbe is really a
very general big catchall term. I'm going to now narrow things down to just talking about bacteria
as encompassing the bacteria and archaea that I've been alluding to. And I'm not going to say much
more about the bigger overarching field of microbiology, even though through the early part of
the 19th century, the late part of the 19th century and the early 20th century, that's what was being
developed. There wasn't as great a differentiation being made between one group of microbes versus
another. These people that I've just been talking about were looking at the microbes as a whole.
It was an amazing thing to be doing at all. And so that was the overarching focus.
In the next lecture, I want to examine the family tree of bacteria a little more closely
and to put into more perspective what happened over four billion years of evolution
and where bacteria and archaea fit in to the family tree of life. And from there, I will talk about
the deepest lineages of bacteria and archaea, which are called the extremophiles, and
which include some that you should be able to observe yourself using particular field marks
that I will describe to you. This ends lecture four. Remember to visit this course's webpage
at www.modernscholar.com where you'll find additional information about the lectures you just heard.
Once there, you can access this course by using the password 1121BDD. Again, that's 1121BDD.
