debt to Paul DeCroof for getting together all the information that Sinclair Lewis needed to
put together his novel, Arrow Smith. And by the way, the last thing I want to do here before going
on to the next lecture is to reiterate briefly what is microbiology versus what is bacteriology.
And again, I think it's a problem that the terminology has not kept pace with the science.
We're stuck with a lot of terminology that was developed at a time when things were being
lumped together into categories that we don't use so much anymore. So the overall term microbiology
refers to not only the bacteria and the archaea, but also to the microscopic fungi and sometimes to
the protozoans like paramecium and amoeba. And sometimes in a course that calls itself microbiology,
there will be included viruses, which are really a very completely different entity that I'll be
talking about briefly later. And there'll be also some mention of the immune system and its reactions
to all of these. So microbiology is really a big catchall topic. And the word microbe is really a
very general big catchall term. I'm going to now narrow things down to just talking about bacteria
as encompassing the bacteria and archaea that I've been alluding to. And I'm not going to say much
more about the bigger overarching field of microbiology, even though through the early part of
the 19th century, the late part of the 19th century and the early 20th century, that's what was being
developed. There wasn't as great a differentiation being made between one group of microbes versus
another. These people that I've just been talking about were looking at the microbes as a whole.
It was an amazing thing to be doing at all. And so that was the overarching focus.
In the next lecture, I want to examine the family tree of bacteria a little more closely
and to put into more perspective what happened over four billion years of evolution
and where bacteria and archaea fit in to the family tree of life. And from there, I will talk about
the deepest lineages of bacteria and archaea, which are called the extremophiles, and
which include some that you should be able to observe yourself using particular field marks
that I will describe to you. This ends lecture four. Remember to visit this course's webpage
at www.modernscholar.com where you'll find additional information about the lectures you just heard.
Once there, you can access this course by using the password 1121BDD. Again, that's 1121BDD.
