students in some classes still memorize, goes like this. First step of Koch's postulate, get some
diseased tissue, like maybe a tissue sample from a patient who has died of pneumonia or tuberculosis,
and look for bacteria in that tissue, look under the microscope for bacteria, and make sure that
you find it in all cases of that disease. That is, there should be no disease tissue that does not
have bacteria. That was the first thing that Koch said. So for example, he was looking for the source
of tuberculosis, and he said he needed to find the bacterium called mycobacterium tuberculosis
in all disease tissues from tubercular patients, and he did. So that was step number one. Step
number two, you should be able to isolate that bacteria from tissue and get it growing
by itself in the correct nutrients on a petri dish. Okay, so that was the second step.
Third step, and here's where he starts to get innovative, because the first two steps are
perhaps somewhat obvious. Third step, you should be able to take those bacteria off the petri dish
and reintroduce them into an experimental animal. You're not going to reintroduce them
into a patient, of course, but you should be able to reintroduce them into some appropriate
experimental animal, some rodent or something. And that experimental animal should then get
whatever the disease was. And then to make absolutely sure, and this gives you a little
bit of an idea of what Koch was up against in trying to prove this, to be absolutely sure,
step four of Koch's postulate is then you should be able to go into that experimental animal,
remove the bacteria and get them back onto the petri dish. Okay, and then you could be absolutely
sure that you would connect the bacteria with a particular disease. Maybe it sounds obvious,
but at the time it was a major innovation. It was not clear up to that point exactly how some
diseases came about, how probably most diseases came about, and certainly there was not a strong
connection between bacteria and disease or bacteria as pathogens. Here's what else Koch did,
and he did this in conjunction with some of his coworkers, one of which was Walter Hess,
and his wife, Angelina Hess, and I'm going to give quite a bit of credit to Walter Hess's
wife for this for reasons that will seem obvious in just a moment. Angelina was not herself working
with Koch, but I think this idea came straight from Angelina, and it goes something like this,
and it may be something that you have observed yourself. If you have food in the refrigerator
that is starting to go bad and is starting to get a little growth of bacteria or fungi
or some such microbe on it, and if that food that is starting to get the growth is a sort of a
gelatin or jelly or aspic or some other moist surface type food, maybe even the surface of
a potato, for example, a cooked potato that is still moist, you might notice that individual
