say some more in a subsequent lecture about what sorts of bacteria and interactions can be seen in
a Winogradzky column or can be seen in nature. But this was really the beginning of understanding
bacteria as major doers out in the environment with major sorts of interactions going on.
One of the really amazing things that Winogradzky discovered was a new type of metabolism
that was just so exotic that it was not even on anyone's radar of what we might be looking at for
metabolisms. Up to that point, metabolisms fell into two categories. What we're doing, we're animals,
and we eat food. And that's how we get our energy. And that's how we get materials to build our bodies
versus what plants are doing. They make their own food. They manufacture their own food out of
carbon dioxide and water. And I'll describe that more in a subsequent lecture. Winogradzky
discovered something completely different from those two called chemo-autotrophy. And now is not
the place for me to develop that, but I will in a subsequent lecture. So watch for it when I start
to talk about different sorts of bacterial metabolisms and how really different and exotic
to our point of view. Some of them are watch for chemo-autotrophy and realize that it was
discovered by Winogradzky, not by having the bacteria separate on individual colonies on a
petri dish, but by putting them together in a Winogradzky column, as he did. After the Russian
Revolution of 1917, Winogradzky went into exile to Paris and ended up at the Institute Pestor.
So there's a little connection between Pestor and Winogradzky after the Russian Revolution.
By the way, I can suggest some things to read about this, two in particular that have been a
great influence on generations of microbiologists, great influence on me and many microbiologists
that I know. One is called The Microbe Hunters by Paul DeCroof. And this is an absolutely
passionate book on the subject of microbiology. And you can read biographies of Van Luenhoek,
of Koch, of Pestor, of Graham. He doesn't say much about Winogradzky because this is mostly
about Western microbiology. One thing I notice about this book that you might enjoy too is
his repeated, Paul DeCroof's repeated use of the word gorgeous when describing the sites
under the microscope. So this is not just an ordinary objective study of the development of
microbiology. It's an absolutely passionate study of the development of microbiology and
well worth reading and really inspiring. And right around the same time that that book was being
written, The Microbe Hunters, Sinclair Lewis was writing Arrow Smith, which is a novel in which
was very much influenced by what was going on in microbiology at the time. And which is a wonderful
story, also very influential of the politics and ethics and emotions that are associated with
microbiology. Well worth reading. And in fact, Sinclair Lewis said later that he owed a great
