colors and slimes grow distinctly as different colonies on that surface,
and it's so easy to observe this, it's so obvious that you could observe it and then not take it
any further. What happened was that Walter and Angelina Hess observed this and realized that it
could be a useful part of a technique for isolating individual bacteria and other microbes.
So they took this into the lab and said, what if we were to deliberately set up moist, firm,
nutrient-rich surfaces on which we could grow bacteria and other microbes, and it was just a
question of what sort of moist surface they would bring into the laboratory, and here were the
obvious choices at the time. They could have used pectin, which is a plant material that is used for
gelling jams and jellies, and certainly you've probably seen on an old jammer jelly a little
bit of fuzz from a mold or a little bit of bacteria, so that's an obvious moist surface on which you
could grow some microbes. They could have used gelatin from which we get gelatin desserts now,
which is an animal product that would be another surface on which you might be able to grow some
things, or they could have used and in fact did use agar, which is a seaweed product. Now it turns
out that agar, the seaweed product, was the best of the three, partly because the organisms that
they were most interested in isolating could themselves digest and eat and actually liquefy
pectin and gelatin, and agar was apparently more foreign to these organisms coming from seaweed,
and therefore was a sort of an inert surface, a surface that was not likely to be dissolved and
digested and disrupted in any particular way, so you ended up with these bacteria sitting nicely on
the surface and growing in these nice discrete colonies that could be distinguished from other
colonies, as long as they didn't grow together, as long as you had them far enough apart from each
other. And then what you could do is you could make a particular nutrient broth solidify by this,
the agar or gelatin or pectin, and you could provide whatever nutrients through the broth
to your organisms that you wished. Now the first obvious thing to try was beef broth,
and for many, many years beef broth was the standard nutrient medium that would be solidified
for the purpose of growing organisms. Dilute beef broth or some version of it with extra nutrients
added or certain nutrients taken away. And to this day we have something in the microbiology lab
called nutrient agar, which is really nothing much more than a beef broth that can be solidified
with agar from seaweed. It really dates right from this particular research at the turn of the
19th century. The next innovation was to do something a little more refined than just simple
beef broth, because in fact, beef broth is not especially simple. It's a mixture of hundreds
of different chemicals and all different proportions and slightly different proportions
