let's look at them in their wild format. Let's look at them in something approximating what
they would look like in the environment, almost as though we were contrasting two different
ways of presenting animals in zoos. You can have animals that are by themselves in cages versus
in some sort of wild habitat. He said, why not put them together in some kind of situation where we
can really see what they do in a natural habitat, nonetheless brought into the lab. And I'll actually
tell you what that habitat was. It's something that you can reproduce at home if you want to.
And finally, the word contamination probably got used quite a bit in Koch's lab,
along with Walter Hess and Julius Petri. That is, if you have bacteria that are growing together on
a plate and interacting with each other, you say, oh dear, my plate is contaminated. I didn't keep
those colonies separate enough. Whereas the word contamination probably didn't exist in Winogradsky's
lab. It was just ordinary interactions of the sort that you expect from bacteria.
So here's how we set things up. Here's an example of a wild habitat for a mixed group of interacting
bacteria. It's called a Winogradsky column. And if I were to set one up at home, I might take a
mason jar, a large mason jar, or a large mayonnaise jar, or perhaps the empty plastic tube from tennis
balls. And I would take a bit of paper towel, crumble it up and stuff it into the bottom,
not very much, maybe a half sheet. That would represent some plant material because after all
paper towel comes from wood pulp, which ultimately comes from plants. So that would represent some
easy to get and fairly neutral form of plant material crumbled in the bottom of my column.
I would sprinkle in a little bit of epsom salts, which can be purchased at the drug store, and
which are sometimes used as bath salts. And when I say sprinkle in a bit, maybe a teaspoon or so,
and then I would fill the rest of the column with the blackest marine mud that I could find.
Or if I were in inland and not able to get to a marine environment, nice black swamp mud would
work here. You want something that is going to even be a little bit smelly. And then I would top
the whole thing off with a little water. And then I would wrap the entire column with some foil,
leaving just a little bit at the top that I would call my photic zone, where the light would be allowed
to come in. And the rest of it would be dark beneath the foil. And I would set the whole thing on a
windowsill. This is what Winogradzky did. It's called a Winogradzky column. And after a few weeks to
months, I might peek under the foil and see what was going on. And if I was lucky, I would be seeing
different colors, representing different bacteria that were interacting with each other, but also
maintaining their own particular part of the habitat that is this column of black mud, which by the
way is full of bacteria, none of them pathogens. This is perfectly safe on a windowsill. And I will
