stays in place. And then we wash away all the excess dye. And that washing step is extremely
important. Well, here's what happened. Some of the bacteria would take the dye up and hold onto it
for other bacteria the dye would wash away. And as I said, those are gram positive versus
gram negative bacteria. Big thrill, right? So what? It turns out that gram positive bacteria
are a major taxonomic group unto themselves on the family tree. So if you recall the big family
tree of organisms that I described a few lectures back, the huge diversity of all the bacteria,
the huge diversity of organisms, most of which are bacteria, one really big branch consists of all
the gram positive bacteria. So to this day, that's considered to be a good cohesive taxonomic group
of bacteria essentially discovered by Hans Christian Graham. Now it turns out that identifying bacteria
in a traditional way that occurred all the way through the 20th century was with a dichotomous key,
a sort of set of yes or no questions, almost like playing the game 20 questions where you'd
start with, is it an animal or a plant? Is it colored or not colored? Is it active or not
active? Well, there are a whole set of questions that were traditionally asked to identify bacteria,
and they almost always began with, is it gram positive or gram negative? So from this one
particular observation of Hans Christian Graham came the whole revolution of using dyes as one of
the parts of the dichotomous set of questions that would be used for identifying bacteria.
That was his contribution. By the way, I am now going to differentiate bacteria and archaea
in a way that I said I would do on occasion. Generally, I'm using bacteria in kind of a
colloquial way to include the archaea with them, but sometimes I'm going to separate them out.
And what I want to say is one of the really strange things about archaea is that they don't
gram stain in any kind of reliable way so that you don't call archaea either gram positive or
gram negative. It's one of the things that makes them really very different, and it was a puzzling
thing about them until we understood that their DNA is very, very different and that they were
essentially evolving along in their own parallel universe. They look superficially like bacteria,
they do some things as bacteria do, but they are not in the realm of things that get stained
either positively or negatively with anything like gram stain. They've got their own repertoire of
staining characteristics that are really quite different. So there's a good example of a striking
difference between those two groups. Now, the third important person from late 19th century
into early 20th century microbiology was Louis Pester, a French scientist, a French chemist
primarily, and he gets an enormous amount of credit for a wide variety of observations that
I'll just touch on a bit, one of which was a greater understanding of fermented beverages,
