So what is DNA sequencing?
I don't want to go another moment in this lecture without addressing that.
It's a topic unto itself, of course.
It's one of the most important innovations of the last part of the 20th century and into
the 21st century in biology.
It goes something like this, if I were to give a simplified account of what we do when
we sequence.
First thing we do is we get an organism that we would like to know the DNA of.
The DNA is the linear representation of all of the information that is needed to make that
organism.
Information is in the form of genes and it's in the form of other sequences and if you
want to visualize it, it turns out that there are just four chemicals that make up DNA that
can be represented by the letters A, C, G and T.
So if I go looking at a DNA sequence loaded with information, I'm really looking at nothing
but A, Cs, Gs and Ts.
Lines and lines and lines of them all representing the information for a particular organism.
I've got that organism.
I take some of its DNA out and here's the part that we can do now with a machine.
So I'm not going to describe to you what we used to do in the old days by hand, which
was laborious and which was tedious and which would take days and months to complete.
I will simply walk us over to a machine called a sequencer.
We will put the DNA into that sequencer and it will use one or another of a couple of
methods, which in essence go like this and this is going to be a simplification of what
these machines do, but in essence they are removing one letter at a time, reading it
is an A, C, G or T, recording that, removing the next letter, reading it, A, C, G or T,
removing the next one and the next and the next and the next and doing so in this amazing
automatic and methodical way.
There are errors that can be made, there are all kinds of little problems that can occur,
but for the most part it's an absolutely wonderful process and out of that you get a whole string
of A's, C's, G's and T's that represent the information that was in the DNA from the organism
that you put in.
Now you're not quite done at that point, you've then got to analyze those A, C's, G's
and T's and that maybe is the most complicated process of it all, especially now that we
have machines that can read DNA one letter at a time.
And so the analysis of DNA is mostly a computational field, computer programs are written that
can look at strings of A's, C's, G's and T's, looking for patterns, seeking out sections
that look like they might be genes and there are certain characteristics of sequences that
are gene-like, other sequences that are not gene-like but are evocative of something else
and little by little a computer program can analyze the strings that have been produced
and to try to make a good guess at which sections are genes and which sections are something
other than genes which might also be interesting.
And all of this information gets put into databases and as it happens we have an enormous
