Unseen Diversity, Lecture 5, The Family Tree of Bacteria, Part 1.
In this lecture, I will address some things that I have mentioned before, but in the context
of our understanding of the family tree of organisms, most of which is bacteria.
I want to remind you that morphology can't get us far with understanding this.
Bacteria are essentially featureless, especially by our standards.
Remember, we're enormous morphological organisms that value other morphologies and which are
highly visual and which can see color and which are best at seeing things of about our
own size and about our own activity level and with features similar to ours.
So we really are in a different place when we're thinking about bacteria, and it can
be something of a mistake to say, okay, what do they look like?
I can tell you what they look like.
They look like punctuation, they look like tiny dots, they look like tiny dashes, they
look like tiny squiggles, they look like somewhat longer squiggles, and a few of them are amorphous,
that is without any particular distinctive shape.
So that's maybe five or six if you include lengths of things, different morphologies
for bacteria.
That's not enough to go on if you're trying to sort out what may be millions of species
of bacteria.
I think you would agree with me on that, that if we're trying to sort out millions of species
of bacteria into their own separate categories, five or six different morphologies won't do
it.
We need to go with something else.
In addition to those morphologies back by the way, some bacteria have particular types
of motilities.
Some of them have flagella, various numbers of flagella that are long, thin, thread,
lip-like organelles extending from their cells that whip around and propel the bacteria
through the water.
The numbers of those flagella and the positions of those flagella also constitute a physical
characteristic that we might latch on to.
But again, that's deceptive and it's certainly not useful by itself for categorizing millions
of species of bacteria.
What we turn to is to what bacteria do.
Bacteria are all about what they do.
By the way, I sometimes get a little frustrated when I get to a website on bacteria for the
general public and see that it features a great many pictures of dots and dashes and
not much of information about what the bacteria are doing because I think that just helps along
the misperception that we should be looking at them as tiny versions of ourselves.
Not literally, but in a sense that is looking for morphologies, looking for things that
we can latch on to as though they were just another morphological entity on the family
tree when they're not.
They're about what they do and we really need to look at what they do.
How do we do that?
