point had been just, oh, a strange part of the plants, something that we don't really
need to give much more of a name to.
They're just tiny, tiny versions of plants.
Suddenly, into the textbooks, including textbooks at the elementary school level, and middle
school, and high school level, were fungi featured in their own kingdom, protists featured
in their own kingdom, certainly bacteria in their own kingdom, along with animals and
plants each in their own kingdoms.
Then came a slight modification of that called the six kingdom system, and that was with
the acknowledgement that the bacteria could be divided into the archaea and the new group,
the new subgroup bacteria that I've been talking about.
Six kingdom, also satisfying, also acknowledges these diverse branches and also keeps in the
forefront the real diversity of organisms that can be studied either in schools or as
naturalists.
What has happened most recently is a three super kingdom system that takes into account
the predominant members of the family tree of organisms, which are bacteria and archaea,
and the relatively minor branch that extends off and consists of the animals and plants
and protists and fungi.
Some new thinking about this is that we ought to have three super kingdoms, one is the bacteria,
one is the archaea, and the other is all the rest of those things.
That will reflect most accurately evolution.
That will reflect most accurately what are the really major groups on the family tree.
A great deal of scientific politics is involved with this.
Scientific reputations are on the line concerning this issue.
I know it's hard to believe.
Sometimes I find it hard to believe, even though I'm in the field.
It's actually enormously controversial, and sometimes I just like to step away from the
whole thing and say, what will be served best?
What will serve us best if we're trying to educate a new generation of biologists?
Do I really want to take all of those fascinating groups, the protists and the fungi along with
plants that sometimes don't get enough attention in schools, and just tuck them all together
under one rubric?
Not necessarily.
I'm pointing all this out to you because if you decide to go searching for yourself about
how to classify things on family trees and how to classify things on these timelines
that I've been talking about, you will encounter aspects of this controversy.
It may seem a little confusing, and one thing that you should realize is this is another
example of a field in flux, a field that has not settled down yet in respect to its taxonomy.
There are some good aspects of that.
It means there's still lots of work to be done, and taxonomy is one of those aspects
of the work that needs to be done, but it does mean that if you're looking up these topics
and trying to get a settled answer as to how to talk about the classification system and
how to talk about the family tree, there will not necessarily be a simple answer.
