it.
But previous to four billion years ago, it doesn't look like it would have been possible.
Around four billion years ago, the earth cooled enough that there was liquid water, but it
was hot water.
And a way to think about it is that it was geysers, it was hot springs, the earth's crust
was still relatively thin, there were probably volcanoes, there were probably rifts of the
sort that we see in the Pacific vents right now, rifts where plates are pulling apart
and extremely hot liquid and molten rock can come up.
And this was the environment in which life originated perhaps four billion years ago.
Thinking about that family tree that I suggested you either measure out across a room by pacing
it off or even if you're driving in your car that you think about as the extent of your
dashboard across the front of your car, thinking about four billion years to the present with
half way across the timeline being about two billion years ago.
Let me put some items on that timeline for you to visualize.
We have the first microfossils presumably of bacteria at about three and a half billion
years ago.
So on your timeline, we're just outside of that four billion year extent of your timeline.
About three and a half billion years ago are the first microfossils.
What do they look like?
They look like tiny dots and dashes, tiny punctuation points, feature lists.
You can't interpret much about them, although I will do a little bit of interpretation concerning
those microfossils later in this lecture, but there's not much you can interpret from
them.
Typical of bacteria, lacking morphology, if it gets amazing those microfossils were first
found because it really took some faith to take a rock in which you could see nothing
with your naked eye, cut it open, make a very, very thin section of it and put it under a
microscope and look for something as tiny as bacteria was an amazing thing to do.
So if we have the first microfossils at about three and a half billion years ago and if the
earth was molten before four billion years ago, then we're extrapolating that the origin
of life must have occurred somewhere around four billion years ago.
Because the fossils that we see at 3.5 are well enough developed, look like recognizable
bacteria such that they are, that that can't be the origin of life.
There must be something before that.
So that's why I have been saying in these lectures that we're placing origin of life
at around four billion years ago, which is the extent of the timeline that I've been
suggesting you try to visualize.
Okay, now other things that go on this timeline include the origin of more complicated cells
which is placed by some people at around two and a half billion years ago.
And I want to place them on this timeline right now because it turns out that those
more complicated cells that make up us, that make up plants, that make up fungi and protists,
the cells that actually have some morphology to them, the cells that really are the classic
cells that people think of when they say describe a cell and describe the things that are inside
