of a cell.
Those complicated cells arose as combinations of bacterial cells in a way that ends up making
us essentially communities of bacteria.
We think we have our own complicated cells, but those complicated cells are really nothing
more than bacterial cells that have gotten together.
So it's an important point in the history of bacteria that around 2.5 billion years ago,
some very interesting things began to happen with more complicated cells, but it's still
part of the bacterial lineage.
And it may be that those complicated cells were predisposed to being multicellular eventually.
They had characteristics that made it especially easy for them to get into multicellular larger
structures.
Thus we get fungi and animals and plants.
I still consider it to be part of the lineage of bacteria.
And this leads me to some controversy about how to talk about these major lineages.
And at this point, let me deviate a little bit into a controversy about how to classify
bacteria and archaea and the organisms that came out of those complicated cells at 2.5
billion years ago.
And for ordinary folks, including myself, I don't tend to want to get embroiled in this
controversy and yet I think it's unavoidable in some ways if we're going to have some sort
of unified way of talking about it.
And it goes something like this.
Before we had a really rich understanding of who bacteria and archaea are and what
exactly is going on with fungi and animals and plants and protus, and I'm assuming we
have a rich understanding now, we probably don't still have as rich an understanding
as people will have hundreds of years from now, but before we had our current understanding,
all organisms were divided into two kingdoms, animals or plants.
That left out bacteria and archaea.
It left out fungi, it left out protus, and those all got jammed into one or another category
and they tended to get put into the category of plants.
So just extra, extra tiny cryptic featureless plants were what bacteria were essentially
considered.
Obviously, that's not very satisfying, it's not very helpful.
Two kingdoms was by no means a good way to divide everything up.
Then came a five or six kingdom scheme, and for many, many years that was the dominant
scheme for dividing up organisms, and in fact I have been using that throughout, and I will
now deconstruct that scheme right now.
You will hear that I've been using it throughout.
I have been saying bacteria as one kingdom, and then I've been saying usually in one sentence
the protists, which is the second kingdom, the fungi, which is the third kingdom, the
plants, which are a fourth kingdom, and the animals, which are a fifth kingdom.
That's the traditional five kingdom system which took over from the two kingdom system,
which is much more satisfying, in which put a spotlight on some organisms that up to that
