We look for things that they're putting out into the environment, signs of the little
chemical reactions that are going on inside of them and things that they are taking up
from the environment.
It is surprisingly easy to see things that they are putting out and things that they
are taking up.
That's what I will focus on when I talk in more detail about how to see bacteria in the
environment.
First of all, back to the family tree.
Let me describe it a little bit further and there is also a description that may help
you in the book that goes with this course.
Most of the family tree, and if you think of it as a big fan shape structure, an enormous
open fan shape structure, the vast majority of that family tree consists of the bacteria
and the archaea.
Here I'm differentiating between the two of them, the bacteria and the archaea.
Then a little branch of that fan, one rib of the fan heading out, let's say, to the right,
which is the way I usually draw it, heading out to the right, consists of the branch that
will diversify into all the rest of the organisms, the protus, the fungi, the animals and the
plants.
We're out there on the tip of one of those sub-branches.
That's where we are on the giant family tree.
Everything else is bacteria and everything else is archaea.
For many, many years, microbiology labs had as their primary occupation categorizing and
classifying bacteria and archaea, although at the time that they weren't necessarily
known as archaea, but bacteria and archaea based on their activities on petri plates
and their activities in respect to stains.
The entire list of identifiers consisted of what sugars these organisms would eat, what
sorts of acids they might put out, what proteins these organisms would eat, what sorts of gases
they might put out, what sorts of colors would they change if certain stains were added
onto them.
It was all about the way they looked.
In for a long time, that was the entire extent of the taxonomy and the sorting out and the
classifying of all the bacteria and the archaea in the world.
It was very much laboratory bound, that is, you needed to bring the organisms in from
wherever you collected them and you then needed to get them going on petri dishes or in some
other culture form and you needed to get them to respond to things that you had in the laboratory.
A great deal was done with that, but it was limiting because we ended up with a large collection
of organisms that could also be characterized by easy to use in the lab or tractable in
the lab or cooperative in the lab and not necessarily ones that were not easy to culture
and that didn't respond readily to things that could be set up in a laboratory.
It turns out to be an important limitation and it turns out to be the limitation that
characterized our understanding of bacteria and archaea through most of the 20th century
until DNA sequencing became a routine thing.
