people who want to get aboard ships and go out to the middle of the Pacific and go down
on submersible research submarines and explore the deep seas and dig deep into the earth
and go to the poles and go to the tops of mountains and go deep into caves.
We're finding more and more and more different types, perhaps different species of bacteria.
The more we look the more we realize that we haven't been looking and DNA sequence analysis
has made it possible.
That means we don't need to bring these organisms back to the laboratory and force them to grow
on petri dishes, many of them will not.
Or the ones that can grow are maybe not the most interesting of what we're collecting
out there, but we can get their DNA sequences and we can see just how strikingly different
their capabilities must be because they've got a whole different set of genes coding
for a whole different set of capabilities of things that they're doing.
So maybe there are many, many more species or types to still be found and that the new
age of microbiology is not in the laboratory, but it's out on a boat or it's on a polar
ice cap or it's deep inside of a cave taking samples for DNA analysis.
So that's the picture of the family tree and I find it delightfully complicated and I like
that there is some things that are not settled about it.
It means we're in the middle of a very dynamic field at this point, means there are a lot
of exciting areas of research to get into and understanding the family tree.
So I don't find it dismaying although I have to admit that that description may at first
glance sound a little dismaying.
In other words, there's nothing particularly solid right now that I can say except that
bacteria and archaea cover most of the family tree, but in ways that we really don't have
a complete understanding of.
Here's something that I can say about the family tree with a fair amount of certainty
and that is one remarkable thing about the really baseline groups, the most ancient lineages
of the bacteria and the most ancient lineages of the archaea, the ones that look like they're
dating back as far back as we can go, close to four billion years ago.
One thing I can say about those is they tend to live in extremely hot water.
They're called hyperthermophiles.
Some of them live at temperatures close to boiling.
And that's an interesting, perhaps coincidence, perhaps not.
And for those who don't consider it to be a coincidence, they consider it to be suggestive
that life originated in extremely hot water and that those ancient lineages of bacteria
and archaea that are still hyperthermophiles and that we can still find on earth are from
those very early lineages.
Now there's other suggestive evidence for this.
Right before four billion years ago, the earth was molten.
The earth was still accreting, was still cooling down, and there was no liquid water on earth
and therefore life as we know it, life as we understand it, probably could not have
been evolving.
We of course have to depend on what we understand life to be and our certain definitions of
