public database called NCBI, the National Center for Biotechnical Information.
It is a free database, it is maintained by our government, it is the repository for all
sequences that are funded by the government which is a great many of them and it's updated
constantly and you can go in and retrieve and analyze for yourself any sequence that
you want for any organism that is database there and there is a huge database that consists
entirely of bacterial and archaeal genomes, genomes being the complete set of DNA for
those organisms.
So it's all wonderful news, however I will also say that the family tree of organisms
is still very much bounded in laboratory methodologies that are not necessarily strictly
sequencing methodologies, we are still working very much with much of what was developed
for 20th century microbiology before sequencing became so routine.
So that's one problem with the family tree is that we are still developing our understanding
of it and still very much of it is based on laboratory bound understandings of what bacteria
and archaea can do.
The interesting confounding problem with understanding the family tree of bacteria is something called
horizontal transfer, sometimes abbreviated HT that's how common and prevalent it is
that actually requires its own little abbreviation for people who are writing it over and over
again in their laboratory notebooks or field notebooks.
So horizontal transfer and it is very strange from our own point of view and it is a real
complexifying aspect of the family tree.
Let me tell you or remind you what our own point of view is, we are obligately sexual
organisms we humans are, obligately sexual as are the other mammals and by the way there
aren't all that many mammals just a few thousand species.
So we few thousand species of mammals absolutely require sex to pass on our DNA and we don't
really have any other way to do it.
Of course there are some interesting laboratory procedures but I mean as far as natural procedures
we don't have any other way of passing on our DNA to other generations.
We don't have any way of me taking a little sliver off my finger and getting that started
into another human being for example.
And we certainly don't have any method of transferring DNA in any kind of reliable way
from one organism to another of a different species.
Again I'm talking about not any peculiar laboratory procedures, I just mean we don't have any
natural way of passing DNA around in a promiscuous manner to completely different species.
We're not exchanging DNA with dogs or with fungi or with plants.
That's what the bacteria are and they're doing it all the time and it's called horizontal
transfer and so the way to think about this fan of this bacterial family tree with ourselves
is just one little branch is that it's not just radiating arms or radiating branches
of the tree but that the tree is anastomosing which is a word that is used and we refer
to branches that come back together and fuse and then maybe branch out yet again, anastomosing.
It's an anastomosing family tree particularly in the sections which are of the bacteria
and the archaea such that gene flow is going from one branch to another.
It turns out bacteria and archaea are amazingly promiscuous with their DNA, amazing to us
