because we're limited in our sexuality.
They are promiscuous in their DNA to the extent of picking up whatever DNA is in the environment
whether it's from other bacteria and archaea or whether it's from animals or plants or
protists or fungi and incorporating it or not incorporating it and transferring it in
all different mechanisms.
It's extremely useful that they do this so readily it makes genetic engineering very
easy by the way.
Genetic engineering is no invention by humans.
It's merely harnessing what bacteria and archaea already do brilliantly.
That is transfer their DNA all in different directions at all times such that what we've
come to realize about the family tree is that at any given point we're just getting a snapshot
of where all the genetic information is.
There's such a flow of genetic information from branch to branch.
It's a sufficient snapshot that we can identify bacteria and archaea that we can consider
to be species like but as far as looking for a really distinct species with solid boundaries
such that DNA does not travel freely across those boundaries such as what we think of
for mammals for example.
As far as finding that kind of a picture of species for bacteria or archaea it appears
there is no such picture.
It appears that there's much more of a flow of genetic information.
So we have branches but we have anastomosing branches and we have a free flow of genetic
information.
So it means a number of things.
It means that either we have and we don't know which of these by the way either we
have vastly overestimated the number of bacteria or we have vastly underestimated the number
of bacteria and I suppose it could mean a third thing too.
It could mean that the word species doesn't really apply to bacteria in any kind of meaningful
way but let's say that species does and we've either over or underestimated the number of
species and here's why and here's why I think either of those possibilities are equally
fascinating.
Maybe we have overestimated the number of species of bacteria and archaea.
Maybe the gene flow between the branches of the family tree is such that this snapshot
of reality is so fleeting that what I call a species right now will not be a species
in the sense of a species you know 100 years from now, 500 years from now.
Maybe the flow is such that it's almost one big flowing gene pool which is an interesting
thought or maybe we have vastly underestimated the number of species or types of bacteria
because we've been so limited to the laboratory during the last century, during the 20th century
when all the laboratory techniques for microbiology were being developed and essentially we were
coming up with vast lists of bacteria who were tractable on the laboratory.
I mean that was a major criterion, something that we could actually get into the laboratory
onto a petri dish and stain and get them to eat laboratory nutrients.
Right now microbiology is looking very much like a field for adventurers and explorers,
