Unseen Diversity, Lecture 5, The Family Tree of Bacteria, Part 1.
In this lecture, I will address some things that I have mentioned before, but in the context
of our understanding of the family tree of organisms, most of which is bacteria.
I want to remind you that morphology can't get us far with understanding this.
Bacteria are essentially featureless, especially by our standards.
Remember, we're enormous morphological organisms that value other morphologies and which are
highly visual and which can see color and which are best at seeing things of about our
own size and about our own activity level and with features similar to ours.
So we really are in a different place when we're thinking about bacteria, and it can
be something of a mistake to say, okay, what do they look like?
I can tell you what they look like.
They look like punctuation, they look like tiny dots, they look like tiny dashes, they
look like tiny squiggles, they look like somewhat longer squiggles, and a few of them are amorphous,
that is without any particular distinctive shape.
So that's maybe five or six if you include lengths of things, different morphologies
for bacteria.
That's not enough to go on if you're trying to sort out what may be millions of species
of bacteria.
I think you would agree with me on that, that if we're trying to sort out millions of species
of bacteria into their own separate categories, five or six different morphologies won't do
it.
We need to go with something else.
In addition to those morphologies back by the way, some bacteria have particular types
of motilities.
Some of them have flagella, various numbers of flagella that are long, thin, thread,
lip-like organelles extending from their cells that whip around and propel the bacteria
through the water.
The numbers of those flagella and the positions of those flagella also constitute a physical
characteristic that we might latch on to.
But again, that's deceptive and it's certainly not useful by itself for categorizing millions
of species of bacteria.
What we turn to is to what bacteria do.
Bacteria are all about what they do.
By the way, I sometimes get a little frustrated when I get to a website on bacteria for the
general public and see that it features a great many pictures of dots and dashes and
not much of information about what the bacteria are doing because I think that just helps along
the misperception that we should be looking at them as tiny versions of ourselves.
Not literally, but in a sense that is looking for morphologies, looking for things that
we can latch on to as though they were just another morphological entity on the family
tree when they're not.
They're about what they do and we really need to look at what they do.
How do we do that?
We look for things that they're putting out into the environment, signs of the little
chemical reactions that are going on inside of them and things that they are taking up
from the environment.
It is surprisingly easy to see things that they are putting out and things that they
are taking up.
That's what I will focus on when I talk in more detail about how to see bacteria in the
environment.
First of all, back to the family tree.
Let me describe it a little bit further and there is also a description that may help
you in the book that goes with this course.
Most of the family tree, and if you think of it as a big fan shape structure, an enormous
open fan shape structure, the vast majority of that family tree consists of the bacteria
and the archaea.
Here I'm differentiating between the two of them, the bacteria and the archaea.
Then a little branch of that fan, one rib of the fan heading out, let's say, to the right,
which is the way I usually draw it, heading out to the right, consists of the branch that
will diversify into all the rest of the organisms, the protus, the fungi, the animals and the
plants.
We're out there on the tip of one of those sub-branches.
That's where we are on the giant family tree.
Everything else is bacteria and everything else is archaea.
For many, many years, microbiology labs had as their primary occupation categorizing and
classifying bacteria and archaea, although at the time that they weren't necessarily
known as archaea, but bacteria and archaea based on their activities on petri plates
and their activities in respect to stains.
The entire list of identifiers consisted of what sugars these organisms would eat, what
sorts of acids they might put out, what proteins these organisms would eat, what sorts of gases
they might put out, what sorts of colors would they change if certain stains were added
onto them.
It was all about the way they looked.
In for a long time, that was the entire extent of the taxonomy and the sorting out and the
classifying of all the bacteria and the archaea in the world.
It was very much laboratory bound, that is, you needed to bring the organisms in from
wherever you collected them and you then needed to get them going on petri dishes or in some
other culture form and you needed to get them to respond to things that you had in the laboratory.
A great deal was done with that, but it was limiting because we ended up with a large collection
of organisms that could also be characterized by easy to use in the lab or tractable in
the lab or cooperative in the lab and not necessarily ones that were not easy to culture
and that didn't respond readily to things that could be set up in a laboratory.
It turns out to be an important limitation and it turns out to be the limitation that
characterized our understanding of bacteria and archaea through most of the 20th century
until DNA sequencing became a routine thing.
So what is DNA sequencing?
I don't want to go another moment in this lecture without addressing that.
It's a topic unto itself, of course.
It's one of the most important innovations of the last part of the 20th century and into
the 21st century in biology.
It goes something like this, if I were to give a simplified account of what we do when
we sequence.
First thing we do is we get an organism that we would like to know the DNA of.
The DNA is the linear representation of all of the information that is needed to make that
organism.
Information is in the form of genes and it's in the form of other sequences and if you
want to visualize it, it turns out that there are just four chemicals that make up DNA that
can be represented by the letters A, C, G and T.
So if I go looking at a DNA sequence loaded with information, I'm really looking at nothing
but A, Cs, Gs and Ts.
Lines and lines and lines of them all representing the information for a particular organism.
I've got that organism.
I take some of its DNA out and here's the part that we can do now with a machine.
So I'm not going to describe to you what we used to do in the old days by hand, which
was laborious and which was tedious and which would take days and months to complete.
I will simply walk us over to a machine called a sequencer.
We will put the DNA into that sequencer and it will use one or another of a couple of
methods, which in essence go like this and this is going to be a simplification of what
these machines do, but in essence they are removing one letter at a time, reading it
is an A, C, G or T, recording that, removing the next letter, reading it, A, C, G or T,
removing the next one and the next and the next and the next and doing so in this amazing
automatic and methodical way.
There are errors that can be made, there are all kinds of little problems that can occur,
but for the most part it's an absolutely wonderful process and out of that you get a whole string
of A's, C's, G's and T's that represent the information that was in the DNA from the organism
that you put in.
Now you're not quite done at that point, you've then got to analyze those A, C's, G's
and T's and that maybe is the most complicated process of it all, especially now that we
have machines that can read DNA one letter at a time.
And so the analysis of DNA is mostly a computational field, computer programs are written that
can look at strings of A's, C's, G's and T's, looking for patterns, seeking out sections
that look like they might be genes and there are certain characteristics of sequences that
are gene-like, other sequences that are not gene-like but are evocative of something else
and little by little a computer program can analyze the strings that have been produced
and to try to make a good guess at which sections are genes and which sections are something
other than genes which might also be interesting.
And all of this information gets put into databases and as it happens we have an enormous
public database called NCBI, the National Center for Biotechnical Information.
It is a free database, it is maintained by our government, it is the repository for all
sequences that are funded by the government which is a great many of them and it's updated
constantly and you can go in and retrieve and analyze for yourself any sequence that
you want for any organism that is database there and there is a huge database that consists
entirely of bacterial and archaeal genomes, genomes being the complete set of DNA for
those organisms.
So it's all wonderful news, however I will also say that the family tree of organisms
is still very much bounded in laboratory methodologies that are not necessarily strictly
sequencing methodologies, we are still working very much with much of what was developed
for 20th century microbiology before sequencing became so routine.
So that's one problem with the family tree is that we are still developing our understanding
of it and still very much of it is based on laboratory bound understandings of what bacteria
and archaea can do.
The interesting confounding problem with understanding the family tree of bacteria is something called
horizontal transfer, sometimes abbreviated HT that's how common and prevalent it is
that actually requires its own little abbreviation for people who are writing it over and over
again in their laboratory notebooks or field notebooks.
So horizontal transfer and it is very strange from our own point of view and it is a real
complexifying aspect of the family tree.
Let me tell you or remind you what our own point of view is, we are obligately sexual
organisms we humans are, obligately sexual as are the other mammals and by the way there
aren't all that many mammals just a few thousand species.
So we few thousand species of mammals absolutely require sex to pass on our DNA and we don't
really have any other way to do it.
Of course there are some interesting laboratory procedures but I mean as far as natural procedures
we don't have any other way of passing on our DNA to other generations.
We don't have any way of me taking a little sliver off my finger and getting that started
into another human being for example.
And we certainly don't have any method of transferring DNA in any kind of reliable way
from one organism to another of a different species.
Again I'm talking about not any peculiar laboratory procedures, I just mean we don't have any
natural way of passing DNA around in a promiscuous manner to completely different species.
We're not exchanging DNA with dogs or with fungi or with plants.
That's what the bacteria are and they're doing it all the time and it's called horizontal
transfer and so the way to think about this fan of this bacterial family tree with ourselves
is just one little branch is that it's not just radiating arms or radiating branches
of the tree but that the tree is anastomosing which is a word that is used and we refer
to branches that come back together and fuse and then maybe branch out yet again, anastomosing.
It's an anastomosing family tree particularly in the sections which are of the bacteria
and the archaea such that gene flow is going from one branch to another.
It turns out bacteria and archaea are amazingly promiscuous with their DNA, amazing to us
because we're limited in our sexuality.
They are promiscuous in their DNA to the extent of picking up whatever DNA is in the environment
whether it's from other bacteria and archaea or whether it's from animals or plants or
protists or fungi and incorporating it or not incorporating it and transferring it in
all different mechanisms.
It's extremely useful that they do this so readily it makes genetic engineering very
easy by the way.
Genetic engineering is no invention by humans.
It's merely harnessing what bacteria and archaea already do brilliantly.
That is transfer their DNA all in different directions at all times such that what we've
come to realize about the family tree is that at any given point we're just getting a snapshot
of where all the genetic information is.
There's such a flow of genetic information from branch to branch.
It's a sufficient snapshot that we can identify bacteria and archaea that we can consider
to be species like but as far as looking for a really distinct species with solid boundaries
such that DNA does not travel freely across those boundaries such as what we think of
for mammals for example.
As far as finding that kind of a picture of species for bacteria or archaea it appears
there is no such picture.
It appears that there's much more of a flow of genetic information.
So we have branches but we have anastomosing branches and we have a free flow of genetic
information.
So it means a number of things.
It means that either we have and we don't know which of these by the way either we
have vastly overestimated the number of bacteria or we have vastly underestimated the number
of bacteria and I suppose it could mean a third thing too.
It could mean that the word species doesn't really apply to bacteria in any kind of meaningful
way but let's say that species does and we've either over or underestimated the number of
species and here's why and here's why I think either of those possibilities are equally
fascinating.
Maybe we have overestimated the number of species of bacteria and archaea.
Maybe the gene flow between the branches of the family tree is such that this snapshot
of reality is so fleeting that what I call a species right now will not be a species
in the sense of a species you know 100 years from now, 500 years from now.
Maybe the flow is such that it's almost one big flowing gene pool which is an interesting
thought or maybe we have vastly underestimated the number of species or types of bacteria
because we've been so limited to the laboratory during the last century, during the 20th century
when all the laboratory techniques for microbiology were being developed and essentially we were
coming up with vast lists of bacteria who were tractable on the laboratory.
I mean that was a major criterion, something that we could actually get into the laboratory
onto a petri dish and stain and get them to eat laboratory nutrients.
Right now microbiology is looking very much like a field for adventurers and explorers,
people who want to get aboard ships and go out to the middle of the Pacific and go down
on submersible research submarines and explore the deep seas and dig deep into the earth
and go to the poles and go to the tops of mountains and go deep into caves.
We're finding more and more and more different types, perhaps different species of bacteria.
The more we look the more we realize that we haven't been looking and DNA sequence analysis
has made it possible.
That means we don't need to bring these organisms back to the laboratory and force them to grow
on petri dishes, many of them will not.
Or the ones that can grow are maybe not the most interesting of what we're collecting
out there, but we can get their DNA sequences and we can see just how strikingly different
their capabilities must be because they've got a whole different set of genes coding
for a whole different set of capabilities of things that they're doing.
So maybe there are many, many more species or types to still be found and that the new
age of microbiology is not in the laboratory, but it's out on a boat or it's on a polar
ice cap or it's deep inside of a cave taking samples for DNA analysis.
So that's the picture of the family tree and I find it delightfully complicated and I like
that there is some things that are not settled about it.
It means we're in the middle of a very dynamic field at this point, means there are a lot
of exciting areas of research to get into and understanding the family tree.
So I don't find it dismaying although I have to admit that that description may at first
glance sound a little dismaying.
In other words, there's nothing particularly solid right now that I can say except that
bacteria and archaea cover most of the family tree, but in ways that we really don't have
a complete understanding of.
Here's something that I can say about the family tree with a fair amount of certainty
and that is one remarkable thing about the really baseline groups, the most ancient lineages
of the bacteria and the most ancient lineages of the archaea, the ones that look like they're
dating back as far back as we can go, close to four billion years ago.
One thing I can say about those is they tend to live in extremely hot water.
They're called hyperthermophiles.
Some of them live at temperatures close to boiling.
And that's an interesting, perhaps coincidence, perhaps not.
And for those who don't consider it to be a coincidence, they consider it to be suggestive
that life originated in extremely hot water and that those ancient lineages of bacteria
and archaea that are still hyperthermophiles and that we can still find on earth are from
those very early lineages.
Now there's other suggestive evidence for this.
Right before four billion years ago, the earth was molten.
The earth was still accreting, was still cooling down, and there was no liquid water on earth
and therefore life as we know it, life as we understand it, probably could not have
been evolving.
We of course have to depend on what we understand life to be and our certain definitions of
it.
But previous to four billion years ago, it doesn't look like it would have been possible.
Around four billion years ago, the earth cooled enough that there was liquid water, but it
was hot water.
And a way to think about it is that it was geysers, it was hot springs, the earth's crust
was still relatively thin, there were probably volcanoes, there were probably rifts of the
sort that we see in the Pacific vents right now, rifts where plates are pulling apart
and extremely hot liquid and molten rock can come up.
And this was the environment in which life originated perhaps four billion years ago.
Thinking about that family tree that I suggested you either measure out across a room by pacing
it off or even if you're driving in your car that you think about as the extent of your
dashboard across the front of your car, thinking about four billion years to the present with
half way across the timeline being about two billion years ago.
Let me put some items on that timeline for you to visualize.
We have the first microfossils presumably of bacteria at about three and a half billion
years ago.
So on your timeline, we're just outside of that four billion year extent of your timeline.
About three and a half billion years ago are the first microfossils.
What do they look like?
They look like tiny dots and dashes, tiny punctuation points, feature lists.
You can't interpret much about them, although I will do a little bit of interpretation concerning
those microfossils later in this lecture, but there's not much you can interpret from
them.
Typical of bacteria, lacking morphology, if it gets amazing those microfossils were first
found because it really took some faith to take a rock in which you could see nothing
with your naked eye, cut it open, make a very, very thin section of it and put it under a
microscope and look for something as tiny as bacteria was an amazing thing to do.
So if we have the first microfossils at about three and a half billion years ago and if the
earth was molten before four billion years ago, then we're extrapolating that the origin
of life must have occurred somewhere around four billion years ago.
Because the fossils that we see at 3.5 are well enough developed, look like recognizable
bacteria such that they are, that that can't be the origin of life.
There must be something before that.
So that's why I have been saying in these lectures that we're placing origin of life
at around four billion years ago, which is the extent of the timeline that I've been
suggesting you try to visualize.
Okay, now other things that go on this timeline include the origin of more complicated cells
which is placed by some people at around two and a half billion years ago.
And I want to place them on this timeline right now because it turns out that those
more complicated cells that make up us, that make up plants, that make up fungi and protists,
the cells that actually have some morphology to them, the cells that really are the classic
cells that people think of when they say describe a cell and describe the things that are inside
of a cell.
Those complicated cells arose as combinations of bacterial cells in a way that ends up making
us essentially communities of bacteria.
We think we have our own complicated cells, but those complicated cells are really nothing
more than bacterial cells that have gotten together.
So it's an important point in the history of bacteria that around 2.5 billion years ago,
some very interesting things began to happen with more complicated cells, but it's still
part of the bacterial lineage.
And it may be that those complicated cells were predisposed to being multicellular eventually.
They had characteristics that made it especially easy for them to get into multicellular larger
structures.
Thus we get fungi and animals and plants.
I still consider it to be part of the lineage of bacteria.
And this leads me to some controversy about how to talk about these major lineages.
And at this point, let me deviate a little bit into a controversy about how to classify
bacteria and archaea and the organisms that came out of those complicated cells at 2.5
billion years ago.
And for ordinary folks, including myself, I don't tend to want to get embroiled in this
controversy and yet I think it's unavoidable in some ways if we're going to have some sort
of unified way of talking about it.
And it goes something like this.
Before we had a really rich understanding of who bacteria and archaea are and what
exactly is going on with fungi and animals and plants and protus, and I'm assuming we
have a rich understanding now, we probably don't still have as rich an understanding
as people will have hundreds of years from now, but before we had our current understanding,
all organisms were divided into two kingdoms, animals or plants.
That left out bacteria and archaea.
It left out fungi, it left out protus, and those all got jammed into one or another category
and they tended to get put into the category of plants.
So just extra, extra tiny cryptic featureless plants were what bacteria were essentially
considered.
Obviously, that's not very satisfying, it's not very helpful.
Two kingdoms was by no means a good way to divide everything up.
Then came a five or six kingdom scheme, and for many, many years that was the dominant
scheme for dividing up organisms, and in fact I have been using that throughout, and I will
now deconstruct that scheme right now.
You will hear that I've been using it throughout.
I have been saying bacteria as one kingdom, and then I've been saying usually in one sentence
the protists, which is the second kingdom, the fungi, which is the third kingdom, the
plants, which are a fourth kingdom, and the animals, which are a fifth kingdom.
That's the traditional five kingdom system which took over from the two kingdom system,
which is much more satisfying, in which put a spotlight on some organisms that up to that
point had been just, oh, a strange part of the plants, something that we don't really
need to give much more of a name to.
They're just tiny, tiny versions of plants.
Suddenly, into the textbooks, including textbooks at the elementary school level, and middle
school, and high school level, were fungi featured in their own kingdom, protists featured
in their own kingdom, certainly bacteria in their own kingdom, along with animals and
plants each in their own kingdoms.
Then came a slight modification of that called the six kingdom system, and that was with
the acknowledgement that the bacteria could be divided into the archaea and the new group,
the new subgroup bacteria that I've been talking about.
Six kingdom, also satisfying, also acknowledges these diverse branches and also keeps in the
forefront the real diversity of organisms that can be studied either in schools or as
naturalists.
What has happened most recently is a three super kingdom system that takes into account
the predominant members of the family tree of organisms, which are bacteria and archaea,
and the relatively minor branch that extends off and consists of the animals and plants
and protists and fungi.
Some new thinking about this is that we ought to have three super kingdoms, one is the bacteria,
one is the archaea, and the other is all the rest of those things.
That will reflect most accurately evolution.
That will reflect most accurately what are the really major groups on the family tree.
A great deal of scientific politics is involved with this.
Scientific reputations are on the line concerning this issue.
I know it's hard to believe.
Sometimes I find it hard to believe, even though I'm in the field.
It's actually enormously controversial, and sometimes I just like to step away from the
whole thing and say, what will be served best?
What will serve us best if we're trying to educate a new generation of biologists?
Do I really want to take all of those fascinating groups, the protists and the fungi along with
plants that sometimes don't get enough attention in schools, and just tuck them all together
under one rubric?
Not necessarily.
I'm pointing all this out to you because if you decide to go searching for yourself about
how to classify things on family trees and how to classify things on these timelines
that I've been talking about, you will encounter aspects of this controversy.
It may seem a little confusing, and one thing that you should realize is this is another
example of a field in flux, a field that has not settled down yet in respect to its taxonomy.
There are some good aspects of that.
It means there's still lots of work to be done, and taxonomy is one of those aspects
of the work that needs to be done, but it does mean that if you're looking up these topics
and trying to get a settled answer as to how to talk about the classification system and
how to talk about the family tree, there will not necessarily be a simple answer.
So I call it good news and bad news.
Here's some good news.
There was lots of speculation after the completion of the human genome project as to what some
of the consequences would be.
Lots of really fun speculation, including the beginning of a new field of bioethics considering
what it would mean to know your entire genome and what it would mean to know what genes
you had and what it would mean to know where particular traits, including disease traits,
were coming from, maybe even to be able to figure out what you would die of or what you
had a high probability of dying from.
So fascinating things to think about, but I think one of the most interesting and powerful
consequences of the completion of the human genome project was that suddenly, rather suddenly,
all of those sequences, those machines that were doing the sequencing, all those tens
of thousands of sequences and the humans that operated them, tens of thousands of humans
operating those sequences, felt idle, temporarily idle, because it was done, the genome was
done, and the analysis was just beginning, but as far as the cranking out of the actual
sequence, it was done, except that nothing's ever done, nobody just closes the door on
those sequences and says, well, that was done.
No, instead, they turn to other things that they might sequence, and it turns out that
it's very easy and quick to sequence a complete bacterium.
It's actually fairly difficult to sequence something as complicated as a human, and that
took a while, and those projects tend to take a while, but it's very easy to take a new
bacterium that you just isolated from a cave or the deep sea or the poles or pretty much
any place on earth, bring it back to the laboratory, have it sequenced relatively cheaply, because
the other great consequence of the human genome project was the technology developed to the
point where sequencing became cheaper and cheaper and cheaper, have it sequenced very,
very quickly, and as a result, one of the really growing aspects of sequencing is the
sequencing of bacterial and archaeal genome, so if you go to the government database of
sequences, which is NCBI, which is a public database where you can get any sequence of
any organism you want, you certainly can find the human genome sequences, and there's more
than one at this point, but you can find hundreds and hundreds of bacterial and archaeal sequences,
and it's being that particular part of the database is being updated every single day,
so that people who want to keep up with that need to look at it all the time, they need
to monitor it constantly, and it's thanks to that that we have such a rich understanding
now, and it's getting even richer by the day of what the bacterial and archaeal parts of
the family tree look like, so if I were to choose one really wonderful consequence of
the human genome project, besides a greater understanding of our own selves, it would
be a much, much greater understanding, a very exciting understanding of bacteria and archaea.
In the next lecture, I would like to elaborate more on those extreme bacteria that I alluded
to that are called the hyperthermophiles, the ones that are growing at near-boiling
temperatures and the ones that might be lineages dating back, probably not directly, but almost
directly from a time that is around when we call the origin of life.
