And when you see that you should say aha there it is those are helophilic archaea that I'm looking
at. Now it's even more interesting especially if you have a little story to tell about them,
they're not just helophilic archaea, they're helophilic archaea that are doing something
really different with their metabolism. That pink color or that reddish color is
rhodopsin and it happens to be the same rhodopsin that we have in our eyes that is allowing us to
pick up light and to process it or to be at the beginning part of the process of detecting light
by our eyes. So our retina has rhodopsin in it and so do these bacteria and it happens to be a
reddish pink pigment that's the rhodo part of the rhodopsin. The opsin part by the way implies
that it was originally isolated from eyes and here's what they're doing with it. They are using it
as a little solar powered pump. They are for the most part heterotrophs just like us and so they are
eating whatever food is available just like us except when we pause for a second there they're
not munching on the food just like us. Their food is nutrients that they absorb through their cell
membranes so at no point are they taking up food in the sense that we take up food but whatever
nutrients are in their environment they're taking up with their cell membranes and processing it
just like us so they're heterotrophs they're food eaters but that's not all they are. They are also
users of a solar powered pump which allows them to get a little extra energy from the light of the
sun and at first glance you might say well isn't that just like plants aren't plants getting energy
from the light of the sun and I will say no it's not just like plants it's really something
remarkably different because remember I just said these are heterotrophs so they're taking up food
from their environment just as we do. What the rhodopsin solar powered pump seems to be about
is a supplement and here's an analogy that may help you. Your home may have a furnace that burns
fuel which is just like a heterotroph using food and burning that food and using that for energy
so that's what we do. We're a furnace like in our use of a fuel or food and so are the
helophilic archaea but in addition your house might have a solar panel to supplement that energy
and to take just a little bit of energy from the sun and process it to give a little extra
something to the energy use of your household so it's a combination of a furnace and a solar panel
that's what's going on with these helophilic archaea. Now for a long long time this was
thought to be fascinating maybe even exploitable in an industrial way by the way not just fascinating
but people thought well solar powered pump little chemical solar powered pump let's see where we
can go with that so not just fascinating but potentially exploitable but limited to these
strange archaea who are essentially sun bathing out on these open salt flats where the sun is
shining hotly that's why they're wonderful salt flats and where they're getting this additional
energy and that's it it was exceptional. Well I think we're changing our minds about that
recently there have been some genome projects that have involved sailing around the world
