partly because the major enzyme, the major molecule that's making the PCR reaction occur,
is coming from a hot spring organism. So thermos aquaticus is the famous bacterium of Yellowstone
from the hyperthermophilic areas of Yellowstone. Its nickname, by the way, or its abbreviated name
is TAC. So it's the T from thermos, and it's the AQ from Aquaticus. So it's TACTAQ is the nickname
for it. And if you're looking it up or reading more about it, look for TAC as the nickname for
what that is and realize that it's a Yellowstone organism. In other sections of Yellowstone,
it's not so much that you see colors in those hot waters that are greater than 80 degrees
centigrade, somewhere between 80 and 100 degrees centigrade, but rather you see mud. These are
boiling mud pots. Some of them are at a full rolling boil, and they're absolutely dense with mud.
The mud is popping and splattering, and they're extremely acidic. You can smell the acid in the
air. You can smell sulfur in the air. Really dangerous looking features. Again, you're standing
on a boardwalk. You're safe. You're looking down into the feature. And when you look into that
feature, you're looking at an environment where essentially only hyperthermophilic archaea
can dwell. So here again is another example of my combining habitat and field mark. The beautiful
thing about that, as you can say with confidence, in that boiling hot mud pot, there is nothing or
that mud pool. There is nothing but hyperthermophilic archaea. There are no hyperthermophilic
archaea bacteria in there, and there is certainly no bacteria or archaea that can handle lower
temperatures. Now, between 60 and 80 degrees is the group of bacteria and archaea that are
characterized as thermophilic. And you can see that the scale I'm talking about has been neatly
divided in 20 degree increments so far. Something will happen as we get a little bit lower,
but so far we've gone from 60 to 80 to 100. So we've got a definition for thermophiles and a
definition for hyperthermophiles. Where can you find thermophiles? Yellowstone Park, because just
as soon as you get away from the boiling hot center of a feature, a boiling hot geyser or a
boiling hot spring or a boiling hot steam vent, your water and your steam, which condenses, of
course, eventually goes to whatever the ambient temperature is of the park. It cools down. And
so you're going to have an entire gradient of warm to cool around pretty much every single
feature at Yellowstone. And in that gradient, you're going to gradually go from 100 degrees to 80
degrees down to 60 degrees and down to cooler, often with bands of color corresponding almost
rainbow-like coming out from the feature. And so between 60 and 80 is the realm of the archaea
that are thermophilic, mainly because of their temperature. And again, you can look at that
with confidence knowing that you're not seeing any other organisms except for those deep
thermophilic lineages. Now, things get interesting with the temperature scale when we get below
60 degrees. And I think this is another wonderful example of a field in flux, a field in which
things are not quite settled yet as to how we should use the terminology. It's because for many,
