is boiling. The water can be extremely acidic. The waters can be unfathomably deep. I mean,
some of these go deep, deep into the Earth, some of these bodies of water. Yet the National Park
Service has put boardwalks everywhere so that you can walk in safety past the most dangerous of
features and look down into them and look across at them and be in the vicinity of steam and geysers,
et cetera. It's remarkable because I've been to some other places that have hot springs, but
none as spectacular as Yellowstone. So that was a little advertisement for Yellowstone National Park.
I think it's worth going to. And even if you went at one point and observed buffalo and observed
lodgepole pines and the other major organisms that they've got there, you might want to consider
going again because this time may be focusing on the hyperthermophiles. By the way, the National
Park Service at Yellowstone is more and more and more every year knowledgeable about the bacteria
and archaea that they have. And so more and more of the signage at Yellowstone focuses on the bacteria
and the archaea that are in the features. So let's say that we're at Yellowstone and we're
ignoring the buffalo, which are there by the hundreds and thousands, and we're ignoring the lodgepole
pines, which are the predominant trees there, and we're focusing in on a pool. And we happen to
know that its temperature is something above 80 degrees centigrade, with 100 degrees centigrade
being boiling. Between 80 and 100 degrees centigrade is the realm of the hyperthermophiles.
It's been defined as the realm of the hyperthermophiles. And the amazing thing that you see in that pool
that is somewhere between 80 and 100 degrees is all different colors, almost a rainbow of colors.
Reds and oranges and yellows in the texture, although you wouldn't touch it because the
water is near boiling, but the texture, you can see the texture. You can see that there's
a certain slimy, kind of flocculent, scummy quality to those colors. And what you're essentially
looking at are the field marks, as well as the habitat of hyperthermophilic bacteria and archaea.
And there are ways to look at the colors and to look exactly at the temperature that those
colors happen to be in, and to even narrow down further exactly which hyperthermophiles you're
looking at. I won't actually get into that specific and aspect of this, because I think it's in a
accomplishment by itself just to know that you're looking at two deep lineages of bacteria and
archaea right there between that temperature of 80 and 100 degrees and nothing else. There's nothing
else that will grow there except for the hyperthermophilic bacteria and archaea. Now, one of the
really famous bacteria that dwells at those temperatures at Yellowstone and at some other
venues of that temperature is a famous bacterium called thermos aquaticus. And it is the bacterium
from which an enzyme protein was isolated to do what's called the polymerase chain reaction, or PCR.
Now, PCR is a process by which large quantities of DNA can be extracted and multiplied in the
laboratory for the purpose of then doing further research on that DNA. So it's an extremely important
technique. It happens best at hot temperatures for reasons that I won't get into, and it happens
