many, many years, scientists were convinced, including microbiologists, that nothing, absolutely
nothing could grow greater than 60 degrees centigrade. In fact, 60 degrees centigrade was
traditionally pegged in textbooks everywhere is the temperature at which proteins would fall apart,
DNA would fall apart, RNA would fall apart. It was impossible to have any of those maintained
higher than 60 degrees. That process of falling apart, by the way, is called denaturation. So
above 60 degrees, everything would be denatured, and we might as well not even look. So it was a
huge innovation even to look above 60 degrees in Yellowstone, by the way. It was one of the
first places where people went seriously looking and made those remarkable discoveries of thermophiles
and hyperthermophiles. Meanwhile, a very different temperature range and set of terminology had
been developed. And so you can still find in textbooks, especially textbooks with an orientation
toward bacteria that are pathogens or bacteria that are associated with us, with humans,
you can still find that thermophiles are those bacteria that grow between 45 degrees and 60 degrees.
Okay, so there's another sort of, meanwhile, in a parallel universe, we have these other
thermophiles. Now, who are they? Well, those are some of the compost heap thermophiles that will
sometimes heat up a compost pile, especially if the compost pile is well contained and has
been maintained properly will heat that compost pile up with the heat of their own fermentative
activities with their own metabolism. And that compost pile can get pretty toasty. And sometimes
on a cool day, you'll see compost pile steaming from this heat. And for a long time, those were
the thermophiles. And I'm mentioning this only because if you decide to look into thermophiles a
little bit more, you will find this other area of thermophiles that doesn't seem to match what
I've been explaining to you about Yellowstone. So I would say those are less than thermophiles at
this point. But there's another problem. For many, many years, microbiology has been presented from
the point of view of ourselves, humans, and our body temperature is 37 degrees approximately centigrade.
And room temperature for us, what we would call comfortable room temperature is 25 degrees centigrade.
And so for many years, the whole temperature scale began there, and then moved up in increments
towards 60 degrees, which was the old high point. And so what we end up with with that older scale,
which still appears sometimes, is sort of a truncated range in which the heat loving bacteria
can be placed. And now what we have, especially now that we have this much greater understanding
of the real high range of temperature loving bacteria is we've got a much wider scale.
But it's also why we don't go by the 20 degrees once we get below 60. We come to a rest somewhere
in the middle of our own favorite temperature ranges, and we call that mesophilic. So the
mesophiles are round about our own temperature range, just like us. By the way, there are also
cryophiles, and those are cold loving organisms. And their scale also still needs a bit of work
as to exactly where they begin and where they end. And again, it's part of the old
