legacy of our own selves being of a particular temperature. And we also know relatively little
so far about cryophiles, that is definitely an emerging field of microbiology, cold loving
organisms. And the more the poles are explored, and the ice and water under the poles are explored,
the more that set of temperature ranges will be expanded and better understood. And maybe at
some point, there'll be a coherent scale for all of those various extremophiles.
Now, the next group of extremophiles that I want to address are the halo files. Those are the
salt lovers, halo files. And they are almost all archaea. So this gives me a chance to give you
another archaeal field mark. And this one also is visible in a number of different venues.
One of them is if you happen to be in a place where there are either natural
salt turns, that is natural places where salt is evaporating and forming a salty crust on the
surface of the earth. And some of these places, by the way, will actually have the word salt in
them. So it will be the salt licks or the salt flats or the salt something else, you can actually
find them on maps. Or if you're at a commercial salt works, a place where a natural salt evaporating
area has been turned into more of a commercial enterprise for the purpose of getting salt
for food and salt for putting on roads and for various industrial processes. If you're at either
of those areas, either looking from the ground or even better looking from the air, if you are
flying over such an area, you will see a beautiful patchwork of pinks and reds and oranges, especially
in a commercial salt works, where different pools have been segregated in different states of salt
and evaporating salt are being maintained in a regular sort of way. You'll see a gorgeous
patchwork of all different shades of pinks and oranges and reds. If you go to a natural salt
turn, then there won't be so much of a patchwork effect, but you'll very definitely see a sort of
a pinkish to orange tint to that salt that is either crystallizing out and forming solid crystals
or is in the process of doing so. And what you're essentially seeing there are helophilic archaea.
It's a group unto itself and it's got a very unusual metabolism that I will describe to you.
Although as soon as I say the word unusual there, I'll say that for many years it seemed
extremely unusual. There may be something new developing around that such that it will turn
out to be not as unusual as we once thought. Before I get to that strange metabolism though,
let me tell you the third place that you might be able to see this pink tinted salt or pink tinted
water that is evaporating to make salt. And that is piles of road salt that are being maintained
probably all over the colder parts of the United States for the purpose of putting on roads in
the wintertime are sometimes kept indoors or kept under a cover and therefore kept relatively dry,
but sometimes they're left out a little bit and can get damp. And some of those same bacteria,
those same helophilic archaea that were in the original commercial salt work that produced that
road salt will have been carried along with it and will turn parts of that pile of salt pink.
