Unseen Diversity, Lecture 6, The Extremophiles
In this lecture, I talk about extremophiles, which is a wonderful word, extreme file means loving,
so loving of extremes. And for many years, this was said almost as one and the same as
the archaea, even before the archaea were known as their own distinctive group. There was something
about them that was considered to be a little bit different, little bit odd, not the usual
purview of a microbiology class, partly because it was difficult to get many of them into the
laboratory and into culture. And extremophile and archaea began to be said together as though
they were one and the same thing. In fact, there are bacteria who also enjoy extreme environments
who love extreme environments. But this lecture will give me a chance to focus in on the archaea
a little more and to even give you some field marks and habitats of archaea that will allow you to
spot them in the wild. And it's the extreme nature of the particular archaea that I will focus on
that allows them to be easily seen or more easily than than certain other archaea or bacteria.
So, recall that the origin of life was most likely very hot and that the first lineages of
bacteria and archaea at the base of the family tree of all organisms tend to be hyperthermophilic,
extreme heat lovers. And by extreme heat, I mean some of these bacteria and archaea can grow at
boiling temperatures. Now, you have an opportunity to see some of them. There are two major places
on earth now where hyperthermophilic bacteria and archaea can be observed. One requires a
research submersible, which is not a likely venue for typical observation by ordinary
folks who are not researchers. But let me start with that to explain how exciting that research
is and what sorts of things people are seeing. They take little research submarines, often in
a spherical or ovoid shape to withstand the extreme pressures that are going to be encountered,
because they're going to take them three miles down or more into the deepest parts of the Pacific
Ocean and the deepest parts of the Atlantic Ocean. And in the case of the Pacific Ocean,
they take them down into these deep sea vent or rift areas. It's pitch black down there, of course.
And originally, when those submersible research submarines, which sometimes hold only two people,
descended to those depths, there was no particular certainty that there would be much of anything
in the way of organisms down there. The great surprise was where these vents are occurring in
the deepest part of the ocean, where enormous continental plates are moving apart or moving
in some way in respect to each other, past each other, up is coming boiling hot water from the
depths and up is coming, in some cases, molten rock in the form of lava of one sort or another.
And the great surprise was that in that freezing cold black water where the boiling water is mixing
is a place with elaborate, complicated, wonderful communities of organisms,
all based on the activities of bacteria and archaea who can dwell in those boiling temperatures.
By the way, not boiling for long, as soon as that boiling water hits the freezing cold ocean water,
