you immediately get a gradient of warm to then cool to then cold water. But right in the middle
of the place where the hottest of water is spewing out, there are bacteria that are doing
just fine there and those are hyperthermophilic bacteria and archaea. I will say a little more
about that particular community in a subsequent lecture. There's some very interesting things
going on in the deep sea vent hyperthermophilic communities. But let me foreshadow a little
bit. It's not just bacteria and archaea. They are growing so abundantly and so
wonderfully and doing so extremely well with cycling nutrients amongst themselves
that they can also support a large, diverse, and morphologically interesting community of animals.
So the big surprise for researchers who went down in that submersible for the first time
was that they saw first of all a community of animals deep, deep, deep in the ocean.
And it was later that they realized it was being supported by a community of hyperthermophilic
bacteria and archaea. But that's off limits to ordinary naturalists. It's off limits to me.
I've never seen that with my own eyes. I've only seen videos taken from submersibles and you can
go on the internet and probably see for yourself videos taken from submersibles. And that may be
the closest that your eye gets to a deep sea thermal vent. However, there is one place on land
that is just the most remarkable venue for observing hyperthermophilic bacteria and archaea.
And that is Yellowstone National Park. And I talk it up in a particular way when I do talk about it
as a pilgrimage for anyone interested in microbiology, for anyone interested in
bacteriology, for anyone who wants to expand that aspect of their natural history studies.
It's the most remarkable area. It is a place that really should geologically be on an ocean floor
somewhere, but due to some peculiarities of geology finds itself essentially in Wyoming.
It is a place that is roughly analogous to some ocean floor activities that are occurring
along the Pacific vent and in the vicinity of the Hawaiian islands. Yet again, there it is in Wyoming
there for us to see because we're terrestrial organisms and here's our chance to see this.
The Earth's crust is extremely thin in the area of Yellowstone. It's an area of great plate movement
of the sort that you see typically in vent areas of deep oceans. And yet again, there it is on dry
land and we can get a look at it easily. Even better than that, unlike other thermal vent
terrestrial environments on Earth, this one is pristine. Many of them have been exploited
for energy. It's an obvious thing to do. You've got hot water spewing out of the ground.
Why not harness some of that and use it for hot water and use it for heat?
So there are other places around the world where there are terrestrial hot springs in huge abundance,
but many of those have been taken over by industries that want to use that kind of energy.
And what's really remarkable about Yellowstone is it's pristine. The other remarkable thing
is that it's safe and these areas are intrinsically unsafe. The ground can be unstable. The water
