Unseen Diversity Lecture 7 An Enormous and Diverse Group, the Proteobacteria
This lecture is about an enormous and diverse group of bacteria called the Proteobacteria.
The Proteobacteria are a wonderful example of the kind of upheaval and excitement that
occurred when DNA sequences began to be routinely produced and analyzed.
This particular large group of bacteria, the Proteobacteria, had been known through the
entire 20th century, pretty well established, we thought, in respect to their classification,
and then came a wonderful, exciting upheaval of all of that with DNA sequencing.
So the Proteobacteria, if you go to NCBI, the National Center for Biotechnology Information,
which is the repository for all the DNA sequences that are coming in, a huge, well-organized
database where you can get any DNA sequence you want, and if you look at all of the bacterial
genomes there, you will find that of the 600 that are there currently, about half of them
are of Proteobacteria, so about 300 are of Proteobacteria.
That's at this speaking, that's a constantly updated database, and those numbers will change
in the future, but about half right now are Proteobacteria.
So what does that mean?
Well, it doesn't necessarily mean that half of all the bacteria in the world are Proteobacteria.
It does mean that Proteobacteria have been relatively easy to culture, so that through
most of the 20th century, during which a lot of microbiology was happening in the lab with
culturing and staining and that sort of thing, Proteobacteria featured very highly as the
subject.
When it came time to sequencing, obviously everything that we could get in the laboratory
was sequenced first, or much of it was sequenced first, and therefore the database reflects
that, the number of genomes that are completed, the number of bacteria that we understand
the DNA of.
The other thing that skews the database of genome sequences to the Proteobacteria is
that of the pathogens that we know well and that are well studied, many of those are Proteobacteria.
That does not mean that all Proteobacteria are pathogens far from it, but pathogens often
are Proteobacteria, so the small number of bacteria that are pathogens often are Proteobacteria,
and I will of course be saying more about that in the lecture that I'm going to devote
to pathogens, and I'll tell you exactly who some of those Proteobacteria are.
What will happen in the future as more and more sequences come in?
I think the Proteobacteria will eventually get to their correct place as one among many
of important groups of bacteria and archaea, and I don't think they will dominate the database
as much as they are dominating it now, but if you want to get hold of some Proteobacterial
DNA sequences, at this point they're pretty easy to get a hold of.
Now here's a really interesting thing that happened.
The Proteobacteria had gotten all sorted out into different subgroups, all based on their
behavior on Petri dishes, and their behavior with stains, and their behavior with various
nutrients that were added to Petri dishes, and other criteria of that sort, and microbiology
students for generations memorized those criteria, and I can remember in graduate school myself
when I was first starting to get interested in bacteria, taking the Proteobacteria very
seriously and learning a great deal of the classification by heart so that I could use
it, which is a typical thing for scientists if they're going into a particular field to
really try to understand something.
Then came the DNA sequences, and everything was completely disrupted so that groups that
we thought were good natural groups worth classifying together suddenly were in completely
separate places in the Proteobacterial section of the tree.
Proteobacteria occupy their own major branch of about 15 major branches on the family tree
of bacteria and archaea, and suddenly the Proteobacterial section of the family tree
was completely unlike what we would ever have suspected.
I think the major problem was that of necessity the Proteobacteria had been categorized by
their metabolism, and their metabolism is the taking up of nutrients, the processing
of nutrients, the output of wastes, all of the things associated with that, and some
of those metabolisms were pretty exotic so there was a thought that well this is the
criterion upon which we are going to group a certain number of these together around
doing this particular metabolism.
The big surprise was, well it didn't seem to matter what sort of metabolism they were
doing, the groups fell out in a completely different way.
Possibly some of that was due to the prevalence of horizontal transfer, which I mentioned a
few lectures back, horizontal transfer, that tendency for bacteria and archaea to exchange
their DNA promiscuously across whatever the species boundaries are, if there are even
real species boundaries among them, so that instead of getting a nice clean family tree
you get this anastomosing family tree.
So that could be part of it, and it could be that metabolism is just not the big divider
and classifier that we thought it was.
So guess what, here are the new classifications of the Proteobacteria, Alpha, Beta, Gamma,
Delta, and Epsilon, and I think that is one of the best indicators of just what an upheaval
that was, so much so that once those classifications had settled down, and they are pretty settled
at this moment, so we actually refer to Alpha Proteobacteria, Delta Proteobacteria, those
are in common parlance right now, but even then no microbiologist has stepped forward
to do what most scientists, most biologists would do, and that is to invent a brand new
multi-syllabic name based on Latin or Greek, there's nothing we like better than inventing
a brand new multi-syllabic piece of terminology that everyone is going to have to memorize
and use, but everyone has backed off from doing that, and everyone is staying very calm,
and Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta, and Epsilon are sticking in the literature, to the point
where we even use them as nicknames, so if you hear a microbiologist saying oh those
are the Alphas, or that's the Beta Proteos, or those are some Epsilon's, that's what
they're talking about, and it's all coming out of the new DNA sequencing upheaval of
the family tree, particularly in that section. Now I'm going to focus here on some of the
more charismatic Proteobacteria, with interesting stories and recognizable field marks, because
remember one of the goals for this course, one of my aspirations for this course, is
that this becomes a more integrated part of your nature studies, and it's one of my aspirations
for myself, that when I go for a walk in the woods, I'm seeing not only all of the animals
and plants that I can see in all of the fungi, but I'm also aware of the bacteria as much
as I can be, so I've chosen some particular examples that may be helpful to that endeavor,
and there will be more examples coming in subsequent lectures in this course as well.
So the first example I've chosen is of an Alpha Proteobacterium, or Alpha Proteobacterial
group, and this is a group that can fix nitrogen, and I will give you one name from this group,
but it is by no means the only name. Alpha Proteobacteria is a large group, and this
is just going to be one genus name that happens to fix nitrogen, but it's somewhat memorable,
it's Rhizobium, and you can hear the word root there, Rhizome means root, so Rhizobium,
root bacteria. Now, lots of bacteria can fix nitrogen, and it turns out to be an extremely
important thing to do. These particular Alpha Proteo nitrogen fixers do so in a way that
is visible to your eyes if you know how to look for them. Here's what nitrogen fixation
is, and here's why it's so important. We have about 79% nitrogen gas in our atmosphere,
and for the most part, for most metabolisms, it's as good as being inert. It's not an inert
gas, but in the sense that many of them are, but it might as well be an inert gas in that
we breathe it in and we essentially breathe it out untouched. So here's the vast majority
of the gas in our atmosphere is not anything that we can directly use, and not anything
that most organisms on earth can directly use. The only exception is from the bacteria.
The bacteria can do something remarkable with it. Here's the thing though, that's nitrogen,
and that's the major way to get nitrogen on earth is through the nitrogen that's stockpiled
in our atmosphere, and yet we can't get a hold of it. We need to do something with it.
Something needs to be done with it in order to get it into a form that we can use because
we're made of nitrogen compounds. Our DNA is full of nitrogen. Our RNA is full of nitrogen.
Our proteins are full of nitrogen. Various other parts of our bodies are full of nitrogen,
so it's an essential nutrient for us. How do we get it? Nitrogen fixing bacteria taking
a lot of energy and in environments that have little or no oxygen are able to convert that
nitrogen to ammonia. That's the same ammonia that you might be thinking of as what's in
a bottle under your sink being used as a cleaning product. That's what I mean by ammonia. You
can smell ammonia, and that's a sign of that particular chemical, unmistakable sign that
you're smelling ammonia. Ammonia is essentially fertilizer-like. Ammonia quickly can be used
by a host of other organisms, including other bacteria. It's just a couple of steps away
from being easily used by plants and incorporated into their tissues, and then plants are just
a few steps away from being eaten by herbivores of one sort or another, and thus the nitrogen
goes through organism after organism after that. So the really difficult step is to go
from gaseous nitrogen to ammonia. That's the nitrogen fixation step that starts the whole
thing going, and only nitrogen fixers can do it. So how can you get a look at them? Well,
especially in a temperate environment. I'll say something briefly about a tropical environment
right after this, but especially in a temperate environment. If you pull up a plant that is
of a type called a legume, and legume is sort of a catch-all term for more than one family
of plant, but you can still look up legumes in plant books and come across a whole list
of them. It could be a pea or a bean plant in a garden, or it could be clover, which
is a likely one to find in some temperate environments, whether it's in the lawn or
along the roadside. If you pull up something like that, and I would recommend not just
yanking it out of the ground, but rather using a trowel or a shovel to take up a divot of
earth with it, because what you want to look at is kind of delicate, and you don't want
to just rip the plant out of the ground. And if you then gently rinse the roots of that
legume in a bucket of water, and then look closely, you will see that the roots have
little nodules all over them, little tiny bumps that are not the usual thing that you
see on a root, not root hairs, not the usual fine-structured thread that you see that usually
makes up roots. But little tiny nodules, and those are specialized plant parts manufactured
by the plant for the purpose of maintaining a little culture of nitrogen-fixing bacteria.
Essentially, the plant is maintaining a little fertilizer factory, because nitrogen-fixation
is essentially the first step to making fertilizer, and it confers a huge advantage on legumes.
It's why lots of legumes can be the first colonizers of land that is of marginal use
that has relatively little nutrients in it. It's why sometimes a vacant lot will have
lots of clover in it, and lots of fetches, and lots of other leguminous type plants.
And again, if you go to that vacant lot and start digging up some of these plants and
rinsing the roots gently, you will definitely see these tiny nodules.
Now, I said that in order to fix nitrogen, there needs to be a lot of energy put into
that process. And so indeed, rhizobium devotes quite a bit of energy to doing it. It's important.
It's the way rhizobium itself is going to get its nitrogen that it needs in order to
make parts of itself. The additional factor is that the process
of fixing nitrogen is best done with little or no oxygen present. Oxygen interferes with
the reaction. So nitrogen fixers have a number of different strategies for that. One of them
is simply to stay away from oxygen. It doesn't take too much of removal from the surface
of the earth to get to a point where there's no oxygen. You go deeper in the pond, you
go deeper into the soil. So there are ways of getting away from oxygen that way. You
can also, and this is the strategy for some alpha proteobacteria, step up your metabolism
to the point where you're using oxygen at such a high rate that there's essentially
not a whole lot left around to interfere with your other reactions, which is kind of an
interesting take on how to avoid oxygen. And then there is what's going on with these
leguminous plants. If you take one of those little nodules that is on the root and break
it open with your thumbnail or maybe the edge of a Swiss Army knife, you will see just a
little hint of pink inside. And that pink is a type of hemoglobin. It's the same kind
of hemoglobin as we have circulating in our bloodstream, except it's being used for
rather a different reason here. That hemoglobin is binding oxygen, just as ours does, but
it is binding it in a way that keeps it away from the nitrogen fixation reaction. And it's
being manufactured by the plant and the bacteria together to maintain that reaction in those
nodules. It's a different use of hemoglobin, what we usually think of, but I will also
say that throughout the natural world, there are lots and lots of examples, perhaps more
examples of hemoglobin being used in this way than hemoglobin being used the way we
use it and the way we think is typical, which is to deliver oxygen someplace where it's
going to be used. It's, I think, more typically used to keep reactive molecules like oxygen
away from other reactions where they might be destructive, as is the case here. So that's
your first example of a easy to see alpha proteobacterium. And I said that I would mention
something about nitrogen fixation in the tropics. Later, when I do the lecture on cyanobacteria,
I will say something more about this. In the tropics, it appears that most of the nitrogen
fixation is not happening from alpha proteobacteria, but is happening from cyanobacteria who can
also do it. So I will evoke them again in a later lecture and connect them up with nitrogen
fixation. So this is looking for nodules is more of a temperate zone activity. And again,
you should probably have a plant guide with you so that you can first locate some legumes
to make sure you're pulling up the right plants to have a look at them. Second group of proteobacteria
that are have an interesting story with them and that with a bit of luck might be accessible
are the magneto-tactic alpha proteobacteria. And you can tell from their name a little
bit about what they do, magneto-tactic. So what they're doing is they're traveling
toward one or the other pole of a magnet. Okay, they're sensitive to magnetic fields.
They're little rod shaped magneto-tactic alpha proteobacteria and they've got a little row of
magnets inside of them that are oriented so that all of the north poles are facing in one
direction, all the south poles are facing in the other direction. If you look at these under
electron microscope, which is not a typical microscope for people to have access to, so
you're more likely to see a picture of them taken under an electron microscope, you see this little
delicate row of magnets inside of them. And they are sensitive to the earth's magnetic field.
And one of the very first questions that came about when these bacteria were first discovered
was why on earth would anything as tiny as an alpha proteobacterium need to be sensitive to the
earth's magnetic field? You could imagine why a migrating bird or a migrating turtle or whales
or some sort of enormous migrating organism that's ocean going in is having to go from one
section of the earth to another might be orienting along the earth's magnetic field. But why on earth
would something as tiny as a bacterium be doing that? The answer turns out to be something like this.
If you look at or imagine the globe of the earth with the north and the south pole looking somewhat
magnet like, and if you imagine the lines of magnetic activity that get typically drawn around
the globe that curve in toward the north pole and curve in toward the south pole but are going
more or less parallel at the equator, then you might also be able to see that the magnetic
forces are not just pointing north and south, they are also pointing up and down. That is they
curve toward the north, they curve toward the south and that curve is inward and therefore
they can also be used these magnetic forces to orient up and down in some sediment or some water
or some mud. That's what these bacteria seem to be doing. These bacteria prefer to have a
particular position in mud or thick sediment or water that is just exactly in the right position
and by sensing the magnetic field they can actually orient themselves and know essentially
what's up and what's down. You know if you've ever been swimming in a situation where the waves have
thrown you topsy-turvy and you're all disoriented, sometimes there's a brief moment of not knowing
what's up and what's down. Well same for bacteria that are in sediment or water, how do they know
what's up and what's down? In many cases it doesn't matter too much or they have some other
mechanism but in this case the magnetotactics are using magnets. Now how can you get a look at these?
Well you could try this. You could go to an estuary or a freshwater pond and you could dig up some
nice black sediment and you could put it into a jar of water, maybe fill it half full of sediment
in the rest of the way with water, you could cover the entire jar with foil and then here comes the
fun part. You could take five or six magnets and you can tape them to the side of the jar
and wait a few weeks and if you're lucky if there were magnetotactics anywhere in the
sediment or anywhere in the water when you remove the magnets and take the foil off you should see
a tiny grayish whitish spot where a little clump of bacteria have congregated where the magnet was.
Now there's an interesting thing going on with hemispheres. Northern hemisphere bacteria
where they were first discovered, northern hemisphere magnetotactic alpha proteobacteria
where they were first discovered are north seeking, they seek the north and so you want
to orient your magnet such that they can seek the north pole of your magnet. As soon as the
researchers who discovered this discovered that it was they were north seeking they immediately
wanted to answer the question that is probably coming to your mind what are the southern hemisphere
magnetotactics doing? So these scientists were very lucky they were immediately got a trip to
Australia out of this, paid for of course, not to mention a trip to the equator because we need
to find out what they're doing there too right? So the southern hemisphere magnetotactics are
south seeking. The ones at the equator do a little of both because there's another idiosyncrasy here
that I didn't mention yet and that is if you really take a close look at the magnetic field around
the earth it's not perfect and linear the way it sometimes gets drawn in textbooks. There are
lots of little idiosyncrasies and anomalies. In other words it's not a perfect line of force
going from north to south and so along the equator there are all sorts of idiosyncrasies and so at
any given point depending on what the earth's field is like there will be bacteria that are
corresponding to it. So you can find both north and south seekers according to the scientists who
made the trip to the equator to check this out. So that's a proteobacterial group with a nice story
to it, a fun story to tell and also the possibility of maybe getting a glimpse of them if you can
isolate them. If you do isolate them you can actually put them under the microscope and
essentially tease them. I remember the first time that I saw this I thought it was the clearest
example of teasing a single-celled organism that I've ever seen before. We had some magnetotactic
bacteria under the microscope, we had a little magnet, we'd stick the magnet to one side of the
scope, force them off the swim light crazy toward the magnet and then we'd flip the magnet around
and then force them to all swim as fast as they could in the other direction. We could make them
swim back and forth and back and forth like that by just flipping the magnet. So if you're fortunate
enough to actually isolate some with a method that I just mentioned you might actually get a chance
to play with them under the microscope after that. Third group of proteobacteria that are accessible
and that you might have a possibility of seeing and which have an interesting story associated
with them are another alpha proteobacterial group and they are bioluminescent, they give off light
and other organisms that you know or have heard of that give off light include fireflies,
sometimes called lightning bugs, there are some fungi that grow in some woods both temperate and
tropical that if your eyes are accustomed to the light you can see them giving off a dim glow of
light. There are dinoflagellates which are microorganisms single-celled but they're not
bacteria which can be seen sometimes in the wake of a boat both in temperate and tropical waters.
Sometimes you see a beautiful display of dinoflagellates out the back of a cruise ship going
through tropical waters for example and those are not bacteria and there are certain fish that
are bioluminescent so I start by disclaimers I'm telling you all the things that these are not so
that when you do see them you know what you're seeing okay so it's none of the above so bioluminescence
you're beginning to conclude I hope is pretty widespread and it is pretty widespread but again
the question comes up what are bacteria doing with this you can imagine why a firefly might be
blinking its lights off and on it's signaling to a mate there might be some reasons for certain
fish to be bioluminescent but what does a little bacterium need with giving off light and it is a
single bacterium giving off enough light to make a difference so let me see if I can explain this
a little bit the first thing to realize is that actually many many many chemical reactions give
off a certain amount of light but usually indetectably so usually nothing that you would remark on
nothing that would be worth remarking on but photons being given off by a reaction is not
all that unusual photons being the little incremental units of light so light being given
off by reactions is not unusual so as far as having a reaction giving off light that's not
what's interesting it's giving off a quantity of light a rather large quantity of light such
that if you had a whole group of these bacteria together they would actually glow one single
bacterium you wouldn't see but a whole group of them you would see glowing faintly in the dark
and why might they be doing that well here's how you might go about looking for them many of them
are marine and many of them are the normal digestive system bacteria of fish and other
ocean animals and when those fish die and begin to decay the bacteria begin to to participate
in that decay and can cause the entire fish to glow faintly in the light so where might you see
these you might be walking along a beach at night in a place where lights are not going to interfere
with your night vision and you might see a dead fish on the beach and you might see a faint faint
glow from that dead fish or you might have a bucket of shrimp that has gone past its prime
that is on its way to being used for bait and again it might be a pitch dark night because
it's got to be dark for you to see this and there might be just faintest eerie glow in that bucket
of of shrimp past its prime so those are bioluminescent bacteria that can glow in the dark from the
alpha proteose but there's more to the story because it this is a this is a reaction that
takes a fair amount of energy and it takes a fair amount of oxygen so why waste energy doing
something like this what could possibly be going on one of the things that might be going on is
that oxygen for the most part in the wrong place is harmful to many many chemical reactions so it
could be as simple as an oxygen detoxification mechanism and that's one hypothesis for how
this might have come about in some bacteria it's a way to take oxygen away just like the use of
hemoglobin in a previous example and to let that oxygen be occupied with something else rather than
than interfering with other reactions but but that doesn't completely explain what's going on
there are lots of other ways to detoxify oxygen there are lots of ways to keep it away from
reactions here's what else might be going on that glowing fish on the beach represents a whole
population of bacteria that have just lost their host they were the digestive system bacteria for
that host and now it's dead they would love perhaps to attract another host and perhaps a glowing
carcass is a good way especially at night to get another fish to eat at least parts of this
decaying animal and the bacteria are right back again into their next host so one possibility
is this is part of a cycle that is somewhat advantageous to the bacteria and that they're not
for long perhaps outside of a host but are quickly going to be part of a cycle that gets them right
back inside of the next host digestive system but there's even something better than that
many many many organisms in the deep sea below the photic zone are bioluminescent and we know
very little about them some get hauled up in dredges some get hauled up in nets some get spotted
going by fleetingly so that you can barely identify what they are when when when researchers are
down in research submarines so there's still an awful lot that we don't know but for the few that
have been studied many of them are in symbiosis with bioluminescent bacteria so that they actually
have a relationship with specialized organs for culturing those bacteria and for making those
bacteria part of their usual signaling system and behavior that they do with those lights
um and it it it calls to mind a question um when i think about a symbiosis like this a bioluminescent
symbiosis between fish and bacteria such that the fish have a whole set of behaviors and morphologies
around this they've got special compartments they signal their mates with these bacteria
what is it that defines a fish i mean if you were to to describe that fish in an ichthyology book
or in a manual to fish or a field guide to fish you would certainly describe special structures
that we're giving off light that would be a major criterion you would certainly describe
particular behaviors using light to attract mates or to attract prey or to startle predators
and what if all these were bacterial then then what's the fish and that that's sort of a rhetorical
question but but you know what's the fish what becomes the fish in a symbiosis in which you've
got such important aspects of it um that are bacteria are responsible for so there's a whole
range of bioluminescent activities all the way from simple oxygen detoxification through just
attracting a place to be next um in from a decayed fish to a fish that will be the next host
to a real full-blown symbiosis with elaborate behaviors and elaborate structures and you
find alpha proteo bioluminescent bacteria along that entire range so that's the third charismatic
example of of proteobacteria final example is um one that i really love and one that i would love
to know more about it's an ongoing project for me and maybe an ongoing project for you if you get
inspired by this it's a group of proteobacteria from the deltas so they're delta proteos and they
are the mixo bacteria my x o b a c t e r i a and these are the bacteria for you if you already
enjoy lichens and tiny fungi and slime molds even um in your walks in the woods if you enjoy
looking at a rotting log and looking at it very very closely and finding that it's wonderfully
full of the most exquisite tiny tiny gardens of fungi and lichens and even slime molds and and
slime molds are an entity unto themselves they're fascinating but if you want to look them up they're
often in fungal field guides so they're often incorporated into into a study of fungi and if
you would already enjoyed looking at these tiny little communities of of organisms on logs then
look a little harder because there is a whole group of delta proteos the mixo bacteria that make
structures that are enormous by bacterial standards enormous half a millimeter to a millimeter high
now granted a millimeter is not very tall but but by bacterial standards it's a skyscraper so think
of a tiny structure maybe a millimeter high an exquisite little structure with a little stock
and maybe little branches and maybe in yellows and oranges and tan colors and those are structures
made by mixo bacteria which are doing something absolutely amazing they live in the soil and
they swarm around looking for whatever detritus or debris might be in the soil that they can digest
but if food is used up they will band together and hoist into the air these amazing little
structures made of thousands of them all together concerted effort to make these tiny structures
about a millimeter high and once they've lifted these structures up off the forest floor up off
the surface of the log any sort of rainstorm or windstorm will blow them easily to some other
location where they will again go back to a single celled existence in the soil but presumably in a
new area with a new start and perhaps with with new nutrients so when I say this is a project for me
maybe a project for you I love looking very very closely at a rotting log it's one of a favorite
thing for me to do and I don't know enough about slime molds and mixo bacteria but it's a project
for me to learn more about them and to try to understand their position and it's easy enough
to make the first forays into that by by looking at some pictures of the kind of structures that
I'm talking about and noticing the beautiful colors of them and then bringing a hand lens along next
time you're walking in the woods so that you can examine things very closely the next lecture will
be about another large group of bacteria the gram positives and I will remind you in that lecture
that it was Dr. Hans Christian Graham who stumbled upon them when he developed his gram stain
this ends lecture seven
