sediment or anywhere in the water when you remove the magnets and take the foil off you should see
a tiny grayish whitish spot where a little clump of bacteria have congregated where the magnet was.
Now there's an interesting thing going on with hemispheres. Northern hemisphere bacteria
where they were first discovered, northern hemisphere magnetotactic alpha proteobacteria
where they were first discovered are north seeking, they seek the north and so you want
to orient your magnet such that they can seek the north pole of your magnet. As soon as the
researchers who discovered this discovered that it was they were north seeking they immediately
wanted to answer the question that is probably coming to your mind what are the southern hemisphere
magnetotactics doing? So these scientists were very lucky they were immediately got a trip to
Australia out of this, paid for of course, not to mention a trip to the equator because we need
to find out what they're doing there too right? So the southern hemisphere magnetotactics are
south seeking. The ones at the equator do a little of both because there's another idiosyncrasy here
that I didn't mention yet and that is if you really take a close look at the magnetic field around
the earth it's not perfect and linear the way it sometimes gets drawn in textbooks. There are
lots of little idiosyncrasies and anomalies. In other words it's not a perfect line of force
going from north to south and so along the equator there are all sorts of idiosyncrasies and so at
any given point depending on what the earth's field is like there will be bacteria that are
corresponding to it. So you can find both north and south seekers according to the scientists who
made the trip to the equator to check this out. So that's a proteobacterial group with a nice story
to it, a fun story to tell and also the possibility of maybe getting a glimpse of them if you can
isolate them. If you do isolate them you can actually put them under the microscope and
essentially tease them. I remember the first time that I saw this I thought it was the clearest
example of teasing a single-celled organism that I've ever seen before. We had some magnetotactic
bacteria under the microscope, we had a little magnet, we'd stick the magnet to one side of the
scope, force them off the swim light crazy toward the magnet and then we'd flip the magnet around
and then force them to all swim as fast as they could in the other direction. We could make them
swim back and forth and back and forth like that by just flipping the magnet. So if you're fortunate
enough to actually isolate some with a method that I just mentioned you might actually get a chance
to play with them under the microscope after that. Third group of proteobacteria that are accessible
and that you might have a possibility of seeing and which have an interesting story associated
with them are another alpha proteobacterial group and they are bioluminescent, they give off light
and other organisms that you know or have heard of that give off light include fireflies,
sometimes called lightning bugs, there are some fungi that grow in some woods both temperate and
tropical that if your eyes are accustomed to the light you can see them giving off a dim glow of
light. There are dinoflagellates which are microorganisms single-celled but they're not
