to do what most scientists, most biologists would do, and that is to invent a brand new
multi-syllabic name based on Latin or Greek, there's nothing we like better than inventing
a brand new multi-syllabic piece of terminology that everyone is going to have to memorize
and use, but everyone has backed off from doing that, and everyone is staying very calm,
and Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta, and Epsilon are sticking in the literature, to the point
where we even use them as nicknames, so if you hear a microbiologist saying oh those
are the Alphas, or that's the Beta Proteos, or those are some Epsilon's, that's what
they're talking about, and it's all coming out of the new DNA sequencing upheaval of
the family tree, particularly in that section. Now I'm going to focus here on some of the
more charismatic Proteobacteria, with interesting stories and recognizable field marks, because
remember one of the goals for this course, one of my aspirations for this course, is
that this becomes a more integrated part of your nature studies, and it's one of my aspirations
for myself, that when I go for a walk in the woods, I'm seeing not only all of the animals
and plants that I can see in all of the fungi, but I'm also aware of the bacteria as much
as I can be, so I've chosen some particular examples that may be helpful to that endeavor,
and there will be more examples coming in subsequent lectures in this course as well.
So the first example I've chosen is of an Alpha Proteobacterium, or Alpha Proteobacterial
group, and this is a group that can fix nitrogen, and I will give you one name from this group,
but it is by no means the only name. Alpha Proteobacteria is a large group, and this
is just going to be one genus name that happens to fix nitrogen, but it's somewhat memorable,
it's Rhizobium, and you can hear the word root there, Rhizome means root, so Rhizobium,
root bacteria. Now, lots of bacteria can fix nitrogen, and it turns out to be an extremely
important thing to do. These particular Alpha Proteo nitrogen fixers do so in a way that
is visible to your eyes if you know how to look for them. Here's what nitrogen fixation
is, and here's why it's so important. We have about 79% nitrogen gas in our atmosphere,
and for the most part, for most metabolisms, it's as good as being inert. It's not an inert
gas, but in the sense that many of them are, but it might as well be an inert gas in that
we breathe it in and we essentially breathe it out untouched. So here's the vast majority
of the gas in our atmosphere is not anything that we can directly use, and not anything
that most organisms on earth can directly use. The only exception is from the bacteria.
The bacteria can do something remarkable with it. Here's the thing though, that's nitrogen,
and that's the major way to get nitrogen on earth is through the nitrogen that's stockpiled
in our atmosphere, and yet we can't get a hold of it. We need to do something with it.
Something needs to be done with it in order to get it into a form that we can use because
we're made of nitrogen compounds. Our DNA is full of nitrogen. Our RNA is full of nitrogen.
