Unseen Diversity Lecture 7 An Enormous and Diverse Group, the Proteobacteria
This lecture is about an enormous and diverse group of bacteria called the Proteobacteria.
The Proteobacteria are a wonderful example of the kind of upheaval and excitement that
occurred when DNA sequences began to be routinely produced and analyzed.
This particular large group of bacteria, the Proteobacteria, had been known through the
entire 20th century, pretty well established, we thought, in respect to their classification,
and then came a wonderful, exciting upheaval of all of that with DNA sequencing.
So the Proteobacteria, if you go to NCBI, the National Center for Biotechnology Information,
which is the repository for all the DNA sequences that are coming in, a huge, well-organized
database where you can get any DNA sequence you want, and if you look at all of the bacterial
genomes there, you will find that of the 600 that are there currently, about half of them
are of Proteobacteria, so about 300 are of Proteobacteria.
That's at this speaking, that's a constantly updated database, and those numbers will change
in the future, but about half right now are Proteobacteria.
So what does that mean?
Well, it doesn't necessarily mean that half of all the bacteria in the world are Proteobacteria.
It does mean that Proteobacteria have been relatively easy to culture, so that through
most of the 20th century, during which a lot of microbiology was happening in the lab with
culturing and staining and that sort of thing, Proteobacteria featured very highly as the
subject.
When it came time to sequencing, obviously everything that we could get in the laboratory
was sequenced first, or much of it was sequenced first, and therefore the database reflects
that, the number of genomes that are completed, the number of bacteria that we understand
the DNA of.
The other thing that skews the database of genome sequences to the Proteobacteria is
that of the pathogens that we know well and that are well studied, many of those are Proteobacteria.
That does not mean that all Proteobacteria are pathogens far from it, but pathogens often
are Proteobacteria, so the small number of bacteria that are pathogens often are Proteobacteria,
and I will of course be saying more about that in the lecture that I'm going to devote
to pathogens, and I'll tell you exactly who some of those Proteobacteria are.
What will happen in the future as more and more sequences come in?
I think the Proteobacteria will eventually get to their correct place as one among many
of important groups of bacteria and archaea, and I don't think they will dominate the database
as much as they are dominating it now, but if you want to get hold of some Proteobacterial
DNA sequences, at this point they're pretty easy to get a hold of.
