are the magneto-tactic alpha proteobacteria. And you can tell from their name a little
bit about what they do, magneto-tactic. So what they're doing is they're traveling
toward one or the other pole of a magnet. Okay, they're sensitive to magnetic fields.
They're little rod shaped magneto-tactic alpha proteobacteria and they've got a little row of
magnets inside of them that are oriented so that all of the north poles are facing in one
direction, all the south poles are facing in the other direction. If you look at these under
electron microscope, which is not a typical microscope for people to have access to, so
you're more likely to see a picture of them taken under an electron microscope, you see this little
delicate row of magnets inside of them. And they are sensitive to the earth's magnetic field.
And one of the very first questions that came about when these bacteria were first discovered
was why on earth would anything as tiny as an alpha proteobacterium need to be sensitive to the
earth's magnetic field? You could imagine why a migrating bird or a migrating turtle or whales
or some sort of enormous migrating organism that's ocean going in is having to go from one
section of the earth to another might be orienting along the earth's magnetic field. But why on earth
would something as tiny as a bacterium be doing that? The answer turns out to be something like this.
If you look at or imagine the globe of the earth with the north and the south pole looking somewhat
magnet like, and if you imagine the lines of magnetic activity that get typically drawn around
the globe that curve in toward the north pole and curve in toward the south pole but are going
more or less parallel at the equator, then you might also be able to see that the magnetic
forces are not just pointing north and south, they are also pointing up and down. That is they
curve toward the north, they curve toward the south and that curve is inward and therefore
they can also be used these magnetic forces to orient up and down in some sediment or some water
or some mud. That's what these bacteria seem to be doing. These bacteria prefer to have a
particular position in mud or thick sediment or water that is just exactly in the right position
and by sensing the magnetic field they can actually orient themselves and know essentially
what's up and what's down. You know if you've ever been swimming in a situation where the waves have
thrown you topsy-turvy and you're all disoriented, sometimes there's a brief moment of not knowing
what's up and what's down. Well same for bacteria that are in sediment or water, how do they know
what's up and what's down? In many cases it doesn't matter too much or they have some other
mechanism but in this case the magnetotactics are using magnets. Now how can you get a look at these?
Well you could try this. You could go to an estuary or a freshwater pond and you could dig up some
nice black sediment and you could put it into a jar of water, maybe fill it half full of sediment
in the rest of the way with water, you could cover the entire jar with foil and then here comes the
fun part. You could take five or six magnets and you can tape them to the side of the jar
and wait a few weeks and if you're lucky if there were magnetotactics anywhere in the
