Now, I said that in order to fix nitrogen, there needs to be a lot of energy put into
that process. And so indeed, rhizobium devotes quite a bit of energy to doing it. It's important.
It's the way rhizobium itself is going to get its nitrogen that it needs in order to
make parts of itself. The additional factor is that the process
of fixing nitrogen is best done with little or no oxygen present. Oxygen interferes with
the reaction. So nitrogen fixers have a number of different strategies for that. One of them
is simply to stay away from oxygen. It doesn't take too much of removal from the surface
of the earth to get to a point where there's no oxygen. You go deeper in the pond, you
go deeper into the soil. So there are ways of getting away from oxygen that way. You
can also, and this is the strategy for some alpha proteobacteria, step up your metabolism
to the point where you're using oxygen at such a high rate that there's essentially
not a whole lot left around to interfere with your other reactions, which is kind of an
interesting take on how to avoid oxygen. And then there is what's going on with these
leguminous plants. If you take one of those little nodules that is on the root and break
it open with your thumbnail or maybe the edge of a Swiss Army knife, you will see just a
little hint of pink inside. And that pink is a type of hemoglobin. It's the same kind
of hemoglobin as we have circulating in our bloodstream, except it's being used for
rather a different reason here. That hemoglobin is binding oxygen, just as ours does, but
it is binding it in a way that keeps it away from the nitrogen fixation reaction. And it's
being manufactured by the plant and the bacteria together to maintain that reaction in those
nodules. It's a different use of hemoglobin, what we usually think of, but I will also
say that throughout the natural world, there are lots and lots of examples, perhaps more
examples of hemoglobin being used in this way than hemoglobin being used the way we
use it and the way we think is typical, which is to deliver oxygen someplace where it's
going to be used. It's, I think, more typically used to keep reactive molecules like oxygen
away from other reactions where they might be destructive, as is the case here. So that's
your first example of a easy to see alpha proteobacterium. And I said that I would mention
something about nitrogen fixation in the tropics. Later, when I do the lecture on cyanobacteria,
I will say something more about this. In the tropics, it appears that most of the nitrogen
fixation is not happening from alpha proteobacteria, but is happening from cyanobacteria who can
also do it. So I will evoke them again in a later lecture and connect them up with nitrogen
fixation. So this is looking for nodules is more of a temperate zone activity. And again,
you should probably have a plant guide with you so that you can first locate some legumes
to make sure you're pulling up the right plants to have a look at them. Second group of proteobacteria
that are have an interesting story with them and that with a bit of luck might be accessible
