Our proteins are full of nitrogen. Various other parts of our bodies are full of nitrogen,
so it's an essential nutrient for us. How do we get it? Nitrogen fixing bacteria taking
a lot of energy and in environments that have little or no oxygen are able to convert that
nitrogen to ammonia. That's the same ammonia that you might be thinking of as what's in
a bottle under your sink being used as a cleaning product. That's what I mean by ammonia. You
can smell ammonia, and that's a sign of that particular chemical, unmistakable sign that
you're smelling ammonia. Ammonia is essentially fertilizer-like. Ammonia quickly can be used
by a host of other organisms, including other bacteria. It's just a couple of steps away
from being easily used by plants and incorporated into their tissues, and then plants are just
a few steps away from being eaten by herbivores of one sort or another, and thus the nitrogen
goes through organism after organism after that. So the really difficult step is to go
from gaseous nitrogen to ammonia. That's the nitrogen fixation step that starts the whole
thing going, and only nitrogen fixers can do it. So how can you get a look at them? Well,
especially in a temperate environment. I'll say something briefly about a tropical environment
right after this, but especially in a temperate environment. If you pull up a plant that is
of a type called a legume, and legume is sort of a catch-all term for more than one family
of plant, but you can still look up legumes in plant books and come across a whole list
of them. It could be a pea or a bean plant in a garden, or it could be clover, which
is a likely one to find in some temperate environments, whether it's in the lawn or
along the roadside. If you pull up something like that, and I would recommend not just
yanking it out of the ground, but rather using a trowel or a shovel to take up a divot of
earth with it, because what you want to look at is kind of delicate, and you don't want
to just rip the plant out of the ground. And if you then gently rinse the roots of that
legume in a bucket of water, and then look closely, you will see that the roots have
little nodules all over them, little tiny bumps that are not the usual thing that you
see on a root, not root hairs, not the usual fine-structured thread that you see that usually
makes up roots. But little tiny nodules, and those are specialized plant parts manufactured
by the plant for the purpose of maintaining a little culture of nitrogen-fixing bacteria.
Essentially, the plant is maintaining a little fertilizer factory, because nitrogen-fixation
is essentially the first step to making fertilizer, and it confers a huge advantage on legumes.
It's why lots of legumes can be the first colonizers of land that is of marginal use
that has relatively little nutrients in it. It's why sometimes a vacant lot will have
lots of clover in it, and lots of fetches, and lots of other leguminous type plants.
And again, if you go to that vacant lot and start digging up some of these plants and
rinsing the roots gently, you will definitely see these tiny nodules.
