When I say important I mean in respect to what we might be able to isolate easily from our body amongst our normal body bacteria and I really wanted to name those names because of all the bacterial names that are commonly used, streptococcus,
nicknamed strep as in strep throat, and staphylococcus, nicknamed staff as in staff infection are ones that people have heard of, strep and staff, and not necessarily in a positive context either so I need to explain that because I'm describing them as best I can in a positive context.
And lactobacillus, that was the third that I mentioned, and for that matter any bacterium that has a lacto prefix, so it could be lactobacillus, lactococcus, anything with a lacto prefix to it is indicative of body bacteria that can participate in fermenting milk products, making yogurt, making various sorts of cheeses.
But let me get back to streptococcus and staphylococcus, the other two firmacutes of our body that are fairly common. We keep them in check. We have immune systems. We have relatively dry skin. We have skin that does not typically have deep, deep cuts and wounds.
If we do then there are problems, but for the most part we are well defended. So there are categories of bacteria that are considered to be opportunistic. Under some circumstances they may become problems, but those are far and few between the absolutely normal system of having them always with us, innocent, honest.
Streptococcus and staphylococcus are actually a wonderful example. If your immune system is functioning, if you don't have deep cuts say from surgeries or wounds or transplants or some kind of major hospital procedure, you're keeping them in check and they're part of your normal microbiota.
It's an important point and it's a point I'll come back to later when we talk about pathogens. There's been a sort of creeping definition of what a pathogen is and I will agree that a streptococcus or staphylococcus out of place doing the wrong things in a patient who's maybe compromised in some way from surgery or from immunosuppressant drugs is maybe in some trouble.
But for the most part these are bacteria that we could easily isolate from anyone's skin. So you're carrying these all the time and yet you are in a normal and healthy situation with them.
Of the actinobacteria, that's the other group of gram positives, we have a couple that are especially interesting. We have propionibacterium and brevabacterium and the two of them contribute to some of our most intriguing body odors.
Propionibacterium usually begin to proliferate during puberty when our glands start to produce sweat including some varieties of sweat that have some interesting odors and these particular bacteria immediately start to culture themselves or to reproduce themselves in those areas that become sweaty especially around puberty.
And give off some of the normal body odors that are associated with puberty and then adulthood. So hold on to that thought for a second because that's not the only thing that they're doing.
And then brevabacterium, those are among the bacteria that are enjoying the dark moist spaces between your toes especially if you've got shoes and not all cultures have always had shoes on their feet but we certainly are a shoe wearing culture here in the United States.
So shoe wearers especially can harbor brevabacterium and they are enjoying the moisture between the toes along with a little bit of skin that just naturally flakes off, we're constantly renewing our skin and also giving off a little bit of the smell of foot odor.
So now we've got two major kinds of bodily odors and by the way it's bacteria that are doing them.
Guess what? Those same bacteria are in your kitchen, those same bacteria fall into a pail of milk, those same bacteria set up housekeeping in that milk and begin to ferment it to the exclusion of other bacteria and that's how we get some of the major important cheeses of the world.
Proprionobacterium are what gives us the Swiss cheeses, the big hole cheeses with a wonderful nutty flavor and the big holes which the big holes are because these bacteria get to fermenting so fast that they produce lots and lots of carbon dioxide and those are big bubbles where carbon dioxide was being formed.
So it's because of those skin bacteria of puberty that we have all of the Swiss cheeses and the brevabacterium is responsible for the surface washed category of cheeses.
Those cheeses that tend to have a pinkish to tannish scum on their outside in which include limb burgers and monster cheeses, real monster cheeses and other such smelly cheeses which are real shibboleths.
Either people grew up with these particular cheeses or have learned to like them but for the most part there's a real learning curve for an adult who's introduced for the first time to a limb burger cheese.
