Now also point out that monster cheese that you can get in a grocery store in the ordinary dairy section of a grocery store sometimes has a little bit of red dye painted around the edge to mimic the look of brevabacterium because the grocery store does not necessarily want to have this kind of cheese
festering away in that particular section of the store. Where you look to find a real monster or a real limb burger that still has active pinkish colored brevabacterium on its surface is at a real cheese shop where the cheese monger is presumably keeping it under control and monitoring the situation
lest it stink up the entire store which it is capable of doing. And I'll remind you brevabacterium that's your foot odor bacteria.
And what they're doing is kind of interesting. Remember I said that sulfur in tiny quantities makes food delicious and savory and wonderful and sulfur in large quantities makes food less delicious maybe even nauseating maybe even inedible.
Brevabacterium specializes in chewing up proteins that have sulfur in them and releasing sulfurous compounds and it's those sulfurous compounds in small amounts that make surface ripe and cheese is so delicious.
So it's something that is very much in the category of a shibboleth and I realize I'm doing really not much service to all of the wonderful Asian cuisines and Nordic cuisines that have turned their attentions to soybeans and fish of various sorts.
But you could do that easily. In fact there's no culture on earth that hasn't embraced some aspect of fermentation. It's just that no culture has embraced everyone else's aspects of fermentation. It becomes really a very personal thing.
And I need to mention another group of bacteria here because I don't want to leave you with the impression that our bodies and our food are all about gram positives.
There's another enormous group of bacteria the bacteroides that are gram negatives that are their very own branch of the family tree that are an enormous aspect of the population of the bacteria that we're carrying around and about which we know relatively little.
And the reason we know relatively little about them is because not a single one is genuinely pathogenic. And most research through the 20th century was to understand as best we could those that were pathogenic or potentially pathogenic.
So it's more of this irony of our own misunderstanding in some cases of our own body bacteria. Here's this enormous group that we're only beginning to understand the bacteroides and our lack of understanding is because there are no pathogens in this group.
Another group of bacteria that we have besides the gram positives that I really should mention in passing and then I'll talk about a little bit further later is E. coli, Escherichia coli.
They're a normal part of our intestinal bacteria, but they are not an abundant part of our intestinal bacteria. And that's an important point. If you think of your intestinal bacteria as a balanced community of bacteria, balanced use and that metaphorical way that we sometimes use when we're talking about a tropical rain forest that's pristine in some way or a temperate forest that seems to have the right numbers of animals and plants.
We're using it in a metaphorical way. So in a balanced community, E. coli is in its place and it is no more harmful than any other bacterium that you've got in there. In fact, it is making vitamin K for us. E. coli makes vitamin K. So it's not only not harmful, it's benign to beneficial.
So you might be wondering what's going on with E. coli scares. What's going on with what gets called a coliform count, which appears to be a count of E. coli, for example, in a public swimming pool where something has gone wrong, or a coliform count, presumably of E. coli in a water system where something has gone wrong, or where E. coli is implicated in travelers' diarrhea,
a problem where if you drink water in a country other than your own, perhaps you're getting an E. coli infection. So I'm going to try to address that in a later lecture. But for now, I want to leave you with the thought of E. coli being, again, just as the grand positives are, part of our normal microbiota when they're in their place and when they're in the right numbers.
So in conclusion, that has been an introduction to the grand positives of our body and of our food, but there's more to say about the grand positives. And so the next lecture will be about the grand positives that are in the soils of the world. And I will give you some suggestions about how you might get some firsthand understanding of those and maybe a better understanding of how soils work.
This ends lecture 8.
