Unseen Diversity, Lecture 8. An Enormous and Diverse Group, The Gram Positives
In this lecture, we're going to look at the Gram Positives of Bacteria, another enormous, diverse group of bacteria.
But let me help you to recall from a previous lecture their interesting history.
This was a group of bacteria discovered inadvertently by Dr. Hans Christian Gram, the Danish physician, who really did not have in mind looking at bacteria in this way at all,
was just trying to use various stains for the purpose of making bacteria more visible against disease tissue.
And at that time, as you recall, the German dye industry was just getting going as an important source of new synthetic dyes.
And all sorts of new synthetic dyes were being tried out on bacteria.
And Dr. Hans Christian Gram just happened to try out one particular one that ended up being named after him.
It's called the Gram stain.
And it turns out that all bacteria, although not archaea, but all bacteria can be divided into two enormous groups, the Gram positives,
the ones that take up the stain, and from which you cannot remove the stain, and the Gram negatives, the ones that you could put the stain on.
But once you try to remove the stain, you will end up removing the stain from them. They do not hold onto the stain.
By the way, this is a bluish, purplish colored stain.
And when we do this in a microbiology lab, we typically then apply another stain afterwards to make the Gram negatives show up too.
And that's a pink stain.
So if you have a combination of Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria together on a slide,
you have typically a combination of blue, purple bacteria and pink bacteria, the blue purples being the Gram positives and the pinks with some other stain just to make them show up or the Gram negatives.
So to everyone's surprise, that is still a good taxonomic group.
Remember that I told you that the proteobacteria experienced a huge shake up in their taxonomy such that everyone just gave up and named them after the first letters of the Greek alphabet,
