And we're still sorting out a lot of their beneficial activities. I'm going to suggest a few of them and tell you a little bit about what research is telling us about them.
But this is still very much an open question as to what all of them are doing. There are so many of them and it's such a normal part of who we are.
How normal is it? Well, from the point of view of bacteria, we are essentially a culture chamber for them, loaded with nutrients from top to bottom.
I mean, our entire digestive system from our mouth to our anus is just one enormous bacterial community.
And then the outside surface, our skin, is also another wonderful, diverse community for bacteria ranging all the way from moist areas, such as in the groin or the armpit,
or areas that are typically covered by clothing, especially in a temperate climate, to areas that are relatively dry and have relatively few bacteria, bacteria on moisture lovers.
So there's a wide range of what can happen on the skin, but the combination of all the bacteria of our skin and all the bacteria that are inside of our digestive system makes up about 10% of our body weight, 10%.
But it makes up about 90% of our cells, 90%.
And let's digest those two numbers for just a moment, because if they seem maybe a little contradictory, how could all of our combined bacteria be only 10% of our body weight and yet make up 90% of our cells?
And that gives us a little view of just how tiny bacterial cells are, and maybe this is a good point for me to sort that out just a little bit.
This is a point at which it might be useful for me to stop and tell you that there are two major sizes and complexities of cells.
There are the tiny, relatively simple cells of archaea and bacteria, about which we've been talking for most of this course.
And there are the larger, more complex cells of protists, fungi, plants, and animals.
These are the larger, more complex cells that arose later than the bacteria in which then gave rise to all the other microorganisms that are not bacteria and archaea, as well as all of the multicellular organisms, many of the fungi, the animals, and the plants.
One way to think about this is all bacteria and archaea are microorganisms, but not all microorganisms are bacteria and archaea.
There are plenty of microorganisms of the protists and of the fungi that are these larger, complex cells, and by larger, I still mean microscopic, but these larger, complex cells.
And this goes a little way toward explaining how this seeming contradiction could be that we have 10% body weight of bacteria, but they are 90% of our cells.
Their cells are much, much tinier, so we can pack an awful lot of cells into that 10% body weight.
There are 10 to the 13th cells that we can claim as our own, 10 to the 13th approximately human cells per human body.
