Of course, that depends on the size of the human, and these cells are not that easy to enumerate, but in the order of 10 to the 13th, there are 10 to the 14th bacteria that we're carrying around with us.
That's 90% of our cells is bacteria, or bacteria.
Some scientists have even suggested that we are more like a microbial community with an attached human body than a human body that has microbes, that maybe the whole thing should be reversed around, that really we are first and foremost a microbial community with all sorts of interesting crevices and places for bacteria to be.
Let me give you one example from our skin before we go into the digestive system to try to figure out what some of those bacteria are doing in there, which is where the majority of our bacteria are.
If you take the skin of your armpit, and perhaps if you haven't been using any personal products for a few days, and that would be the ideal situation if you were looking for bacteria,
and if you took a square centimeter of that armpit material, you would find 2.5 million bacteria enjoying themselves there on the moisture and in the secretions that are in that area.
And I'm also going to say they're not pathogens.
It could be that there's an aesthetic issue there, it could be that there are some reasons to keep those folks under control, but these are not pathogens, they're part of your normal body bacteria.
You could take any animal and look for the moist as part of its body and find that sort of numbers of bacteria in that area, so it's a perfectly normal situation in moist areas of any organism's body.
Okay, so what are these bacteria doing?
We don't know what they're all doing, and in fact there's a brand new genome initiative that has just begun to take stock of the potentially thousands of species of bacteria that are in and on us and to understand them much better,
especially from the point of view of what they have in their DNA sequences, to find out what they're doing. Many of them may be benign, neither positive or negative in their relationship with us.
Many, many more may be beneficial, and there's still much to be sorted out.
It's interesting that this particular genome initiative is commencing at a time when there is heightened hysteria about pathogenic bacteria and almost a different force of activities around keeping ourselves scrubbed clean of bacteria and keeping our surfaces that we associate with as sterile as possible of bacteria.
It's a bit ironic because I think, and I have to say personally, I hope that what will ultimately win out in this is a general understanding of bacteria that is much more in the direction of their beneficial aspects or benign aspects and above all their normal aspects in their relationship with us.
I would even go so far as to say that pathogenicity is a bit of an illusion. Certainly there are some serious pathogens, and I'm going to tell you about them in a lecture coming up, but many bacteria that are now being called pathogens have been quietly moved into that category by industries who are eager to sell us antibacterial items.
Okay, so I'll leave you with that thought and let me go on to our own personal bacteria and tell you a little bit about what we think they might be doing.
First thing they might be doing is taking up space. They certainly do take up space. 90% of ourselves, they're certainly taking up some space, but that might be extremely important because that space that is not being taken up by whatever pathogens there might be.
In other words, if you've got a full intestinal tract full of your bacteria, then you don't have a whole lot of place for anything else to settle down, and you actually have some firsthand experience with that.
