A prebiotic is any food that you take deliberately into your system for the purpose of enhancing and helping your normal bacteria.
A really good example of a prebiotic is a nice bowl of oatmeal.
Nothing your bacteria like better than a nice fibrous bowl of oatmeal and so in a sense you're revving up your bacterial system by having oatmeal and that would be one thing to try to do if you were suffering from the effects of antibiotics and if your bacteria were suffering from the effects of antibiotics.
Another thing that you could consider is probiotics and that term is being currently used for directly taking in bacteria that will be useful to your system.
And one great example is with yogurts, but it's not the only example by any means, but yogurts are a wonderful example.
And more and more these days the yogurt manufacturers are recognizing this about their product and are proudly listing on the side of the container all the different bacteria that are inside.
It's getting to be a longer and longer list I notice over the years as this becomes more and more a positive attribute of yogurt.
And certainly one of the things that your doctor may have advised you to do if you are taking a course of antibiotics is to at the same time have plenty of yogurt to try to reconstitute your normal good bacteria in your digestive system.
In fact some doctors even go so far nowadays to suggest that you go to the part of the drug store or the part of the pharmacy where probiotic pills can be bought and these are little freeze dried cultures of bacteria.
Similar to the bacteria that you would find in yogurt so you could get really the same bacteria if you were just eating yogurt or eating other fermented milk products, but that would be one place to reconstitute your bacteria quickly if you were trying to counteract the effects of antibiotics.
So this is I think a really positive trend in medicine and a really good way to look at bacteria and it certainly does not preclude the need for antibiotics and it certainly does not would not cause anyone to make light of true pathogens but I think it is important to put pathogens into their real place in the context of all these thousands of bacteria that are normal.
Now from the point of view of your bacteria, your body and your food are on a continuum.
Not from our point of view but certainly from their point of view that the food that you take in and the food that goes out the other end and the food that gets cycled around through the environment and goes back in again, it is all part of one continuum and they are part of that.
So that a way to think about the evolution of all the wonderful fermented foods in the world, all the wines and the beers and the sourdough breads and the various pickles and the Kim cheese and fermented fish and fermented soybeans and the marvelous cheeses and everything that makes cuisine worth enjoying.
All of those fermented foods are really not so much an invention of our human ancestors as it is something that they tolerated and then came very quickly to enjoy because from the point of view of a bacterium, they're on your body, therefore they're in your kitchen, therefore they're in that pale of milk that you just brought in for milking the cow.
And therefore they're in the milk fermenting overnight and then they are in a few days part of what is going to become cheese fermenting milk, essentially milk that's starting to go bad, milk that's starting to decay is milk that's on its way to being cheese.
One of the surprising things that was surprising to me when I first learned it is the bacteria from your body that are most likely to be among your beneficial bacteria and the most likely to take up housekeeping and a pale of milk or a container of soybeans or grains or grapes or vegetables or fish or grand positives.
I don't know exactly why that is, I just know that's the case that we are full of beneficial and benign grand positives and so are our fermented foods.
And if you're thinking to yourself, well, why aren't other bacteria including pathogens tumbling into that same pale of milk? Why is it that we're getting cheese out the other end? Why aren't we getting something toxic and nasty to eat instead of a wonderful new cheese?
