alphabetic gamma, delta and epsilon and said, well, that's that, no more fancy names for these.
Gram positives still remain, even after all that DNA sequencing, a pretty good cohesive group divided into two subgroups.
One of the things that makes them especially cohesive and probably a good evolutionary group in their own big branch of the family tree is that they have a different sort of cell wall and actually it's that cell wall that makes them stain as they do.
Another interesting thing about the Gram positives is that many of them are spore formers, that is they can make a little round hard structure, very, very resistant to drying and very resistant to other sorts of environmental challenges.
And even in some cases resistant to boiling, they are among the few bacteria that are not hyperthermophiles to begin with, among the few bacteria that can live at room temperature and yet could be taken to a boiling point and would survive that as long as they were tucked up inside of their little resistance spores.
So Gram positives, some of them can do that and it's quite remarkable.
Now the two major groups of Gram positives are the firmicutes and the actinobacteria. Firmicutes means firm skin and that actually refers to their tough little cell walls, their cell walls that allow them to be stained in that particular way.
And actinobacteria means thread bacteria. Now I'm not usually giving you a lot of technical jargon because it's not necessary to remember it and to have that in order to appreciate the bacteria.
But I did want to mention these two particular names because the thread like nature of the actinobacteria is part of their lifestyle and is part of what's interesting about them.
So I wanted to mention them. Another way to talk about the actinobacteria in case you want to look them up later is they have also been called the actinomycetes, A-C-T-I-N-O-M-Y-C-E-T-E-S.
So they can be looked up under either name, actinobacteria or actinomycetes.
Who are they and what are the more accessible field marks? Well, it turns out that this is my opportunity to talk about our own personal natural bacteria of our bodies, our own personal microbiota.
And it's also an opportunity for me to talk about the bacteria that make food and drink so interesting by their normal fermentative reactions.
And it's also an opportunity for me to connect those two together because they are very much connected. Our personal bacteria, completely normal bacteria, are also one in the same in many, many cases as the bacteria that are enhancing food and drink through fermentative processes.
So it's a chance to show off some really fun field marks of both of those. And then in a subsequent lecture, I'm going to say something about the gram positives that live in the soil.
So beginning with our own natural bacteria, and I keep repeating the word natural and normal because I want to really distinguish these from the pathogens, which are few and far between and which will have their own lecture in its place.
And this is maybe the beginning of the setup for that lecture because I want to make sure that we start with the normal bacteria so that we can really contrast them when we get to the pathogens.
We have a huge number of bacteria and we know relatively little about what they're all doing. What we can say with a certain amount of confidence is that they're not pathogenic.
They're doing something benign. That is nothing particularly positive or negative, perhaps, but beneficial is very likely the case for many of them.
