You've probably done a sort of an experiment yourself on this that I will tell you about in just a few moments.
Second thing that they might be doing, and this is some new research that is very exciting and which is very much ongoing and about which there are new developments all the time, is that our bacteria may keep our immune systems ready and on the alert,
wrapping them up as it were so that if we do encounter a true pathogen, and there are true pathogens, if we do encounter a true pathogen, our immune system is ready to go and ready to go into action,
and that our normal bacteria, which begin to colonize our bodies at birth, were born essentially sterile bacteria, but our normal bacteria, which begin to colonize us at birth, are going hand in hand with the development of our immune systems when we're born.
A baby's immune system has to develop, and a child's immune system is still developing, and the bacteria that that baby or child is carrying, the normal bacteria may be helping that whole process.
And in fact, impeding that process, keeping a child or a baby in too sterile an environment, keeping that baby or child away from other babies and children, being overly paranoid about the bacteria in the world of that baby or child may actually be more of a hindrance to the correct development of the immune system.
So that's some exciting new research, and two things that our bacteria may be doing for us in a very beneficial way.
Here's a little of the evidence for that. There have been some interesting epidemiological studies comparing and contrasting humans from either parts of the country or from different countries that are more rural and more likely a place where children would be encountering animals,
or children would be encountering normal soils and maybe even getting involved with agriculture of some sort, maybe living in larger families, having more interactions with a variety of people, versus perhaps more urban families, perhaps more affluent families that have no pets.
The children have few siblings, children are apt to have their own rooms, and perhaps the parents are especially vigilant about soil and bacteria in the house.
And you compare and contrast those two groups and you find much more of asthma and allergies in the kids that have been kept away from just a normal interaction with bacteria, the soil bacteria of other children, the normal household bacteria that you would expect to find.
And one hypothesis about that is that their immune systems are acting inappropriately. Essentially, asthma and allergies can be simplified, and this is going to be too much of a simplification.
So forgive me for that, but I'll do it in just a couple of sentences. Asthma and allergies really can be chalked up to immune systems that are acting inappropriately.
Why would an immune system cause you to react to strawberries? It sounds crazy. It is crazy. There's an immune system that's going a bit haywire if it doesn't allow you to eat strawberries, or it doesn't allow you to eat wheat, or it doesn't allow you to drink milk, or it doesn't allow you to have shellfish.
Why? I mean, why would our immune system be vigilant against those particular foods? So that's an immune system that's gone awry.
What's wrong with breathing in a little bit of plant pollen? Why would folks get allergies to plant pollen? Why would people have breathing problems under some circumstances as you get with asthma and allergies?
So these are what seem to be developing in communities in which things are overly sterile and which infants and children are being kept artificially away from others and maybe not getting a proper influx of bacteria into their lives.
Here's some other things that our personal bacteria are doing. They seem to be producing vitamin B12 and vitamin K and perhaps even other vitamins for us.
We are an enormous resource of nutrients for them, but they in contrast seem to be supplementing our nutrients with these essential vitamins.
