I think it's that the grand positives not only tumble in but immediately set up whatever metabolism that they're going to do and start to exclude other bacteria.
It's why fermented foods are not just delicious. They're a great way to preserve food too.
And believe me, our ancestors understood that and knew that that a great way to preserve something fresh for the winter was to allow it to naturally ferment so that pretty much every available nutrient was being used by grand positive bacteria to the exclusion of any other bacteria.
So even though making a fermented food is sometimes set up to be something pretty complicated, you need to follow a recipe, you need to have particular cultures of bacteria in order to get a particular cheese.
I would contend that it's actually simpler than you might think. It's just your normal body bacteria. It's just your normal bacteria around the kitchen that are the most likely to be able to make the fermented products that I'm talking about.
By the way, this is a good point for me to give some credit to the fungi. They deserve a great deal of credit. Along with the bacteria on your body, you also have fungi usually in the form of yeast.
And that's very convenient because yeast are the wonderful fermenting microorganisms that participate with bacteria to also give us all the wonderful fermented foods and drinks of the world.
And this is another point for me to reiterate that there are plenty of fungi among the microbes. They are in their own group. So again, fungi can be microorganisms. Bacteria and archaea are very definitely microorganisms.
And microorganism is the overall umbrella name for anything that's really tiny. There's a diversity of organisms under that rubric.
So some people might recall the word shibboleth from the Old Testament. It was a word that some Israeli tribes could pronounce and some could not.
And shibboleth came to be a metaphor for talking about that which was defining of a culture such that you could tell that another person was of a different culture if they were unable to pronounce your words.
And I would argue that microbial fermentations, I'm including the fungi there too, microbial fermentations are important definers of culture because food can be a real shibboleth.
No matter how much you might enjoy fresh foods and fresh meats and other fresh things, as soon as that fermentation starts, you're starting to head into the direction of really distinctive cuisines.
Such that if you've grown up with a particular sort of fermented fish or you've grown up with a particular sort of fermented soybean or fermented milk which is cheese and other sorts of products.
That might be your favorite food, that might be your comfort food, that might be the food that defines your culture and your holidays, the food you long for, the food that you want to go home for.
And it may be the most challenging of food to eat as an adult if you're trying to be polite in another person's culture.
I mean the real challenge of anthropologists and world travelers may be not so much eating the fresh foods of another culture but the shibboleth foods, the foods that are part of the continuum of that culture from body to food and back to body again.
Okay, so let me name some names here. Who are some of these bacteria?
Remember I said there are two major kinds of gram positives. We have firmacutes and the three most important firmacutes are streptococcus, staphylococcus, and lactobacillus.
