Experiments have been done with rodents in which they have been taken at birth from their mothers and not allowed to develop a repertoire of microbes in their digestive systems to take a look and see what happens to the production of these vitamins,
and essentially these vitamins don't get produced in those rodents, and they suffer for a number of reasons for not having their full microbial community.
So what are the field marks for these?
Well, odors, odors of all sorts, because remember bacteria are all about what they do and what they do is they take up things from the environment and they release things into the environment and much of what they release is in the form of odors.
So I will say that you already have been experimenting all your life with bacterial odors.
You certainly know something about what we do with skin care to prevent odors in various places.
As far as your bacteria in your digestive system, I will contend that you've been experimenting with those all your life.
You know from personal experience that extra fiber in foods, that legumes such as beans, that extra flavorful foods such as garlic and onions and coffee and chocolate can do all sorts of interesting things to natural body odors.
I'll give you a particular example. Many of our most flavorful foods have tiny amounts of sulfur in them.
Just the right amount of sulfur makes something delicious.
So garlic and onions have just the right amount of sulfur to make them savory and delicious.
Well, in your digestive system or bacteria that grab onto that sulfur and produce a wonderful smelly gas called hydrogen sulfide, which has this very sharp smell of sulfur and which is a great example of the kind of output that your bacteria can produce that would then be chopped up to your body odor.
In fact, it's the bacterial odor that you're smelling.
Second experiment that I suspect many people have done, whether they wanted to or not, is that you've been prescribed a course of antibiotics by your doctor for something serious.
And the type of antibiotic you were given wiped out many of your normal bacteria from your intestines and therefore allowed an influx at a particular point of inappropriate bacteria or inappropriate balances of bacteria and you experienced from that antibiotic therefore extreme intestinal pain.
I know I've had this happen to me and I suspect it's happened to some of you with courses of antibiotics.
So there's a little glimpse of what it's like to live without your bacteria.
And the third thing I think that you've tried a little bit in an experimental way is prebiotics and probiotics.
Those are some new words that I think are coming into common parlance and which I think are going to be very useful in years to come.
