Unseen Diversity, Lecture 9, Gram positives in the soil community.
This lecture continues the theme of gram positives. In the previous lecture we talked about
gram positive bacteria for the most part of our bodies and of our foods and our drinks,
all of the foods and drinks that make cuisine so much fun, so interesting. And this continues
along with the gram positives, these are the gram positives that are in the soil community.
And I would contend that this is one of the extreme environments that is inaccessible to us except
perhaps through our imaginations. We don't get too far down into the soil before we run into
some difficulties and yet there's an entire community of organisms down there. Here's what
the Harvard biologist E.O. Wilson said about a handful of garden soil. He said,
if I pick up a handful of garden soil, I'm picking up 10 billion bacteria,
handful of garden soil, 10 billion bacteria and perhaps thousands of species, thousands of
different species. No matter how you define species, whether it's a real species or it's a type or
variety, thousands of species. And this is yet another ongoing area of research,
another frontier of microbiology. We know very, very little about these thousands of species.
Right now there are sequencing projects in which scientists are doing just that,
taking up metaphorical handfuls of soil and sorting through all of the bacteria and taking
all of those sequences and analyzing them and trying to understand better just how complicated
the soil community is. Now, I would say that this little microcosm of soil or large microcosm is
off limits to us as off limits as the deep sea, as the rainforest canopy. We might be able to get
up there and catch a glimpse. We might be able to go down in a submersible and catch a little glimpse,
but I think we're only catching glimpses of the soil community as well. And as best you can,
try imagining being part of that soil community. Try imagining yourself as a gliding bacterium
capable of gliding over a moist film surface that is covering every particle of sand, every
particle of clay and every bit of debris that comprises rich soil. So imagine gliding through
that surface and here are some of the things you're going to see. You're going to see enormous
boulders of sand maybe made of quartz, sparkly white quartz, maybe smaller boulders of other
sorts of minerals and then the fine particles of clay you'll be gliding past those. And then here
and there you're going to see debris of something that has fallen to the forest floor and is in
some process of decomposition. Imagine a feather that has dropped from a bird and that feather is
in the process of being decomposed or a leaf that has fallen or a bit of bark or the feces or urine
of some organism and here it has fallen and is temporarily identifiable as part of the soil
construct and is on its way to being mere chemicals incorporated in other organisms.
And imagine this is a sort of fractal like network where it's like going through a cave system
going past structures of all sizes and into tiny crevices and the bacteria that are living in there
many many gram positives that are doing in a simplified way one of two things.
