They are either competing with each other for nutrients which are going to be few and far
between which are going to be temporary which are going to be in some places scarce and in some
cases they're collaborating. So that's two different things that they're doing and two different things
that I'll address in this lecture. So we have soil microorganisms, soil bacteria that are competing
for those scarce nutrients, bit of a bird feather, a little flake of a leaf, little drop of urine
from some organism and then we surprisingly perhaps have organisms that are also collaborating
around those same scarce nutrients. It's almost like two different strategies both of which
work out just fine both of which are prevalent throughout soils and both of which make soils
actually very very interesting places. So let's start with competition and we'll start with the
actinobacteria that I mentioned in the previous lecture as being one of the two big groups of
gram positives and we have some of those on our skin and we have some of those in our fermented
foods and there are also actinobacteria all through the soil and here's where they really come into
their own with their thread like shape. They are shaped like tiny threads and when they are in the
vicinity of a nutrient that they can break down when they are in the vicinity of say for example
a little flake of a leaf that they're going to decompose a little further they surround it with
their threads and essentially take possession of it. The thread like habit is about encompassing
and in keeping away other microorganisms temporarily by making a little net like
structure around that bit of nutrient so that's a way to envision them. So again if you're gliding
through the soil community here and there you may see little bits of decomposing debris and
actinobacteria have taken it over and surrounded it by their tiny threads. Now if you dig through
soil looking for such tiny threads you will see some threads and I need to clear up what those are
you will be seeing threads of fungi. Fungi have larger cells they too make threads and they too
have that same strategy so here's our first example of competition we have tiny thread makers and
big thread makers the actinobacteria versus the fungi and it's a competition that extends further
than just simply making threads to encompass bits of decomposing food it extends much further than
that but that's the first glimpse of it and I will say that if you go into your compost heap or go
into your garden and take a nice trowel full of fresh soil and see faint white threads tiny white
threads in it know that you're seeing fungi. The actinobacteria are an order of magnitude
tinier and can only be visualized under a microscope but I'll also add that it can be
difficult to make a preparation directly from soil for the microscope for the purpose of seeing
actinobacteria. So instead for a field mark for the actinobacteria smell the soil that smell that we
associate with soil that smell of good rich soil or good rich compost is the smell of G osman
G E O S M I N the G part means earth the osman part means odor so it's the odor of the earth or the
smell of the earth is the etymology of that word and it happens to be the product of actinobacteria
so you're essentially smelling the field mark of of good soil and therefore of actinobacteria
