Your immune system is looking for something that is foreign and it doesn't see anything that's foreign.
It sees just Borrelia in its little disguise that it has managed to rig together by recombining its genes in all sorts of clever ways that are not even fully well understood.
I just know that it's a serious problem and not one of my favorite bacteria, I will say that.
On a personal note, my dog has had it, it's quite debilitating and it's quite a process to cure a dog of it.
And I know people that have had it perhaps you do, too, and it's very debilitating in people and a real challenge to cure.
Another spirochete is Trepanema.
It's the cause of syphilis.
Now that's passed venerially from person to person, so it's not injected, at least not by insets, and it's very invasive and can get all over the body and imagine it corkscrewing everywhere.
Now there are two other pathogens that I want to discuss last in this lecture and they really fall into their own category and it's an unfortunate category.
These are two antibiotic resistant versions of bacteria that we typically carry with us naturally.
They are especially virulent, especially antibiotic versions of E. coli and especially virulent and especially antibiotic resistant variations of Staphylococcus aureus or Staph.
So E. coli and Staph have rightly made the news in the last several years.
For reasons that are unfortunate, their antibiotic resistance has really been in great part a consequence of misuse of antibiotics by ourselves.
And I'm going to say a little bit more about that in the next lecture, exactly how that misuse has come about and what some of the consequences have been.
E. coli and Staph aureus should not in a normal situation be so highly resistant and it means unfortunately that if you were to get an infection with these very resistant forms, it might be difficult even in a hospital setting for your doctors to do much even with antibiotics to get you cured of them.
The other interesting thing about E. coli, especially resistant form in Staph aureus, the especially resistant form, is that they're much more highly invasive than the usual E. coli and Staph aureus that we carry with us, shockingly invasive and therefore in some patients lethal or causing enormous damage and horrific damage.
In the next lecture I'm going to give you some circumstances in which both this type of E. coli and this type of Staph aureus come about and say something about how perhaps we could control it a little bit better and maybe put an end to this era that we're in of developing our own pathogens by our own particular uses of antibiotics.
At this point though it's a serious problem and if you look in the NCBI database for E. coli and Staph aureus, you will see that there are several strains for each of them and one of the things that scientists are trying to do right now is to understand how the DNA in these various strains of E. coli differs and in what ways it's similar and how the DNA of the various strains of Staph aureus differ and in what way they're the same.
So genome projects are underway to try to sort this out and to try to understand exactly what it is about these that makes them so virulent and so resistant to any treatment.
So the next lecture will begin with antibiotic resistance and how that comes about and then from there I'm going to segue to something about viruses because I would like at this point to put them into their proper perspective along with the pathogens that I've been talking about.
This ends lecture 10.
Remember to visit this course's website at www.modernscholar.com where you'll find additional information about the lectures you just heard.
Once there you can access this course by using the password 1121BDD.
Again that's 1121BDD.
If you borrow this course from a public library and would like your own copy of the course guide for future reference call recorded books at 1-800-636-3399 and we'll send you a free copy.
A shipping charge will apply.
