They look like gram positives, but they're not acting like gram positives. They don't take up this special stain.
Well, part of the reason is because this is yet another example of bacteria who have lost much of their complexity because they have no outside existence.
And in fact, they dwell inside of our cells and inside of the cells of their hosts, no matter what those hosts might be.
And two of the really unpleasant diseases that get caused by mycobacteria are leprosy and tuberculosis.
Those are not necessarily injected. Those can be just simply passed around by either sputum that's being coughed up in the case of tuberculosis or contact in the case of leprosy.
But you should also know that our immune system defends us against these. You could be working in a leper colony and not necessarily come up with leprosy.
And there are, of course, many, many examples of that. And you could be in a city where unfortunately tuberculosis is still prevalent and there are cities like that and not necessarily come up with tuberculosis.
So there are some good news about that as well, perhaps.
Now, in addition to proteobacteria and in addition to gram positives are a couple of other major groups that are in my deck of pathogen cards.
There are the chlamydia, which are a group unto themselves, C-H-L-A-M-Y-D-I-A. And they, too, are obligate intracellular inside the cell pathogens without any particular existence outside of a host.
I won't say much more about them. They're not necessarily among the really mainstream pathogens, but they certainly fall into the category of having an obligate and often dysfunctional relationship with a host.
What I want to go to now is a fascinating group of bacteria that have their own main branch on the big family tree of all the bacteria and archaea and are well worth studying in all their different forms.
One of my favorite groups of bacteria and most of them are free living. The vast majority of them can be found out in the environment, doing whatever bacteria do out there, whatever particular function, or found in perfectly benign, even beneficial relationships with a host.
So the vast majority of spirochetes are not pathogens, but they've got some characteristics that make it especially easy for those that are pathogens to do what they do. And here's where it gets a bit unpleasant.
These are among the few bacteria that actually have a striking morphology. For the most part I've been talking about very tiny, very simple cells with not much to speak of in respect to morphology.
The choices are few. Little round things, little rod shaped things, little squiggly things, that's about it. Spirochetes are different. Spirochetes have a wonderful morphology.
They look like long, skinny worms and they move about in a sort of a wonderful corkscrew kind of pattern and it means that they can do what a corkscrew does.
When you think of moving a corkscrew through the hard cork at the top of a bottle of wine, it gets through well because it spirals in.
If you were trying to put something in straight and then pull it out as you do with a corkscrew, it would be less effective. Spirochetes corkscrew into very dense material.
So out in the rest of the world, that means they corkscrew their way into thick muds and into thick sediments and into soils, moist soils where they can get through very readily, almost like a corkscrew going through a cork.
So it's a wonderful adaptation for them. Here are the two bad Spirochetes that are in my deck of cards.
Borrelia, B-O-R-R-E-L-I-A, and that is the cause of Lyme disease, terrible disease, carried by ticks.
So here we've got the injectable aspect, carried by ticks to humans and to dogs in some cases.
This Spirochete Borrelia not only gets injected, but then uses its ability to get deep into the body by corkscrewing its way in through the tissues, very unpleasant thought.
And there's an additional thing, too, which makes it especially difficult to cure and especially difficult for your immune system to defend against it.
And that is it's got some very strange things going on with its DNA.
If you go and look up Borrelia in the database at NCBI and see what's happening with its genome, you will see that in addition to its regular genome,
it's got a large number of auxiliary small versions of genomes that it carries around that are extremely flexible and that allow it to change its disguise spontaneously such that it's almost like a Trojan horse in your bloodstream.
