Unseen Diversity, Lecture 10, Bacteria as Pathogens
This lecture is about pathogens. It's a lecture that I have been leading up to for the last several lectures in this course.
And that leading up has consisted mostly of only the most positive words that I can say about bacteria.
There are perhaps millions of species or types of them.
The vast majority of them have absolutely nothing to do with pathogenicity.
We ourselves are carrying a huge load of bacteria as part of our normal microbiota.
The pathogens are really a very exceptional topic.
They tend to be the ones that get the press. They tend to be the ones that get the most focus in the media.
But I want to present them in the context, in the much, much greater context of all of the rest of the bacteria.
One of the questions that I ask about them is a reverse of maybe the usual way that people think about pathogens.
I don't ask why there are so many, because there are not.
I ask why there are so few. How can there be so few pathogens?
Now granted, some of these are horrific pathogens.
And if I or a family member or a friend got them, I would be very concerned and I would want to immediately have the best medical attention possible.
So I don't make light of the pathogens.
But nevertheless, I ask why there are so few of them and what makes them so different.
And I think this is a key to understanding them such that they might be controlled a little better.
Asking that question in that particular way, seeing them as different, seeing them as anomalous may be helpful in trying to get a better handle on how to control them.
One way to think about it is bacteria and archaea have been evolving for four billion years.
And some of those lineages go way back to a time when the earth was much hotter.
And we have Yellowstone, for example, Yellowstone National Park as a modern day example of an environment, perhaps like that.
We began evolving as a lineage, Homo sapiens, less than a million years ago.
So one question is what were those bacteria doing before we showed up and showed up in the evolutionary sense?
What were they doing?
Well, they weren't doing anything pathogenic.
And actually one of the interesting characteristics of pathogens is that they tend to be relatively new in their relationships with us.
And that newness sometimes results in dysfunctional relationships or unbalanced relationships and therefore pathogenic relationships.
We'll say, however, for the most part we are well defended against bacteria.
