Begins with our dry skin and our skin is for the most part a dry surface.
Here and there are dark shadowy places where things are a little more moist, but for the most part we have a dry, impenetrable skin surface.
And even a shallow cut is not enough to get bacteria deep inside where they could do some serious harm.
So for the most part our dry skin is a protective surface.
And remember we also have bacteria on our skin, our own normal microbiota in those moist and darker places.
And their presence there takes up space such that it's more difficult for bacteria that are less desirable to get into those places.
Furthermore, we've got an immune system.
We've got a wonderful functional immune system that for the most part is vigilant against any sort of invading bacteria, viruses.
And of course there are exceptions and the study of the immune system is a whole topic unto itself so I'm not going to say much more about that.
Except to say that in our day to day interactions with bacteria we are essentially well defended against them.
Most of us are not sick of bacterial diseases.
Most of us are healthy and most of us are carrying around our correct microbiota of bacteria.
So imagine this.
What if we could look at the pathogens as though they each had their own trading card, like a baseball card.
Maybe for each pathogen there would be one card with the face of it having a picture of that pathogen and maybe a picture of what that pathogen might be up to in a human.
And then on the reverse side in tiny print would be a whole list of statistics on that pathogen.
Exactly where it's found, how it might be cured, what the epidemiology is, who gets it, the consequences of that.
And guess what, those cards exist.
And I want to tell you about them because I think they make a good mnemonic aid for thinking about and talking about the pathogens.
Turns out that the American Society for Microbiology actually produces a set of microbe cards, is what they're called, pathogen trading cards.
And I just happen to have a stack with me.
And what's good about it as far as the mnemonic aid goes is that in that deck of cards, which by the way also includes virus pathogens and parasites, also includes bacteria, the bacteria number about 50.
That is the deck of cards that represents the pathogenic bacteria is about the size of an ordinary deck of cards.
It's a great mnemonic aid if you find yourself in a social situation in which pathogenic bacteria are being brought up.
You can very easily recall that the trading cards for the pathogenic bacteria number about 50 and that it's the size of an ordinary pack of trading, of playing cards.
As opposed to the millions of species or types of bacteria that are doing anything but something pathogenic.
So what do the cards tell us?
Preparing for this lecture, I decided to set out all of the pathogen trading cards that I own.
