And by new, I mean perhaps introduced into human populations tens of years ago, hundreds of years ago,
maybe thousands of years ago, but all of that is relatively new on the scale of evolution.
And therefore, we have not established, and they have not established, a smoother relationship yet with us.
Maybe there's something that will happen thousands of years from now, but at this point, we're at a juncture where their relationship with us is dysfunctional,
and they are using more resources, we being the resources, they are using more of our resources, they are out competing our own cells,
they are overgrowing wherever they manage to find a place in us, and are essentially being destructive.
So they're injectable, they're new, and sometimes they don't have any existence outside of our own bodies.
Those are the characteristics of the truly pathogenic bacteria.
So who are they?
Well, here are some proteobacteria, some of which you've probably heard of.
Remember, most of the proteobacteria are not in this category. These are the real exceptions.
The first is a famous one, Yersinia pestis. It's the cause of bubonic plague.
It is a very serious pathogen, and in fact, in the Middle Ages, it killed one quarter of the population of Europe as well as other populations in the world.
I'm not going to go around continent by continent, but it was a worldwide serious problem, especially since at that time it could be carried by people who were aboard a ship
and heading out to some different place where they would carry the plague along with them.
What was going on at that time? Well, there are whole books written on this, as there should be, because it was an extremely important event in the Middle Ages
caused by this one little bacterium Yersinia pestis.
Rats and fleas were prevalent in the cities that were beginning to become more and more crowded, more and more congested,
in living conditions, poorer and poorer in some of these cities or some of these sections of cities in medieval Europe.
And so humans were having more and more contact with rats and fleas, and it turns out that Yersinia pestis is endemic in some rat populations.
Notice that word endemic contrasted with epidemic.
So endemic implies that it's just a relatively normal, relatively symptomless part of the rat's microbiota.
There may be some mild symptoms, but it's not something that was necessarily killing rats.
Rats have fleas. The fleas were picking up the Yersinia pestis and they were injecting it into us.
Humans were being bitten by rat fleas. Very unpleasant thought.
And so here's this brand new rat pathogenic bacterium arriving to us, and we don't have any sort of relationship with it at all,
except for this extremely negative relationship that resulted in a great many deaths.
So there's a great example of everything that I was saying characterizes a pathogen.
