So that's another example of something that I don't want to make light of.
I just mean people who are outside of the hospital and who have normal health usually have nothing much to fear from bacteria
that have temporarily changed their relationship with us.
So back to Streptococcus and Staphylococcus, also nicknamed Strep and Staph,
which I mentioned as being part of our normal microbiota, these are some of the ones that can cause skin infections.
These are some of the ones that can cause sore throats, and these are the ones that have this passing potentially pathogenic,
temporarily pathogenic relationship with us.
So then I turn to the trading cards in the deck for the truly pathogenic bacteria,
the ones that have a really dysfunctional relationship with ourselves,
and I sorted them into a number of piles just trying to understand what was the nature of that exceptionally dysfunctional relationship
for these exceptional pathogens.
And here's what I came up with, two things.
One is they have a tendency to be injected, which is a very unpleasant thought, but I'm afraid it's true.
We're talking about fleas, we're talking about ticks, we're talking about mosquitoes,
and in other sorts of biting arthropods, which we might encounter,
and which might be carrying these things, and which can get them right past our dry skin barrier and right into our bloodstream.
It's not a pleasant thought, but that's one of the characteristics that has come out in my sorting of these cards,
and I will give you some specific examples in just a bit.
Another characteristic that goes perhaps hand in hand with that injectability is that some of these have a tendency to not only get injected in
or to find their way in in some other method, but to get into our cells, which is pretty deep inside.
That is, they're not just in our bloodstream, they're not just in amongst some tissue, they're not superficially there,
they're far from superficial, they're actually inside of our cells.
These interesting bacteria, they often don't have any existence outside of that cellular existence inside of our cells,
and that's kind of a scary thing.
When you see a bacterium that doesn't have any free-living existence at all and has only this task of being inside of our cells,
that's a pathogen, that's a serious pathogen, and that's worthy of some scrutiny, so I will tell you about a couple of those as well.
Here's another characteristic that came up when I was sorting through the pathogen trading cards.
They're new. They're new to us, and that is part of the problem.
