which is a huge database growing every single day, that I said most of the sequences that are stored there are for gram positives and for proteobacteria,
but that this did not necessarily reflect that these are the most common bacteria on earth.
It rather represented that these are the bacteria that have received the most attention in laboratories because of their pathogenicities.
They also, by the way, are among the bacteria that are easiest to grow in the laboratory because they like the same sorts of temperatures that we like.
They like the same sort of nutrients that we like.
In fact, they consider us, in some cases, to be a source of nutrients.
And all of that is relatively easy to put together in a laboratory setting and to get them growing in the laboratory.
So most of the sequences are of these organisms, but that by no means indicates that they are the most prevalent of bacteria.
It's one of the illusions of the database at this point.
So what I did next with my pathogen trading cards is I removed all the superficial, albeit unpleasant, bacteria.
I'm not going to say anything very nice about these, but these are the bacteria that are curable.
These are the bacteria that are going to have a passing pathogenic relationship with you that will not be nice, but that you will survive.
And you will survive it just fine.
And you might actually be better later for it because you will have built up some small immunity to subsequent problems with these bacteria.
So I'm not, again, making light of this.
I don't enjoy getting some of these minor afflictions, but this is what many, many, many of the bacteria in the deck of cards are all about.
Many of them give you diarrhea.
And there you go.
It's not pleasant, but you don't have it forever and ever.
And it's for the most part not fatal.
And what you do against diarrhea is fairly simple and fairly straightforward.
Some of them will give you skin infections, including the sorts of erupting acne problems that occur at puberty.
And those two are curable, controllable.
You don't die of them.
You move on from those.
Some of them are involved in ear aches.
And those are the afflictions of young children very often.
Sometimes young enough children such that their nasal passages and their ear passages are still in development.
