And again, not to make light of the subject.
It may sound as though I'm not being respectful of them or sufficiently concerned about them.
I am, but I'm not participating in the hysteria about them.
I'm not participating in any of the frantic hysteria that sometimes gets generated by some industries that would like us to scrub up as though we were going into surgery every single day.
So laying them out on the table, laying all these cards out, I found that 23 of the pathogen cards were for gram positives.
And remember, we had the gram positives as part of our normal body bacteria.
We saw them as a normal part of soil bacteria.
They included the firmacutes.
They included the actinobacteria.
They include many bacteria that are producing antibiotics.
And some of the names that I'm going to name these names because they might be familiar to you are Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, Bacillus, and Clostridium.
Notice that some of those names are ones that have already named before as being a normal part of our microbiota.
And this is one of the riddles of pathogens that I want to deal with.
The riddle being that there are some pathogens that are opportunistic.
They spend most of their time in a completely benign relationship with us, maybe even a beneficial relationship with us,
and then under certain unusual circumstances, often recognizable circumstances,
some of those bacteria can then be pathogenic for a time period.
And that's an obligate pathogenicity.
Also in the deck of cards are 26 proteobacteria.
And recall that I talked about proteobacteria a few lectures back,
especially highlighting some of the more charismatic ones.
And I also mentioned a few of the proteobacteria in respect to there being our normal body bacteria when I talked about that microbiota.
So that's about the entire deck of cards right there.
In addition, are a few bacteria that are called spirochetes, which are fascinating, in which I'm going to linger on a little later.
And a group of bacteria called the chlamydia that I will also linger on a little later.
But those have relatively few cards in this deck.
So the vast majority are gram positives and proteobacteria.
By the way, recall that when I described the national database for genome sequences of bacteria,
