Then there is Franciela tularensis, which causes a plague-like disease, and it too is endemic in a population.
It happens to be a population of rabbits. It is carried to us by deer ticks and flies that might be on the rabbits,
and then they transfer and inject that into us.
So again, there's a relatively new dysfunctional relationship that arrives to us via injection.
Rickettsia. There are two rickettsias. These two are proteobacteria.
And I mentioned them not because they're so common, although I'll give you the names of the diseases that a couple of them cause,
but because they are also an example of bacteria that don't have any existence outside of their relationship with us.
They get inside of our cells, and there's some interesting characteristics around that.
One of the rickettsias causes Rocky Mountain spotted fever.
The other rickettsia causes typhus.
The first rickettsia, the Rocky Mountain spotted fever one, is carried by ticks.
So here's another injectable bacterium, and typhus is carried by lice.
Here's what's interesting about them. They have really tiny genomes.
So if you were looking through the database at NCBI and looking at the genomes and getting to the place where the size of the genomes is indicated,
these are among the smallest of genomes in that database.
And what does that mean? It means that these are obligate parasites.
It means that these bacteria are not easily grown out on petri dishes because most of their needs are taken care of by a complex host such as ourselves.
And when they get deep inside of our own cells, they lose many of their own genes that they don't need anymore because we're supplying the nutrients to them.
We're supplying the protection. We're supplying all of their regular cell needs.
They get greatly reduced genomes, far fewer genes, and this is one of the signs of a really serious pathogen in many cases.
Ironically, it can also be the sign of a good relationship as well in that there are probably many examples of bacteria as yet unstudied
with greatly reduced genomes which have been evolving with us for a long time in which actually have a compatible relationship in which our genes are complementing each other.
But in the case of rickettsia, it's not a good situation.
Now, on to the grand positives. We have some really unpleasant grand positives.
A group called the mycobacteria, M-Y-C-O-B-A-C-T-E-R-I-A, and a number of interesting things about them.
You might recall that the grand positives were inadvertently discovered by Dr. Christian Graham who stained them blue with what later came to be called gram stain.
However, mycobacteria don't have any walls with which to retain gram stain. They don't stain with gram stain, so they're an exception.
And it took a number of years for scientists to sort this out. Who were these mycobacteria?
