Unseen Diversity, Lecture 11. What about the viruses?
This next lecture will be in two parts. In the first part, I would like to address further
aspects of antibiotic resistance in bacteria that are particularly disturbing and maybe
controllable and maybe something that should be considered important in dealing with some
of the more serious pathogens that seem to be coming up lately in the news and certainly in
a serious way in hospitals. The second part of this lecture will be my attempt to put the viruses
into perspective with all of the rest of this. It will certainly not be a complete lecture on
viruses. There are entire courses called virology and the viruses are complicated enough and
important enough to warrant their own course. However, it will be part of a lecture in which
I will try to put them into perspective compared to the bacteria and compared especially to pathogens.
So, beginning with antibiotic resistance, bacteria can produce antibiotics, bacteria can also produce
antibiotics or chemicals that allow them to be resistant to antibiotics and it makes a great
deal of sense. Much of this activity is going on in the soil and you might recall from my lecture
on gram positive bacteria of the soil that there's a great deal of competition between bacteria and
between fungi and bacteria and between fungi to get at limited resources and antibiotics is one
of the ways that that competition occurs. So, antibiotics have a long history of being involved
in soil bacteriology and of course they have a long history of being used very effectively by
humans to treat bacterial infections. Here's where the problem comes in. It's very easy for bacteria
to pass around to each other the genes that allow them to be resistant to antibiotics
and these genes are most likely to be passed around and held on to and that's an important
point held on to by the bacteria that receive them if there are antibiotics present in the
environment. Now, in a previous lecture I gave you a short list of environments where antibiotics
are present. They're present in soils in local areas where bacteria are competing and fungi
are competing so that makes a lot of sense. Antibiotics may be present temporarily in us
when we're being treated by a doctor for a bacterial infection and those are circumstances
in which our bacteria are going to be most likely to be holding on to genes that get passed to them
that pertain to antibiotic resistance so it's a not only are we being treated for antibiotics but
we're also for a time period temporarily increasing the transfer of resistant genes. On a petri dish
in a laboratory where antibiotics are being studied and resistance is being studied it's very easy
to select a group of bacteria that have passed around those resistant genes and who are surviving
on a petri dish that you've deliberately laced with antibiotics such that all of the other bacteria
who are not successful in picking up those resistant genes are now dead. So that's a really dramatic
example of how important it is when there are antibiotics in the environment to have those
resistant genes. Hospitals are another location where you find a great deal of antibiotics in use
of necessity nothing that can be done about that except that it's also unfortunately a wonderful
place for bacteria to pass around and hold on to those genes for resistance so hospitals
