Next I want to clarify some terminology, some of which I've been using in previous lectures.
But now I'm going to elaborate in particular on some of these types of metabolisms.
And this is a good point for me to linger a bit on some etymologies.
When we talk about organisms that can make their own sugars, and we were just talking about one,
the cyanobacteria that are taking carbon dioxide and water and making that into sugar, something edible,
we are talking about autotrophs.
And that auto implies self and the implication with that etymology is that they are making their food themselves.
They only need themselves along with a lot of energy from the sun, of course, in order to make whatever they need.
We then tack on two prefixes to autotrophy and come up with photoautotrophy and chemoautotrophy.
Now chemoautotrophy only applies to bacteria, but bacteria, many of them are wonderful chemoautotrophs.
So this is a type of metabolism that's going to sound rather exotic, rather different from what we usually think of for metabolism,
but definitely worth talking about, and I have some wonderful examples.
As photoautotrophs are using light energy, and you can tell that from the photo part of that word,
the chemoautotrophs are using energy from chemical bonds in order to make sugar.
So both of them are making sugar, they just have two different sources of energy.
So I will tell you more about chemoautotrophs in a subsequent part of this in the next lecture.
Let me tell you about the other trophy, though.
We have hetero trophy, and hetero implies different, and those are the host of organisms that need to look elsewhere for their source of sugar.
They need to go and eat something else, essentially.
We are hetero trophs, fungi are hetero trophs, many, many protos and protozoans are hetero trophs, many, many bacteria are hetero trophs,
and as far as the autotrophs go, we're really thinking about those specialized bacteria that can do those processes along with plants.
So that's the perspective on those three words, and sometimes photosynthesis gets used interchangeably with photoautotrophy,
and I may do that in these lectures, but I'm also going to try to keep clear that autotrophy part of the word so that we can sort out chemo versus photoautotrophy.
So look back at the timeline or put into your mind's eye the timeline that we've been talking about throughout this course, the 4 billion timeline,
and let me show you a very interesting event that occurred beginning around two and a half billion years ago that involved bacteria,
and in particular I'm going to focus in on cyanobacteria, and what that was was an absolutely remarkable symbiotic event,
a set of symbiotic events that resulted in all complex cells, complex cells that make up us, complex cells that make up plants, fungi, protists,
complex cells that make up a number of microorganisms because they're still microscopic, but they're complex, they're larger than bacterial cells,
and that symbiotic event that occurred around two and a half billion years ago may have been triggered by the accumulating oxygen in the atmosphere around that time.
