Unseen Diversity, Lecture 12, Cyanobacteria, The Original Photosynthesizers
In these next two lectures, I am going to address bacterial metabolism in as much detail as I can manage on an audio tape.
There are some challenges there, but I'm going to go slowly and I'm trying to go carefully here.
And it's a very important topic for understanding the bacteria.
Recall, as I've said many times, that we don't identify bacteria by their morphology.
There's nothing much in the way of morphology with these tiny streamlined cells.
We identify bacteria by what they do.
And what they do is extraordinary.
What they do is diverse.
It's what makes them the most diverse of all organisms on Earth.
And I want to give you a little idea in the next two lectures about what sorts of diverse metabolisms they can do.
And think of metabolism as the set of chemical reactions that any organism does in order to take in molecules that it will need to build parts of itself
and to take up energy in some form.
And that's important in some form.
There are a number of different forms of energy in order to go about building parts of itself.
So taking in materials and taking in energy and processing it and then usually giving off some sort of waste products.
That whole thing combined is what I mean by metabolism.
It's also, by the way, why there are so many wonderful field marks for bacteria because they're taking things in.
They're putting things out and very often these are detectable.
Either we're going to smell things or we're going to notice textures or we're going to notice particular colors.
So what I will try to interweave with my descriptions of these metabolisms is also what sorts of field marks we might be able to see.
When we're trying to examine bacterial metabolism.
So I'm beginning with the cyanobacteria.
C-Y-A-N-O cyanobacteria.
Implying a blueish-green color, they're sometimes also called the blue greens.
They have also sometimes erroneously been called the blue-green algae.
I steer away from putting that algae ending on there.
And I'd like to encourage you to steer away from that as well.
I don't mind calling them the blue greens.
I don't mind calling them the cyanose or cyanobacteria, but the word algae has connotations of a larger, more complex cell.
There are plenty of algae.
Some of the green pond scum that you can readily see sometimes is an alga, but it's not a bacterium.
So I steer away from saying blue-green algae.
They are the dominant photosynthesizers on Earth.
And I want to try to prove that to you because it may not seem at first obvious.
We're talking about bacteria.
They are therefore, for the most part, invisible to our eyes.
And photosynthesis is a pretty important process.
It is in brief, and I'll go into more detail in a couple of minutes.
In brief, it is the method by which light from the sun, light energy from the sun, is incorporated by organisms in such a way that food can be made.
So photo, light from the sun, synthesis, synthesis of food is what's going on.
And typically when you first learn about it in school, you learn about it as a process done by green plants.
And certainly that's a legitimate way to think about it.
But what I want to develop a little later in this lecture is that even the photosynthesis being done by green plants is indirectly being done by cyanobacteria.
So I'm going to give them credit for all of that as well.
And that's why I'm going to end up with this statement that they are the dominant photosynthesizers on Earth.
They began to evolve sometime shortly after the origin of life.
And I'll tell you why we think that.
Their major waste product is oxygen.
At the origin of life, which is about four billion years ago, which on your timeline is over on the extreme left-hand side, there was relatively little or even no oxygen in the atmosphere.
And that's a good thing.
It turns out that free oxygen tends to interfere with all sorts of important biological chemical reactions.
And probably origin of life would not have been any sort of success if there had been free oxygen around.
Oxygen essentially rusts things.
It oxidizes things.
And that's generally disruptive to organisms.
So at the beginning, there was no oxygen.
Shortly after, though, we begin to see signs of gradually accumulating oxygen.
Now, that gradual accumulation begins in the sedimentary rocks that we still have from those early time periods.
And there aren't very many places on Earth, by the way, where you can go to see these rocks.
They tend to be in certain parts of Australia, in certain parts of South Africa.
In other words, there are not a whole lot of rocks earlier than three billion years old left on Earth for us to examine closely.
But if we do find rocks of that age, we start to see effects and evidence of gradually accumulating oxygen, which continues on until the present.
So that if you were to make a little graph of the levels of oxygen, you would start with almost nothing, and then you would gradually lift the line,
indicating that oxygen was increasing.
And by and by, you'd get all the way up to the present levels of 20% oxygen in our atmosphere.
So we went from zero to 20% oxygen.
It's an enormous amount of gas put into the atmosphere over this period of time.
Some biologists have even called it the greatest pollution event ever to go from having zero to 20% oxygen in the atmosphere, all produced by cyanobacteria.
Cyanobacteria responsible for all of that.
It had enormous consequences for other bacteria in their metabolisms, again, because oxygen is such a potentially damaging molecule in ways that I'll try to describe a little later.
So we see that increasing oxygen, and we also see the first microfossils at around three and a half billion years ago.
And one pretty good hypothesis about them is that they may be the earliest of cyanobacteria.
The evidence is that they seem to be well preserved in a way that cyanobacteria can manage because they tend to build a really tough sheath around themselves.
And it's difficult for a tiny little fossil like that to be preserved in rocks, but if you've got a really tough sheath, you can withstand maybe the fossilization process.
And so we see these little tiny filaments with really tough sheaths, and we know that cyanobacteria, modern cyanobacteria, can do that.
And so we make a guess, combined with the increasing oxygen levels starting around that time, that we're looking at some of the earliest photosynthesizers, and therefore the cyanobacteria.
Now, here's what cyanobacteria are doing, and this is going to be the first of a number of chemical equations that I'm going to try to put into audio format.
So you'll have to listen closely, but I'm going to deconstruct them a little bit too so that by the time we're done going through some equations, it will maybe begin to be something that you can visualize fairly well.
Also, not going to balance these equations.
I'm saying that just in case there are some chemists listening or some people who had quite a lot of chemistry in high school or college and who are accustomed to seeing balanced equations, I'm going to make no attempt whatsoever to create balanced equations.
I really want to use words here and not get too far into the terminology and nitty gritty of chemistry.
So start with some carbon dioxide and water, and I want to pause there for a second.
Those are going to be our two ingredients for this process, but I want you to think about this.
Carbon dioxide and water are about the most un-nutricious, most un-useful molecules you could ever come up with if you wanted to build something new, and rich, and exciting.
We're talking about a gas, and we're talking about water.
Put the two of them together and you've got nothing, nothing that's very exciting at all.
I hope you'll agree with me on that.
By the way, carbon dioxide is CO2, and water is H2O.
So can you hear the two O's in there?
CO2 and H2O.
Hold on to those two O's in your mind.
Also think about the C of the CO2 and the H of the H2O.
Now what we're going to do is something absolutely, absolutely remarkable.
We are going to use the energy of the sun to turn those two un-nutricious molecules into something extraordinarily nutritious, sugar.
And that's the whole thing of what photosynthesis is about.
We're taking those two starting molecules.
We're taking an enormous amount of sunlight and energy, therefore.
And we're making sugar, and I am going to give you the formula for sugar, but I just want you to hear the C's and H's and O's.
That's really what I want you to hear.
Sugar is C6H12O6.
Hear the C's, hear the H's.
Here are a few O's.
There are extra O's that we don't need.
There are extra oxygens that we don't need.
Where do they go?
That's the oxygen that is the waste product of photosynthesis.
So there you have it, the entire equation.
Carbon dioxide plus water with the help of the sun.
An enormous amount of energy makes sugar an oxygen as a waste product.
And that oxygen, by the way, is a toxic waste product.
And it's hard to believe because it's such an important part of our own metabolism.
But I'm going to address that a little bit later.
I'm going to show you exactly where oxygen fits into our own metabolism so that you can see that even for us it's toxic.
But we have a controlled, very specialized use for it.
And it has turned into something essential for our own metabolism.
Next I want to clarify some terminology, some of which I've been using in previous lectures.
But now I'm going to elaborate in particular on some of these types of metabolisms.
And this is a good point for me to linger a bit on some etymologies.
When we talk about organisms that can make their own sugars, and we were just talking about one,
the cyanobacteria that are taking carbon dioxide and water and making that into sugar, something edible,
we are talking about autotrophs.
And that auto implies self and the implication with that etymology is that they are making their food themselves.
They only need themselves along with a lot of energy from the sun, of course, in order to make whatever they need.
We then tack on two prefixes to autotrophy and come up with photoautotrophy and chemoautotrophy.
Now chemoautotrophy only applies to bacteria, but bacteria, many of them are wonderful chemoautotrophs.
So this is a type of metabolism that's going to sound rather exotic, rather different from what we usually think of for metabolism,
but definitely worth talking about, and I have some wonderful examples.
As photoautotrophs are using light energy, and you can tell that from the photo part of that word,
the chemoautotrophs are using energy from chemical bonds in order to make sugar.
So both of them are making sugar, they just have two different sources of energy.
So I will tell you more about chemoautotrophs in a subsequent part of this in the next lecture.
Let me tell you about the other trophy, though.
We have hetero trophy, and hetero implies different, and those are the host of organisms that need to look elsewhere for their source of sugar.
They need to go and eat something else, essentially.
We are hetero trophs, fungi are hetero trophs, many, many protos and protozoans are hetero trophs, many, many bacteria are hetero trophs,
and as far as the autotrophs go, we're really thinking about those specialized bacteria that can do those processes along with plants.
So that's the perspective on those three words, and sometimes photosynthesis gets used interchangeably with photoautotrophy,
and I may do that in these lectures, but I'm also going to try to keep clear that autotrophy part of the word so that we can sort out chemo versus photoautotrophy.
So look back at the timeline or put into your mind's eye the timeline that we've been talking about throughout this course, the 4 billion timeline,
and let me show you a very interesting event that occurred beginning around two and a half billion years ago that involved bacteria,
and in particular I'm going to focus in on cyanobacteria, and what that was was an absolutely remarkable symbiotic event,
a set of symbiotic events that resulted in all complex cells, complex cells that make up us, complex cells that make up plants, fungi, protists,
complex cells that make up a number of microorganisms because they're still microscopic, but they're complex, they're larger than bacterial cells,
and that symbiotic event that occurred around two and a half billion years ago may have been triggered by the accumulating oxygen in the atmosphere around that time.
It was right around two and a half billion years ago that we began to see enough oxygen so that rocks and water were being oxidized.
It wasn't even in the atmosphere yet, it was just in local rocks and local water, but we can still see that in the fossil record.
And remember oxygen is a toxic compound for all organisms, they all need to evolve some way of handling it,
and one way of handling it seems to have been to get larger, more complicated cells, at least in some lineages.
And so the beginning of large, complicated cells, the beginning of what was going to become our lineage and the lineage of other larger, complicated organisms,
may be right around here cells got maybe 10 times larger than a typical bacterial cell.
If a typical bacterial cell is about one micrometer in diameter, these cells got to be about 10 or 20 micrometers in diameter.
They got to have extra membranes not just outside, but extra membranes inside of them.
And then most importantly, these cells picked up symbiotic bacteria.
They were themselves bacteria, but they picked up additional symbiotic bacteria so that we ended up with complicated chimeric cells that characterize the complex cells that make up many organisms today.
The first symbiont to be picked up in this remarkable set of events may have been what confers nowadays the kind of heterotrophy that we do.
And the structure that we picked up is something that I'm going to elaborate on a little bit more when I talk about heterotrophy.
But the very first symbiont may have been picked up and is still with us to this day that allows us to be the kind of efficient heterotrophs that we are.
We're essentially symbionts of bacteria dating from way back 2.5 billion years ago.
The other kind of symbiont that was picked up was cyanobacteria, and some cells picked those up and those were going to be the future algae in the future plants.
And it was a wonderful symbiosis to pick up because essentially when you take on a cyanobacterium as a symbiont, you are taking on a little food-making factory.
You're taking on an individual that can take carbon dioxide and water and turn it into sugar, which is extremely useful.
And in fact, it's such a useful sort of symbiosis that you can go walking through the woods today and find such symbioses occurring right now.
Lichens are a wonderful example. There are symbiosis between fungi and photosynthetic algae.
And again, the fungi have picked up little food-making factories when they pick up photosynthetic algae.
There are many, many, many examples of symbioses that involve picking up photosynthesizers.
But this particular early acquisition of a photosynthetic cyanobacterium by a particular lineage of cells was destined to become all of the algae of the world
and all of the plants of the world, all of them.
And so that's why I started off with rather sweeping generalization about cyanobacteria at the beginning of this.
I said they are the dominant photosynthesizers of the world because I'm giving them credit for also being inside of every single algae and plant.
Now, nowadays, if you look inside an algal cell or a plant cell and say, where are the cyanobacteria in here?
You can see them in the form of little green structures inside of the cell called chloroplasts.
And chloroplasts actually have their own little genome of DNA that is a remnant of the DNA from when they were free-living cyanobacteria.
So it's one of the best pieces of evidence that these are of symbiotic origin.
They actually carry around their own little bit of bacterial DNA inside of the chloroplasts,
which in turn are inside of plant cells, which are the method by which plant cells are able to photosynthesize.
So that, again, is why I gave cyanobacteria so much credit for photosynthesis.
The other credit that I need to give them is something that we're only just beginning to recognize.
That is, if you go out into the open ocean and ask the question, what's going on out there for photosynthesis?
And remember, that's most of the surface area of the earth.
Most of the surface area is ocean.
If you go out there and try to analyze what's going on out there, where's the photosynthesis happening?
We don't have all the answers to that yet.
There's a great deal we don't know about photosynthesis as done by especially bacteria.
But the more we look out there, the more we realize that there may be missing information when we try to model climate.
And climate modeling is increasingly important as people try to sort out a little bit what's going on with temperature changes on earth,
what's going on possibly with those temperature changes that seem to be exacerbated by humans.
And climate modeling is all about trying to figure out what's going on with carbon.
And in the form of carbon dioxide, we're talking about something that's going into the atmosphere possibly,
maybe affecting the temperature of earth.
And if we're trying to model that correctly, we need to know where all that carbon is going and we need to know about photosynthesizers.
Very often, if you hear about a climate model that seems to have some difficulty,
it doesn't necessarily predict correctly what's going on.
There's missing carbon and very often it's because cyanobacteria haven't been taken properly into consideration.
It's difficult to consider them.
It's difficult to sort out exactly what they're doing.
And it's one of the future problems for climate modeling is to get the cyanobacteria,
especially the ones out in the open ocean that are not well understood sufficiently into the model so that we can understand what's happening with carbon dioxide.
So in this next section, I want to tell you how to go about getting a look at cyanobacteria yourself.
I want to tell you what the field marks of cyanobacteria are.
These are actually among the most visible of bacteria, partly because of their habit of lying out in the sun and photosynthesizing.
And because as photosynthesizers, as typical photosynthesizers, they have pigments, beautiful pigments in many cases.
That's why they're called blue greens.
It turns out that all photosynthesizers have chlorophyll, without exception.
And chlorophyll is a green pigment and any pigment is defined as that chemical that absorbs particular wavelengths of light.
If all possible wavelengths of light are coming in from the sun, some of those colored wavelengths are being absorbed and some of them are being reflected.
And in fact, the color of a pigment, in this case a green pigment like chlorophyll, is due to the green wavelengths of light being reflected back to our eye.
And the other wavelengths of light, such as the reds and the ultraviolets, are being absorbed by that pigment.
That's how cyanobacteria capture light for use to make sugar.
And it's also what makes them nice and visible and why we call them blue greens.
But there's a little extra thing that I need to tell you because it would be a mistake to only look for a blue-green coloration if looking for cyanobacteria.
They can also acquire blackish to brownish and even orange pigments that can sometimes camouflage the blue-green coloration.
So you have to be alert for this as well.
What's going on with that is that they are protecting themselves from excess light, almost like putting on a little pair of sunglasses.
You know that pigments can be very susceptible to bleaching out.
There are some pigments that if you put them into curtains and you set them in a sunny window, gradually whatever brilliant color they began with will be bleached and faded away.
Cyanobacteria and photosynthesizers in general have that same problem.
On one hand, they need to lie out in the sun and acquire energy.
On the other hand, sun streaming in constantly can damage these delicate little photosynthetic pigments.
So many, many photosynthesizers will then have an additional set of pigments, an accessory set of pigments that will be somewhat protective against that problem.
So cyanobacteria can also lean toward the blackish and brownish and sometimes even strange to say the orangish colors.
So there's an additional criterion that you need in order to sort out whether you're looking at cyanobacteria or not.
Look for them in relatively dim light and definitely in damp places.
So favorite places that I have for looking for cyanobacteria include the damp walls on the north sides of buildings,
especially where there might be a dripping drain pipe or a drip from an air conditioner perhaps on the shadowy side of the building, not on the sunny side of the building,
possibly on the face of a cliff where water is dripping down, where you've got enough shade from surrounding vegetation,
or perhaps there's a north facing cliff with water dripping down,
or if you're in a cave just at the entrance where there's still dim light and it's definitely damp on the walls,
look on the walls for cyanobacteria or if you're deeper in a cave that has been electrified for the purpose of showing it off to tourists,
you may actually find on the damp walls deep in the cave where the electric light bulbs have been installed,
areas that are light enough and damp enough for cyanobacteria.
These are some of my favorite places for looking for cyanobacteria and what might they look like?
They will range all the way from blue-green to brownish to black and if you take a little bit of them in your fingers
and they are not pathogens so it's not a problem to pick up a little bit of these,
you will notice that they have the consistency of damp, drier lint,
and this is an important point because you want to distinguish them from the green pond scums and pond slimes that often you see in a freshwater pond.
If you were to pick up some of those, and again those are not pathogens, there's nothing wrong with picking up a bit of pond scum or pond slime,
you will immediately realize as you feel them in your fingers and as you try to resolve what the filaments are like that they're long and thread like.
So those are not cyanobacteria, those are algae, those are more complicated cells.
What you want to feel when you take up a little bit of this material of whatever color from the north side of the building where there's a drip
is almost as though you've picked up some drier lint and it resolves as the finest, finest, tiniest of particles.
And that's a sign of cyanobacteria.
Now where else might you find them?
You may also find them in and on the surfaces of estuary sediments and sand flats and mud flats and other areas where there's some sort of tidal activity.
And in the next lecture I'm going to be talking a little bit more about how to sort out all of the wonderful microorganisms and metabolisms that can be going on in that sort of an environment.
So I'll leave that thought for the next lecture.
Another place that you can find them, and this is what I promised I would tell you about when we were first talking about nitrogen fixation,
is I said I would tell you further about how nitrogen fixation seems to be occurring in tropical environments.
So let me just remind you what I had said about nitrogen fixation several lectures back.
In a temperate environment there are a host of different bacteria that can be involved with fixing nitrogen which is an absolutely essential bacterial mediated part of the nitrogen cycle.
It's how we get gaseous nitrogen from the atmosphere where it's present in 79% into organisms, into some form that organisms can use.
So it's an absolutely essential link in that nitrogen cycle.
So we have proteobacteria that can do that of all sorts.
We have some gram positive bacteria that I didn't talk very much about in this respect who can do that and others.
And I even said that you could pull up some temperate zone leguminous plants and examine the little nodule chambers where nitrogen fixation is occurring in the roots of those plants in the temperate zone.
Turns out that even though there are lots of leguminous plants in the tropics, including some that are enormous and are of tree size and are well worth looking at,
you do not see so many nodules on the roots.
What you do see though if you're in a tropical forest, think of a tropical rainforest perhaps, is that pretty much every surface that can be covered is covered with some form or another of photosynthesizer.
It can be absolutely chaotically covered so that it can be difficult to sort out.
And so we're talking here about lichens, which are symbiosis between fungi and algae.
We're talking about algae themselves, which are not bacteria, but which are photosynthesizing in their own right.
And we're talking about cyanobacteria.
And we're talking about other organisms that are not photosynthesizing, but that are covering every surface that could be covered as well.
Some of the surfaces being covered are those of plants.
That is, if you take the leaf of a tropical tree and examine it closely, it's very often covered with its own little assemblage of lichens and cyanobacteria and algae.
And if you look at the bark of a tropical tree, it's very often not empty of organisms.
Rather, it's full of tiny lichens and tiny cyanobacteria and tiny algae.
And if you sort all of that out and you ask, where is the nitrogen?
One of the answers that seems to be coming out from people who are studying tropical ecology is that many of the cyanobacteria that are on every surface are fixing nitrogen, which they're capable of doing.
And then some of that nitrogen is being passed on to the trees and other plants that they are on by mechanisms that are not fully well understood yet,
but apparently they're producing enough fixed nitrogen that they can certainly do enough for themselves and enough for whatever plant they're on.
Now, there are some particular classic examples of this in which there's relatively few organisms growing in a particular area.
You can actually see a bright blue-green color of cyanobacteria and extrapolate what might be going on.
But in many cases, it's very difficult to sort out a tropical community with so many different parts to it.
The other thing that happens with nitrogen in the tropics is there's not a whole lot of it hanging around unused.
Another characteristic of a tropical cycle of nutrients like nitrogen, as compared to a temperate cycle that I described in a previous lecture,
is that organisms very quickly pick up whatever nitrogen is around and incorporated immediately into whatever they need for their own growth and their own reproduction.
So that that long, laborious nitrogen cycle that I carried us through when we were talking about the grand positives of the soil,
we talked about the nitrifiers and the denitrifiers and it started with the ammonifiers,
we're less likely to see that in a tropical community.
We're more likely to see a much more streamlined, rapid process of handing around that nitrogen,
which means it's a little more difficult to catch bacteria in the act of participating in the nitrogen cycle in the tropics.
It just makes it more interesting, but it also means that if you're looking for signs of cyanobacteria,
it does depend somewhat on where you live and how you interpret the greater habitat that you're examining.
Now, in the next lecture, I'm going to focus in on one particular type of environment that is reasonably accessible, I think,
and where a number of different striking bacterial field marks can be seen,
and where a number of different metabolisms can be essentially observed in action.
And I'm again going to try to carry us through a set of equations, not balanced equations,
but ones that I think I can talk through so that you can get a real feel for how these different metabolisms can be compared and contrasted.
This ends lecture 12.
