It turns out that all photosynthesizers have chlorophyll, without exception.
And chlorophyll is a green pigment and any pigment is defined as that chemical that absorbs particular wavelengths of light.
If all possible wavelengths of light are coming in from the sun, some of those colored wavelengths are being absorbed and some of them are being reflected.
And in fact, the color of a pigment, in this case a green pigment like chlorophyll, is due to the green wavelengths of light being reflected back to our eye.
And the other wavelengths of light, such as the reds and the ultraviolets, are being absorbed by that pigment.
That's how cyanobacteria capture light for use to make sugar.
And it's also what makes them nice and visible and why we call them blue greens.
But there's a little extra thing that I need to tell you because it would be a mistake to only look for a blue-green coloration if looking for cyanobacteria.
They can also acquire blackish to brownish and even orange pigments that can sometimes camouflage the blue-green coloration.
So you have to be alert for this as well.
What's going on with that is that they are protecting themselves from excess light, almost like putting on a little pair of sunglasses.
You know that pigments can be very susceptible to bleaching out.
There are some pigments that if you put them into curtains and you set them in a sunny window, gradually whatever brilliant color they began with will be bleached and faded away.
Cyanobacteria and photosynthesizers in general have that same problem.
On one hand, they need to lie out in the sun and acquire energy.
On the other hand, sun streaming in constantly can damage these delicate little photosynthetic pigments.
So many, many photosynthesizers will then have an additional set of pigments, an accessory set of pigments that will be somewhat protective against that problem.
So cyanobacteria can also lean toward the blackish and brownish and sometimes even strange to say the orangish colors.
So there's an additional criterion that you need in order to sort out whether you're looking at cyanobacteria or not.
Look for them in relatively dim light and definitely in damp places.
So favorite places that I have for looking for cyanobacteria include the damp walls on the north sides of buildings,
especially where there might be a dripping drain pipe or a drip from an air conditioner perhaps on the shadowy side of the building, not on the sunny side of the building,
possibly on the face of a cliff where water is dripping down, where you've got enough shade from surrounding vegetation,
or perhaps there's a north facing cliff with water dripping down,
or if you're in a cave just at the entrance where there's still dim light and it's definitely damp on the walls,
look on the walls for cyanobacteria or if you're deeper in a cave that has been electrified for the purpose of showing it off to tourists,
you may actually find on the damp walls deep in the cave where the electric light bulbs have been installed,
areas that are light enough and damp enough for cyanobacteria.
These are some of my favorite places for looking for cyanobacteria and what might they look like?
