And we're talking about cyanobacteria.
And we're talking about other organisms that are not photosynthesizing, but that are covering every surface that could be covered as well.
Some of the surfaces being covered are those of plants.
That is, if you take the leaf of a tropical tree and examine it closely, it's very often covered with its own little assemblage of lichens and cyanobacteria and algae.
And if you look at the bark of a tropical tree, it's very often not empty of organisms.
Rather, it's full of tiny lichens and tiny cyanobacteria and tiny algae.
And if you sort all of that out and you ask, where is the nitrogen?
One of the answers that seems to be coming out from people who are studying tropical ecology is that many of the cyanobacteria that are on every surface are fixing nitrogen, which they're capable of doing.
And then some of that nitrogen is being passed on to the trees and other plants that they are on by mechanisms that are not fully well understood yet,
but apparently they're producing enough fixed nitrogen that they can certainly do enough for themselves and enough for whatever plant they're on.
Now, there are some particular classic examples of this in which there's relatively few organisms growing in a particular area.
You can actually see a bright blue-green color of cyanobacteria and extrapolate what might be going on.
But in many cases, it's very difficult to sort out a tropical community with so many different parts to it.
The other thing that happens with nitrogen in the tropics is there's not a whole lot of it hanging around unused.
Another characteristic of a tropical cycle of nutrients like nitrogen, as compared to a temperate cycle that I described in a previous lecture,
is that organisms very quickly pick up whatever nitrogen is around and incorporated immediately into whatever they need for their own growth and their own reproduction.
So that that long, laborious nitrogen cycle that I carried us through when we were talking about the grand positives of the soil,
we talked about the nitrifiers and the denitrifiers and it started with the ammonifiers,
we're less likely to see that in a tropical community.
We're more likely to see a much more streamlined, rapid process of handing around that nitrogen,
which means it's a little more difficult to catch bacteria in the act of participating in the nitrogen cycle in the tropics.
It just makes it more interesting, but it also means that if you're looking for signs of cyanobacteria,
it does depend somewhat on where you live and how you interpret the greater habitat that you're examining.
Now, in the next lecture, I'm going to focus in on one particular type of environment that is reasonably accessible, I think,
and where a number of different striking bacterial field marks can be seen,
and where a number of different metabolisms can be essentially observed in action.
And I'm again going to try to carry us through a set of equations, not balanced equations,
but ones that I think I can talk through so that you can get a real feel for how these different metabolisms can be compared and contrasted.
This ends lecture 12.
