Now, that gradual accumulation begins in the sedimentary rocks that we still have from those early time periods.
And there aren't very many places on Earth, by the way, where you can go to see these rocks.
They tend to be in certain parts of Australia, in certain parts of South Africa.
In other words, there are not a whole lot of rocks earlier than three billion years old left on Earth for us to examine closely.
But if we do find rocks of that age, we start to see effects and evidence of gradually accumulating oxygen, which continues on until the present.
So that if you were to make a little graph of the levels of oxygen, you would start with almost nothing, and then you would gradually lift the line,
indicating that oxygen was increasing.
And by and by, you'd get all the way up to the present levels of 20% oxygen in our atmosphere.
So we went from zero to 20% oxygen.
It's an enormous amount of gas put into the atmosphere over this period of time.
Some biologists have even called it the greatest pollution event ever to go from having zero to 20% oxygen in the atmosphere, all produced by cyanobacteria.
Cyanobacteria responsible for all of that.
It had enormous consequences for other bacteria in their metabolisms, again, because oxygen is such a potentially damaging molecule in ways that I'll try to describe a little later.
So we see that increasing oxygen, and we also see the first microfossils at around three and a half billion years ago.
And one pretty good hypothesis about them is that they may be the earliest of cyanobacteria.
The evidence is that they seem to be well preserved in a way that cyanobacteria can manage because they tend to build a really tough sheath around themselves.
And it's difficult for a tiny little fossil like that to be preserved in rocks, but if you've got a really tough sheath, you can withstand maybe the fossilization process.
And so we see these little tiny filaments with really tough sheaths, and we know that cyanobacteria, modern cyanobacteria, can do that.
And so we make a guess, combined with the increasing oxygen levels starting around that time, that we're looking at some of the earliest photosynthesizers, and therefore the cyanobacteria.
Now, here's what cyanobacteria are doing, and this is going to be the first of a number of chemical equations that I'm going to try to put into audio format.
So you'll have to listen closely, but I'm going to deconstruct them a little bit too so that by the time we're done going through some equations, it will maybe begin to be something that you can visualize fairly well.
Also, not going to balance these equations.
I'm saying that just in case there are some chemists listening or some people who had quite a lot of chemistry in high school or college and who are accustomed to seeing balanced equations, I'm going to make no attempt whatsoever to create balanced equations.
I really want to use words here and not get too far into the terminology and nitty gritty of chemistry.
So start with some carbon dioxide and water, and I want to pause there for a second.
Those are going to be our two ingredients for this process, but I want you to think about this.
Carbon dioxide and water are about the most un-nutricious, most un-useful molecules you could ever come up with if you wanted to build something new, and rich, and exciting.
We're talking about a gas, and we're talking about water.
Put the two of them together and you've got nothing, nothing that's very exciting at all.
