Unseen Diversity, Lecture 12, Cyanobacteria, The Original Photosynthesizers
In these next two lectures, I am going to address bacterial metabolism in as much detail as I can manage on an audio tape.
There are some challenges there, but I'm going to go slowly and I'm trying to go carefully here.
And it's a very important topic for understanding the bacteria.
Recall, as I've said many times, that we don't identify bacteria by their morphology.
There's nothing much in the way of morphology with these tiny streamlined cells.
We identify bacteria by what they do.
And what they do is extraordinary.
What they do is diverse.
It's what makes them the most diverse of all organisms on Earth.
And I want to give you a little idea in the next two lectures about what sorts of diverse metabolisms they can do.
And think of metabolism as the set of chemical reactions that any organism does in order to take in molecules that it will need to build parts of itself
and to take up energy in some form.
And that's important in some form.
There are a number of different forms of energy in order to go about building parts of itself.
So taking in materials and taking in energy and processing it and then usually giving off some sort of waste products.
That whole thing combined is what I mean by metabolism.
It's also, by the way, why there are so many wonderful field marks for bacteria because they're taking things in.
They're putting things out and very often these are detectable.
Either we're going to smell things or we're going to notice textures or we're going to notice particular colors.
So what I will try to interweave with my descriptions of these metabolisms is also what sorts of field marks we might be able to see.
When we're trying to examine bacterial metabolism.
So I'm beginning with the cyanobacteria.
C-Y-A-N-O cyanobacteria.
Implying a blueish-green color, they're sometimes also called the blue greens.
They have also sometimes erroneously been called the blue-green algae.
I steer away from putting that algae ending on there.
And I'd like to encourage you to steer away from that as well.
I don't mind calling them the blue greens.
