It was right around two and a half billion years ago that we began to see enough oxygen so that rocks and water were being oxidized.
It wasn't even in the atmosphere yet, it was just in local rocks and local water, but we can still see that in the fossil record.
And remember oxygen is a toxic compound for all organisms, they all need to evolve some way of handling it,
and one way of handling it seems to have been to get larger, more complicated cells, at least in some lineages.
And so the beginning of large, complicated cells, the beginning of what was going to become our lineage and the lineage of other larger, complicated organisms,
may be right around here cells got maybe 10 times larger than a typical bacterial cell.
If a typical bacterial cell is about one micrometer in diameter, these cells got to be about 10 or 20 micrometers in diameter.
They got to have extra membranes not just outside, but extra membranes inside of them.
And then most importantly, these cells picked up symbiotic bacteria.
They were themselves bacteria, but they picked up additional symbiotic bacteria so that we ended up with complicated chimeric cells that characterize the complex cells that make up many organisms today.
The first symbiont to be picked up in this remarkable set of events may have been what confers nowadays the kind of heterotrophy that we do.
And the structure that we picked up is something that I'm going to elaborate on a little bit more when I talk about heterotrophy.
But the very first symbiont may have been picked up and is still with us to this day that allows us to be the kind of efficient heterotrophs that we are.
We're essentially symbionts of bacteria dating from way back 2.5 billion years ago.
The other kind of symbiont that was picked up was cyanobacteria, and some cells picked those up and those were going to be the future algae in the future plants.
And it was a wonderful symbiosis to pick up because essentially when you take on a cyanobacterium as a symbiont, you are taking on a little food-making factory.
You're taking on an individual that can take carbon dioxide and water and turn it into sugar, which is extremely useful.
And in fact, it's such a useful sort of symbiosis that you can go walking through the woods today and find such symbioses occurring right now.
Lichens are a wonderful example. There are symbiosis between fungi and photosynthetic algae.
And again, the fungi have picked up little food-making factories when they pick up photosynthetic algae.
There are many, many, many examples of symbioses that involve picking up photosynthesizers.
But this particular early acquisition of a photosynthetic cyanobacterium by a particular lineage of cells was destined to become all of the algae of the world
and all of the plants of the world, all of them.
And so that's why I started off with rather sweeping generalization about cyanobacteria at the beginning of this.
I said they are the dominant photosynthesizers of the world because I'm giving them credit for also being inside of every single algae and plant.
Now, nowadays, if you look inside an algal cell or a plant cell and say, where are the cyanobacteria in here?
You can see them in the form of little green structures inside of the cell called chloroplasts.
And chloroplasts actually have their own little genome of DNA that is a remnant of the DNA from when they were free-living cyanobacteria.
So it's one of the best pieces of evidence that these are of symbiotic origin.
