They actually carry around their own little bit of bacterial DNA inside of the chloroplasts,
which in turn are inside of plant cells, which are the method by which plant cells are able to photosynthesize.
So that, again, is why I gave cyanobacteria so much credit for photosynthesis.
The other credit that I need to give them is something that we're only just beginning to recognize.
That is, if you go out into the open ocean and ask the question, what's going on out there for photosynthesis?
And remember, that's most of the surface area of the earth.
Most of the surface area is ocean.
If you go out there and try to analyze what's going on out there, where's the photosynthesis happening?
We don't have all the answers to that yet.
There's a great deal we don't know about photosynthesis as done by especially bacteria.
But the more we look out there, the more we realize that there may be missing information when we try to model climate.
And climate modeling is increasingly important as people try to sort out a little bit what's going on with temperature changes on earth,
what's going on possibly with those temperature changes that seem to be exacerbated by humans.
And climate modeling is all about trying to figure out what's going on with carbon.
And in the form of carbon dioxide, we're talking about something that's going into the atmosphere possibly,
maybe affecting the temperature of earth.
And if we're trying to model that correctly, we need to know where all that carbon is going and we need to know about photosynthesizers.
Very often, if you hear about a climate model that seems to have some difficulty,
it doesn't necessarily predict correctly what's going on.
There's missing carbon and very often it's because cyanobacteria haven't been taken properly into consideration.
It's difficult to consider them.
It's difficult to sort out exactly what they're doing.
And it's one of the future problems for climate modeling is to get the cyanobacteria,
especially the ones out in the open ocean that are not well understood sufficiently into the model so that we can understand what's happening with carbon dioxide.
So in this next section, I want to tell you how to go about getting a look at cyanobacteria yourself.
I want to tell you what the field marks of cyanobacteria are.
These are actually among the most visible of bacteria, partly because of their habit of lying out in the sun and photosynthesizing.
And because as photosynthesizers, as typical photosynthesizers, they have pigments, beautiful pigments in many cases.
That's why they're called blue greens.
