I don't mind calling them the cyanose or cyanobacteria, but the word algae has connotations of a larger, more complex cell.
There are plenty of algae.
Some of the green pond scum that you can readily see sometimes is an alga, but it's not a bacterium.
So I steer away from saying blue-green algae.
They are the dominant photosynthesizers on Earth.
And I want to try to prove that to you because it may not seem at first obvious.
We're talking about bacteria.
They are therefore, for the most part, invisible to our eyes.
And photosynthesis is a pretty important process.
It is in brief, and I'll go into more detail in a couple of minutes.
In brief, it is the method by which light from the sun, light energy from the sun, is incorporated by organisms in such a way that food can be made.
So photo, light from the sun, synthesis, synthesis of food is what's going on.
And typically when you first learn about it in school, you learn about it as a process done by green plants.
And certainly that's a legitimate way to think about it.
But what I want to develop a little later in this lecture is that even the photosynthesis being done by green plants is indirectly being done by cyanobacteria.
So I'm going to give them credit for all of that as well.
And that's why I'm going to end up with this statement that they are the dominant photosynthesizers on Earth.
They began to evolve sometime shortly after the origin of life.
And I'll tell you why we think that.
Their major waste product is oxygen.
At the origin of life, which is about four billion years ago, which on your timeline is over on the extreme left-hand side, there was relatively little or even no oxygen in the atmosphere.
And that's a good thing.
It turns out that free oxygen tends to interfere with all sorts of important biological chemical reactions.
And probably origin of life would not have been any sort of success if there had been free oxygen around.
Oxygen essentially rusts things.
It oxidizes things.
And that's generally disruptive to organisms.
So at the beginning, there was no oxygen.
Shortly after, though, we begin to see signs of gradually accumulating oxygen.
