They will range all the way from blue-green to brownish to black and if you take a little bit of them in your fingers
and they are not pathogens so it's not a problem to pick up a little bit of these,
you will notice that they have the consistency of damp, drier lint,
and this is an important point because you want to distinguish them from the green pond scums and pond slimes that often you see in a freshwater pond.
If you were to pick up some of those, and again those are not pathogens, there's nothing wrong with picking up a bit of pond scum or pond slime,
you will immediately realize as you feel them in your fingers and as you try to resolve what the filaments are like that they're long and thread like.
So those are not cyanobacteria, those are algae, those are more complicated cells.
What you want to feel when you take up a little bit of this material of whatever color from the north side of the building where there's a drip
is almost as though you've picked up some drier lint and it resolves as the finest, finest, tiniest of particles.
And that's a sign of cyanobacteria.
Now where else might you find them?
You may also find them in and on the surfaces of estuary sediments and sand flats and mud flats and other areas where there's some sort of tidal activity.
And in the next lecture I'm going to be talking a little bit more about how to sort out all of the wonderful microorganisms and metabolisms that can be going on in that sort of an environment.
So I'll leave that thought for the next lecture.
Another place that you can find them, and this is what I promised I would tell you about when we were first talking about nitrogen fixation,
is I said I would tell you further about how nitrogen fixation seems to be occurring in tropical environments.
So let me just remind you what I had said about nitrogen fixation several lectures back.
In a temperate environment there are a host of different bacteria that can be involved with fixing nitrogen which is an absolutely essential bacterial mediated part of the nitrogen cycle.
It's how we get gaseous nitrogen from the atmosphere where it's present in 79% into organisms, into some form that organisms can use.
So it's an absolutely essential link in that nitrogen cycle.
So we have proteobacteria that can do that of all sorts.
We have some gram positive bacteria that I didn't talk very much about in this respect who can do that and others.
And I even said that you could pull up some temperate zone leguminous plants and examine the little nodule chambers where nitrogen fixation is occurring in the roots of those plants in the temperate zone.
Turns out that even though there are lots of leguminous plants in the tropics, including some that are enormous and are of tree size and are well worth looking at,
you do not see so many nodules on the roots.
What you do see though if you're in a tropical forest, think of a tropical rainforest perhaps, is that pretty much every surface that can be covered is covered with some form or another of photosynthesizer.
It can be absolutely chaotically covered so that it can be difficult to sort out.
And so we're talking here about lichens, which are symbiosis between fungi and algae.
We're talking about algae themselves, which are not bacteria, but which are photosynthesizing in their own right.
