It wasn't something so much that our ancestors invented.
It was something that our ancestors were hungry enough to appreciate.
They were much hungrier probably in most cases than what we experience now with the abundance of food that we have available all the time.
So it was hunger that drove our ancestors into appreciating that.
And so one particular food that is easy enough to make and it might be one of your first forays into experimenting with probiotic foods or bacterially enhanced foods is yogurt.
I'm not going to give you a blow by blow recipe here.
You can certainly go to many sources, books, and the Internet to get the exact recipe.
But the essence of it is that you're allowing milk to go bad in your kitchen.
It's not going bad to the extent that you're approaching cheese, which is milk that is highly, highly decomposed and transformed by microbes to the point where it's unrecognizable as milk.
You're just going a little distance.
You're doing this over the course of a few days.
You're starting with some milk that you have heated up, not to the point of a full rolling boil.
You don't want to get into any situations where you're changing the nature of the protein and the milk too much.
But you're heating it up enough to make conditions good for the kind of bacteria that you're going to add in after you've got that milk cooled back down again to something like body temperature.
Now, where are you going to find body temperature at your house?
It could be that you take your container and wrap it in a towel and set it near or on a radiator.
It could be that you tuck it into a corner near some other heat source.
It could be that you take an electric blanket and allow that to warm up a jar of this milk that you're about to turn into yogurt.
Honestly, I wouldn't worry too much about precise temperatures.
One thing I would suggest is that when you're reading through one of these recipes and they give you an absolute precise temperature for what you must keep your future yogurt at,
I would ignore that. I would let it be plus or minus 10 degrees. It's going to happen.
It just might happen a little more quickly or a little bit more slowly.
It's not necessarily rocket science.
It's something that your great grandmother probably did regularly on her kitchen counter without taking any temperatures at all.
But you want it to be warm.
Then you're going to take some yogurt, maybe from the grocery store, and you're going to add that yogurt.
Probably not flavored yogurt, by the way, probably not with fruit in it.
Just plain yogurt that's got lots of nice bacteria in it.
Add a dollop of that yogurt into your milk.
Put a loose cover on it and let it go for a few days and see what happens.
So that's the simple recipe for it.
Obviously, you can go and get more complicated recipes.
The one thing is the yogurt that you start with, the yogurt that you get from the grocery store,
take a look at the side of the container.
What you would like to see is a nice long list of bacteria on the side of the container.
Nowadays, more and more, that's exactly what you're seeing on the side of yogurt container.
