I am continually mystified and puzzled by the kind of information we are currently getting about viruses from the genome projects.
I was astounded to learn, as you were probably astounded to learn, what huge percent of our DNA is viral DNA,
far out numbers and far out is in far greater proportion genome-wide to our own genes,
what we consider to be our own repertoire of genes.
What's going on with that? I don't know, but this is a subject that bears a great deal more scrutiny
and in the brief section that I included on viruses, I also talked about some of the pathogens
but it really was my goal there to place them as securely into perspective as I could
because I think a good outcome for this would be that you are as curious about viruses as I am
and would like to really keep an eye on that situation as it develops,
understanding that the vast majority of them are not pathogenic at all, are benign,
are maybe even in some cases beneficial to us.
A ninth suggestion, contemplate the fungi. This also is a personal goal for me.
I only hinted at their diversity in these lectures.
They are as fascinating as the bacteria and the archaea.
They are as challenging to look at as the bacteria and archaea.
You may have a field guide to the fungi somewhere at home, probably a field guide to the mushrooms.
Realize the mushrooms are just a tiny part of the total diversity of the fungi.
They are an absolutely amazing cryptic group, well worth exploring further, deserving of their own course.
So my personal goal, perhaps your personal goal could be to add those to nature studies
in a more secure way than you might have.
And finally, to conclude this, when I was working on the field guide to bacteria,
I came across, coined essentially, two new words.
I'll say I came across them because I think that's how word coinage sometimes happens.
You realize that you've got a concept and you realize there might be a word that goes with it,
so you maybe stumble across the new word.
Two words are bacteriocentric and bacteriophilic.
Bacteriocentric.
That word came up when I started to think about anthropocentricity.
In other words, that tendency to look at things such as nature through human eyes
and to interpret things strictly from a human point of view.
And then I got to thinking, isn't there a bacteriocentric point of view as well?
And yes, indeed, that was a word that really carried me through a great deal of the project
of writing the field guide to bacteria, has in fact carried me through these lectures.
The idea that there might be a bacterial point of view.
Now, it would be presumptuous of me to say that I have a bacterial point of view.
I'm nothing but a human and I have all those points of view that any human has.
