It can be a challenge to suddenly see yourself presented with a great many chemical equations that are supposed to represent what these bacteria are doing.
But if you concentrate on these as being the field marks of organisms that are almost entirely about what they do and very little about what they look like.
I think it brings them more into the realm of field studies, the sort of thing that you might be able to imagine yourself doing a bit more with.
Now, I want to anticipate a couple of questions, a couple of logical questions that you might have in mind and in fact questions that I've had on my mind as I've undertaken studies of bacteria myself.
One of those is microscopy. What do I do about microscopy? What do you do about microscopy?
Well, I have a microscope and it's the right kind of microscope for looking at bacteria, but I also have to say that my real appreciation of bacteria does not necessarily come from looking at them under the microscope.
Morphologically, they are often not all that exciting.
That said, I do not want to deprive you of the possibility of seeing bacteria under the microscope.
This course was not the place for me to give you explicit instructions on that, but let me give you a few instructions that might send you off in that direction if you wished.
First thing is you would need a compound microscope and whether you're buying it online or buying it at a flea market or buying it from a friend,
make sure it's a compound microscope and not a dissecting microscope or a stereo microscope.
It's a simple thing, but it might be in the description of the microscope. You need to look for that word compound.
It needs to have lenses that take you up as far as a magnification of 400 to 1,000 times.
That means it needs to have individual lenses that are often marked with the number 40 and 100.
That 40 and that 100 are the lenses that will take you up to 400 times, typically, and 1,000 times magnification.
Again, it's a simple thing, but if you're reading a description of a microscope that you're getting ready to purchase, those need to be two of your lenses.
Otherwise, you're not going to see bacteria with that particular microscope.
The third thing is that you want to take a look at whatever lighting system is available.
There are lots, but it should be a lighting system that you can adjust readily so that you can play around with that a little bit.
Bacteria are transparent for the most part. They're often fading into the background with their transparency.
A little bit of lighting and adjustment of lighting can help things enormously if you're trying to get a look at them.
Now, let me tell you a couple of my favorite samples to look at if I'm looking for bacteria and one of my favorite tricks for preparing a slide for bacteria.
One of my favorite samples is to take some beef broth or some chicken broth with as little fat as possible, leave it out on the counter open for two or three days.
Take a little sample of it onto a glass slide.
I mean, a tiny little sample, you need the tiniest, tiniest little drop because remember, these organisms are really small.
You do not need a big swimming drop on that glass slide.
A tiny little sample of this chicken broth or beef broth, try not to get any fatty globules in there.
They'll just obscure your vision.
Put a cover slip on and make sure the preparation, again, is not swimming around with excess liquid.
And then here's one of my tricks.
I let that sit for five or 10 minutes.
And the reason I do that is because bacteria like to find a surface and cling to it.
They seem to be more comfortable that way.
They're more subtle that way.
They don't like to be all topsy turvy in freshly dumped liquid that has just appeared on this glass slide.
Give them a chance to settle down and that will make it a little easier to find them.
