I like to take it a little bit further.
I like to go out and say I'm going to find five field marks of bacteria.
That might include digging up some legumes.
It might include sniffing some soil.
It might include some other things which are not included in these lectures.
I would like to suggest to you that the field guide to bacteria that I wrote is packed with additional suggestions that you might use on your nature walks.
By no means limit yourself to field marks that I've described in these lectures.
Go further with that and challenge yourself and really try to incorporate it in your nature studies.
Second suggestion.
Maybe don't look at animals and plants quite the same way anymore.
Certainly you've been looking at them as a naturalist and you've been enjoying them as a naturalist.
But a new twist on that idea is to see them as entirely dependent upon bacteria.
Whether you're looking at plants that need nitrogen in the soil and therefore are dependent on the nitrogen fixing bacteria of the soil.
Whether you're looking at herbivores of any kind that are not in a one-to-one relationship with their food,
which is plants in which need all the help they can get from the microbial world,
which they often have contained inside of themselves in their intestines as a way for supplementing that diet.
No matter what you think about animals and plants, add bacteria to that picture and see where that takes you.
I think it's an interesting suggestion for really a complete and holistic look at biodiversity.
Third suggestion.
Try rereading or reading some favorite or influential book or article from a newspaper or a magazine about pathogenic bacteria.
But perhaps read it or reread it with some new ideas about the nature of pathogenicity.
You can read that and you can tuck things between the lines and you can add your own mental footnotes.
And it might be a useful thing to do to kind of reconsider whatever your initial take might have been on the whole nature of pathogenicity.
I think there's a lot of interesting directions that you can go with that,
including just being the local mini-expert on pathogenicity such that if it comes up in ordinary conversations, say at a party,
you might have some interesting things to say on the topic that are not simply what you typically find in a newspaper article or in a magazine article.
You might have some extra things that you could add to the conversation.
Fourth suggestion.
And this one I'm doing myself.
This is one that is a personal challenge for me.
Right now we're hearing a great deal about climate modeling in respect to understanding climate change.
And much of the climate modeling has to do with asking where's the carbon?
Where's the carbon at any given point?
Where's the carbon in the oceans?
Where's the carbon usually in the form of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere?
Where's the carbon in the organisms that we see?
