And you might notice that throughout this entire course, I have never once used the word germ for any of these.
That's a disparaging term for bacteria.
It's a term that I never, ever use.
But there may be still an aspect in the back of your head.
What am I doing personally with my bacteria?
I understand now perhaps that 10% of the human body weight is bacteria.
Perhaps you are recalling that 90% of the cells you're hauling around are bacteria.
And even that some microbiologists have described us as microbial communities with a human attached.
You might also recall some things that I've said about the bacteria that are in our digestive system as well as on our skin,
how they're not only holding places that therefore pathogens cannot get access to,
but they also may be revving up our immune systems and allowing us to be healthier in general with immune systems ready to go
if we should encounter real pathogens.
And then of course there are a host of functions that we don't know yet for all of those body bacteria.
This is an ongoing project, an ongoing genome project actually,
to get sequences for every single one of what may be thousands of species of bacteria that we're hauling around.
So what does that mean to you?
What might you do or what you should you be doing?
What should be your new stance on this?
And I want to remind you of three words that I've used in several lectures, prebiotic, probiotic and antibiotic.
And I think those three words sum up what you might consider taking as your new stance or continuing as your stance on bacteria.
Prebiotic is a relatively new word that really has to do with your diet.
And in what you put into your body is being not just for you, but also for your bacterial community.
And you experiment all the time with this.
I think I pointed out that you are capable of producing all sorts of interesting smells when you make adjustments to your diet,
because in fact those smells are coming from your bacteria.
And you can also make your bacterial community quite healthy and quite vibrant by eating certain foods, especially high fiber ones.
And there's nothing like a bowl of oatmeal as a good example of a prebiotic and other such foods.
So it's a worthwhile subject to pursue a little bit and prebiotic is a good keyword for it.
I'm not going to make a lot of suggestions about specific things with your diet, but it's something that's worth looking into.
It's an interesting point of view to consider it from the point of view of the intestinal bacteria that are a part of you.
Probiotics.
That's deliberately eating foods that contain bacteria, which are essentially one and the same with the bacteria that you are carrying around in and on you.
Remember the continuum in your kitchen.
Your body bacteria are in your kitchen, are therefore in your food, and if that food begins to ferment and turns into one of the great fermented cuisines or drinks,
then you're on your way to having fermented foods essentially made with your own body bacteria.
It's an almost unavoidable process.
