So that's a good sign that you're using the right stuff.
And that's a probiotic.
When you eat yogurt, you are replenishing and enriching your bacteria of your body.
And it's a great thing to do if you are suffering from any temporary problems with bacteria,
such as a bout of diarrhea or some other difficulty like that.
That will be a passing situation, but you can make yourself more comfortable more quickly by eating yogurt.
And finally, antibiotics, which have been the topic of several of these lectures.
If you take a stance to only use antibiotics appropriately under those circumstances,
in which you've got a serious bacterial infection that needs to be treated immediately,
pneumonia comes to mind.
Pneumonia is a good example.
If you suspect you have bacterial pneumonia, you need to get to a doctor and you need to get the prescription for the antibiotics.
But if you take a stance that you are only going to use antibiotics under those circumstances,
then you will be well underway to helping all of us to have a world that's less full,
less disconcertingly full of antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
I think it's a very important thing.
It's a very important personal choice to make careful decisions.
Antibiotics do absolutely nothing against viruses.
Viruses are little bits of DNA and little bits of RNA, as I've explained in other parts of this course.
Antibiotics do absolutely nothing for that.
Be among the many and the growing numbers who refuse to use antibiotics for common flu symptoms and for common cold symptoms.
Simply don't do that.
It's completely inappropriate.
Only use antibiotics appropriately.
I feel passionately about this, as you can tell.
Now, in this third section of the conclusion, I want to do what I'm going to call future directions.
What I described earlier as a typical ending section of a scientific paper.
When we're done with the experiments and we're done with the results and we're done with interpreting those results,
we're at a point of thinking about what we would like to do next.
Here are my suggestions for what you might want to do next.
Some of them are suggestions for what I might want to do next because I certainly have ideas about where I'd like to go with this topic.
It's one of intrinsic interest to me.
Some of these are suggestions for me as well.
First suggestion.
Get started right away with including bacteria in your nature studies on your very next nature walk.
Make it a point to find one field mark of a bacterium.
