Unseen Diversity, Lecture 14, Future Directions
This is the concluding lecture for our course on Bacteriology, and I will present it in three parts.
In the first part, I am going to do some recapitulation of topics that we have seen in the past 13 lectures for this course,
but I will not simply recapitulate them. Instead, I would like to take you a little bit through a deconstruction of what I was thinking about as I put those particular topics together in that particular order.
I think now at this point we can look back and take a look at them in that particular way, and it might be a useful way to make some conclusions.
The second part of this concluding lecture is one in which I would like to bring up at least a couple of questions that I suspect might be on your minds.
I am basing this on other lectures that I have given. I tend to get certain sorts of questions, and I am going to anticipate a couple of them perhaps and maybe begin to send you in the direction of some answers.
Finally, I would like to end this with what I call Future Directions. It is a typical section of a scientific paper, actually. It is the part where we are done with our experiments, we are done with our conclusions for those particular experiments,
but we still have something more to say. We want to talk about what we might do next outside of the confines of the scientific paper or outside of the confines of the course.
That will be the three sections of this lecture.
First of all, I began these lectures realizing that I wanted to be very clear about our own point of view.
I spent quite a bit of time describing us, describing humans as being somewhat anomalous in respect to what we see, what we can appreciate, the sorts of morphologies and activities that we tend to be attracted to,
our unusual size, our complexity, and even the fact that we are terrestrial, that we are essentially limited to terrestrial environments.
I went on quite a bit about that because I think it is a really important aspect for any natural history study, especially if you are going outside of the usual bird watching or mammal watching or perhaps wildflower identification.
As soon as you start to head into the other areas of studying natural history, I think it is important to look at yourself as well along with that and realize what it is that you are not seeing and what it is that you are not experiencing
and then try to do the best you can to handle that situation or to try to rectify certain aspects of that.
I also had as a goal for this course, and I think I've probably put it into several of these lectures, that I would like you to appreciate even more than perhaps you did at the beginning,
or at least as much, the amazing biodiversity of organisms on earth and to realize just how important bacteria and archaea are in that biodiversity and to present this biodiversity as surprisingly accessible.
And I think that was the major challenge of this course and one that I was taking very seriously, how to make this seem like something that you could go out into your backyard and experience.
Let me remind you that the first thing you could do is go out into your backyard, pick up a handful of soil and smell it and say that's the smell of geosman, that's the smell of actinobacteria, that's the smell of some predominant
gram positive bacteria that are living in your backyard. That's just but one example, so to make it seem accessible.
Then I spent a bit of time on history and I made the decision to turn to history at that point in the course beginning with Van Gogh and Hook in the 17th century,
then jumping ahead to some important microbiologists at the end of the 19th century and early 20th century.
Because I think their vision and their interpretation of things really sent microbiology in various interesting directions as it developed.
First of all, I don't know if we would have seen bacteria in the 17th century at all if it had not been for Van Gogh and Hook.
I don't think anyone else in the 17th century was set up to look for bacteria, so that's a remarkable achievement in and of itself and well worth thinking about.
An extraordinary genius and he was way ahead of his time. As for the 19th century, we had two major directions that microbiology took and they're both very interesting.
Most of the western microbiologists were focusing very hard on the disease causing pathogens, the pathogenic bacteria.
It was a worthy enterprise. They got a long way along with that project and thanks to their work, we have antibiotics, we have a better understanding of pathogens.
We also have interestingly enough though a particular mindset sometimes about bacteria that they are all pathogens and it's hard to get away from that mindset.
I think it has deep roots in a mindset that makes a lot of sense. We needed to get a lot of work done on pathogens and we did.
Meanwhile though, I said we also had Russian microbiology developing almost in a parallel universe and it's from the Russian microbiologists that we get all sorts of wonderful observations that set us off in the direction of realizing just how metabolically complex bacteria can be.
And so the last part of this course has been my attempt to try to take you through some of these major metabolisms, including even talking about some of the equations that are involved with those.
And I think the most exciting one that was discovered very early on by Russian microbiologists was chemo autotrophy, that really strange type of autotrophy, which you can make food using the bonds of chemicals in complete darkness.
And I also throughout tried to weave in as many field marks and habitats as I could again to make this whole topic seem more accessible.
And I also especially toward the end wanted to weave those in with metabolism, perhaps to make it seem like a somewhat less intimidating topic.
