Unseen Diversity, Lecture 14, Future Directions
This is the concluding lecture for our course on Bacteriology, and I will present it in three parts.
In the first part, I am going to do some recapitulation of topics that we have seen in the past 13 lectures for this course,
but I will not simply recapitulate them. Instead, I would like to take you a little bit through a deconstruction of what I was thinking about as I put those particular topics together in that particular order.
I think now at this point we can look back and take a look at them in that particular way, and it might be a useful way to make some conclusions.
The second part of this concluding lecture is one in which I would like to bring up at least a couple of questions that I suspect might be on your minds.
I am basing this on other lectures that I have given. I tend to get certain sorts of questions, and I am going to anticipate a couple of them perhaps and maybe begin to send you in the direction of some answers.
Finally, I would like to end this with what I call Future Directions. It is a typical section of a scientific paper, actually. It is the part where we are done with our experiments, we are done with our conclusions for those particular experiments,
but we still have something more to say. We want to talk about what we might do next outside of the confines of the scientific paper or outside of the confines of the course.
That will be the three sections of this lecture.
First of all, I began these lectures realizing that I wanted to be very clear about our own point of view.
I spent quite a bit of time describing us, describing humans as being somewhat anomalous in respect to what we see, what we can appreciate, the sorts of morphologies and activities that we tend to be attracted to,
our unusual size, our complexity, and even the fact that we are terrestrial, that we are essentially limited to terrestrial environments.
I went on quite a bit about that because I think it is a really important aspect for any natural history study, especially if you are going outside of the usual bird watching or mammal watching or perhaps wildflower identification.
As soon as you start to head into the other areas of studying natural history, I think it is important to look at yourself as well along with that and realize what it is that you are not seeing and what it is that you are not experiencing
and then try to do the best you can to handle that situation or to try to rectify certain aspects of that.
I also had as a goal for this course, and I think I've probably put it into several of these lectures, that I would like you to appreciate even more than perhaps you did at the beginning,
or at least as much, the amazing biodiversity of organisms on earth and to realize just how important bacteria and archaea are in that biodiversity and to present this biodiversity as surprisingly accessible.
And I think that was the major challenge of this course and one that I was taking very seriously, how to make this seem like something that you could go out into your backyard and experience.
Let me remind you that the first thing you could do is go out into your backyard, pick up a handful of soil and smell it and say that's the smell of geosman, that's the smell of actinobacteria, that's the smell of some predominant
gram positive bacteria that are living in your backyard. That's just but one example, so to make it seem accessible.
Then I spent a bit of time on history and I made the decision to turn to history at that point in the course beginning with Van Gogh and Hook in the 17th century,
then jumping ahead to some important microbiologists at the end of the 19th century and early 20th century.
Because I think their vision and their interpretation of things really sent microbiology in various interesting directions as it developed.
First of all, I don't know if we would have seen bacteria in the 17th century at all if it had not been for Van Gogh and Hook.
I don't think anyone else in the 17th century was set up to look for bacteria, so that's a remarkable achievement in and of itself and well worth thinking about.
An extraordinary genius and he was way ahead of his time. As for the 19th century, we had two major directions that microbiology took and they're both very interesting.
Most of the western microbiologists were focusing very hard on the disease causing pathogens, the pathogenic bacteria.
It was a worthy enterprise. They got a long way along with that project and thanks to their work, we have antibiotics, we have a better understanding of pathogens.
We also have interestingly enough though a particular mindset sometimes about bacteria that they are all pathogens and it's hard to get away from that mindset.
I think it has deep roots in a mindset that makes a lot of sense. We needed to get a lot of work done on pathogens and we did.
Meanwhile though, I said we also had Russian microbiology developing almost in a parallel universe and it's from the Russian microbiologists that we get all sorts of wonderful observations that set us off in the direction of realizing just how metabolically complex bacteria can be.
And so the last part of this course has been my attempt to try to take you through some of these major metabolisms, including even talking about some of the equations that are involved with those.
And I think the most exciting one that was discovered very early on by Russian microbiologists was chemo autotrophy, that really strange type of autotrophy, which you can make food using the bonds of chemicals in complete darkness.
And I also throughout tried to weave in as many field marks and habitats as I could again to make this whole topic seem more accessible.
And I also especially toward the end wanted to weave those in with metabolism, perhaps to make it seem like a somewhat less intimidating topic.
It can be a challenge to suddenly see yourself presented with a great many chemical equations that are supposed to represent what these bacteria are doing.
But if you concentrate on these as being the field marks of organisms that are almost entirely about what they do and very little about what they look like.
I think it brings them more into the realm of field studies, the sort of thing that you might be able to imagine yourself doing a bit more with.
Now, I want to anticipate a couple of questions, a couple of logical questions that you might have in mind and in fact questions that I've had on my mind as I've undertaken studies of bacteria myself.
One of those is microscopy. What do I do about microscopy? What do you do about microscopy?
Well, I have a microscope and it's the right kind of microscope for looking at bacteria, but I also have to say that my real appreciation of bacteria does not necessarily come from looking at them under the microscope.
Morphologically, they are often not all that exciting.
That said, I do not want to deprive you of the possibility of seeing bacteria under the microscope.
This course was not the place for me to give you explicit instructions on that, but let me give you a few instructions that might send you off in that direction if you wished.
First thing is you would need a compound microscope and whether you're buying it online or buying it at a flea market or buying it from a friend,
make sure it's a compound microscope and not a dissecting microscope or a stereo microscope.
It's a simple thing, but it might be in the description of the microscope. You need to look for that word compound.
It needs to have lenses that take you up as far as a magnification of 400 to 1,000 times.
That means it needs to have individual lenses that are often marked with the number 40 and 100.
That 40 and that 100 are the lenses that will take you up to 400 times, typically, and 1,000 times magnification.
Again, it's a simple thing, but if you're reading a description of a microscope that you're getting ready to purchase, those need to be two of your lenses.
Otherwise, you're not going to see bacteria with that particular microscope.
The third thing is that you want to take a look at whatever lighting system is available.
There are lots, but it should be a lighting system that you can adjust readily so that you can play around with that a little bit.
Bacteria are transparent for the most part. They're often fading into the background with their transparency.
A little bit of lighting and adjustment of lighting can help things enormously if you're trying to get a look at them.
Now, let me tell you a couple of my favorite samples to look at if I'm looking for bacteria and one of my favorite tricks for preparing a slide for bacteria.
One of my favorite samples is to take some beef broth or some chicken broth with as little fat as possible, leave it out on the counter open for two or three days.
Take a little sample of it onto a glass slide.
I mean, a tiny little sample, you need the tiniest, tiniest little drop because remember, these organisms are really small.
You do not need a big swimming drop on that glass slide.
A tiny little sample of this chicken broth or beef broth, try not to get any fatty globules in there.
They'll just obscure your vision.
Put a cover slip on and make sure the preparation, again, is not swimming around with excess liquid.
And then here's one of my tricks.
I let that sit for five or 10 minutes.
And the reason I do that is because bacteria like to find a surface and cling to it.
They seem to be more comfortable that way.
They're more subtle that way.
They don't like to be all topsy turvy in freshly dumped liquid that has just appeared on this glass slide.
Give them a chance to settle down and that will make it a little easier to find them.
And then you have your work cut out for you.
I will admit that the next steps, be patient about.
You are looking for something very tiny.
You are looking for something that is only going to appear probably on your 40x to 100x lens and you're cautiously adjusting the light at each step.
Nonetheless, don't start with those lenses.
Start with your lower powered lenses and get anything that you can in focus at each step.
Little bit of debris, get that in focus, then try your next highest lens.
Little bit of debris, get that in focus and then finally at your higher lenses start looking for bacteria.
So that would be my attempt to get you started in that direction and it's certainly a promising direction to give a try at.
I'd also like to make some suggestions about another area that you might want to explore on your own with certain precautions.
And that is you might want to try some culturing of bacteria, but I want to tell you what I would recommend and what I wouldn't recommend.
I would recommend that you go back and look at and read in the booklet my instructions for making a Winogradsky column.
It's a very safe preparation, a very interesting preparation for anyone to make.
To see a wide variety of bacteria, sometimes colorful bacteria, all interacting in fascinating ways.
It's safe enough that I would do it in a classroom. I would certainly do it in my own home.
I actually have on my office window sill some Winogradsky columns that I've kept for years.
So I highly recommend this.
I would also recommend that as much as you want to, you should explore in your own kitchen wonderful traditional fermented foods.
Maybe beginning with getting the right recipes off the Internet or the right recipes from a library book or asking your grandparents what they used to do with pickling and making wine and making vinegar.
And get started right there because those are essentially culture methods for bacteria.
Safe culture methods and fun culture methods and ones that result in good foods and good drinks.
And if not that, at least going to delis where things are being prepared traditionally and enjoying some of those fermented foods.
Should you get things going on Petri dishes?
As was done by Dr. Koch and his colleagues, the beginning of the turn of the century and which revolutionized 20th century microbiology.
That's where I would lean a little bit away from making that a project for your kitchen.
If you were doing this at home, I would suggest not trying to get little pure cultures of bacteria on plates because it opens up a whole interesting avenue of figuring out exactly who they are and then disposing of them properly.
If it turns out that they're not the bacteria that you necessarily want living in your kitchen.
Again, I don't want to raise any alarms about pathogens, but it's likely to be something that in very large quantity could take a little opportunistic pathogenic detour.
And it's not the sort of thing that I would typically be doing in my kitchen.
That said, you can consider doing all sorts of other things with bacteria.
And if you have access to any sort of school laboratory or college laboratory, you can of course go even further than that.
I mentioned this because sometimes students want to do science fair projects with bacteria, which I highly encourage.
I wish more of them would work with Wienegrodski columns and I wish fewer of them would work with pure cultures of bacteria on Petri dishes.
So there's an additional type of question that I get from people and it might come out of pathogens still being on people's minds.
It's hard to have them not on your mind.
And in fact, sometimes people call pathogens germs.
And you might notice that throughout this entire course, I have never once used the word germ for any of these.
That's a disparaging term for bacteria.
It's a term that I never, ever use.
But there may be still an aspect in the back of your head.
What am I doing personally with my bacteria?
I understand now perhaps that 10% of the human body weight is bacteria.
Perhaps you are recalling that 90% of the cells you're hauling around are bacteria.
And even that some microbiologists have described us as microbial communities with a human attached.
You might also recall some things that I've said about the bacteria that are in our digestive system as well as on our skin,
how they're not only holding places that therefore pathogens cannot get access to,
but they also may be revving up our immune systems and allowing us to be healthier in general with immune systems ready to go
if we should encounter real pathogens.
And then of course there are a host of functions that we don't know yet for all of those body bacteria.
This is an ongoing project, an ongoing genome project actually,
to get sequences for every single one of what may be thousands of species of bacteria that we're hauling around.
So what does that mean to you?
What might you do or what you should you be doing?
What should be your new stance on this?
And I want to remind you of three words that I've used in several lectures, prebiotic, probiotic and antibiotic.
And I think those three words sum up what you might consider taking as your new stance or continuing as your stance on bacteria.
Prebiotic is a relatively new word that really has to do with your diet.
And in what you put into your body is being not just for you, but also for your bacterial community.
And you experiment all the time with this.
I think I pointed out that you are capable of producing all sorts of interesting smells when you make adjustments to your diet,
because in fact those smells are coming from your bacteria.
And you can also make your bacterial community quite healthy and quite vibrant by eating certain foods, especially high fiber ones.
And there's nothing like a bowl of oatmeal as a good example of a prebiotic and other such foods.
So it's a worthwhile subject to pursue a little bit and prebiotic is a good keyword for it.
I'm not going to make a lot of suggestions about specific things with your diet, but it's something that's worth looking into.
It's an interesting point of view to consider it from the point of view of the intestinal bacteria that are a part of you.
Probiotics.
That's deliberately eating foods that contain bacteria, which are essentially one and the same with the bacteria that you are carrying around in and on you.
Remember the continuum in your kitchen.
Your body bacteria are in your kitchen, are therefore in your food, and if that food begins to ferment and turns into one of the great fermented cuisines or drinks,
then you're on your way to having fermented foods essentially made with your own body bacteria.
It's an almost unavoidable process.
It wasn't something so much that our ancestors invented.
It was something that our ancestors were hungry enough to appreciate.
They were much hungrier probably in most cases than what we experience now with the abundance of food that we have available all the time.
So it was hunger that drove our ancestors into appreciating that.
And so one particular food that is easy enough to make and it might be one of your first forays into experimenting with probiotic foods or bacterially enhanced foods is yogurt.
I'm not going to give you a blow by blow recipe here.
You can certainly go to many sources, books, and the Internet to get the exact recipe.
But the essence of it is that you're allowing milk to go bad in your kitchen.
It's not going bad to the extent that you're approaching cheese, which is milk that is highly, highly decomposed and transformed by microbes to the point where it's unrecognizable as milk.
You're just going a little distance.
You're doing this over the course of a few days.
You're starting with some milk that you have heated up, not to the point of a full rolling boil.
You don't want to get into any situations where you're changing the nature of the protein and the milk too much.
But you're heating it up enough to make conditions good for the kind of bacteria that you're going to add in after you've got that milk cooled back down again to something like body temperature.
Now, where are you going to find body temperature at your house?
It could be that you take your container and wrap it in a towel and set it near or on a radiator.
It could be that you tuck it into a corner near some other heat source.
It could be that you take an electric blanket and allow that to warm up a jar of this milk that you're about to turn into yogurt.
Honestly, I wouldn't worry too much about precise temperatures.
One thing I would suggest is that when you're reading through one of these recipes and they give you an absolute precise temperature for what you must keep your future yogurt at,
I would ignore that. I would let it be plus or minus 10 degrees. It's going to happen.
It just might happen a little more quickly or a little bit more slowly.
It's not necessarily rocket science.
It's something that your great grandmother probably did regularly on her kitchen counter without taking any temperatures at all.
But you want it to be warm.
Then you're going to take some yogurt, maybe from the grocery store, and you're going to add that yogurt.
Probably not flavored yogurt, by the way, probably not with fruit in it.
Just plain yogurt that's got lots of nice bacteria in it.
Add a dollop of that yogurt into your milk.
Put a loose cover on it and let it go for a few days and see what happens.
So that's the simple recipe for it.
Obviously, you can go and get more complicated recipes.
The one thing is the yogurt that you start with, the yogurt that you get from the grocery store,
take a look at the side of the container.
What you would like to see is a nice long list of bacteria on the side of the container.
Nowadays, more and more, that's exactly what you're seeing on the side of yogurt container.
So that's a good sign that you're using the right stuff.
And that's a probiotic.
When you eat yogurt, you are replenishing and enriching your bacteria of your body.
And it's a great thing to do if you are suffering from any temporary problems with bacteria,
such as a bout of diarrhea or some other difficulty like that.
That will be a passing situation, but you can make yourself more comfortable more quickly by eating yogurt.
And finally, antibiotics, which have been the topic of several of these lectures.
If you take a stance to only use antibiotics appropriately under those circumstances,
in which you've got a serious bacterial infection that needs to be treated immediately,
pneumonia comes to mind.
Pneumonia is a good example.
If you suspect you have bacterial pneumonia, you need to get to a doctor and you need to get the prescription for the antibiotics.
But if you take a stance that you are only going to use antibiotics under those circumstances,
then you will be well underway to helping all of us to have a world that's less full,
less disconcertingly full of antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
I think it's a very important thing.
It's a very important personal choice to make careful decisions.
Antibiotics do absolutely nothing against viruses.
Viruses are little bits of DNA and little bits of RNA, as I've explained in other parts of this course.
Antibiotics do absolutely nothing for that.
Be among the many and the growing numbers who refuse to use antibiotics for common flu symptoms and for common cold symptoms.
Simply don't do that.
It's completely inappropriate.
Only use antibiotics appropriately.
I feel passionately about this, as you can tell.
Now, in this third section of the conclusion, I want to do what I'm going to call future directions.
What I described earlier as a typical ending section of a scientific paper.
When we're done with the experiments and we're done with the results and we're done with interpreting those results,
we're at a point of thinking about what we would like to do next.
Here are my suggestions for what you might want to do next.
Some of them are suggestions for what I might want to do next because I certainly have ideas about where I'd like to go with this topic.
It's one of intrinsic interest to me.
Some of these are suggestions for me as well.
First suggestion.
Get started right away with including bacteria in your nature studies on your very next nature walk.
Make it a point to find one field mark of a bacterium.
I like to take it a little bit further.
I like to go out and say I'm going to find five field marks of bacteria.
That might include digging up some legumes.
It might include sniffing some soil.
It might include some other things which are not included in these lectures.
I would like to suggest to you that the field guide to bacteria that I wrote is packed with additional suggestions that you might use on your nature walks.
By no means limit yourself to field marks that I've described in these lectures.
Go further with that and challenge yourself and really try to incorporate it in your nature studies.
Second suggestion.
Maybe don't look at animals and plants quite the same way anymore.
Certainly you've been looking at them as a naturalist and you've been enjoying them as a naturalist.
But a new twist on that idea is to see them as entirely dependent upon bacteria.
Whether you're looking at plants that need nitrogen in the soil and therefore are dependent on the nitrogen fixing bacteria of the soil.
Whether you're looking at herbivores of any kind that are not in a one-to-one relationship with their food,
which is plants in which need all the help they can get from the microbial world,
which they often have contained inside of themselves in their intestines as a way for supplementing that diet.
No matter what you think about animals and plants, add bacteria to that picture and see where that takes you.
I think it's an interesting suggestion for really a complete and holistic look at biodiversity.
Third suggestion.
Try rereading or reading some favorite or influential book or article from a newspaper or a magazine about pathogenic bacteria.
But perhaps read it or reread it with some new ideas about the nature of pathogenicity.
You can read that and you can tuck things between the lines and you can add your own mental footnotes.
And it might be a useful thing to do to kind of reconsider whatever your initial take might have been on the whole nature of pathogenicity.
I think there's a lot of interesting directions that you can go with that,
including just being the local mini-expert on pathogenicity such that if it comes up in ordinary conversations, say at a party,
you might have some interesting things to say on the topic that are not simply what you typically find in a newspaper article or in a magazine article.
You might have some extra things that you could add to the conversation.
Fourth suggestion.
And this one I'm doing myself.
This is one that is a personal challenge for me.
Right now we're hearing a great deal about climate modeling in respect to understanding climate change.
And much of the climate modeling has to do with asking where's the carbon?
Where's the carbon at any given point?
Where's the carbon in the oceans?
Where's the carbon usually in the form of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere?
Where's the carbon in the organisms that we see?
Next time you see or hear about some new complicated model of carbon,
especially in respect to understanding global climate change or modeling that climate change,
it's okay for you to say where are the bacteria because sometimes those models fall a bit short.
Not necessarily the fault of the model or by the way, it's a very, very challenging problem,
but it's okay for you to say where are the bacteria in this model?
Where are all those photosynthetic bacteria?
What are they doing and how have you managed to take that into consideration?
Or what are your goals for trying to take that into consideration?
It's a legitimate question and it's one that I'm using myself these days as I try to understand global climate change.
Fifth suggestion, one for all of us, one for me too, live more comfortably with your normal bacteria,
regardless of the heightened concerns that are being generated by some industries.
On the other hand, here are some concerns that you could generate all by yourself.
It would be okay with me if you came away from this course with heightened concerns
about what's going on with the misuse of antibiotics and cattle feedlots.
That's certainly one of my concerns and a little bit of activism in that particular direction wouldn't be such a bad thing,
but as far as your own personal normal bacteria maybe become something of an advocate for them.
It's certainly one of my goals.
A sixth suggestion, you could come out of this taking a regular course in microbiology at some college
and it could be quite an interesting experience because I will tell you that if you choose a microbiology course
that is primarily for people going into the medical field and there are such courses,
you will probably hear a great deal more about pathogens.
Some of those courses are almost entirely about bacterial pathogens
and that could be an interesting experience for you to go through a course like that
with your particular perspective on pathogenicity and your particular perspective on biodiversity,
so you could actually bring to that class an interesting viewpoint.
There are also, by the way, microbiology classes that focus almost entirely on environmental microbiology
and that, by the way, has been mostly what we've been through in this course.
Seventh suggestion, I suggest you book a trip to Yellowstone to see the gorgeous thermophiles and the hyperthermophiles.
I was recently in Yellowstone, it's always a great privilege to be there
and to see just the absolutely brilliant layout of boardwalks right near the thermal features
so that you can actually see the beautiful colors of bacteria that live in boiling hot water
and it's really one of the best places to see these extraordinary groups of hyperthermophilic and thermophilic bacteria
and it's accessible. You get to Yellowstone and you're there and you can see it
and for that matter you could plan trips to other extreme environments which are also wonderful
such as salt-rich environments and sulfur-rich environments.
And eighth suggestion is to continue contemplating the viruses and this is a personal goal for me too.
I am continually mystified and puzzled by the kind of information we are currently getting about viruses from the genome projects.
I was astounded to learn, as you were probably astounded to learn, what huge percent of our DNA is viral DNA,
far out numbers and far out is in far greater proportion genome-wide to our own genes,
what we consider to be our own repertoire of genes.
What's going on with that? I don't know, but this is a subject that bears a great deal more scrutiny
and in the brief section that I included on viruses, I also talked about some of the pathogens
but it really was my goal there to place them as securely into perspective as I could
because I think a good outcome for this would be that you are as curious about viruses as I am
and would like to really keep an eye on that situation as it develops,
understanding that the vast majority of them are not pathogenic at all, are benign,
are maybe even in some cases beneficial to us.
A ninth suggestion, contemplate the fungi. This also is a personal goal for me.
I only hinted at their diversity in these lectures.
They are as fascinating as the bacteria and the archaea.
They are as challenging to look at as the bacteria and archaea.
You may have a field guide to the fungi somewhere at home, probably a field guide to the mushrooms.
Realize the mushrooms are just a tiny part of the total diversity of the fungi.
They are an absolutely amazing cryptic group, well worth exploring further, deserving of their own course.
So my personal goal, perhaps your personal goal could be to add those to nature studies
in a more secure way than you might have.
And finally, to conclude this, when I was working on the field guide to bacteria,
I came across, coined essentially, two new words.
I'll say I came across them because I think that's how word coinage sometimes happens.
You realize that you've got a concept and you realize there might be a word that goes with it,
so you maybe stumble across the new word.
Two words are bacteriocentric and bacteriophilic.
Bacteriocentric.
That word came up when I started to think about anthropocentricity.
In other words, that tendency to look at things such as nature through human eyes
and to interpret things strictly from a human point of view.
And then I got to thinking, isn't there a bacteriocentric point of view as well?
And yes, indeed, that was a word that really carried me through a great deal of the project
of writing the field guide to bacteria, has in fact carried me through these lectures.
The idea that there might be a bacterial point of view.
Now, it would be presumptuous of me to say that I have a bacterial point of view.
I'm nothing but a human and I have all those points of view that any human has.
On the other hand, by attempting to put myself more in the position of a bacterial point of view,
I think I can see the bacterial world a little more completely and a little more clearly.
And then I would even dare to use the word bacteriophilic, loving bacteria.
That word also came easily.
I've used quite a few words in this course with philic at the end,
like thermophilic and halophilic.
So that I stumbled upon bacteriophilic as well.
Loving bacteria, appreciating the bacterial load that you have,
appreciating that you are mostly bacteria, appreciating your mitochondria,
which originated as symbiotic bacteria in which you're providing you with enough energy
to be the enormous and complicated and energetic organism that you are.
So I would even go so far as saying bacteriophily might be the final and absolute goal for this course
and one that you might consider embracing yourself.
Thank you for listening to this course on bacteria.
Thank you for listening to these 14 lectures.
I enjoyed giving them.
I hope you enjoyed listening to them.
Even to an unseen audience, it's a pleasure to talk about bacteria
and the idea that I might be introducing even a small number of people to the world of bacteria
and doing so in a positive way has been a great pleasure for me.
So thank you for listening.
Once there, you can access this course by using the password 1-1-2-1-B-D-D.
Again, that's 1-1-2-1-B-D-D.
If you've enjoyed this program, the modern scholar series from recorded books
offers courses in a variety of subject areas taught by the world's greatest professors.
Call 1-800-636-3399 or visit the course's web page for a free catalog.
This course, produced by John J. Alexander, is copyrighted 2007 by recorded books LLC.
The lecture text is copyrighted 2007 by Betsy Dexter Dyer.
The lectures were edited under the direction of Ian McCulloch.
