Next time you see or hear about some new complicated model of carbon,
especially in respect to understanding global climate change or modeling that climate change,
it's okay for you to say where are the bacteria because sometimes those models fall a bit short.
Not necessarily the fault of the model or by the way, it's a very, very challenging problem,
but it's okay for you to say where are the bacteria in this model?
Where are all those photosynthetic bacteria?
What are they doing and how have you managed to take that into consideration?
Or what are your goals for trying to take that into consideration?
It's a legitimate question and it's one that I'm using myself these days as I try to understand global climate change.
Fifth suggestion, one for all of us, one for me too, live more comfortably with your normal bacteria,
regardless of the heightened concerns that are being generated by some industries.
On the other hand, here are some concerns that you could generate all by yourself.
It would be okay with me if you came away from this course with heightened concerns
about what's going on with the misuse of antibiotics and cattle feedlots.
That's certainly one of my concerns and a little bit of activism in that particular direction wouldn't be such a bad thing,
but as far as your own personal normal bacteria maybe become something of an advocate for them.
It's certainly one of my goals.
A sixth suggestion, you could come out of this taking a regular course in microbiology at some college
and it could be quite an interesting experience because I will tell you that if you choose a microbiology course
that is primarily for people going into the medical field and there are such courses,
you will probably hear a great deal more about pathogens.
Some of those courses are almost entirely about bacterial pathogens
and that could be an interesting experience for you to go through a course like that
with your particular perspective on pathogenicity and your particular perspective on biodiversity,
so you could actually bring to that class an interesting viewpoint.
There are also, by the way, microbiology classes that focus almost entirely on environmental microbiology
and that, by the way, has been mostly what we've been through in this course.
Seventh suggestion, I suggest you book a trip to Yellowstone to see the gorgeous thermophiles and the hyperthermophiles.
I was recently in Yellowstone, it's always a great privilege to be there
and to see just the absolutely brilliant layout of boardwalks right near the thermal features
so that you can actually see the beautiful colors of bacteria that live in boiling hot water
and it's really one of the best places to see these extraordinary groups of hyperthermophilic and thermophilic bacteria
and it's accessible. You get to Yellowstone and you're there and you can see it
and for that matter you could plan trips to other extreme environments which are also wonderful
such as salt-rich environments and sulfur-rich environments.
And eighth suggestion is to continue contemplating the viruses and this is a personal goal for me too.
