And then you have your work cut out for you.
I will admit that the next steps, be patient about.
You are looking for something very tiny.
You are looking for something that is only going to appear probably on your 40x to 100x lens and you're cautiously adjusting the light at each step.
Nonetheless, don't start with those lenses.
Start with your lower powered lenses and get anything that you can in focus at each step.
Little bit of debris, get that in focus, then try your next highest lens.
Little bit of debris, get that in focus and then finally at your higher lenses start looking for bacteria.
So that would be my attempt to get you started in that direction and it's certainly a promising direction to give a try at.
I'd also like to make some suggestions about another area that you might want to explore on your own with certain precautions.
And that is you might want to try some culturing of bacteria, but I want to tell you what I would recommend and what I wouldn't recommend.
I would recommend that you go back and look at and read in the booklet my instructions for making a Winogradsky column.
It's a very safe preparation, a very interesting preparation for anyone to make.
To see a wide variety of bacteria, sometimes colorful bacteria, all interacting in fascinating ways.
It's safe enough that I would do it in a classroom. I would certainly do it in my own home.
I actually have on my office window sill some Winogradsky columns that I've kept for years.
So I highly recommend this.
I would also recommend that as much as you want to, you should explore in your own kitchen wonderful traditional fermented foods.
Maybe beginning with getting the right recipes off the Internet or the right recipes from a library book or asking your grandparents what they used to do with pickling and making wine and making vinegar.
And get started right there because those are essentially culture methods for bacteria.
Safe culture methods and fun culture methods and ones that result in good foods and good drinks.
And if not that, at least going to delis where things are being prepared traditionally and enjoying some of those fermented foods.
Should you get things going on Petri dishes?
As was done by Dr. Koch and his colleagues, the beginning of the turn of the century and which revolutionized 20th century microbiology.
That's where I would lean a little bit away from making that a project for your kitchen.
If you were doing this at home, I would suggest not trying to get little pure cultures of bacteria on plates because it opens up a whole interesting avenue of figuring out exactly who they are and then disposing of them properly.
If it turns out that they're not the bacteria that you necessarily want living in your kitchen.
Again, I don't want to raise any alarms about pathogens, but it's likely to be something that in very large quantity could take a little opportunistic pathogenic detour.
And it's not the sort of thing that I would typically be doing in my kitchen.
That said, you can consider doing all sorts of other things with bacteria.
And if you have access to any sort of school laboratory or college laboratory, you can of course go even further than that.
I mentioned this because sometimes students want to do science fair projects with bacteria, which I highly encourage.
I wish more of them would work with Wienegrodski columns and I wish fewer of them would work with pure cultures of bacteria on Petri dishes.
So there's an additional type of question that I get from people and it might come out of pathogens still being on people's minds.
It's hard to have them not on your mind.
And in fact, sometimes people call pathogens germs.
