Hello again, and welcome to our lecture on rational functions. You'll remember that
a rational number, or a fraction, is a quotient of two integers, like two over three, two-thirds.
Well, a rational function is a quotient of two polynomials. For instance, the rational
function f of x equals x squared plus four over x cubed minus one is a quotient of two
polynomials, and that's an example of a rational function. And today we'll talk about rational
functions, and some of the key issues will be issues we brought up before with functions.
What are the domains of these rational functions? What are their graphs look like? And of course,
let's see some applications of rational functions. So the formal definition of rational function
is basically what I just said. It's a function that can be written as a quotient, n of x
over d of x, where n and d are both polynomials. And the domain of a rational function consists
of all x values for which the denominator is not zero. Because remember, you can't
divide by zero in math. So if the denominator is zero for some x value, that's not going
to be in the domain. And let me also make another quick comment. We aren't going to
use complex numbers in this lecture or for the remaining, say, 10 or 20 lectures. So
we'll put the complex numbers behind us for a while. They'll come in later on in the course.
So what's a rational function look like? What's the graph of a rational function? What
attributes does it have? Well, let's look at perhaps the simplest example of a rational
function, f of x equals 1 over x. And let's ask some good questions. What's the domain?
Well, clearly x cannot be zero. So the domain is all real numbers except for zero. Now look
what happens here when we approach zero from the right. As we get towards zero from the
right, as x gets nearer and nearer to zero, 1 over x gets bigger and bigger. 1 over a
small number is a large number. So what we say is that as we approach zero from the
right, the function increases without bound. In a similar manner, as we approach from the
left, the function decreases without bound. Now here's another interesting feature of
this function. What happens as x gets very large? What happens if x is, say, a million
or minus a million? Well, I think you see that 1 over a very large number is very close
to zero. So we can sort of see this behavior getting close to zero and when x is large
on either side. And then by plotting a few points like 1, 1 or minus 1, minus 1, we obtain
the following graph. This is the graph of the rational function 1 over x. It has some
very interesting features, I think. First of all, the y-axis, x equals zero, is a vertical
asymptote. And the x-axis is a horizontal asymptote. And you also see that this is an
odd function. It's symmetric about the origin. So again, x equals zero is called a vertical
asymptote and y equals zero is called a horizontal asymptote. And the idea of asymptote technically
involves something called limits. It's the behavior as you get closer and closer to a
number or as x gets really, really large. Limits is a big topic in calculus classes,
but I think we can understand this asymptotic behavior even in a pre-calculus course. What
we're saying is that, for instance, as x gets very, very large positive, then 1 over x is
getting closer and closer to zero. Good. Let's look at a slightly more difficult example.
Let's find the vertical and horizontal asymptotes of the rational function 2x divided by 3x
squared plus 1. Here's a picture of that function. And it doesn't look like it has a vertical
asymptote, but it does seem to have a horizontal asymptote being the x-axis. Well, it doesn't
have a vertical asymptote because the denominator is never zero. The domain of this function
is all real numbers, so we don't have to worry about division by zero. But the horizontal
asymptote, you can see in an intuitive way that as x gets very large positive, the numerator
is 2 times a large number, but the denominator is 3 times a large number squared, and hence
the denominator kind of overwhelms the numerator and the quotient approaches zero.
All right. Here's a similar-looking example, but I've made it even more interesting. 2x
squared over x squared minus 1. What are the asymptotes, domain, etc.? Well, clearly,
if x is 1 or minus 1, you're dividing by zero, and hence the domain is all real numbers
except for plus and minus 1. And in fact, x equals 1 and x equals minus 1 are vertical
asymptotes. As x gets closer and closer to 1 or closer and closer to minus 1, the function
gets very, very large or very, very small. And furthermore, there's a horizontal asymptote
at y equals 2. Here's how you can see that. It's 2x squared divided by x squared minus
1. When x is really large, that minus 1 becomes irrelevant. And it's really 2x squared divided
by x squared. They're both going to infinity. I admit that. But the top one is twice the
bottom one. So you see that the horizontal asymptote is y equals 2. Here's a picture
of that graph. Kind of difficult, I think, to draw that graph by hand. But with a graphing
calculator, you can produce this graph, and I invite you to do so. Notice that the has
two vertical asymptotes at 1 and minus 1, and then you see that horizontal asymptote at
2. Interesting looking function, I think. Now, rational functions have lots and lots
of applications. Let me pause here real quickly and show you one from chemistry. We won't
delve into this application too much. But if you studied chemistry, you probably remember
Boyle's law. And let me remind you what it says. Boyle's law says that for a quantity
of gas at constant temperature, the pressure is inversely proportional to the volume. And
you can write that as the following equation. P, pressure, equals k over v. v is the volume,
and k is a constant of proportionality. And there's some units involved here, but I won't
worry about those. But p is now a rational function of the variable v. So you could ask
yourself, what happens to the pressure p when the volume approaches zero when you squeeze
in this volume? Well, I think you see, according to the equation, that when v gets near zero,
p gets bigger and bigger. The pressure gets larger and larger. Okay. Let's go, let's take
it up a notch. Let's look at a trickier example. Vertical asymptotes have a little bit more
to worry about here. Here's a function x squared minus 4 over x minus 2. It's a rational function.
The domain is clearly all x except for 2. What are the vertical asymptotes? Well, you
might think x equals 2 because the denominator vanishes at 2. But wait, watch what we're
going to do here. Let's take the numerator and factor it. So it becomes x plus 2 times
x minus 2 divided by x minus 2. And then we see the common factor x minus 2. So we cancel
those common factors. And this original rational function can be simplified to x plus 2, the
surviving factor in the numerator, as long as we remember, be careful here, as long as
we remember that x cannot equal 2. x cannot be 2 because 2 is not even in the domain.
So what do we have here? This rational function looks like the line x plus 2, doesn't it?
That's a straight line except wait. It's got a hole in it. There's a hole when x is 2.
So this is what I like to call when I'm teaching precalculus or calculus, the proverbial line
with a hole in it. And the hole is at x equals 2. This kind of function where you have this
cancellation and you get curves or lines with holes in them occur quite a bit in calculus
courses. In summary, this function, this rational function, doesn't have any vertical or horizontal
asymptotes. It doesn't. It's really a straight line, but with a hole in it. Kind of neat.
It's the straight line x plus 2, slope 1, y-intercept 2. But when x is 2, it's got
a hole there. In fact, it wants to be 4, doesn't it? If you wanted to fill in that hole with
some chalk, you would fill it in at 2, 4. But 2 is not in the domain, so you can't fill
it in. So this brings up a general pitfall that I can't help but reiterate again. You
can't just look at the denominator to determine the vertical asymptotes. Just because the denominator
is 0 doesn't mean you necessarily have a vertical asymptote there. Let me show you another tricky
example. Look at the following kind of complicated rational function. The numerator's x squared
plus x minus 2, the denominator I'll factor for you, x plus 2 times x minus 3. And I asked
you, what are the vertical asymptotes? And you might automatically say, well, minus 2
plus 3, because that's where the denominator vanishes. But I'm tricking you. Factor that
numerator. It factors to x plus 2 times x minus 1. Ah, common factor of x plus 2. Cancel
that common factor. And we have a new version of our rational function. It's x minus 1 over
x minus 3, as long as we remember that x cannot be minus 2. Minus 2 is not in the domain of
this function. So, what's happening here? Well, look at the graph and you'll see what's
what happened. We only have one vertical asymptote and that occurs at x equals 3. Over there
at minus 2, there was not a vertical asymptote after all. There was a hole in the graph.
And in fact, as we'll see in a few minutes, that hole occurs at minus 2, 3 fifths. That's
where the hole is on the graph. So, this complicated rational function simplifies slightly to another
rational function with one vertical asymptote, a hole, and of course it has a horizontal
asymptote at 1, y equals 1. Okay, good going. I think you can see that graphing these rational
functions is a non-trivial task. And when you take a calculus class, you'll learn many
advanced techniques for graphing functions. The good news is in today's world, we have
these graphing calculators and computers that can produce graphs very quickly for complicated
functions. I invite you throughout this course when you see one of our pictures, try to replicate
it with your own graphing calculator. It's kind of nice to say, hey, I got the same graph
as on the DVD. Let me ask you some questions. Now that we're experts on asymptotes, how
many vertical asymptotes can a graph of a rational function have? How many? Well, I say you can
have any finite number. Like, the number depends on the polynomial in the denominator, doesn't
it? And if that's an nth degree polynomial, then it'll have up to n vertical asymptotes.
That said, there are functions that have an infinite number of vertical asymptotes. In
fact, when we study trigonometry, we'll see such a function. Okay, here's a similar question.
How many horizontal asymptotes can a rational function have? And the answer here is a little
bit easier. It can be zero, and we've seen an example of that like a straight line, or
it could have one. Now, there are functions out there that are not rational that have
two horizontal asymptotes, one to the left and one to the right. And we'll see an example
of that in a moment. Okay, before we look at that example, I'd like to sort of summarize
how to handle horizontal asymptotes for rational functions. The bottom line is there's sort
of three cases. A rational function can have a horizontal asymptote at zero, the x-axis,
or it could have a horizontal asymptote, say, at some positive or negative number, or it
might not have a horizontal asymptote at all. So let's look at these three cases. Here's
the graph of the function 2x over 3x squared plus 1. This graph has a horizontal asymptote
at y equals zero. And here's the intuitive reason why. The numerator is 2x, but the denominator
is 3x squared plus 1. As x gets really large, either positive or negative, the denominator
will overwhelm the numerator, and hence the quotient approaches zero. Well, here's a
related function, 2x squared over 3x squared plus 1. The only change now is the numerator
is 2x squared. What's the situation now? Well, now it has a horizontal asymptote at two-thirds,
at y equals two-thirds. Now, why is that true? Well, do the same informal argument. The numerator
is 2x squared, the denominator is 3x squared, and when x is large, you can ignore that plus
1. And it's something x squared divided by something else x squared. The leading coefficients
2 over 3 determine that horizontal asymptote. And a third example, related to the first
two, now I'll change the numerator to 2x cubed. And now the numerator is bigger than
the denominator, and hence this function doesn't have a horizontal asymptote at all. As x gets
very large, the numerator overwhelms the denominator. Now, a lot of people might say that was a
very good informal argument about asymptotes, Professor. I want to see an algebraic argument.
So let me look at that first example we did, 2x over 3x squared plus 1. And let me try
to convince you why the horizontal asymptote is y equals zero. And here's how the analysis
goes. And this same analysis would work for any rational function. Take your given function
2x over 3x squared plus 1, and multiply numerator and denominator by 1 over x squared. And this
you'll see why in a minute, the reason for doing this. What happens to the numerator?
2x times 1 over x squared is just 2 over x. And the denominator becomes 3x squared times
1 over x squared, so that's just 3, and then plus 1 over x squared. So we've rewritten
the rational function in a new form. But this form is easier to understand, because look,
when x goes to infinity or to minus infinity, when x gets really, really big, like a billion,
the 2 over x and the 1 over x squared die off. They approach zero. And you're left with
zero in the numerator and three in the denominator. And hence the quotient is zero. So the limit
is zero as x gets larger and larger. And you can do this analysis with the other two examples
I gave you. So what's the summary of our rules for horizontal asymptotes of rational functions?
If the degree of the numerator is less than the degree of the denominator, y equals zero
is a horizontal asymptote. If the degrees are the same, then the horizontal asymptote
is given by the ratio of the leading coefficients in that example, 2 over 3. And if the numerator
has a greater degree than the denominator, then there's no horizontal asymptote. Now
I promised to show you a function that has two horizontal asymptotes. Let me show you
this function. It's kind of interesting function. It's kind of bizarre. It's not a rational
function. And of course there are many such examples, but I chose this one. Let's consider
the function x plus 10 divided by the absolute value of x plus 2. It's not a rational function
because that denominator is not really a polynomial. It's got that absolute value sign in there.
And if you're like me, you get a little nervous when you see absolute value signs like, oh,
I don't like to deal with those. So I recommend you consider the two cases when x is positive
and when x is negative, and that'll let you analyze that absolute value function. So when
x is negative, the absolute value of x is minus x. So for negative x, the function equals
x plus 10 over minus x plus 2. Whereas if x is positive or is equal to zero, then the
denominator is just x plus 2. So we've expressed this unusual function, this non-rational
function in terms of two rules. When x is less than zero, do this rule, and when x is
greater than zero, do the other rule. Now look what happens. Look at these two rules.
When x is less than zero, say going to minus infinity, the quotient of the leading coefficients
is 1 over minus 1, so it has a horizontal asymptote of minus 1 to the left. But to the
right, the horizontal asymptote is 1 because the quotient of x plus 10 over x plus 2,
the leading coefficients are 1 over 1 or 1. Here's a picture of that unusual function.
You can see that it has two horizontal asymptotes. It's horizontal asymptote to the right is 1
and to the left is minus 1. That was a tricky example, and it wasn't really a rational
function, but kind of a fun example. Let's turn to an application. Suppose you're designing
a school poster, and you'd like this poster, say, to have 48 square inches of printed material,
maybe a picture and some words, but you also want to have some margins, both on the left
and the right and on the top and the bottom. Let's assume the margins on each side, on
the left and the right, are one and a half inches, and then on the top and the bottom,
let's say one inch. So it's 48 square inches of printed material, and then you have these
margins, one and a half inches on either side, one inch on the top and the bottom. Here's
a picture of the setup. Here's a picture of our proposed poster, and I've labeled the
dimensions of the printed part x by y. X is the horizontal distance, y is that vertical
distance, and then you see that I've added one and a half inches on either side, those
are the margins, and then one inch on the top and the bottom. So the question is, what
should the dimensions of this poster be in order to minimize the amount of paper used?
We want to save money. I want the smallest amount of paper to be used to construct this
poster under these conditions. Okay, let's get to work. We've labeled the dimensions
of the printed part as x and y, and because that has to be 48 square inches, we know that
x times y is 48, and then we can solve for either variable like y is then 48 over x.
So what's the area to be minimized? Well, it's the larger area, the whole paper. So
that's this way, it's x plus the two margins, and the margins were one and a half, so it's
x plus three, one and a half on each side. And how about this way? It's y plus the margin
of one and the margin of one, so it's y plus two. So we want to minimize the quantity x
plus three times y plus two. But we know what y is. We can replace y with 48 over x. So we
have a new function, the area equals x plus three times the quantity 48 over x plus two.
And we can do a quick simplification, get a common denominator, and it's x plus three
times 48 plus two x, all divided by x. Okay, we want to minimize the quantity of x
and minimize this function. Ouch, not clear how to do it. Now if you took a calculus class,
you would learn some skills to find the minimum value of this function. But we have graphing
calculators. We could graph this function, it'll have an unusual looking graph, and then
we can find the minimum value. Remember, we're trying to find the values of x and y that
make the area of the big piece of paper, the poster, as small as possible. Well here's
the graph using a graphing calculator of our area function, x plus three times 48 plus
two x, all divided by x. Wow, kind of an interesting looking graph, isn't it? It seems to have a
vertical asymptote over there when x is zero, and indeed it does, because x equals zero
is a vertical asymptote. And then it seems to have a minimum point, and then the graph
grows again. Okay, what's that minimum value? Well, your graphing utility has a button
on it, which allows you to find or approximate the minimum value of a graph. You can actually
zoom in on that bottom part of the graph and discover the minimum value. It turns out that
x is approximately 8.5 at the low point of the graph. And when x is approximately 8.5,
the y value, 48 divided by 8.5, is about 5.6. So those are the x and y values. Remember,
the paper was bigger. So we have to add the margins, x plus three is 11.5, and x equals
7.5 approximately, and y plus two is approximately 7.6. Those are the dimensions to minimize the
amount of paper. And as I said, if you took a calculus class, and I hope you do, after
you take this pre-calculus course, you'll be ready for calculus, you'll discover a technique
for finding the exact value of that minimum. And it turns out to be six square roots of
two. That's the precise answer. And that's about 8.485.
Okay, why don't you be the teacher again? This is kind of fun to do. You're making up yet another
test. And this time, you want to have a rational function with certain properties. You want the
asymptotes to be the vertical asymptotes to be at minus two and at one. You'd like it to
have a horizontal asymptote at y equals two. And how about zeros at x equals three and minus
three? What should your function look like? Now let's build it. It has zeros at three and minus
three. So in the numerator, we have to have an x minus three and an x plus three. We want those
vertical asymptotes at minus two and at one. So the denominator needs to have an x plus
two and an x minus one. Now there's one more feature, horizontal asymptote at two, y equals
two. Remember, that's the quotient of the leading coefficients. So I'm going to have to add a two
in the numerator to make that quotient two. So multiply out this kind of frightening looking
expression and you get your function to be two x squared minus 18 over x squared plus x minus
two. So you're the teacher. Here's what you do. You tell the student or you ask the student on a
test. Dear students, here's a problem. Two x squared minus 18 over x squared plus x minus
two. I want you to find the vertical asymptotes, the horizontal asymptote, and the zeros. Tough
but we know how to do it because we sort of did it backwards. Okay. Let's do some true-false
problems. I don't think we've done any true-false problems. I like to put these on tests, the main
reason being they're easy to grade. So here are some true-false questions. First one, a
rational function can have infinitely many vertical asymptotes. Well, the answer is false. Remember
that the number of vertical asymptotes is related to the degree of the polynomial in the denominator.
That said, again, tune in for trigonometry when we'll see the tangent function and some others that
have an infinite number of vertical asymptotes. Okay, so that was a false. Another question.
A rational function must have at least one vertical asymptote. What do you think? False again. For
instance, two x over three x squared plus one, an example we've seen earlier today, doesn't have any
vertical asymptotes. The reason being the denominator is never zero. Three x squared plus one is
always positive. That's false, too. Third question. The graph of a rational function can
cross a horizontal asymptote. Can you cross your horizontal asymptote? And the answer is true. In
fact, if you look at that previous example, two x over three x squared plus one, you'll see that it
crosses the horizontal asymptote at the origin. Another question. Can the graph of a rational
function cross a vertical asymptote? And the answer here is false. It cannot because the vertical
asymptotes come about where the denominator vanishes and those points are not in the domain of the
function. Great going. I hope you've enjoyed this very brief study of rational functions and some
simple applications. So what's next? What are we going to do next time? Well, we'll turn now to a
topic called inverse functions. Again, a big topic in pre-calculus and a major role in calculus. Let
me give you a taste of what we'll do. Here are some simple examples. The function 5x multiplies
x by five. Its inverse is x divided by five. They kind of undo each other. First you multiply by
five and then you divide by five. You're back to where you started from. Or how about x cubed?
Well, it's the inverse of the cube root function. They undo each other. Now, these inverse functions
will play a major role when we get to the exponential function because its inverse will be the logarithmic
function. And then we'll study trigonometry. And we'll have the trigonometric functions and then we'll
develop their inverses. So there's a lot of power in these inverse functions and we'll touch on that
topic next time. I'll see you then.
