Hello. I hope you've enjoyed our lecture so far on the development of the trigonometric
functions. Today we'll spend some time studying the sine and cosine functions, and in fact
we'll look at their graphs. You'll recall we defined the six trigonometric functions
two ways. First as a using a right triangle, and then we defined it for an arbitrary angle
positive or negative. And we noticed near the end of the previous lecture that you can
think of the sine and cosine function as functions of a real variable. For any angle
theta, you can compute sine theta and cosine theta. So I'd like to explore that functional
relationship of the sine and cosine function a bit deeper. But before we do, let's recall
that definition of the trigonometric functions, that definition using an arbitrary angle.
Here's how it goes. You let theta be an angle in standard position, and let x, y be the
coordinates of the terminal sine of that angle. And of course, r is the distance from
that point back to the origin, and we assume it's non-zero. And then sine was defined to
be y over r, and cosine was x over r. And the other four trigonometric functions were
also defined. But today I'm going to focus on sine and cosine. Here's a picture of what
we're talking about. x, y is the terminal point, r is the distance to the origin, sine
is y over r, cosine is x over r. Okay, now let's go a little deeper. For every angle
theta, you can compute sine of theta and cosine of theta. So these are functions of a real
variable. The input is a real number, theta, the angle. But now we're going to change the
letters on you. Instead of using theta to represent the angle, we're going to use the
variable x. This is not the x of the ordered pair x, y that I just alluded to a few seconds
ago. Ignore that for the moment. Just think of x as being the angle. Okay, we're just
relabeling instead of using theta, we're using x. And the output, sine x, we'll call y, or
f of x. And we have a function, f of x equals sine x. You give me x, you give me an angle,
I will compute y, the sine of that angle. What's the domain of our new function? All
real numbers. What's its range? Well, remember that the sine and the cosine are sandwiched
between minus one and one. So the range is not all real numbers, it's a small closed
interval minus one to one. And also recall that periodicity. The sine function and the
cosine function is periodic with period 2 pi. By that I mean sine of x plus 2 pi is equal
to sine of x. Because if you're at some angle x and you go all the way around 2 pi radians
or 360 degrees, you're back to where you started from. So the sine value will be the
same. Alright. What does the graph of the sine function look like? Maybe you've seen
a picture of it before. It's a good looking graph. You'll like this graph. And how can
we do it? Well, here's how your graphing calculator would do it, or here's how you would do it
if you had a lot of time. You would pick x values, you would pick certain angles and
compute the sine of those angles. And you would do like a million of them and start
connecting the dots. Just like we point plotted back in earlier lectures with the exponential
function. For instance, you could let x be zero and sine of zero is zero. So the point
zero zero, the origin, is on the graph of the sine function. You could let x be pi over
6, the angle pi over 6. Remember what the sine of pi over 6 was? Yeah, one half. So you
would plot that point. Pi over 6 comma one half. How about pi over 4? Hmm, oh yeah, sine
of pi over 4 was square root of 2 over 2. So you would plot that point. And then you would
plot, say, sine of pi over 2. And remember that that's equal to 1. And you would plot
more and more points. Here I've indicated on the graph a few of those key points. And
then you connect them with a smooth curve and you get this very nice, sinal-soycal behavior,
this periodic behavior. You see how it goes up and down, up and down. Here are some important
features of this graph. Please, savor it. When you're having breakfast one day, bring
the graph and put it next to you and start looking at it. For instance, it crosses the
x-axis at zero, pi, 2 pi, minus pi, minus 2 pi. Those are the x-intercepts. How high
does it go? It goes up to 1 and then it goes down to minus 1. Notice how it repeats itself
at zero, zero. It's at the origin. And then over at 2 pi, it's back at zero again and
you've had a complete period, a complete cycle of the sine curve. And then that cycle is
repeated over and over again. Again, the domain is all real numbers. This graph goes on forever
in both directions, but the range is minus 1 to 1. Notice also it was an odd function,
wasn't it? Look at the graph again. It's an odd function. It's symmetric about the
origin. We've talked about the intercepts. Where does the maximum value occur? Well,
at pi over 2, because sine of pi over 2 is 1, and then by periodicity, 5 pi over 2, that's
pi over 2 plus 2 pi, etc. So there are lots of high points and there are corresponding
low points, say, at 3 pi over 2, the value is minus 1. Okay, so it's a nice graph. It's
got interesting features. What's the cosine graph look like? Well, the cosine graph is
very similar to the sine graph. Here's one of the big differences. Remember that sine
of zero was zero? But what's cosine zero? Oh, yeah, cosine zero. I look back at that
table. Cosine zero is one. So when x is zero, y is one. So the cosine hits its maximum value
right away when x is zero. And then it still has this periodic behavior. In fact, the cosine
graph looks just like the sine graph, but it's been shifted, hasn't it? It's been moved.
They are translations of each other. You can check that on your graphing calculator.
Try this experiment sometime. Graph y equals cosine x, and also graph y equals sine of
the quantity x plus pi over 2, pi over 2 being the shift factor here. You'll get the same
graph. They'll be on top of each other. In fact, you won't notice any difference. You'll
graph it and you'll think you've only graphed one function. Okay, so the cosine graph is
very similar to the sine graph. It's now an even function, though, isn't it? Notice the
symmetry across the y-axis. It's an even function, not an odd function, but it has the same domain
and range of the sine function. Domain? All real numbers. Range minus one to one. Okay,
let me make some comments about the sine function and the cosine function. These are periodic
functions, period 2 pi. They repeat themselves one cycle every 2 pi. So they're used all
over science and engineering to model periodic behavior, such as waves, the tides, heartbeats,
movement of pendulums, clocks. We saw harmonic motion with the spring last lecture. All these
kinds of engineering applications require knowledge of trigonometric functions. Needless
to say, again, this course is called PreCalculus, trigonometry plays a key role in all of calculus.
When I teach calculus, I'm using trig functions every day, and students need to be pretty
sharp with some of the trig values and the shapes of trigonometric curves in order to
be successful in calculus. And I'll admit to you, I think graphing trigonometric functions
can be difficult. Of course, graphing sine and cosine, we just did it. That's not so bad.
But now we're going to massage them. We're going to complicate things. We're going to
look at some trigonometric functions based on sine and cosine, but with some tweaking.
And you'll see that, as we say, it's more interesting. Remember, that's what mathematicians
like to say when they really mean it's more difficult.
Let me start with a fairly easy example. What does 2 sine x look like? f of x equals 2 sine
x. What do you think now? Well, I know what sine x looks like. Here, I'll draw it for
you. Like this. Well, what about 2 sine x? Well, the only difference here is when x
is pi over 2, sine of pi over 2 used to be 1, and now it'll be 2, 2 times 1. So all we're
doing is changing the, what we call the amplitude of the curve. Instead of going between minus
1 and 1, it will now go between minus 2 and 2. So let's graph it on, say, the interval
minus 4 to 4 pi. Here's what the picture would look like. And this is a nice graph, I think,
because we have, first of all, in green, the sine function. Our old friend, the sine function.
You see it there? It starts at the origin, and at pi it's 0 again, and at 2 pi it's 0.
And it goes up to 1 at pi over 2. That's the peak. Well, 2 sine x is stretched. It goes
from 0 up to 2 when x is pi over 2. We've changed the amplitude of the function. Okay,
so that wasn't so bad. Putting a constant out in front didn't upset us too much. But
now I'd like to look at sort of a whole class of functions. I want to talk about what we
call the general sine and cosine curves. And these are curves of the following form.
y equals d plus a sine quantity bx minus c, and the corresponding cosine equation, y
equals d plus a cosine bx minus c. There are four constants here, and depending on your
application, those constants can be determined or be given to you, and those constants will
change the shape of the sine curve. It'll always have the basic shape up, down, up, down.
But it might be going up higher. It might be shifted. It might be moved vertically,
etc. So let's explore these complicated equations, and I'm going to do it by focusing on
each constant in turn. All right. What about what we call the amplitude? We just did an
example with amplitude. 2 sine x had amplitude 2. That's affected by the value of a. And
technically speaking, the amplitude represents half the distance between the minimum value
and the maximum value. Remember that problem 2 sine x went from minus 2 up to 2. So half
of that is 2. The whole distance is 4. So the amplitude there was 2, and in general,
the amplitude is the absolute value of a. If a is positive, then it's just a. That's
the amplitude. Let me show you a picture of this situation. Let's graph one half cosine
x and three cosine x in the same Cartesian coordinate system. Okay. This is pretty easy
actually. This part's pretty easy, I think. Here you see three graphs actually. One graph
in blue is our old friend cosine. Okay. Cosine goes up to one. Notice that at zero one, it
touches there. And then we had the function one half cosine x. Well, that will change
the amplitude. It'll squish it down a little bit, and that's drawn in green. It has the
same general shape. It just doesn't go as high. And then we have three cosine x, and
that has a much bigger amplitude. The amplitude is now three. So it's a big wave. It's like
there's a storm, and the wave has gotten quite big. So you see how these are related to each
other, and I hope you sort of say to yourselves, oh, amplitude's pretty easy. Let's go on
to looking at the cycle, the period of these trigonometric functions. This is slightly
more interesting. Okay. Here's how you can analyze it. Sine x completes one cycle, its
period, is from zero to two pi, and then it's back to where it started from. So it follows
that sine of bx, where b is some constant, completes one cycle from zero to two pi over
b. Now, how did we get that two pi over b? Well, if x is two pi over b, then bx is two
pi, and sine of two pi is zero, so we're back to where we started from. So here's the definition.
Let b be, sorry about that, let b be a positive real number. The period of a sine bx and a
cosine bx is given by two pi over b, two pi over b. In particular, if b is one, the period
is just two pi as before. Let's do an example of this, and again, you'll see this is pretty
straightforward. What does sine of x over two look like? Well, again, you should expect
it to look like the sine function. It's got the same amplitude, doesn't it? Amplitude
is still one here. I don't have anything in front, but I've got the x over two there.
That will change the period. And b here is equal to one half, it's x over two, so b is
one half, and hence the period is two pi over b, or two pi divided by one half, or four
pi. So the period of this function is actually bigger, it's four pi. And you can sort of
check this. When does this function touch the x-axis? What are its intercepts? Well,
zero, sine of zero over two is zero, and the next time it touches is two pi, because sine
of two pi over two is sine of pi, and then at four pi, it's completed a full cycle. Here
is a picture of both sine x and sine x over two. And you can see what happens. The yellow
graph is sine x, it's our old friend, it starts at the origin, goes to pi, and then back to
two pi, and then it starts repeating. The green graph is sort of stretched out. The
period is now four pi, so it completes a full cycle in four pi rather than two pi. The period
is four pi. Alright, good going. I think we're getting there. We've analyzed two of the
variables, the amplitude and the period. Now we'll turn to what I think is the most difficult
part of this general equation, and that's what does c do? What's that bx minus c going
to cause? Alright, this turns out to create translations of the sine curve. It moves it
up and down the x-axis. Let's see how that works. It's a little complicated, I admit,
but I think you'll find it understandable. Let's first look at sine bx and compare it
to sine of the quantity bx minus c. So these are the two characters. Sine bx, which I think
we're comfortable with, and then sine bx minus c has got that minus c in there. How do they
compare? Well, the first guy, sine bx, completes one cycle when bx is zero to bx being two pi,
from zero to two pi is a full cycle. So when bx is zero, that means x is zero, and when
bx is two pi, that means x is two pi over b, and we knew that. That was the period of
this modified function. What about the second guy? Sine of bx minus c. Well, let's do the
same analysis. It starts when bx minus c is zero, because sine of zero is zero, and it
finishes when bx minus c is two pi. So solve those equations for x. In the first equation,
if bx minus c is zero, x is c over b. Just bring the c to the other side and divide by
b. So now x starts at c over b. It used to start at zero, didn't it? But now it's starting
at c over b. It's been shifted a little bit. Where does it finish? Well, that will be at
bx minus c equals two pi, completing a full period, and now solve for x. It's a little
more arithmetic to solve for x here, and you get x equals c over b plus two pi over b.
I think that makes sense, because watch, if I start at c over b, this new function, I
do one period, and remember the period was two pi over b, and that's what we're saying.
The finishing value is c over b plus two pi over b. Now, I don't necessarily recommend
you memorize that. Most people do the following. They solve the equations bx minus c equals
zero, and the other equation bx minus c equals two pi. But either way, it gives the same
answers. All right, let's do an example. Let's do an example. How about the following equation?
Y equals one half sine x minus pi over three. What in the world does that look like? Y equals
one half sine x minus pi over three. What can we say about this? Well, here's a couple
of facts about it that we're sort of comfortable with, I think. What's the amplitude? One half,
no problem. That's the coefficient out in front. So it's not going to be too high. It's
going to be squished down a little bit. How about the period? Well, that's the b coefficient.
Remember it's two pi over b, but b is one here, isn't it? It's just x. So the period
is still two pi. So I'm comfortable with the amplitude in the period. Now, what about the
shift? They sometimes call that a phase shift in engineering. How do we determine that? Well,
set the thing inside parentheses, x minus pi over three equal to zero, and that implies
that x is pi over three. So that's sort of one of the starting points. And now set it
x minus pi over three to two pi, and you get x equal seven pi over three. So from pi over
three to seven pi over three, it completes a full cycle. The period is still two pi,
but it's been shifted to the right by pi over three. Here's a picture of both the function
sine of, excuse me, one half sine x together with the graph of one half sine x minus pi
over three. So we're graphing the two functions together. The graph of one half sine x is
a pretty understandable graph. It's basically the sine function squished down so its amplitude
is a half. Then we've grap next to it in yellow, the graph of our shifted sine curve, one
half sine x minus pi over three. You see how it's been shifted? It used to pass through
the origin, and now it's zero is at pi over three. It's just been moved a little bit to
the right. Pretty nice, isn't it?
Let's sort of summarize some of these graphing ideas for this general curve, a sine b x minus
c and a cosine b x minus c. And then we'll go back and attack the final letter d, which
will be added. What kind of observations can we make? Well, first of all, if we assume
that b is positive, and in most cases it will be, the period is two pi over b. Okay, that's
good. The amplitude is the absolute value of a. Hopefully a is positive so you don't
have to worry about absolute value. And then to get the right hand and left hand end points
of a full cycle, what do you do? Well, you solve b x minus c equals zero, sort of the
beginning part of the cycle, and then you do b x minus c equals two pi for the end of
the cycle. Perhaps it wasn't so difficult after all, but no, I have to tell you, it is
pretty difficult. I think graphing these shifted sine curves is quite difficult. Plugging in
values and checking with a graphing utility sure help. Let's finish off with the final
letter, we've done a b c, and then we had a d in the front. So now we're going to look
at the most general equation possible here, d plus a sine, the quantity b x minus c or
with cosine. What does the coefficient, what does the number d do to this graph? How does
d affect the graph? Well, let's think about that. If d were zero, the graph would be just
sitting right there. But if d is say five, that means every value gets vertically shifted
five units upwards. Or if d is minus three, then everybody goes down three units. So
d is a vertical translation, a vertical shift of the graph. So we've done a lot of changes
with these trig functions, haven't we? We've changed the period, we've changed the amplitude,
we've shifted them horizontally, and now we're going to shift them vertically. Wow. You can
see how useful they are for modeling because you can play with those coefficients and make
the graph look a lot different. Okay, let's do an example, as we always do. What does
two plus three cosine two x look like? Let's graph two plus three cosine two x. What can
we say about it? Let's think about it. What are some of the easy things to say? For instance,
what's the amplitude? Oh, yeah, there's a three in front of the cosine. So the amplitude's
three. Okay, I'm okay with that. How about the period? Well, that's two pi over b, and
b here is two. So it's two pi over two or pi. Ah, the period used to be two pi, and now
it's shrunk down to pi. It's going to go faster. Okay, the cycle is shorter now. All
right, is there any shift in this curve? No, thank goodness, we don't have a shift. Okay,
but we do have a two in the front, and that means there'll be a vertical shift two units
upward. Let me show you a picture of both the curve three cosine two x, which I think
we're very comfortable with, and then the shift upwards of two plus three cosine two
x. So we have two plus three cosine two x, and the original function three cosine two
x. Look what's happened. For the function three cosine two x, it crosses the y-axis
at three. The amplitude is three. But now it's been shifted upwards two units, so the
point zero five is on the graph. It used to be zero three, it's been moved upwards two
units. Let's look also say at the low point, the low point used to be at minus three. But
now it's at minus three plus two or minus one, and you see I've labeled there pi over
two comma minus one, that's been moved up from minus three to minus one.
Wow. All right. Difficult. This is non-trivial mathematics. Let me make some suggestions
for graphing techniques. I've pointed this out before that when you go on and take a
calculus course, you spend days, if not weeks, on learning how to graph functions and using
some calculus techniques for graphing. But I think we were pretty exhaustive here in
analyzing sine and cosine graphs and all the possible shifts, vertical, horizontal, etc.
But some advice. It's always a good idea to plot some points. I find point plotting,
it gives me a lot of confidence when I plug in some points and I start putting them on
the paper. And remember, a graphing utility is nothing more than a point plotter. It's
just a lot faster than I can do it. Always keep in mind the periodicity. It's really nice
to know the period of the function because then you can repeat it over and over again.
You don't have to analyze it too far. Once you know one cycle, it repeats itself. I think
you'll agree with me, I hope you agree with me, that the amplitude and the vertical shifts
are pretty easy. The amplitude is just stretching it and the vertical shift moves the whole graph
upwards or downwards. I think horizontal shifts take a lot more work, don't you? I do. I think
those are much tougher. Okay. Let's finish off here with a little application. I've mentioned
that trigonometric functions occur in real life. Many things are periodic. Well, here's
a great example of periodic behavior. Pulsars. It turns out that the first radio pulsar ever
discovered was in 1967 by Jocelyn Bell Bernel. She was a British astrophysicist. What's
really amazing to me is she discovered it as a graduate student. As a young graduate
student, she discovers the first pulsar. Pretty impressive. It has a name. This designation
was originally PSRB1919 plus 21. I'm not sure what that really means, but you can, of course,
go to the Internet and learn more about this pulsar. What is a pulsar? Well, it's a very
small star that is rotating very, very quickly and it emits beams of electromagnetic radiation.
It pulses. It has a certain period. Boom, boom, boom. Well, Jocelyn Bell Bernel
calculated that period to be 1.3373 seconds. Boom, boom, just like that. All these pulsars
have a period associated with them. These periods are many, many pulsars. They range
from 1.4 milliseconds, which is pretty fast, to over eight seconds. So it's kind of neat
that periodic behavior is occurring out there in the sky right now. And to understand it,
we need to know some trigonometry. Okay. I hope you've enjoyed today's lecture and yet
found it challenging. In the workbook, you'll see some problems where we ask you to try
your hand at graphing some trigonometric functions, some signs and cosines. Don't despair. You
can check your answer with the graphing utility or even better, look in the back of the workbook
where we've given all the complete solutions. The analysis requires knowing about amplitude,
periods, horizontal shifts, and vertical shifts. All right. What are we going to do next time?
Well, we've only focused so far on the sine and cosine, haven't we? What do the other
trigonometric functions look like? They're also functions. That's what we'll see next time.
The graphs of the four remaining trigonometric functions. I'll see you then.
