Hello again and welcome to another lecture on our series covering trigonometry. Last
time we looked at the graphs of the sine and cosine function and we kind of tweaked those
graphs a little bit and saw some fairly complicated curves. Well today I'd like to look at the
remaining four trigonometric functions tangent, cotangent, secant, cosecant and briefly look
at their graphs. You'll be surprised at what these graphs look like. They're kind of interesting.
One of the things to keep in mind throughout today's lecture is the issue of periodicity.
Once we know what a piece of these graphs look like then we know the entire graph. All these
functions are periodic in one sense. Okay, let's recall the sine and cosine properties that we
did last time because they'll affect what we do today a little bit. Sine x and cosine x. The
domains all real numbers. The ranges minus one to one. Sine's an odd function, cosine's an even
function. They're both periodic with period two pi. The amplitude is one for these functions. Then
we spent a lot of time changing the amplitude, changing the period, shifting them horizontally
and then shifting them vertically. All of those involved more complicated expressions, but the
bottom line is they all pretty much look like sine functions or cosine functions just moved around
a little bit. Let's now go to the tangent function. This is a neat graph. You'll like this graph.
Let's see how to find out what it looks like. First of all, tangent is sine over cosine. Already I
see a problem. The denominator might be zero. Cosine x could be zero and hence the domain of the
tangent function is not all real numbers. There are certain values of x you cannot plug into the
tangent function. In particular if you take x to be pi over two then cosine of pi over two is zero
and the tangent's not defined. So already we have something interesting I think. It's not defined
for certain x values. In a minute I'll list those values for you. Tangent is also an odd function.
Odd in both senses. It's kind of a weird looking graph as we'll see in a moment. It's odd in the
mathematical sense that tangent of minus x is minus tangent of x. You can see that by saying
tangent minus x is sine of minus x divided by cosine of minus x then remember the numerator
sine of minus x that's an odd function. So that's minus sine x whereas the denominator is an even
function. So cosine minus x equals cosine x. Pull out that minus sign and you have minus tangent x.
So we'll have some symmetry here across the origin. What about intercepts of the tangent function?
When will it touch the x-axis? Well when the numerator is zero and sine is zero when x is zero
or pi or two pi or minus pi minus two pi etc. So how could we get the graph? Well the most mundane
way would be plot a lot of points. For instance here's a nice point you could plot. When x is pi
over four tangent of pi over four we did that earlier that's equal to one. Okay so we could plot
that point. We could plot the intercepts. We could do a lot more points. Here's the graph you get.
What a good looking graph. Don't you like it? I really think this is an interesting graph. This
is the graph of the tangent function. Let's savor it for a moment. First of all notice that it's
symmetric about the origin. It's an odd function. How about those dotted lines? Those indicate the
vertical asymptotes. At pi over two the tangent's not defined and it has a vertical asymptote there
and in fact the graph goes up towards positive infinity on one side and to minus infinity on
the other side. What's the period of this function? Well look it's got these chunks these pieces and
they seem to repeat well one of them is from minus pi over two to pi over two that's length pi
and then it's repeated. So the period here is pi not two pi like sine and cosine but rather pi.
Isn't that interesting? So it's a function with period pi odd with these vertical asymptotes
how many vertical asymptotes does the tangent function have? Wow an infinite number of vertical
asymptotes. So let's review some of the properties of this tangent function. Its period is pi its
domain is all real numbers except those numbers where the cosine is zero and the cosine is zero
at pi over two and then pi over two plus pi i.e. three pi over two and then five pi over two
and then you go the other way you can go pi over two minus pi which would be minus pi over two
and we write this in the following compact form. Pi over two plus n pi and n can be any integer
so that's a list of all the bad points in fact that is a list of all the vertical asymptotes.
Look back at the graph pi over two vertical asymptote three pi over two vertical asymptote
minus pi over two vertical asymptote you get the picture. What's the range of this function?
Well the graph kind of tells you the range is all real numbers this goes from the way down there
to way up there it goes from as far as you want negative direction up to as far as you want in
the positive direction. Now you remember last lecture we took the sine and cosine which we
were very comfortable with and then we began to massage them. I'm not going to do too much of that
it's pretty complicated with the tangent function let alone with the other functions that we're going
to look at today but let me show you a quick example of a modified tangent function and we'll
use some of the same techniques we did last time. What do you think the graph of tangent x over two
would look like? Tangent of x over two well it's going to look like the tangent function
but the asymptotes will be a little bit different because the bad points where the cosine is zero
have changed slightly. When x over two is minus pi over two that's a bad point because that's where
cosine is zero that means x is minus pi so minus pi is now a vertical asymptote.
In a similar fashion when you have x over two equal to pi over two you get another vertical
asymptote and that yields x equals pi. So here's a graph of our tangent x over two function and
the only real difference is that the period is now two pi because the vertical asymptotes go pi,
three pi, five pi, etc. It's kind of been stretched horizontally a little bit but it still looks like
a basic tangent curve doesn't it? Alrighty good. I invite you to repeat that graph on
your graphing calculator. Graph the tangent function or the tangent of x over two on your
graphing calculator. When you do that you might observe something kind of weird and here's what
might happen. Let me look back at this graph. As the calculator is plotting points it just plots
the pixels. It just goes bloop, bloop, bloop, bloop. Well when it gets up to that vertical
asymptote real high it then jumps down to a very low point and it might connect them
which it shouldn't do. It shouldn't cross the vertical asymptote but it might connect them
and that would give you sort of a misleading graph. One thing you can do to avoid that is
put your graphing calculator into something called dot mode rather than connected mode.
In dot mode the calculator just puts in the dots. In connected mode it puts in the dots and connects
them and hence it might connect dots that shouldn't be connected and this is true of all the functions
tangent, cotangent, secant and cosecant because all four of these functions as we'll see
have vertical asymptotes. What about the cotangent graph? How is it going to behave?
We're comfortable with the tangent graph, an interesting graph. What about cotangent? Well
I'm not going to dwell on cotangent but let me give you some of the features. It's cosine over sine
so the problem here will be when sine is zero that's going to be division by zero
and sine is zero when x is equal to zero pi two pi three pi etc and we write that as x equals n
pi where n's an integer. Those are the vertical asymptotes of the cotangent function. This is
also an odd function and this will decrease on each piece rather than increase on each piece.
The period again will be pi like the period of the tangent function. Here it is. Here's a picture of
cotangent. Notice the vertical asymptote at x equals zero also known as the y-axis and then the next
one is over at pi that's the next vertical asymptote and notice that at pi over two the graph touches
the x-axis that's because cosine of pi over two is zero the numerator is zero. Students might ask
you professor I want to graph this on my calculator to verify this picture and I've looked on my
calculator there's no cotangent key is there what would you say to that student as a teacher
help help how do I graph cotangent there's no key on my calculator. Well cotangent is the
reciprocal of tangent so all you have to do is graph one over tangent and bingo you'll get the
graph of cotangent. Let's turn to secant x okay what can we say about secant let's savor this
graph for a moment well let's see secant is one over cosine and I already see some problems
for some values of x secant will not be defined will it when cosine x is zero we're in trouble in
fact there'll be vertical asymptotes again and that occurs just like with the tangent function at pi
over two plus multiples of pi pi over two three pi over two five pi over two and then the other way
so we have vertical asymptotes those points are not in the domain of the secant function
all right let me ask you this what are the x intercepts of the secant function where does
it cross the x axis trick question it never does why not well secant is one over cosine
and if that's ever going to be equal to zero the numerator has to be zero doesn't it and one is not
zero so the secant function is either above the x axis completely or below it but it never crosses
the x axis so it has no intercepts all right let me show you the graph of secant and I'm
going to graph it together with cosine because there's a really nice interplay between these
two graphs in fact if you're comfortable with the cosine graph you'll be equally comfortable
with the secant graph watch how they they go together is kind of a team cosine is yellow here
and notice that it's when x is zero the y value is one that means that secant is also one there
because the reciprocal of one is one all right notice that at pi over two cosine is zero isn't it
pi over two cosine is zero that means secant is not defined there so secant has a vertical
asymptote at pi over two in other words the zeros of the cosine function are the vertical
asymptotes of the secant function okay and you get this nice little picture the the green
secant function is kind of interesting looking it kind of looks like a bunch of parabolas doesn't
it but those are not really parabolas because a parabola would open up forever these are kind of
I don't know what you would call them but they they go up and hug their asymptotes and then there's
a chunk down there at the bottom and then another chunk there they sort of go back and forth with
these chunks like that okay so that is the secant graph and again it's kind of based on the cosine
graph what about cosecant how could we graph cosecant well I think you got the picture don't you
same technique it's one over sine uh-oh sine can be zero sometimes can it at multiples of pi
zero pi two pi so those will be the vertical asymptotes and here we've drawn a similar graph
to the previous one we saw but now I've shown sine x our old friend sine x goes through the origin
it's an odd function it touches it pi it touches it two pi etc and then I've drawn cosecant x and
notice how it comes down and kind of kisses the sine function at various values it kisses it when
x is pi over two because sine of pi over two is one and so is cosecant of pi over two at pi
sine is zero so cosecant has a vertical asymptote so I you know I I feel comfortable with secant
and cosecant because I'm comfortable with cosine and sine and then I've tangent is sort of well
tangent and cotangent you know memorize the picture of tangent that's kind of an important
graph and and we'll be using it a few times in this course let's do an example um let's massage
say the secant function a little bit and see how you can get a picture of a of an altered secant
by studying the corresponding altered cosine so let's compare the graphs of cosine 2x
and secant 2x another way of phrasing this problem would be how would you graph secant 2x
well here's how I would do it I would first graph cosine 2x and then kind of paste the secant graph
to the cosine graph so let's look at this let's look at cosine 2x f of x equals cosine 2x
what's the amplitude one is there any horizontal shift no is there any vertical shift no the only
thing that's changed here is the period and the period is two pi over b which is two pi over two
that 2x is the indicates the period so the period is now pi instead of period two pi
it's shrunk down to pi one cycle in pi here's some values f of zero is one cosine of zero is one
and then f of pi is also one we're back to where we started from in one period all right
what's the corresponding conclusion for secant 2x g of x equals secant 2x well g of zero will be one
just like cosine was one and g of pi will be one so now we can graph them together the yellow graph
is our old friend cosine with a different period so it starts at zero one and it does a full period
and at pi it's back to where it started from at pi one the period is pi instead of two pi
and then you paste on the secant pieces the secant will be at zero one and go up it will have
asymptotes at pi over four and three pi over four etc how do you get those asymptotes well
if the cosine is ever zero then you've got an asymptote for the secant and notice that the
yellow graph is zero at pi over four so that must be a vertical asymptote for the secant function
again a nice interplay between secant and cosine and the same kind of dance would be between
cosecant and sine okay you be the teacher we sort of alluded to this a little bit earlier but
it's fun to be the teacher you're standing up there teaching trigonometry and a student comes up in
panic because the student bought a calculator that's incomplete it only has the sine cosine and
tangent buttons on it teacher where's my cotangent button where's my secant button
where's my cosecant button what do you tell the student relax you can calculate cotangent as one
over tangent and in the same way secants one over cosine cosecant is one over sine so you really
need just three buttons on your calculator to get all six functions thank goodness all right let me
turn now to a topic that that really is a calculus topic but it involves functions that we've learned
to love so far in this course so I thought I would bring these functions together play with them a
little bit but I'm going to couch some of the terminology in the language of calculus now don't
panic I'll make it clear I think of what I'm talking about we're going to look at an interesting
combination of the sine function with an exponential function we're going to glue them together and
analyze the graph so let's look at the graph of f of x equals e to the minus x times sine x
so sine x I know about up and down up and down up and down what about e to the minus x well it's a
decaying exponential isn't it as x gets bigger e to the minus x tends to zero so it's a decaying
exponential what will the graph of this product look like well here's a picture of it on a graphing
utility this is a graph of e to the minus x sine x now let me sort of explain what's going on here
this is a these are used a lot in engineering in the following scenario the sine functions going up
and down like a pent like a harmonic motion a spring going up and down but suppose there's friction
so the amplitude starts shrinking it gets smaller it tires down and it starts stop moving
though this would model some kind of behavior where the the amplitude gets smaller and smaller
the e to the minus x term brings it down towards zero now why is it have that horizontal asymptote
at zero well look what happens when x is really big when x is really big sure sine x is between
minus one and one i'm that's okay but the e to the minus x when x is really big imagine x say a
thousand that's e to the minus one thousand power or one over e to the one thousand that's an enormously
small number tiny number one over e to the thousand and that's why the product shrinks down
towards zero all right so this is an example of what we called damped harmonic motion there's friction
involved you can illustrate this on your graphing utility if you graph the following three functions
you'll kind of see a pretty picture graph e to the minus x sine x together with two other functions
e to the minus x and minus e to the minus x and you should get a picture somewhat like this one
and you see here how e to the minus x sine x is inside a sandwich the sandwich is the top piece
of bread is e to the minus x and the bottom piece of bread is minus e to the minus x and the function
is kind of in between those two kind of a need isn't it so what's the calculus language for what we
just talked about let me let me throw a calculus some symbols to you a calculus equation and you
would see this if you took a calculus class but i think you'll understand it right now
here's what we just observed as x gets really big the expression e to the minus x times sine x
gets closer and closer to zero it has a horizontal asymptote at zero here's how you would write this
in a calculus textbook the limit as x approaches infinity that means x getting larger and larger
of the function e to the minus x times sine x equals zero okay that means that as x gets larger
and larger that product gets closer and closer to zero okay that's what that notation limit means
l i m we'll see that notation again in a moment here's one of my favorite functions of all time
i love this function students love it too i think because it's it's it's got a bizarre picture
it's the function sine of one over x not sine x sine of one over x let's look at a picture of
this function get out your graphing calculator and i'm going to graph it on the interval minus two
to two and then the height the the vertical window i'm going to go say minus one and a half
to one and a half i know the amplitude is still one isn't it there's no number in front of the
size so it's going to go between minus one and one and then i have a certain x interval
and here's a graph of it whoa what's going on here let me try to describe it i mean this is
this is bizarre as x gets near zero this function goes up and down between minus one and one
infinitely often it goes crazy it just goes like this forever infinitely often notice
that it's not defined when x is zero is it it's not even defined at zero but as you get really
close to zero if x is like point 0001 it could be some number between minus one and one and it
keeps going up and down well you might say wait a minute professor you have this plotted on a
pretty big interval minus two to two how about if we plot it on a smaller x interval how about
minus 0.01 to 0.01 we'll do that you'll get basically the same picture it'll look crazy
in fact as you magnify in it has that same behavior going up and down infinitely often
what would we say in terms of that limit notation is this function settling down to a single number
as we approach zero uh-uh it's going back and forth up and down it never settles down does it
it won't have a limit there and i'll show you the notation in a moment but before i do
let me modify that function let me put an x in front so now it's x sine one over x what do you
think's going to happen now when i graph it okay sure the sine part's going to go up and down go
crazy as you get near and near to the origin but there's an x in front and when x gets near zero
that thing in front gets near zero so i have a product of something between minus one and one
times something that's going closer and closer to zero the product will actually get closer and
closer to zero here's a picture of x sine one over x i've modified it with an x we can use
that language i've dampened the function haven't i i've dampened it it's it's it's amplitude is
kind of getting smaller and smaller now it does have a limit now it's getting closer and closer
to zero even though it's not defined at zero you can't divide by zero in mathematics it's getting
closer and closer here's the calculus notation you can write this down and impress your friends
who have never taken calculus the limit as x gets closer and closer to zero and you indicate that by
x arrow zero of sine one over x does not exist that just means that there's no fixed number
that it approaches it just goes back and forth it doesn't settle down however x sine one over x
as x gets nearer to zero approaches zero it gets very very close to zero as close to zero
as you want so we write that the limit is now equal to zero let's do an application okay an
application of trigonometry again we've explored some calculus applications let's step back and do
application of trigonometry now this is kind of a fun easy application here's the scenario you
have a plane flying overhead and let's assume the plane is always five miles up in the air
and on the ground there's a radar station and it's tracking the plane and in fact the plane
might be far away and then the plane comes overhead and goes off that way here's a picture of the
scenario the height of the plane is always five miles and there's the radar station over there
and the radar station is making an angle x with the horizontal up to the plane and d is the distance
between the radar station and the foot of the plane the point perpendicular to the plane's position
so that sort of forms a right triangle there and here's the question if d is the ground
distance from the antenna from the radar station to the point directly under the plane as indicated
in that figure and if x is the angle of elevation to the plane the angle as labeled in the picture
can we write d as a function of x the distance as a function of x let's do that and then we'll
notice the picture that results from this well look at the setup can you write d as a function of
the angle x well what's the cotangent of x cotangent is adjacent over opposite remember tangent is
opposite over adjacent so cotangent is backwards so it's d over five so cotangent is d over five
multiply by five and you have d equals five cotangent x what's the domain of this function
well the angle x might be close to zero so x is bigger than zero and it goes up and finally it
might be a pi or 180 degrees but of course we're using radians now and in particular at pi over
two let's see what's cotangent of pi over two that's cosine pi over two divided by sine pi over
two zero isn't it cosine is zero sine of pi over two is one so the distance d is actually zero
when the plane's overhead and that makes sense look at the picture the plane is moving towards the
radar station and ultimately the distance d is zero and then it grows the other direction
here's a picture of five cotangent x it's on the interval zero to pi and notice that at pi over
two it crosses the x axis and that's because at that point the plane is exactly overhead
and notice the shape of this curve it looks like our old friend the cotangent function doesn't it
except it's got a five in front okay I think we're kind of at a point where we are comfortable
with graphing trigonometric functions and the next time I'd like to sort of shift gears and use some
of those skills of inverse functions that we developed quite a while ago to develop what are
called the inverse trigonometric functions now here's a surprise not one of those trigonometric
functions we've looked at is one to one not one of them passes the horizontal line test
so to define the inverses we're going to have to restrict the domains of these trigonometric
functions so it'll be a fun lecture because it's got some interesting complications again these
functions will be on your calculator so next time I look forward to taking our knowledge of the
trigonometric functions and developing the six inverse trigonometric functions see you then
