Hello again, and welcome to our lecture on vectors.
Some quantities, like time and temperature and say area, involve only magnitude.
But yet in science and mathematics and engineering, there are other quantities that have both
a magnitude and a direction.
For instance, velocity.
Not only is there a magnitude to the velocity, faster versus slower, but there's a direction.
Which way are you pointing?
Acceleration has both magnitude and direction.
Force, in engineering, force is not only the certain magnitude of the force, but in
which direction are you applying the force?
And those are different.
So vectors are used to describe this situation where you have a quantity that has both magnitude
and direction.
And the way you represent that is with a so-called directed line segment.
It'll have an initial point and a terminal point and an arrow joining them.
Let me add that vectors are used a whole lot in calculus, but especially in second and
third semester calculus courses.
In the advanced placement program, vectors are used just a little bit, and of course
in physics and science courses they're used all the time.
So let's talk about the setup for vectors.
Imagine a point P and a point Q joined by a directed line segment.
P will be called the initial point, Q the terminal point, and we indicate that by an
arrow on that directed line segment showing the direction from P to Q.
A very common notation for this is the set of letters P, Q, with an arrow on top to indicate
that it's a vector.
These vectors have length, and in a minute we'll calculate the length of some vectors,
and that's usually denoted by two vertical lines around the vector P, Q.
That said, in many textbooks that notation is different.
Sometimes it's just single vertical lines like the absolute value symbol.
So please check your textbook or the manual that you're reading in order to be sure about
the notation.
We say that two directed line segments having the same length and the same direction.
We call them equivalent.
Let me show you a picture of some equivalent directed line segments.
Loosely speaking, we'll say that all of these vectors are the same vector.
They all represent the same vector.
So you can kind of move vectors around as long as you preserve their length and their
direction.
More technically speaking, the set of all directed line segments that are equivalent
to a given one, that's called the vector V in the plane.
But loosely speaking, we'll just say we can move vectors around as long as we preserve
direction and magnitude.
As I said, the notation for vectors can vary with different books.
I like a little arrow over the letters P, Q. Sometimes a vector will be denoted by a
lower case letter, sometimes bold face, like bold face V or bold face U. Again, the magnitude,
a couple of vertical lines is the notation we'll use, but that's not uniform at all.
So again, check your book that you're reading, your textbook, to make sure of the notation.
Let's do an example.
Let's talk about how to represent a given vector and verify, in fact, that two vectors
are equivalent.
So imagine the following scenario.
The point P and the point Q are joined, where P is the origin, zero, zero, and Q is the
point three, two.
And then consider another directed line segment joining R and S, where R is one, two, and
S is four, four.
Here's a picture of that situation.
I have two directed line segments, one beginning at the origin and going out to three, two,
and the other one begins at the point one, two, and ends at four, four.
Now they kind of look equivalent in this picture, don't they?
They look like they have the same length and the same direction.
Let's actually prove that using some of our pre-calculus skills.
To show they have the same length, we would find the distance between the end points.
So the length of P, Q would be three minus zero squared plus two minus zero squared all
square rooted.
That's the Pythagorean theorem.
And you get nine plus four, or the square root of 13.
For R, S, you would get, similarly, the square root of four minus one squared plus four minus
two squared all square rooted.
Now and that also gives the square root of 13.
Okay, so they have the same length.
What about the slopes of these two lines?
They'd be pointing in the same direction if they had the same slopes.
Well, remember what slope is?
Change in Y over change in X.
So for P, Q, the slope is two minus zero over three minus zero, or two-thirds, and the slope
of R, S turns out to be the same, four minus two, difference in the Y values divided by
four minus one, again, two-thirds.
So those directed line segments are equivalent.
They represent the same vector.
Now one of those vectors in that picture, P, Q, started at the origin.
Its initial point was at the origin.
We call that standard position.
And if you're in standard position, then the terminal point determines uniquely that vector.
And so the coordinates of that terminal point are very, very important, and you indicate
that vector as, with brackets now, v1, v2.
That indicates the terminal point of a vector in standard position.
V1 and v2 are the components of your vector in standard position.
For instance, the origin, not a very interesting vector, its coordinates are zero, zero.
It's the vector zero, zero.
It has no length and no direction, really.
In that previous example, the vector represented by P, Q in standard position would be given
by 3, 2 using brackets to indicate that it's a vector.
By the way, that notation is also not consistent across all textbooks, but we'll use brackets
to indicate that it's a vector.
If we use parentheses, then it's the point 3, 2.
But with these brackets, it's the vector 3, 2.
Okay, so let's describe the technical definition now of the component form of a vector.
If the initial point is P1, P2, and the terminal point is Q1, Q2, then the vector PQ is given
by Q1 minus P1 comma Q2 minus P2.
That would be the component form of our vector v, joining those two points.
And its length, its magnitude using the vertical lines would be nothing more than Q1 minus
P1 squared plus Q2 minus P2 squared all square rooted.
All right, some more notation and definitions.
If a vector is length one, if its magnitude is one, it's called a unit vector, and we'll
be using unit vectors in a moment.
And of course, a vector is the zero vector, if and only if its length is zero.
That's kind of a nice way to show that a vector is the zero vector.
And I can't stress enough that in calculus and in physics and in engineering and in science,
people deal with vectors all the time.
In this lecture, we'll talk about vectors in the plane.
We're talking about planar vectors, two-dimensional situation.
But in real life, of course, we're living in three dimensions.
And so there's a whole world of three-dimensional vectors out there that is beyond the scope
of these lectures.
Let's illustrate some of these ideas with a quick example.
Let's find the component form and the magnitude of the vector that it has initial point four
minus seven and terminal point minus one five.
Okay.
Here I've drawn the situation.
There's four minus seven where the vector starts and it finishes up at minus one five.
Well, here's how we go.
P is four minus seven, and that's P1, P2.
Q is minus one five, that's Q1, Q2.
So we subtract, V1 is Q1 minus P1 or minus one minus four minus five, V2 is Q2 minus
P2, five minus a minus seven or 12.
So in standard position, we have the component form minus five, 12.
Here's a picture of that.
Here's the original vector PQ starting at four minus seven and finishing at minus one
five.
We've now constructed an equivalent vector, an equivalent directed line segment starting
at the origin and going to minus five, 12.
That's the same vector.
What's its length?
Well, the Pythagorean theorem again, minus five squared plus 12 squared, that gives the
square root of 169, which is a perfect square.
That's 13.
All right.
So kind of a nice picture, I think.
You're given the beginning point and the end point, the initial point and the terminal
point, and in a sense you kind of move the vector so that it begins at the origin.
And then those coordinates minus five, 12, the coordinates of the end point of the terminal
point are the components of the vector.
Okay.
So where did all these vectors come from?
Well, it has a long complicated history.
Let me just name three mathematicians that worked a lot in what we call vector calculus
and the development of the theory of vectors.
Hamilton, an Irish mathematician, Grossmann, the German mathematician, and the American
Joshua Willard Gibbs all had a lot of input into developing vectors.
Today, vectors play a role all over science, thanks in part to these three great mathematicians.
Now you can combine vectors.
For instance, the sum of vectors or multiplying a vector by a real number.
Let's do the definitions and then I'll show you some examples.
Suppose you have the vector u1, u2, and I'll denote that vector u.
So u equals in component form, u1, u2, and in a similar fashion v is v1, v2.
How do you add them, u plus v?
You add the components.
Thank goodness, it's a pretty easy definition, u1 plus v1, u2 plus v2.
How do you multiply them by a real number?
Again, it's pretty simple.
A real number times a vector is multiply the individual components by that real number.
And by the way, in this business, they don't say multiply by a real number, they make things
more complicated, they call that scalar multiplication.
So you can multiply by a scalar and that's a fancy way of saying multiply by a real number.
So given a vector or given two vectors, you can add them or you can multiply them by scalars.
Here's a picture of what that scalar multiplication does to a vector.
It's kind of a neat picture, I think.
Here we draw a vector v in arbitrary position.
It has a certain direction and a certain length and then we try to indicate what one
half v would look like.
Well, it would be the same direction.
When you multiply by a scalar, you don't change the direction, you just change the magnitude,
the length of the vector.
So one half v would be half as long, two v would be twice as long.
What about minus v?
What would that look like?
Well that would multiply each component by minus one, wouldn't it?
It would reverse the vector.
So minus v is the opposite direction of the original vector and then we've also indicated
what minus three halves v would look like.
Let's do a specific example.
Let's add and multiply some vectors here.
So let's let v be minus two five, w say be three four.
Let's play with these vectors.
What would two times w be?
Well, that would be two times three four.
That would be two times three comma two times four or six eight.
Notice that the components have been doubled.
How about v plus two w?
Well, minus two five plus that answer we just got, six eight, that would be four thirteen.
You add the first components together, minus two plus six is four and five plus eight is
thirteen.
Let's do a few more computations.
What would minus six eight be?
Well that means minus one times the vector six eight.
So the components get multiplied by minus one and you're left with minus six comma minus
eight.
That vector is the opposite direction of six eight.
What if you were to add those two vectors together?
Add six eight with that new vector minus six minus eight.
What do you get?
Right, zero zero.
In a sense we have an additive inverse here, don't we?
We've added two vectors and obtained the zero vector.
Now here's a picture of some of these vectors kind of put together in an interesting way.
Notice I've drawn the vector v starting at the origin and going out to the point minus
two five.
Our original vector v was minus two five so in standard position it would look like that.
Then we calculated the vector two w.
If you remember that vector was six eight.
Well I've drawn that vector but I've moved it off the origin.
I don't have it in standard position.
It's been displaced in a parallel fashion.
The directed line segment going from the point minus two five up to four thirteen is equivalent
to two w.
Here you can check that real quick.
Like the x coordinates you get four minus a minus two or six and the y coordinates are
thirteen minus five or eight.
Six eight was the vector two w, wasn't it?
So I've written or I've drawn v and two w and notice that two w's initial point is placed
at the terminal point of v and this is the geometry of vector addition.
v plus two w is the resultant vector starting at the origin and ending up at the point four
thirteen.
Isn't that neat?
So you can represent vector addition by these triangle diagrams.
Okay, you be the teacher for a moment.
Student comes up to you.
Professor, given a vector v, how can I describe what minus two v looks like?
How can I describe that teacher?
How would you answer the student?
Given a vector v, describe minus two v.
Well I'd try to do it this way.
First of all I'd say the new vector is twice as long as the old vector because it's two
v.
But there's a minus sign.
So it's in the opposite direction, twice as long opposite direction.
And then I'd show an example to the student.
I think a lot of learning takes place when you show examples.
For example, if v is the vector one three then minus two times v would be minus two
times the vector one three which is minus two minus six and here's a picture of that.
Here's the vector one three and then the vector minus two minus six.
You see that it looks a lot longer and it's in the opposite direction.
All right, good.
I think we're comfortable with adding vectors, multiplying them by a scalar.
Let's now move to something called unit vectors.
And this will play a big role in the rest of this lecture and next lecture as well.
Then the vector minus six minus eight.
The vector minus six minus eight.
It's not a unit vector.
And by unit vector I mean a vector of length one.
It's not length one.
In fact, what is the length of that vector?
Well, let's do the usual trick.
It's magnitude, its length is minus six squared plus minus eight squared all square rooted
36 plus 64 square root of 100 or 10.
So that vector is length 10.
Now can you think of a vector in the same direction as V as the original vector but
having not length 10 but length one.
I want to shrink it down to length one.
How could I do that?
Right, take the vector and multiply it by one tenth or divide it by 10.
That will shrink it down to a unit vector.
So one tenth of the vector minus six minus eight is, if you bring the one tenth inside
of scalar multiplication, it's minus three fifths comma minus four fifths.
And that is a unit vector.
The length of that vector is one.
You can just check it.
Find the length of that vector, nine over 25 plus 16 over 25, that adds up to one.
Now given a vector, to construct a unit vector in the same direction is pretty simple.
All you have to do is find the length of the original vector and divide by it.
Okay, now there are two unit vectors that occur over and over.
They're kind of obvious unit vectors.
The vector one zero, that's nothing more than going out the x-axis one unit.
That vector, a horizontal vector, is a unit vector and the vector zero one, a vertical
vector starting at the origin and going up the y-axis, zero one is a unit vector and
they're so important, they're given special symbols.
I, and this is a bold face I because it's a vector, equals the vector one comma zero
and j equals the vector zero comma one.
If you were doing three dimensional vectors, there'd be a third one called k in the third
dimension but we're only doing planar vectors.
So i and j are our two sort of fundamental vectors and watch what you can do with them.
Take any old vector, you can write it in terms of these two special vectors.
For instance, a vector minus three eight would be minus three times one zero plus eight times
zero one or if you want to use our new symbols, minus three i plus eight j.
What we've done is we've expressed an arbitrary vector as a linear combination of i and j.
Now, a little warning here, the symbol i that we're using for the vector one zero should
not at all be confused with the square root of minus one, remember we had i equal the
square root of minus one in the complex numbers, those are completely different ideas.
The bold face i is a vector in this lecture.
Okay, I've mentioned about of course how important vectors are in calculus and engineering
and describing motion, velocity and acceleration of particles.
Vector operations are also very, very important in calculus and in fact these vector operations
of addition and scalar multiplication are so important that over time an entire course
has been built up based on analyzing vectors and it's called linear algebra or vector analysis.
It's a subject that students usually take after calculus and it deals with issues of
what are called vector spaces and a vector space consists of a set of vectors and those
two operations we were talking about and a lot of properties that those operations satisfy.
So if you're at a university, you might see in the catalog courses called linear algebra,
they're talking about the kind of vectors that we've been developing today.
Let's go on, let's use these unit vectors now to talk about how to express an arbitrary
vector in a very convenient form, remember i is the unit vector one zero, j is the unit
vector zero one, now I want to express direction, okay so here's a picture that will help me
express the direction of a vector, imagine a unit vector u making an angle theta with
the positive x axis and the end points of this vector u will be x, y, so what is x?
Well we go back to the original definition of trigonometry, x is cosine theta and y is
sine theta, that's how we defined sine and cosine in trigonometry.
So the vector u which is a unit vector here because that circle was a unit circle can
be described as cosine theta comma sine theta, x comma y, it's really a convenient notation,
it says that you pick an angle theta and you move out and u is a unit vector in that
direction theta, theta is often called a direction angle and u is the unit vector in that direction
theta, now you can write this slightly differently but more conveniently, factor out the cosine
theta and you have cosine theta times the vector one zero plus sine theta times the
vector zero one and that equals cosine theta i where i is our new symbol plus sine theta
j, so that is a way of describing an arbitrary unit vector in terms of its angle, well now
wait suppose I had a vector that is not a unit vector but length longer or shorter, suppose
the vector v has length v with vertical lines around it, you could describe that vector
as follows, length of v times the corresponding unit vector, in other words if v is a long
vector it's nothing more than the unit vector stretched out the appropriate length and that
length is the length of v, so it's length of v times cosine theta comma sine theta and
then you can do the manipulations and get length of v times cosine theta i plus sine
theta j and that's often written as length of v times cosine theta i plus length of v
sine theta j, that's a very standard way of describing a vector v, it has sort of two
components to it, two issues, one is the angle theta, that's telling me the direction of
my vector v and then there's a multiplication by the length of v, that tells me the magnitude
of v, it's a very nice form, let's do a quick example of this new idea, suppose v is the
vector three three which would be three i plus three j, what's the length of the vector
three three, well it's three squared plus three squared all square rooted, nine plus
nine is eighteen, square root of eighteen is three square roots of two, what angle does
the vector three three make with the positive x axis, yeah a 45 degree angle, so we can
describe this vector v as length of v times cosine theta sine theta or three square roots
of two times cosine 45 i plus sine 45 j, again that's a very attractive way of describing
this vector, it tells you the angle it makes and it tells you how long it is, all in one
simple equation, here's a picture of our vector v making the 45 degree angle and it ends
up at three three and we described it using the length and the angle, okay good, let's
talk about some properties that unfortunately are not true, let me ask you some questions
about some things, for instance is it true or not that the magnitude of the sum of two
vectors is the sum of their magnitudes, in other words if you have two vectors and you
add them up and find out how long that is, what's the length of that sum, is that the
same as the sum of the individual lengths, what do you think, is the magnitude of a sum
of two vectors the same as the sum of their magnitudes, well I claim it's false, some
of the good news about mathematics is when something is false all you have to do is find
a counter example, can we think of an example that shows that this is not true in general,
well how about some of our simple vectors, what if we take the vector i which is 1 0,
its length is 1 and the vector j, its length is also 1, i is along the x axis, j is along
the y axis, each is a unit vector, what about their sum, well their sum is 1 0 plus 0 1
or the vector 1 1 and what's the length of the vector 1 1, well that would be 1 squared
plus 1 squared all square rooted or the square root of 2 which is not 1 plus 1, so we've
shown a counter example to this idea that the magnitude of a sum is not the sum of the
magnitudes, too bad but it's just not true, it's another question for you, given an arbitrary
vector how can you find a vector in the same direction but of length 1, in other words
a unit vector in the same direction, well we've seen how to do this I think but let's
formalize it, you're given a vector v, it's a long vector say, it's not length 1 necessarily
and you'd like to have a vector in the same direction but length 1, what do you do, well
here's what I would do, I would find the length of v and then I would divide v by its length
producing a new vector, that vector is in the same direction as v, it's just a scalar
multiple of the vector but this new vector which I'll call u turns out to be a unit vector,
the length of u is now 1, how about a vector that's a unit vector but in the opposite direction,
right just take minus u and that would be in the opposite direction of u, okay good going
we've got a lot of time on vectors, a full lecture on them, not nearly enough time to
talk about all the interesting properties of vectors, I invite you to look at an even
a calculus book on vectors because in many calculus books the chapter on vectors doesn't
use any calculus, it uses just the ideas that we started today, next lecture we're going
to continue this study of vectors and we're going to do a combination of some really interesting
ideas, we're going to bring in our friends the complex numbers and we're going to see
how ideas related to vectors can combine with complex numbers and trigonometry and we'll
be able to do things like this, find the cube roots of a number, the three cube roots of
a number, even if those cube roots might be complex and then I'll also show you next
time perhaps without derivation, one of the most beautiful and amazing formulas in mathematics,
it's a formula that involves some of the most important constants in all of science and
math, it involves pi which we love since we took geometry, the number e which we've seen
in our study of logarithms and exponents and the number i square root of minus 1, those
three numbers are all inside the same formula, so I look forward to seeing you next time,
thank you.
