Hello again and welcome to our lecture on the trigonometric form of a complex number.
This lecture will combine a lot of different ideas. We'll bring in complex numbers, we'll
bring in trigonometry of course, as well as sort of the ideas of our previous lecture
on vectors. This will be actually our final lecture on the series of lectures on trigonometry
and after this lecture we'll move on to a different subject. The ideas today will permit
us to express a complex number very conveniently and in particular permit us to find high powers
or roots of numbers and in particular complex numbers. And as I promised last time at the
end of the lecture I'll show you a very beautiful formula involving e pi and the square root
of minus one. Let's remind ourselves a bit about that complex plane we looked at a long
long time ago in this pre-calculus course. Remember that we could represent a complex
number a plus b i graphically as an ordered pair in the plane a comma b. The horizontal
axis was often called the real axis and the vertical axis the imaginary axis. Here are
some complex numbers that we've plotted in the plane. You can see down in the third quadrant
the complex number minus two minus i the real part is minus two and the complex part
or the imaginary part is minus i and it's plotted as the ordered pair minus two minus
one. And then up in the second quadrant you see the number minus one plus three i and
that's plotted as the ordered pair minus one three. So there's a nice correspondence between
complex numbers and ordered pairs in the complex plane. Okay, given this geometric interpretation
you can ask how far is it from a complex number down to the origin and that's called the absolute
value of a complex number. It's length and the notation here is absolute value the same
notation as with real numbers a plus b i with vertical bars that's defined to be a squared
plus b squared all square rooted. That comes from of course the Pythagorean theorem. In
particular if your imaginary component b is zero then of course you get the ordinary absolute
value that we've learned to love in mathematics absolute value of a or if you want the square
root of a squared. Let's do a quick example to make sure we're comfortable with this idea of
absolute value of a complex number. How about that number minus one plus three i that we saw
in the graph previously. How far is it to the origin from that number to the origin or if you
want what's the absolute value of that complex number. Well it would be minus one squared plus
three squared all square rooted one plus nine square root of ten. That's the distance from
that complex number back to the origin. Now the goal here in the next few minutes is to try to
explain how to express a complex number in trigonometric form. This will be a nice interplay
between complex numbers and trigonometry. So here's how it works. Consider the complex
number a plus b i which corresponds geometrically to the ordered pair a comma b. Now if a comma
b is in the plane it has some components a is the distance along the x axis b along the
y axis and r is the distance to the order the absolute value of that number. So in particular
r the distance to the origin or the absolute value is often called the modulus and theta
will be the angle this complex number makes with the positive x axis just like in trigonometry.
So what is the trigonometric form of our complex number? Well what's a? Remember the definition
a is excuse me cosine theta is a over r so a is r cosine theta. Just look at that triangle.
Cosine theta is going to be a over r and sine theta is b over r. In fact that was the original
definition of the trigonometric functions. r of course is the square root of a square
plus b square and if you take r sine theta divided by r cosine theta that's b over a
the r's cancel and you're left with tangent theta. So what does all this say? Given this
complex number a plus b i we can find out its angle theta by solving that equation tangent
theta equals b over a and we can find the distance from the complex number to the origin
by calculating the square root of a square plus b squared. So what's the complex form
or the trigonometric form of our complex number? Well let's call the complex number z that's
a very common letter by the way for complex numbers. z is a plus b i and that's r cosine
theta plus r sine theta times i and i here of course is the square root of minus 1 so
that's r times the quantity cosine theta plus i sine theta. That might look a lot like what
we did last lecture with vectors. Now of course there's an i in this new equation that's not
the same i that we had in vectors. In vectors i was the unit vector along the x axis. This
i is the square root of minus 1 but the similarities are pretty obvious here. We're expressing this
complex number z in terms of two issues, two things. One is how far is it from the origin?
That was sort of like the magnitude of that vector and also what angle does it make with
the positive x axis? So in that sense the expression is very similar to what we did
with vectors. Again in the literature r is often called the modulus and theta is the
argument. These are terms that sort of I like to tell students to keep the math club small,
adding more words to mean things that you have to kind of memorize those terms. Let's
not worry about that memorization but just in case you're reading a textbook on this
material you'll see the words modulus and argument. They often call this the polar form
of a complex number and it's related to something called polar coordinates. You might have heard
of polar coordinates. We'll be studying polar coordinates later on in this course. Also
that angle theta is normally taken to be between 0 and 2 pi but remember the periodicity of
the trigonometric functions you can go outside that interval sometimes. Alright that's been
a lot of talking. Let's do an example. Let's write the following complex number in trigonometric
form. The number is z equals minus 2 minus 2 square roots of 3i. First of all ask yourself
in what quadrant is this number lying? Right it's in the third quadrant isn't it? So that
angle is going to be between 180 degrees and 270 degrees. So let's figure it out. First
of all what's the length of this complex number? It's modulus. Well it's the absolute value
of minus 2 minus 2 square roots of 3i. That's minus 2 squared plus the quantity minus 2 square
roots of 3 all squared and that's 4 plus 12 square rooted. That equals the square root
of 16 or 4. Now what about the angle? Well remember tangent theta is b over a. So that's
minus 2 root 3 divided by minus 2 which is the square root of 3. Can you find an angle
theta whose tangent is the square root of 3? Ah but it also has to be in the third quadrant.
So the angle would be in radians 4 pi over 3. And finally our trigonometric form is r
times cosine theta plus i sine theta 4 times cosine 4 pi over 3 plus i sine 4 pi over 3.
Once we've moved back to radian measure and there's a reason for it coming up later on.
Of course you could also use degree measure here if you so choose. And I invite you to
check this answer. Take that trigonometric form and convert it back to standard form.
Let's look at another example. Let's look at now at a number that's already in trigonometric
form and ask ourselves what is the standard form of this complex number. And suppose the
number is z equal square root of 8 times the quantity cosine minus pi over 3 plus i sine
minus pi over 3. Notice how convenient this form is by the way before we do the arithmetic.
I know the angle that this complex number makes with the positive x axis minus pi over
3. It's in the fourth quadrant. And I know how far from the origin this complex number
is. It's square root of 8 units from the origin. Alright well let's simplify. Square root
of 8 can be written 2 times the square root of 2 and then cosine minus pi over 3 is a half.
Sine of minus pi over 3 is minus square root of 3 over 2 times i. Multiply in that 2 square
roots of 2 and you're left with square root of 2 minus square root of 6i. So here we've
converted trigonometric form to standard form. Okay. You be the teacher for a moment. Student
comes up and says teacher I got an answer for a trigonometric form of a complex number
and my friend got a different form for that complex number. Is that possible? Can a complex
number have different trigonometric forms or is the trigonometric form unique? What
would you say to that student? Well yeah the trigonometric form is clearly not unique.
Remember that periodicity of the trigonometric functions. In fact here's something even more
interesting. The number zero, the complex number zero can be any angle it wants can it? You
could use any angle you wanted as long as you made the modulus r equal to zero. So this
expression of a complex number in trigonometric form is clearly not unique. Okay. Division
and multiplication. These complex numbers can be multiplied and divided very conveniently
and let me just show you the formulas. They're beautiful formulas and they're based on the
summation formulas for the sine of a sum and the cosine of a sum. Here's how they go. Suppose
z1 is written in trigonometric form as r1 cosine theta 1 plus i sine theta 1 and the
second complex number is r2 times cosine theta 2 plus i sine theta 2. Then their product
z1 times z2 you multiply the moduli r1 times r2 times the quantity cosine and you add the
angles. Wow how simple cosine theta 1 plus theta 2 plus i sine theta 1 plus theta 2. And if you
have a quotient of two complex numbers all you have to do is divide r1 divided by r2 and then
it's the cosine of the difference and the sine of the difference. So the plus sign changes to a
minus sign. Let's do a quick example of this multiplication formula and you'll see how nice
it is. Suppose one complex number is minus 1 plus square root of 3i and the other one is 4 square
roots of 3 minus 4i. Now you could multiply these out as we've done earlier in the course but let's
use this new property for multiplying. Well I'm going to first of all express both of them in complex
form in trigonometric form and the first number is 2 times the quantity cosine 2 pi over 3 plus i
sine 2 pi over 3 and the second one is 8 times the quantity cosine 11 pi over 6 plus i sine 11 pi
over 6. That takes a little bit of work to get that trigonometric form but I think you can do that.
Let's multiply them out. This is a little bloody here but I think we can get ourselves through it.
The product would be well you multiply 2 times 8 and that'll give 16 out in the front and then it's
cosine of the sum of the angles plus i sine sum of the angles and the sum of 2 pi over 3 plus 11 pi
over 6 is 15 pi over 6 if you get a common denominator there. So it comes out to be 16 times the
quantity cosine 15 pi over 6 plus i sine 15 pi over 6. But now wait 15 pi over 6 that's
coterminal with pi over 2. Think about it 12 pi over 6 would be 2 pi and then I'm left with
3 pi over 6 which is pi over 2. So 15 pi over 6 and pi over 2 are coterminal so another way of
writing this complex number an equivalent way is 16 times cosine pi over 2 plus i sine pi over 2.
Well what's cosine pi over 2? Zero. What's sine pi over 2? One. What's our final answer? 16 times i
or 16 i? Whoa kind of amazing kind of simplified didn't it? That's that's unusual I think normally
products don't simplify so nicely but I thought it was kind of nice to have it come out to be a
beautiful answer 16 i. And of course you can check your answer by multiplying it in the normal way.
By the way dividing is very similar to multiplying and you'll see an example in the workbook or an
exercise in the workbook for you to try division. The good news is the complete solutions are also
in the workbook if you have any trouble. All right well this multiplication of complex numbers
permits us to calculate powers of complex numbers. Here's how it goes. Let z equal an arbitrary
complex number r times cosine theta plus i sine theta. What would z squared be? Well you'd multiply
these two together so the r's would be r squared r times r is r squared and the angles would be cosine
theta plus theta you add the angles so it'd be cosine 2 theta plus i sine 2 theta.
Okay what would z cubed be? Well you multiply that answer by another r times cosine theta plus i
sine theta so now it becomes r cubed and what about the angles? You add 2 theta plus theta 3 theta.
Do you see a pattern? z cubed is r cubed times the quantity cosine 3 theta plus i sine 3 theta.
What if it were the fourth power? All the threes change to fours. Here's the general form and it's a
very famous theorem due to Du Moivre and we just about proved it didn't we? At least we explained how it works.
If your complex number is expressed in trigonometric form r times the quantity cosine theta plus i
sine theta and n's a positive integer then z to the n taking that complex number to the nth power
nth power is nothing more than r to the n times the quantity cosine n theta plus i sine n theta.
That's pretty simple that's an impressive formula. Du Moivre you know came up with a nice theorem
here I think. Du Moivre by the way very famous mathematician worked in all areas of mathematics
probability he worked a lot with Fibonacci numbers and we'll be looking at Fibonacci numbers
later on in this course so you have something to look forward to again.
Let's do an example of Du Moivre's theorem. Let's see how it works. It's kind of amazing I think.
Suppose you had to find the 12th power of minus 1 plus square root of 3i so the the complex number
is minus 1 plus square root of 3 times i and you want the 12th power. Well of course if you had
a few free days you could multiply that out in the usual way we did back in lecture three.
You could just multiply it two of them and then another one and another one and another one
and a few hours later you would have the answer. Let's see how this new theorem will give the
answer really nicely. Okay first of all we have to express our number in trigonometric form minus
1 plus square root of 3i that number has to be transformed to trigonometric form. Well what's
its length what's its modulus that'll be minus 1 squared plus square root of 3 squared which is the
square root of 4 also known as 2. How about the angle? Well tangent theta is b over a square root
of 3 over minus 1 or minus the square root of 3. Well where's this complex number located?
Because it's minus 1 plus square root of 3i it's in the second quadrant isn't it? So the angle theta
will be 2pi over 3. Tangent of 2pi over 3 equals minus square root of 3. That's one of our old
trig skills coming back to haunt us today. Alright let's take this complex number now to the 12th
power. Alright in trigonometric form it's 2 times the quantity cosine 2pi over 3 plus i sine 2pi
over 3 and that whole thing gets raised to the 12th power. What did Des Moivre's theorem tell
us to do? Well the modulus part the 2 just gets raised 2 to the 12th. That's easy. And what about
the angle? Well it's cosine 12 times the original angle so it's 12 times 2pi over 3 plus i sine
12 times 2pi over 3. Pretty nice isn't it? And that can be simplified to cosine 8pi 24 over 3 is 8
plus i sine 8pi and outside is 2 to the 12th which is 4096. Okay we're almost done. What's cosine 8pi?
Oh that's one. What's sine of 8pi? Zero. Our final answer is 4096.
Wow yeah I wouldn't have expected that the 12th power of that complex number
is so simple. In fact it's a real number. It's 4096. There's no complex part to that number.
That's an amazing answer and if you'd been doing it the old way multiplying it out you
of course be still be working on it but you'll also get 4096. All right so we can take a complex
number now put it into trigonometric form and raise it to a large power. Well now we're going to kind
of flip things around. Notice that 4096 is the 12th let me say a different way. The 12th root of 4096
is the original complex number minus 1 plus square root of 3i. In other words minus 1 plus the
square root of 3i to the 12th power is 4096. So the 12th root of 4096 is the original complex
number minus 1 plus square root of 3i. So in a sense by raising something to a power we've
discovered one of the roots of it one of the 12th roots of it. And you can twist around
de Moivre's theorem and develop a formula for finding roots of complex numbers. And here's how
it goes. This is how you find the n-th roots of a complex number. It's a little complicated looking
but I'll do an example in a minute to show you how it works. It's kind of an amazing theorem
and it's based on de Moivre's theorem but I won't show the the full proof of it of course.
So here's how it works. Take a complex number r times cosine theta plus i sine theta. The claim is
that complex number z has precisely n distinct n-th roots. It has two square roots. It has three
cube roots. Four fourth roots. This is in the complex number system of course.
And here's how you find them. Here's what the theorem says. To find those n distinct roots
they're of the following form. Well the modulus is the real n-th root of r. Remember r is the
modulus of the original number. So you take the n-th root of r the real n-th root and then you
multiply it by the following expression. Cosine in the numerator it's theta plus 2 pi k over n
and then plus i sine theta plus 2 pi k over n. Now that looks pretty complicated but let me try to
explain it. k takes on n different values 0 1 2 out to n minus 1. So if you're finding fourth roots
k would be 0 1 2 3. Fourth roots n is 4 so you go out 0 1 2 3. So there are really four values
in this expression. When k is 0 you get a certain angle theta plus 0 over n then you get theta plus
2 pi over n theta plus 4 pi over n etc. So as k varies from 0 out to n minus 1 you get a different
angle each time in the formula and each time you get a different n-th root of your original
complex number. All right again pretty complicated formula. Let's watch it in action. Let's find
the three cube roots of one. Now you might say to yourself wait a minute I know one is a cube
root of one because one cubed is one but I claim there are two other cube roots of one. Now they're
complex numbers. They aren't real numbers. There's one real cube root of one but there are two others
hiding somewhere and they're complex. Let's find them. It's kind of neat. All right so first of all
we have to express one in trigonometric form. Well that's not so hard. How far is one from the
origin? One unit. What angle does it make? Angle of zero. One is on the x-axis isn't it? It's on the
real axis. So it's one times the quantity cosine 0 plus i sine 0. That's expressing the number one
in trigonometric form. Okay what are the three cube roots? Well the n-th root formula would be
the n-th root of r times cosine theta plus 2 pi k over n plus i sine theta plus 2 pi k over n k going
from zero to n minus one. Here n is three so k goes zero one two. And out in front we have the cube
root of one. That's the real cube root of one so outside's just going to be one. And then inside
it's cosine of the angle. The angle was zero plus 2 pi k over three plus i sine zero plus 2 pi k over
three. Okay so k takes on three different values each time it produces a cube root. Okay how about
if k is zero? Then if k is zero the numerator is zero plus zero or zero and you have cosine zero over
three plus i sine zero over three sine of zero zero cosine zero one. The output is the root we knew
about. We knew about one. Now here comes the fun part. Plug in k equals one into our formula.
Watch what happens. The angle is theta plus 2 pi k and k is one so it's zero plus 2 pi over three
and that is 2 pi over three. So it's cosine 2 pi over three plus i sine 2 pi over three. Oh boy we
have to know some trig now don't we? What's the cosine of 2 pi over three minus a half? The sine
is square root of three over two. So the second cube root of one is the complex number minus
one half plus square root of three over two i. What's the third one? Well now k is two so it's zero
plus 4 pi over three and that's cosine 4 pi over three which is also minus a half but sine 4 pi over
three is minus square root of three over two so the third cube root is minus one half minus
square root of three over two i. Wow a complicated theorem but I hope you could sort of see how we
did it and we ended up with three cube roots. The one we knew about one and then a couple of
complex roots minus one half plus root three over two i and minus one half minus root three over two
i. Now I invite you to do a few things when you have a free moment. Those well each of those roots
cube it. I'll cube the first one for you one cube is one but if you cube the second one and the third
one you'll get one also. Those are cube roots of one. They're pretty complicated cube roots.
Anything else you noticed about them? They're conjugates aren't they? They're complex conjugates
of each other that's kind of neat. In fact there's even something more interesting to notice.
Let's plot these three cube roots in the complex plane using our skills of plotting complex numbers
as ordered pairs. Here's a picture of the three numbers. One is over there on the x-axis and then
we have a number in the second quadrant and its mirror image in the third quadrant the complex
conjugate of it. These three numbers are equally spaced on that circle. The cube roots are equally
spaced on the circle and there's a lot more that we haven't had a chance to touch on. If we were
doing fourth roots of some number they would also be equally spaced on a certain circle.
It's a really beautiful mathematics here as you study the roots of complex numbers.
Now I promised you a famous formula before we finish this lecture. I'm not going to be able
to derive this and prove it for you but you have to trust me that if you take an advanced math class
or a calculus class or a course in what we call differential equations you'll see an equation
that says that e to the a plus bi power equals e to the a times cosine b plus i sine b. Kind of
looks like what we've been doing doesn't it but now it brings in the exponential function e.
In this general equation let a equals zero and b equal pi. If you do that you get e to the zero
times cosine pi plus i sine pi, sine of pi is zero, cosine of pi is minus one and you're left with
e to the i pi equals minus one or e to the i pi plus one equals zero. Talk about a spectacular
formula. Here's a formula involving five of the most important numbers in mathematics, zero and one
which we're fairly comfortable with, pi from geometry, e the base of the natural logarithm,
a number we discovered a few lectures ago and i the square root of minus one they're all meshed
together linked together in this beautiful beautiful formula. I actually had a bumper sticker once on
my car that said mathematicians, weird number minus e to the i pi which is equivalent to saying
weird number one. Okay I think we can say we've finished with the time being our study of trigonometry
and then vectors and then the trigonometric form of complex numbers. We're going to turn completely
around now and begin a brand new topic. We'll be spending four lectures on systems of linear
equations and matrices so I look forward next time for the beginning lecture on solving linear
equations. See you then.
