Hello, and welcome to our lecture on sequences and series.
This topic does not play a major role in first semester calculus, but it is crucial for second
semester calculus, and in particular for one of the advanced placement examinations,
the so-called BC Advanced Placement Examination. So, it is an important topic, but it often
is not part of, again, first semester calculus. We're going to talk about two themes today.
One is infinite sequences, and the next one is our so-called infinite series. And the
sequence topic will lead very naturally to the topic on series.
Let me give you a quick example of a sequence. Suppose you have this string of numbers, this
infinite string of numbers, one, one-half, one-third, one-fourth, one-fifth, etc. I think
you see the rule, don't you? Here are some questions. Is that sequence approaching a limit?
And by that we mean, is it getting closer and closer to a single number? Well, I think
you see the answer, don't you? It's getting closer and closer to zero. It doesn't quite
get there, but it gets as close as you want to zero, doesn't it? So, those are some of
the issues we'll talk about. Let's begin by analyzing some sequences. For instance, let's
suppose the sequence is given by the following rule. The n-th term of the sequence is 3n
minus 2. Now, here's what I mean by that. For every value of n, you plug it into the
formula 3n minus 2 and it generates a term of the sequence. Here, n's an integer. We'll
start, say, with 1. n starting at 1 and n goes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 out to infinity and it
generates the sequence. So, when n is 1, it's 3 times 1 minus 2 or 1. When n is 2, it's
3 times 2 minus 2 or 4. When n is 3, it's 3 times 3 minus 2 or 7. I think you see the
pattern, don't you? 1, 4, 7, skip 3, 10, skip 3 more, 13. There's a nice sequence. Okay.
Here's sort of the technical definition of a sequence. Again, it's one of these definitions
where it may be overly complicated and I think one can understand a sequence without understanding
fully the definition. But here's how it goes. It's a function. A sequence is a function,
but the domain now is the set of positive integers. And then the function values, the
elements in the range, are denoted a sub 1, a sub 2, a sub 3, a sub n and out to infinity.
Those are called the terms of the sequence. Let me show you another example. Suppose our
rule for this sequence is 3 plus the quantity minus 1 to the nth power, 3 plus minus 1 to
the nth. Here we go. Well, plug in 1 and you get 3 plus minus 1 to the first power. That's
just minus 1. 3 minus 1 is 2. Now plug in n equals 2. Well, minus 1 squared is positive
1, so 3 plus 1 is 4. The third term is back to 3 minus 1 because minus 1 cubed is minus.
So it goes 2, 4, 2, 4. I think you see the pattern, don't you? It goes like that forever,
back and forth between 2 and 4. Let me show you another example. Let's let the nth term
of our sequence be 1 half to the nth power. And I'm going to start this sequence when
n is 0. It turns out you can start a sequence with any integer value, n equals 1 or n equals
0, and sometimes they start at 2, etc. That's not the real important issue with a sequence.
So let's start it at 0 and plug in some numbers. When n is 0, it's 1 half to the 0 power, and
any number to the 0th power is 1. And then it's 1 half to the first power, and so a sub
1 is a half. And then it's 1 half squared, which is a fourth. And again, I see a pattern,
don't you? It goes 1, 1 half, 1 fourth, 1 eighth, 1 sixteenth, etc. Now this sequence
has an interesting property that the other two sequences didn't have. As we go further
and further out in this sequence, it's getting closer and closer to a fixed limit, a fixed
number. Can you see what that number is? Yeah, 0. The terms are getting closer and closer
to 0. This is similar to the idea of asymptotes that we dealt with much earlier in this course.
Remember how we had, say, a vertical asymptote for the function 1 over x? Well, the graph
never touched its vertical asymptote, but it got closer and closer to it. So what we say
with sequences is kind of the same idea. What we say is this sequence, 1, 1 half, 1 fourth,
1 eighth, etc. gets closer and closer to 0 as you go further out in the sequence. In
fact, you can get as close to 0 as you like by going suitably far out in the sequence.
So what do we say? We say that that sequence has a limit. Okay? It has a limit. It converges.
And if you look at the other two examples I talked about, they don't have limits. One
of them went 2, 4, 2, 4, 2, 4. It doesn't settle down at a single number, does it? It
bounces back and forth. And then another sequence we looked at, those numbers differing by 3,
that just blew up to infinity. It never settled down to a finite number. So this issue of
whether or not a sequence has a limit is the crucial idea, the crucial concept of dealing
with sequences. Let's do another example. I want to now talk a little bit about notation
for sequences and then show you kind of a pitfall that comes up sometimes. Let's try
to find a rule for the odd numbers. The odd numbers form a sequence, don't they? 1, 3,
5, 7, 9, etc. Those are the odd numbers. What would be a good rule for that sequence? Well,
there's one, the rule 2n minus 1 starting with n equals 1. And you would get the odd
numbers. As n goes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, this generates 1, 3, 5, 7, 9. But there are other ways of
writing this. You could say, well, the sequence would be 2n plus 1 as long as you start with
n equals 0. And that would also generate those same odd numbers. Or you could have 2n minus
3 and start with n equals 2. So there are various forms of the rule that you can have
and still get the same sequence. But here's a much more subtle point. Suppose somebody
gives you the terms of a sequence, a few terms of the sequence. Suppose they said, here's
a sequence, 1, 3, 5, and they ask you the following question. What's the rule for that
sequence? 1, 3, 5. Well, you might sort of think to yourself, well, it sounds like it's
odd numbers. I'll bet you the rule is 2n minus 1, like we just saw. But you could have a
different rule generate those same three numbers. Here's a rule that I came up with. Consider
the rule minus n cubed plus 6n squared minus 9n plus 5. Kind of an obscure, complicated
rule. But if you take that rule and plug in 1, 2, and 3 for n, you will get back 1, 3,
5. It generates the first three odd numbers. Unfortunately, when you plug in 4 into that
rule, it generates 1. So that rule doesn't work past the third odd number. So the bottom
line is, what's the moral of this story? Just given a few terms of a sequence, you might
think you know what the rule is. Oh, I think it's odd numbers. But it may not be. It may
be a more obscure rule. All right, let me show you now one of the most famous sequences of
all time. This is a great sequence. I love it. And it's defined in a somewhat different
way. It's called a recursive definition. Let me try to explain it. This sequence starts
off with the first two terms, and I'll call the first term a sub 0 and the second term
a sub 1. The first two terms are 1 and 1. So it starts off 1, 1. After that, every term
is the sum of the previous two terms. So if you start 1, 1, the third term is the sum
of the first two. So the third term is 2. And the next term is the sum of the previous
two terms. So it's 2 plus 1 or 3. And then it's 2 plus 3, 5. 3 plus 5, 8. And you keep
going like that. The nth term is the sum of the nth minus first term and the nth minus
second term. Kind of hard to explain that. Kind of hard to write that down. But it's
the sum of the two previous terms. See how that works? And so you get this very famous
Fibonacci sequence, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21. It keeps growing. Now, of course, it doesn't
have a limit, does it? It's going off to infinity. But here's something kind of interesting.
If you take quotients of successive pairs, for instance, 3 over 2, 5 over 3, 8 over 5,
13 over 8, 21 over 13, that sequence, sequence of quotients, approaches a limit. And that
limit is 1 plus square root of 5, all divided by 2. A very famous number that you, well,
let me say it this way. I invite you to go to the Internet and search for the Fibonacci
sequence. It's all over the Internet. There are websites devoted to this sequence because
it seems to occur all over the place. In nature, a lot of plants have patterns in their leaves
and things that are in the form of a Fibonacci sequence. The mathematics of the Fibonacci
sequence is very, very deep. We just touched on it here. There's actually a mathematics
journal totally devoted to properties of this sequence and related sequences. It's called
the Fibonacci Quarterly, and it's a mathematics research journal based on this very famous
sequence. By the way, who was Fibonacci? He was born in Pisa, Italy, and traveled widely,
and he was one of the early folks to argue that the Hindu-Arabic base 10 number system
was superior to Roman numerals. And, of course, we know now he was right. We don't use Roman
numerals very much anymore. Okay. Sequences, sequences. Have we seen some of these earlier
in the course? Well, let me remind you, way back in an earlier lecture, we actually saw
a sequence. We didn't call it that then, but we saw when we were dealing with compound
interest that every year we earned a certain amount of money based on a formula. And that
formula in a specific example, say $1,000 invested at 3% interest, would be, the rule
would be 1,000 times 1 plus 0.03 to the nth power. And when n is zero, you have $1,000.
That's how much money you put in the bank. After one year, you plug in one as the exponent
and you get $1,030. You've earned $30 of interest. After two years under this compound interest,
you have $1,060.90, and you go on. That's a sequence of numbers. It's the amount of
money you have in your bank account at the end of each year. All right. We're now going
to move on a bit to infinite series. This is a beautiful topic in mathematics. You're
going to like this, trust me. But we need to set up some notation first. And the first
notation I'd like to remind you of, I think, you might have seen it already, is so-called
factorial notation. And here's what factorial means. You have an integer and you put an
exclamation point by it, and that means like three factorial or five factorial. And what
it means is five factorial is five times four times three times two times one. Three factorial
is three times two times one. Eight factorial is eight times seven times six down to one.
So the technical definition, n factorial is the product n times n minus one times n minus
two all the way down three, two, one. So we've done some calculations. What's two factorial?
That's two times one or two. What's three factorial? Three times two times one, six.
What's four factorial? Well, I think you get the picture, don't you? Four times three times
two times one, 24. And by the way, for notational reasons, mathematicians define zero factorial,
which doesn't make any sense, I know, but just accept it to be equal to one. And we'll
need that in a moment. So zero factorial is one, one factorial is one, and then the numbers
start growing. Here's some good news. Factorials are available on calculators. There's a key
for factorials. Why? Because they're important. And so the engineers had decided to hardwire
them into calculators. And factorials can get big pretty fast. I mean, we already saw
that five factorial, five times four times three times two times one, that's equal to
120. That's pretty big. 20 factorial is a giant number. It has 19 digits. It just strung
out. Don't make me read the digits, but it's a big number. Factorials grow quickly. So
if you have to calculate things like 20 or 30 factorial, ouch, that's going to be a tough
calculation. And here's the second notation I'd like to introduce. It's a notation for
summations, how you add up a certain amount of numbers. And it's a very compact notation.
Here's how it goes. If you have, say, the numbers a sub one plus a sub two out to a
sub n. So we're adding up n numbers. A compact way of writing that is to use the Greek letter
sigma. And you write it as sigma i equals one to n of a sub i. That notation means the
following. A sub i takes on the values i equals one, i equals two, out to i equals n, and
you add them up. Sigma sort of sounds like sum. And this index i, by the way, is sort
of a dummy variable. It can be any letter you want. It can be k or j or anything. That
i has nothing to do with the square root of minus one or vectors or anything like that.
It's just a symbol that they use there for the summation. And the lower limit, i equals
one, that can vary. You could start the summation at zero or at two, depending on the context
of the problem. And the upper limit is n. n might be five. So you're adding up five
terms. All right. Let's do some examples to make sure we're comfortable with this new
notation. Suppose you have the summation from i equals one to four of three i. Three i.
Well here's how you should read it. i is going to change. i's going to start at one and then
go one, two, three, four. And each time you add up that term. So it's three times one
plus three times two plus three times three plus three times four. And then you add those
numbers up. Three plus six plus nine plus twelve. That adds up to thirty. Now these
summations have properties. One of the most obvious properties is I could factor that
three outside the summation symbol. Watch what happens when I do that. Now it's three
times the summation of i. But i goes from one to four again. So it's three times the
following sum. One plus two plus three plus four. And that again is three times ten or
thirty. So the summation symbol is not too hard. Just sort of keep in mind that it's
a compact way of writing a summation. Let me show you a really neat example. And this
will, the answer will surprise you. It will trigger some memories. I'm going to add up
one over n factorial. Remember that notation n factorial we just talked about. And I'm
going to start at n equals zero and go out to eight. So I'm adding up actually nine terms.
Here's what those terms look like. It'd be one over zero factorial plus one over one
factorial. One over two factorial all the way out to one over eight factorial. I'm going
to add those numbers up. Remember zero factorial we define to be equal to one. So here are
the terms of my summation. One over zero factorial is just one. One over one factorial, one again.
What's two factorial? Two times one is two. So that's a half. Three factorial, three times
two times one, that's six. So it's one sixth. And then it's one twenty fourth. And you keep
going. One over eight factorial, the final last term of my summation is one over a big
number. It's forty thousand three hundred and twenty. That's equal to eight times seven
times sigma down to one. Alright, I added those up on my calculator. And here's the
answer I got. See if you recognize this answer. Two point seven one eight two eight approximately.
Two point seven one eight two eight. Do you recognize that fellow? Have you seen that
number before? Wow, that looks like E, doesn't it? That's our friend E. In fact, as you add
up more terms, if you were not to stop at eight factorial but say stop at a million factorial,
you would really be close to E. In fact, here's what mathematicians say. Here's what the theory
of infinite series says. If you were to add up an infinite number of these terms, go out
to infinity, keep adding. It's exactly E. In fact, that could be a definition of that
number E, that strange number that was the base of the natural logarithms. Here it is
occurring again in a completely different setting. One of the things that I love about
mathematics is that seemingly unrelated ideas suddenly are glued together. Ideas that appeared
in a different context suddenly reappear as it does here. Okay, I said that there are
some surprises with these summations. Let me just mention two more. The summation of one
over n squared, that'd be one plus a fourth plus a ninth. It's the reciprocal of the squares,
a four, nine, then it'll be one over 16, one over 25. That equals, and this you would prove
in a calculus class, that equals pi squared over six. If you add from one to infinity,
in other words, the sum goes out forever, it adds up to pi squared over six. Whoa, where
did pi come from here? Isn't that neat? Suddenly pi appears. And here's a bonus question for
you. What about the sum of the reciprocals of the cubes, one plus one over two cubed,
one over three cubed? That summation, nobody knows the answer. It's an unsolved problem
in mathematics. Of course, you could get an approximation. You could take the first million
terms and get a decimal approximation. But I want the exact value, like in the previous
problem, pi squared over six is the exact value. Nobody knows the exact value to that
one. Okay, on we go. I'd like to now look at a class of infinite series that are probably
the most familiar to us, and I would say the most important in pre-calculus. And this is
called the geometric series. Let me show you an example. The summation from n equals zero
to four of one half to the ith power, i goes from zero to four. That would be the following
finite sum, one plus a half plus a fourth plus an eighth plus a sixteenth. And I could
add that up, that finite sum. If you get a common denominator of 16, the numerator becomes
16 plus eight plus four plus two plus one. Add those numbers up. It comes out to 31 over
16. Good. Here's the question. What happens if I keep adding more terms? I go out to infinity.
I add from i equals zero to infinity. I don't stop. Does that approach a fixed number? Let's
find out. And I'm going to show you some real mathematics now. We're going to do a proof.
This is a nice little calculation. I think you'll enjoy it. We're going to try to figure
out what the answer is going out to infinity. And the way we'll do it is we'll find the
answer out to some number n. And then we'll let n go out really big. So let's calculate
the summation from zero to n of r to the ith power. That's one plus r plus r squared out
to r to the n. r can be any number. In the previous example, r was a half. And we added
up one plus a half plus a half squared. But r could be a third or r could be anything.
We'll call that sum one plus r out to r to the n. Call that x. I want to know what x
is. Here's the trick. It's a neat trick. Multiply both sides of that equation by r. So the left
side becomes r plus r squared, blah, blah, blah, out to r to the n plus r to the n plus
one. And the right side becomes r times x. And now subtract the two equations, the second
equation minus the first. Notice that all the terms on the left cancel, they cancel
each other except for two. Two terms remain, two survive. r to the n plus one doesn't have
anybody to cancel with. And the one in the first equation doesn't have anybody to cancel
with. Everybody else has a partner. So the left hand side simplifies to r to the n plus
one minus one. And the right hand side, of course, is r x minus x. I subtracted. Factor
out the x. And we have x times the quantity r minus one, divide by r minus one. And we
now have x. x equals r to the n plus one minus one divided by r minus one. And it's perhaps
better to flip everybody here, write it as one minus r to the n plus one divided by one
minus r. That's a formula for the finite sum. Let's check it. I always like to check formulas
before I go on. Let r be a half and n four. That's the problem we just did. If you plug
those numbers into this formula, you get one minus a half to the four plus one power, also
known as five, divided by one minus r or one minus a half. And the numerator becomes 31
over 32. One minus one over 32 is 31 over 32. The denominator is a half. Cancel and
you get 31 over 16, which was the previous answer we had. Okay. So now we have our fancy
formula for adding up these terms, one plus r plus r squared, et cetera. And it's one
minus r to the n plus one divided by one minus r. Now imagine the following. Imagine that
r is less than one and greater than minus one. In other words, the absolute value of
r is less than one. That means that r to a large power starts getting smaller and smaller
doesn't it? Like if r were a half, then one half to the billionth power is really small.
So in the limit, as we go to infinity, that r to the n plus one begins to disappear. And
in fact, if you add from i equals zero to infinity, r to the i, that's one plus r plus
r squared forever, the r to the n plus one disappears and your formula is one over one
minus r. And of course, you have to make sure that the absolute value of r is less than
one. If r is greater than one or equal to one in absolute value, the series doesn't add
up to a finite number. This problem, by the way, arose very early in something called
Zeno's Paradox. Let me try to explain it real quickly. Suppose I want to travel across this
room. I want to cross the room. Let's imagine it's two meters long. Well, here's what Zeno
says. You'll never get there because first you go halfway. Then you go halfway again.
Then you go halfway again. Then you go halfway again. Well, you never get to the end because
you're just adding a half of the previous step. And he argued you never get across the
room. And you can sort of see this as an infinite series. We're adding up one. That was the
first step, and then a half, and then a quarter, and then an eighth, et cetera. But we know
better, don't we now? Now that we've studied these infinite series, we're adding this up
to infinity. And of course, if you add up to infinity, it's one over two, one half to
the i, from i equals zero to infinity. According to our formula, it's one over one minus r,
which is one over one minus a half, and that equals two. So this infinite series out to
infinity adds up to two. Zeno does cross that two meter walk.
All right, let's play with these infinite series a moment. Here's a problem that often
stumps people. Let's talk about decimal expansions for a moment. What does it mean to say the
number, point, nine, nine, nine, nine, nine, nine, nine, nine, nine, nine, nine, nine, nine,
nine, nine forever. String of nines forever. Well, let me try to explain what that means.
And while I'm doing it, ask yourself, what does point nine, nine, nine, nine, nine, nine,
nine, nine, nine, nine, nine forever really equal? Well, here's one way to imagine what
that number is. The point nine, the first point nine, really is 9 tenths, isn't it? And then
point nine is nine over a hundred. It's in the hundredth spot. And the third one is nine
over a thousand, nine over ten cubed. So we can consider point nine, nine, nine, nine,
nine, nine forever as an infinite series. We're adding up nine-tenths plus nine-one-hundreds
plus nine-one-thousandths, et cetera. Well, let's add that up with our new fancy formula.
And here's how you can do it. Factor out the nine-tenths and you're left with one plus
one-tenth plus one over ten squared, one over ten cubed, forever. I recognize that as r
being a tenth. R is a tenth. So it's nine-tenths, that's outside the summation, and then it's
summation i equals zero to infinity of one-tenth to the i. What did our formula tell us to do
here? Well, the answer is one over one minus r, and r here is a tenth. So first of all,
the nine-tenths just sits there. It was already factored out. And then it's one over one minus
a tenth. One minus a tenth is, of course, nine-tenths. So we have nine-tenths times one
over nine-tenths. They cancel, and the answer is one. Whoa! Point nine, nine, nine, nine,
nine forever equals one. Now that surprises a lot of people. It surprises me. The decimal
representation of numbers is not unique, is it? The number one has another representation
as this infinite decimal. I think people, you know, they kind of are hesitant about this.
So why don't you be the teacher for a moment? A student comes up and says, I don't believe
it. How could you help that student? Well, one way would be the student's comfortable
with point three, three, three, three, three forever. Multiply that by three, and you get
the same equation we just talked about. Or ask the student the following question. If
it's not equal to one, what is it equal to? And the student won't have a good answer there
either. Okay. That was a lot of fun, I think, talking about sequences, especially the Fibonacci
sequence. Again, I invite you to go to the internet and then explore it some more. And
then adding up the terms of a sequence for these infinite series, and in particular the
geometric series. There are a lot more series around there. Let me just wet your appetite
so you'll study some mathematics on your own. E to the X, our old exponential function,
has an infinite series expansion, and here it is, one plus X plus X squared over two
factorial, et cetera. Okay. So there's a whole world out here with infinite series. But we're
going to switch gears. And next lecture and the following, we're going to talk about probability
theory. It's a whole new topic, lots of fun because we'll talk about the lottery and rolling
dice and things like that. So I'll see you then when we begin counting principles and
probability.
