Hello again, and welcome to the first of two lectures on counting principles and elementary
probability.
Today we'll talk about permutations and combinations, and then in the next lecture we'll apply these
ideas to some probability questions.
We'll talk about things like how many different telephone numbers are possible, or how many
different lottery tickets are possible, how many ways can you form a team of players,
how many poker hands are possible, how many ways can you roll the number seven, say with
two dice.
These are neat questions.
This is fun stuff, I think, because it has a lot of everyday appeal.
These are questions that we often ask ourselves.
And that said, it's also a big subject at universities.
In our department we teach many courses on probability, and over in the statistics department
they have many more courses on probability.
These ideas are at one level fairly straightforward, as we'll see in our lectures, but higher level
probability is based on calculus actually.
So it's a very deep topic.
All right, let me start with, again, as I usually do, with some fairly simple examples
just to get us warmed up about counting principles.
Suppose the following is going on.
I've got a box here with eight numbers in it on pieces of paper.
So the pieces of paper have the numbers one through eight on them.
One paper has a one on it, the other piece has a two, etc.
So there are eight pieces of paper.
Then I reach into the box and pick out a piece.
And then I write down the number that I picked out.
Then I put that piece of paper back into the box, shake it up again, and reach down again
and pick out another number and write it down.
So I've done this twice now.
So here's the question.
If I add up those two numbers to get a final number, in how many ways can a sum of twelve
be obtained?
You pick a number, write it down, put the number back in the box, shake it up, pick
another number, write it down, add them up, in how many ways can a sum of twelve be obtained?
Well let's count the ways.
If the first number's four and the second number were an eight, I'd get twelve.
If the first number were five and the second number were seven, again I'd get twelve.
I could have picked a six out in the beginning, and because I put it back in the box, it's
still there, and I might have picked it again.
So that's another way of getting twelve.
I could have picked a seven and then a five and an eight and then a four.
And there are no other ways, are there?
If you had picked a three, you're doomed.
It's too small.
Or if you'd picked a nine, again you're doomed.
So there are five ways of obtaining the sum of twelve.
Let's twist the problem slightly.
The only change now is, I reach into the box, pull out a number, write it down, but I don't
put that piece of paper back in the box, okay?
It's not back in the box.
So then I reach in again and write the second number down.
How many ways can I obtain a twelve now?
Well let's count them again.
I could have picked a four the first time and an eight the second time, a five the first
time and a seven, but now that six won't work, will it?
Because I need to have the six back in the box and I've taken the six out and I'm not
putting it back in the box.
So that way is gone and then of course a seven and a five and an eight and a four.
So now there are four different ways.
Okay, that was a pretty simple problem because we were able to actually list all the possible
outcomes and just count them up, five in the first example, four in the second example.
This is not feasible for more complicated problems.
So we're going to have to develop some tools for handling more complicated counting problems.
One of the tools we'll use is the fundamental counting principle.
Here's how it goes in technical language and then of course I'll illustrate it with
some examples.
Suppose you have two events, call them E1 and E2.
And the first event E1 can occur M1 different ways and the second event E2 can occur M2
different ways.
So in this way what I mean is that after E1 is occurred then E2 independently can occur
in M2 different ways.
So how many ways can the two events occur?
That's the product M1 times M2.
Let me illustrate that principle with a very simple example.
How many different pairs of letters from the English alphabet are possible?
How many different pairs?
Okay, well there are two events in this situation.
The first event is the choice of the first letter and the second event is the choice
of the second letter and they're independent of each other.
So I pick that the first event has 26 possibilities because the alphabet has 26 letters and so
it's 26 times 26 or 676 possible pairs of letters.
See how that works?
26 is the first event.
I can pick one of 26 and then the second event and you multiply them together.
Let's do a slightly harder problem.
Telephone numbers.
In the United States telephone numbers have 10 digits.
As you know they have an area code for three digits and then a seven-digit number.
So here's my question for you.
Given a given local area code, how many different local numbers are possible?
How many different seven-digit numbers are possible?
So imagine you're in my Florida area code 352.
How many different seven-digit numbers are possible in that area code?
And we're going to assume that zero or one cannot be the first digit in the telephone
number.
Okay, let's count how many possible telephone numbers there are.
And it's this same counting principle.
Here we go.
The first digit of a telephone number, it can't be a zero or a one.
So it has to be two, three, four, or possibly out to nine.
It can be one of eight different choices.
We have eight choices for the first number, two through nine.
For the other six digits of our telephone number, we have ten choices, don't we?
Zero through nine.
So the total would be the product of these seven numbers, eight times ten to the sixth
power.
Ten times ten times ten times ten times ten times ten times ten, six times.
That's a big number.
Eight times ten to the sixth is eight million.
There are eight million possible telephone numbers within that single area code.
Now that seems like a big number, of course.
Speaking practically, is it really such a big number in today's world?
In my household, we have a landline and we have a couple of cell phone numbers and we
have a fax number.
That's already four telephone numbers in one home.
So you can imagine that this number eight million is not very big after all.
And I think around the country, you see all the time where certain area codes are split
into two pieces and dividing up because they've run out of telephone numbers.
This happens all the time.
So despite this large eight million number in today's world with cell phones and faxes
and things, it's actually not that big.
All right.
Let's turn to the first of the two topics I'd like to study in more depth.
Permutations and then we'll go later on to combinations.
So here's what I mean when I say permutations.
This is the number of ways that you can arrange n objects, n elements in order.
For instance, let me give you an idea.
Suppose you have eight people and you'd like to arrange them in a line with a first person
here and then a second person and a third person like that.
So it's eight people and they're in a certain order.
It's a different order if I'm in front than if I'm second in line.
Those are different orders.
So the order is important here.
A permutation of n different elements is a ordering of those elements such that one element
is first and another one is second and another one is third.
It's not like, say, forming a basketball team.
Five players make up a basketball team, but there's no order involved there necessarily.
You just have the five players.
So we're talking about an ordering of objects.
Let me show you some examples, a very simple example.
In how many ways can we order four people so that they stand in line a first person,
a second person, a third person, and a fourth person?
Well, let's count the ways here.
There are four possibilities.
We have four people.
So there's four possibilities for that first position.
And once you fill that first position, there are just three people left for the second
position.
So there are three possibilities.
Then there are two possibilities for the third position and then the last person is stuck
at the end of the line.
So it's a multiplication problem by that basic principle four times three times two times
one.
You recognize that number?
Four times three times two times one.
Right.
That's four factorial, isn't it?
Remember that notation we introduced four with an exclamation point after it?
Four factorial or n factorial means n times n minus one times n minus two all the way
down to three, two, one.
So this factorial notation will play a big role in permutations and later in combinations.
So here's the theorem.
The total number of permutations of n elements, n objects, n people, is given by n factorial,
n times n minus one all the way down to one.
So it's n factorial is the answer here.
All right.
Let's complicate things slightly.
We go to horse racing.
And in horse racing, it's often very important to know who wins and who comes in second and
who comes in third.
Those are the ones that usually get prizes.
So here's the setup.
Suppose you have eight horses running in a race.
In how many ways can these horses come out in the following position?
There's a first horse, a second horse, and a third horse, and I don't care about the
rest of them.
So how many ways can they come in first, second, and third?
Okay.
Let's figure it out.
How many choices are there for the winner?
Well, there are eight horses.
We're assuming they're equally likely to win.
So there are eight possibilities for the winner.
And then how about second place?
Well, now there are only seven horses to choose from, so there are seven choices for second
place, and I think you see the picture, there are six choices for third place.
So the answer would be eight times seven times six, or three hundred and thirty-six different
ways we can order these horses so that three of them come in first, second, and third.
Now this is a type of permutation slightly more complicated than the first example we
did.
It's called a permutation of n elements taken r at a time.
We had eight horses taken three at a time.
That's how you would say it.
Eight horses taken three at a time.
And there's a formula for calculating such situations.
Let me show you the formula, and we'll talk about it for a minute.
It's kind of a funny notation in the literature.
It's a capital P with a couple of subscripts.
In the front there's an n, and after the P there's a subscript r.
So why don't we call it NPR?
And that means the permutation of n elements taken r at a time.
In the example we just did, the notation would be eight P three.
One was eight, there were eight horses, and we took them r times three at a time.
So it's NPR, and here's the formula for that computation.
And it uses our factorial friends, the numerator's n factorial, the denominator is n minus r,
all factorial.
So it's n factorial over n minus r factorial.
Let's check that formula with the example we just did with the horses.
Okay, so it's eight P three, so the numerator's eight factorial, that's what n is, eight factorial
in the numerator.
The denominator would be n minus r, eight minus three factorial, in other words five
factorial.
Now, eight factorial over five factorial, a couple of ways of evaluating that.
One way would be calculate eight factorial, not so pleasant, it's a big long string of
numbers.
And then calculate five factorial, then divide them.
Let me show you a shortcut.
Eight factorial means eight times seven times six times five times four down to one.
Let me tell you what it means in a different language, eight times seven times six times
five factorial, because five factorial is the rest of the string, isn't it, five four
three two one.
So you can write eight factorial as the following, eight times seven times six times five factorial.
And look at the denominator, it's also five factorial, cancel them.
And I'm left with eight times seven times six, oh, that looks familiar, that's what
we just did with the horses, three hundred and thirty six.
So you see that little trick, we'll play with that trick in a moment, but let me first mention
this funny symbol, NPR, and this formula is fortunately like so much of pre-calculus,
it's built into your calculator as well, isn't that nice?
So if you have a really big problem with giant factorials, you can use your calculator and
that special button to figure out the answer.
All right, I mentioned about this factorial trick, how we cancel that five factorial.
Let's make sure we're comfortable with this cancellation trick.
Let's simplify a couple of factorial expressions.
How about ten factorial divided by eight factorial?
All right, here would be the slow way.
Calculate ten factorial, all right, yuck.
Calculate eight factorial, yuck and divide them.
Here's the clever way, ten factorial is ten times nine times eight factorial, isn't it?
Because eight factorial is eight, that is six, five, four, so the whole string is ten factorial.
And now cancel the eight factorials in the numerator and denominator, you're left with
just ten times nine or ninety.
Isn't that cool?
How you don't have to get your hands so dirty when you calculate that, it's some clever
cancellation.
Here's another one, ten factorial over eight factorial times two factorial.
All right, I think you see how to do it.
Ten times nine times eight factorial in the numerator, denominator is eight factorial
times two factorial, cancel the eight factorials and you're left with ten times nine divided
by two, two factorial is two and that's forty-five, okay?
And in the workbook you'll have a few other examples of this simplification to play with.
It's a nice trick, you avoid some unpleasant factorial calculations.
Let's move on to baseball.
We did a problem earlier with baseball having whether or not a certain batted ball was going
to be a home run.
Here's a completely different baseball application.
You're a manager of a baseball team and you've got thirteen players who are in the field
who can be batters and you want to choose a batting lineup of nine players.
You want somebody to bat first, somebody to bat second, down to somebody to bat ninth.
So as manager, how many different batting orders are possible using your thirteen players?
How many different batting orders are possible?
Well, this is a permutation of thirteen elements taken nine at a time.
So our symbol will be thirteen p nine and the formula says that's thirteen factorial
divided by thirteen minus nine and minus r, so it's thirteen minus nine factorial.
We have to compute thirteen factorial divided by four factorial.
This is even our fancy simplification techniques don't really work that well here.
This is a little ugly, but here we go.
Thirteen factorial is a giant string, isn't it, thirteen times twelve times eleven, all
the way down to six, five, and then four factorial.
And I stop at four factorial because that's what the denominator is, so I can cancel the
four factorials, slightly simpler.
And now I'm left with this giant multiplication, thirteen times twelve times eleven all the
way down to seven, six, five.
Trust me, here's what you get, two million, oh no, two hundred and fifty nine million
is even bigger than I thought, four hundred and fifty nine thousand two hundred.
That's a lot of different batting orders.
Maybe that's why managers are paid so much money.
They have to work out which is the best batting order given all these possibilities.
Okay, let's pause for a minute and talk about what we've been doing.
Notice something obvious, it would have been much too difficult to write down all the possible
batting orders, wouldn't it, and then just count them.
And that's sort of a common theme here, that as you get into counting problems that are
complicated, you need to do the arithmetic, use these formulas rather than just count
the number of possibilities.
Keep in mind that permutations have an order associated with them.
In that batting order, it's different the guy that bats first and the person that bats
second.
So now we're going to turn to a different topic, the second major topic today called
combinations.
And the main difference is that combinations don't have an order attached to them.
It's like forming a committee.
If I form a committee of seven people out of say fifty five people, there's no order
in that committee.
It's not like I have to line them up in an order.
They're just in a bundle here, the seven people in the committee.
So that's sort of the main difference.
Let's do a very simple example with committees.
Suppose you have a small club and the club has four members, Alex, Bruce, Carly and Dana.
We'll call them ABCD.
And these four members want to form a subcommittee of two members.
That subcommittee is going to do some special work.
How many subcommittees, how many possible little two-person committees are possible
here using these four people?
Well, we can enumerate them in this example, can't we?
We could have Alex and Bruce in the committee or Alex and Carly or Alex and Dana.
We could write those as A, B, A, C and A, D. And then we could have Bruce and Carly
and Bruce and Dana.
And then we could have Carly and Dana.
Now, I claim that's all the possible committees because look, the committee of Alex and Bruce
is the same as Bruce and Alex.
There's no order here.
We aren't doing a permutation.
We're doing what are called combinations.
So that committee is the same.
We don't have to have Alex first and Bruce second.
So there are really only six committees possible out of these four people.
And here's the general theorem.
These are called combinations of n elements taken r at a time, different from permutations
of n objects taken r at a time.
These are combinations.
Order is not important.
There's a symbol for this.
n, c, r, capital C, and you have the subscripts n and r on either side.
So it kind of looks like the other symbol.
The formula here is, looks sort of like the permutation formula, but there's an added
person in the denominator.
It's now n factorial all divided by n minus r factorial times r factorial.
There's an extra r factorial in the denominator.
Let's check our formula on that previous example.
I think this is always an important idea in mathematics.
When I learn mathematics and somebody gives me a formula, somebody gives me a theorem,
I like to check it right away on some simple examples.
That's not a proof that it's correct, but it gives me a lot of confidence in how to
use it, and I think, well, it probably is true because it checked out here.
And trust me, this is a true theorem.
So we had in that previous example four people, and we picked a committee of two.
So we were taking n elements taken r at a time, four elements taken two at a time.
So it would be four, c, two in our symbols, and the formula says that's four factorial
divided by four minus two factorial n minus r factorial times r factorial times two factorial.
Let's simplify the numbers.
Four factorial divided by two factorial times two factorial, 24 divided by four equals six,
which is the answer we had before.
Great.
Okay.
Are you a fan of poker on television?
Just hold them.
I'm always amazed on those shows that they can compute the probabilities of somebody
winning in a certain situation.
Let's do an elementary computation with poker, and you'll sort of get a feel for perhaps
how they do that on television.
So here's my fairly straightforward question.
Remember that in a standard poker hand, there are five cards, you're dealt five cards, and
the deck has 52 cards.
So you're dealt five cards out of 52.
Here's the question.
How many different poker hands are possible?
How many different poker hands are possible out of 52 cards dealing five?
Well, remember, a poker hand doesn't have any order attached to it.
It doesn't matter how you arrange the cards in your hand.
So this is a combination question, and the formula says n factorial over n minus r factorial
times r factorial, well, who's n and who's r?
Well, we have 52 elements, so n is 52, and we're taking them five at a time, so r is
five.
Plug in the numbers.
Here we go.
The numerator, 52 factorial.
The denominator, 52 minus five factorial times r factorial times five factorial.
Don't forget that five factorial down there.
All right.
That's a pretty ugly looking quotient, but let's do our trick.
It works pretty well here.
What are we going to do?
Well, 52 minus five in the denominator is 47, so we have a 47 factorial down there.
In the numerator, we have 52 factorial.
Let's write that numerator as 52, 51, 50, 49, 48, 47 factorial.
Stop there.
We're going to do the factorial.
Cancel the 47 factorials, and we're left with 52 times 51 times 50 times 49 times 48
over five factorial, five factorials 120.
Now I do have to use a calculator, but it's not so bad here, and it turns out to be 2,598,960.
So there are about 2,500,000 possible poker hands, kind of an interesting answer, I thought.
It's actually not that many.
And of course, some of these hands are, you know, are winners, like if you get dealt Ace
King, Queen Jack, 10 of Spades.
That's one of those 2,500,000 hands.
All right, so now if you watch poker on television, you'll have a better feel for
perhaps how they're calculating some of those probabilities.
Keep in mind with these permutations and combinations, the big difference is that combinations don't
have an order attached to them, whereas permutations do.
And again, that good news, not only are permutations built into calculators, but so are combinations.
Both those formulas are in your calculator.
Okay.
So let's move on to lotteries.
Florida has a lottery now.
Most states have lotteries.
Here is a typical example of a lottery game.
So let me pose it this way.
Suppose you have a lotto game in which a player chooses six distinct numbers from 1 to 49.
Okay?
So you're allowed to pick six numbers, they have to be different, and the numbers come
from 1 to 49.
How many different ways can you select these six numbers?
How many ways can you select them?
Okay, I think you see that this is going to be a combination problem because in this lotto
game, it doesn't matter which number is first and which is second, etc.
All you have to do is match the six numbers, so you pick six numbers.
All right, so this is going to be 49 elements taken six at a time.
So our formula is 49 factorial divided by 49 minus 6 factorial times 6 factorial.
And I think you know now the tricks for simplifying that.
Trust me, here's what you get, 13,983,816.
Let's call it about 14 million.
So there are about 14 million possible tickets that you could form with six digits, with
six numbers.
So what if the payoff of the lottery is $5 million?
Wow, not a very good deal, is it?
Here's another thing you could say, people have talked about this.
Suppose you bought every lottery ticket, every possible combination, well then you would
surely win, wouldn't you?
But if they're $1 each, you're talking spending around $14 million to buy each lottery ticket.
And sure, you might win that $5 million prize, but it might be even worse.
You might have to share the prize with somebody else who also bought a winning ticket.
So it's interesting to calculate these odds of these probabilities, I won't say probabilities
yet, but these number of possibilities, number of lottery tickets possible.
And then keep in mind what the payoff might be.
Okay, we've spent today's lecture, this lecture on counting principles, permutations, combinations,
and we did a little bit with factorials again and played around with some very practical
problems, poker hands and lottery tickets and things like that.
Next time we'll take these ideas and move to the field of probability.
And we'll use these counting principles to develop odds.
What's the probability of, say, winning the lottery, or what's the probability of rolling
a seven with two dice?
Those are the kinds of questions we'll look at next time when we move to probability.
Thank you very much.
