Hello again, and welcome to our lecture on elementary probability.
Last lecture we looked at some counting principles.
We talked about permutations and combinations, and in this lecture we'll take those ideas
and talk a little about probability.
Questions like, what are the odd, what's the probability of rolling a 7 with a paradise?
Or what's the probability of winning a lottery?
These are great questions, I think, very practical questions.
And most pre-calculus courses, both at the high school level and the university level,
spend usually a week or two on probability theory.
I think one reason is, it's a lot of fun.
I think students enjoy this.
But also in calculus courses, many of the applications of calculus deal with ideas of
probability.
Furthermore, as I probably said last lecture, if you go on in mathematics and take calculus
and after calculus, there are probability courses that require a full three semesters
of calculus to be successful.
Higher level probability is based on calculus, actually.
But don't worry here, we're going to be doing some very elementary probability using our
counting principles.
And one of the fun problems we'll do at the end of the lecture is a very famous birthday
problem it's called.
So I think you'll like that problem a lot.
Okay, let's develop some vocabulary first in probability theory.
And let's suppose the following scenario.
I have a single die, a six-sided die, and I throw it onto the ground.
And the result of that experiment is uncertain.
A one, two, three, four, five, or six could show up.
There are six possible, what we call, outcomes.
And the set of all the outcomes is called the sample space.
So in this example, the sample space would be one, two, three, four, five, six.
It would have six elements in it.
A subset of the sample space is called an event.
So an event is a subset of the sample space.
Let me show you some elementary examples.
You toss that six-sided die, and what's the sample space?
Well, as we've said, it's the set one through six.
Let's ask a probability question right away.
What's the probability of tossing a four?
Well, I think you see what's going on here.
The event of tossing a four can occur once out of those six.
So it's one out of six.
What's the probability of rolling an even number?
Well, two, four, and six are even, so there are three even numbers.
So that would be three over six or a half.
Okay, here's even a simpler sample space.
You toss a coin in the air, and it lands head or tails.
What's the sample space?
Well, you could describe it as heads or tails, or H comma T.
It has two members in that sample space.
What's the probability of a head?
Well, of course, it's just one half.
So you see these ideas are fairly straightforward.
The definition of the probability is you take the size of the sample space,
and that would form your denominator.
And in the numerator, you take the size of the event under consideration.
And it's that quotient that is the probability.
Let me show you another example of that.
Now we'll toss two coins.
Okay, so we toss two coins.
What's the probability that both land heads up?
Okay, to answer that question, let's first figure out what the sample space is.
So I toss the two coins, and
the possible outcomes are head, head, tail, tail, head, tail, or tail, head.
So the sample space has four elements in it.
H-H, H-T, T-H, and then T-T, meaning tail, tail.
Okay, what event are we interested in?
We're interested in both coins landing heads up.
And there's one, that's an event with a single event.
So the probability will be the size of that event,
one divided by the full sample space, four, so the probability is one fourth.
Here's the formal definition.
If an event E has N of E, equally likely outcomes.
Everything has to be equally likely, like tossing coins there.
The outcomes are equally likely, equally likely.
If sample space S has N of S equally likely outcomes,
then the probability is the quotient, N of E divided by N of S.
The size of the event divided by the size of the sample space,
that's the probability.
That's the definition of the probability of the event E.
Let's do some examples.
Okay, now we'll have two dice.
We roll two dice.
What's the probability that a seven is rolled?
Well, think of the ways you can get a seven.
I claim there are six possible outcomes that produce a seven.
Well, here's how you can think of it.
The first die, there are six possibilities, aren't there?
And the second die, there are six other possibilities.
So all told, there are 36 possible outcomes here.
So the sample space has 36 possible outcomes.
But to get a seven, you have to roll the dice a little bit special.
For instance, you might roll a one with one die and a six with the other,
and that produces a seven.
Or you could roll a two and a five, or a three and a four,
or a four and a three, or a five and a two, or a six and a one.
And those are six total events that give a roll of seven, okay?
So the probability of rolling a seven would be six divided by 36.
The size of the event, which is six possible outcomes,
divided by the size of the sample space, 36.
What's the probability of rolling two ones, one and a one?
Well, there's only one possibility there, right?
That would be one out of 36, wouldn't it?
Okay, how about the probability of box cars, two sixes?
That again would be one out of 36.
So rolling a seven is more probable than rolling those other two numbers.
In fact, seven is the number that is most probable when you're rolling two dice.
Six and eight are not quite as probable.
All right, let's move on to our favorite topic, lotteries.
Have you played the lottery?
I never have, actually.
But being a state employee in Florida has a state lottery.
In a sense, I'm supported by the lottery, so I think they're quite important.
And there's a lottery out there, Delaware's lottery, in fact,
called the multi-win lotto game.
It works like this.
If you want to participate in that lottery, you pick six numbers out of 35.
So you have the numbers from one to 35, and
you're supposed to pick, select six of those numbers.
You select six out of the 35, and order's not important here.
You don't have to order those numbers.
And if your six numbers match the winning numbers, you win the top prize, okay?
Or you share it if somebody else also picked the same six numbers.
So here's my question for you.
What's the probability of winning the top prize if you buy one ticket?
So you buy one ticket in the Delaware multi-win lotto game.
What's the odds of winning?
What's the probability of winning?
Let's figure it out, all right.
So, again, this is a combination problem because order's not important.
And we're dealing with 35 numbers.
So in a sense, we're dealing with 35 elements, and we pick six of them.
So we're dealing with a combination of 35 elements taken six at a time.
That's the sample space, all possible lotto tickets.
Which is 35 elements taken six at a time.
Let's figure that out.
So that's the size of the sample space.
That would be N of S in our notation.
And it's 35C6.
Remember that notation for combinations?
It's a capital C, and there's a 35 on one side and a six on the other.
It's a number, it's a calculation that's actually built into calculators.
But we can at least show the numbers here right now.
The numerator would be N factorial, that's 35 factorial.
And the denominator is N minus R factorial, or 35 minus 6 factorial,
times R factorial, which is 6 factorial.
So it's 35 factorial divided by 29 factorial times 6 factorial.
Okay, we know how to figure these out, don't we?
We could do that trick of 35 factorial equals 35 times 34 times 33,
down to 29 factorial and cancel.
Let's not go through that again, I think we're experts on that topic.
Here's the final answer you get.
You get 1,623,160 possible lottery tickets.
That's how big the sample space is.
Pretty big number.
Over one and a half million different lottery tickets.
So what's the probability of winning?
Well, you select one ticket, you form one lotto ticket,
it's one over that giant number.
Not very good odds, are they?
It would take a lot of tickets to get better odds.
And again, I'm not sure how much these lotteries pay if you win.
I know in the Florida lottery, there are some weeks where nobody wins.
And then the prize is lumped in for the next week's lottery.
And after a while, the prize can get pretty big.
And then a lot more people start betting.
Okay, let me pause here for a confusing question.
This is something that's bothered me since I was a child.
And maybe it's bothered you, you might think about this on your own.
The weather forecast, how does that work?
Not how do they predict it?
That's the weather maps and all that.
But when they say something like, the probability of rain is 40%,
that's a statement I hear all the time.
The probability of rain is 80% or 70%.
What does that mean?
This is not a mathematics question as much as a philosophical question.
But it's something that's always bothered me.
Personal anxiety.
To me, it's not clear.
Do they mean that 40% of the time during that day it's going to rain?
Or do they mean that 40% of the days just like today will have rain?
In other words, and how much rain are they talking about?
Does one drop count as rain?
Does it mean that, well, I'm not sure what it means.
And it's always been confusing to me.
I do know the following.
If they say the chance of rain is 10%, I'm not going to bring my umbrella.
And if they say 90%, I will.
But I'm still not clear what 90% means.
Okay, personal problem, don't worry about it.
Onto some mathematics.
Probability, where did it all come from?
What motivated people to study probability?
What's the history of this fascinating field?
Well, I think you probably can guess.
It came around from gambling.
Probability arose because people were gambling, and
they wanted to know the odds of winning.
They wanted to figure out how to win in a game of poker or in a gambling event.
And it turns out the gambler Chevalier de Meuray,
he posed some gambling questions way back in the 1600s.
And two very famous mathematicians, Blaise Pascal and Pierre de Fermat,
living in the 1600s, began to correspond and
develop the ideas of elementary probability that we use even today.
These two mathematicians made great contributions to the theory of probability.
In 1657, the first book came out on probability,
written by Christian Huygens, and he was a Dutch mathematician,
lived also in the 1600s.
And as I said before, this has grown not just from gambling, but
it's now a field that permeates lots and lots of science and engineering.
When you talk about, say, doing testing of new drugs on the market,
there's a lot of probability and statistics built in there.
What are the odds of this drug having side effects and things like this?
You'll have a sample space of so many patients taking a drug.
It's a big field.
I highly recommend if you have a chance to study
mathematics that you also consider studying probability.
It's really fun stuff.
Okay, why don't you be the teacher for a moment?
We've done a lot of these.
These are kind of fun.
And here's the question.
Student comes running up to you, and you're talking about couples having children.
And here's the question that you've posed to this student,
who is running up to you with an answer.
So this couple intends to have two children, okay?
They wanna have two babies.
What's the probability they'll have one boy and one girl?
Let's assume these are equally likely outcomes.
You wanna have this, this couple wants to have one boy and one girl.
What's the probability that that'll actually happen?
Well, here's what the student comes up and tells you.
The student claims that the probability is a third.
And here's how the student argues.
He says, well, the possible outcomes for these two children are both or
boys, boy-boy, girl-girl, or mixed-boy-girl.
And there's only one boy-girl combination in there, so it's one out of three.
Sample space has three things in it.
One of them is the boy-girl combination, so it's one out of three.
How do you answer that student?
What do you say?
Is that student right?
Is that the right answer?
What do you think?
Well, I claim that's not quite the correct sample space.
Here's why.
These children, you can sort of think that there's a first child and
a second child, and the first child could be a boy, and the second could be a boy.
Or the first could be a girl, and the second could be a girl.
Or the first could be a boy, and the second a girl, or vice versa.
The first could be a girl, and the second could be a boy.
So I claim the sample space actually has four events in it, four elements in it.
Boy-boy, girl-girl, boy-girl, and girl-boy.
Those are different.
Boy-girl is different from girl-boy.
Okay, so now what's the probability of getting a boy and a girl?
Well, it's one half, because boy-girl and girl-boy are both successful here.
Okay, so it's kind of a tricky little problem, I thought.
All right, let's move on to a slightly more complicated situation with probability.
We're going to talk about, first, mutually exclusive events, and then complicate things
a little bit.
And I'll pose it as an example again.
Suppose you have a standard deck of 52 cards, and if you remember, it has four suits, hearts,
spades, diamonds, and clubs, and then you have the face cards, king, queen, jack, and
then 10 down to ace.
Okay, you select one card out of your deck of 52.
What's the probability that that card is either a king or a queen?
It's either a king or a queen.
What's the probability of that?
Well, the probability of being a king is four out of 52.
There are four kings in a deck.
And the probability of a queen is also four out of 52.
And these are called mutually exclusive events.
Kings are not queens, and queens are not kings.
There are no outcomes in common.
So all you would do is add up four over 52.
That's the probability of getting a king, plus the probability of getting a queen, and
that's eight out of 52.
So that's the probability of getting a king or a queen.
But suppose you have events that have an overlap.
Here's an example of that that we'll come back to in a moment.
Suppose again, you select a card out of your deck of cards.
Select one.
That's the probability that either it's a heart or a face card.
Now, you see why this is more complicated.
The probability as a heart is one out of four, because there are 13 hearts out of the 52.
But some of those hearts are actually also face cards, aren't they?
There's some overlap in these two.
The jack, the queen, and the king of hearts are in a sense both face cards and hearts.
So how do we handle this situation?
If the events were mutually exclusive, like they were with that first example dealing
with kings and queens, the probability of a king or a queen, the probability of the union
of those two events, is nothing more than the sum of the individual probabilities, probability
of a plus probability of b.
But if there's that overlap, then the formula is slightly more complicated.
The probability of the union of the two events is the sum of the probabilities, probability
of a plus probability of b, minus the probability of their overlap of their intersection.
In a minute, I'll try to explain that in street language, why you should believe it.
But let's do that example now.
We go to our deck of cards, pick out a card, what's the probability it's a heart or a face
card?
Okay, so let's pin down the notation.
Let's let event a being that the card is a heart, and that probability is 13 out of
52.
There are 13 hearts in our deck.
Let's call event b that the card is a face card.
Now how many face cards are there?
Four jacks, four queens, four kings, there are 12 face cards.
So that's 12 out of 52.
But some of those face cards are hearts, in fact three of them are, right?
The jack, the queen, and the king of hearts.
So that overlap, that intersection is three.
And so the probability of those is three out of 52.
And we have to take that off.
In a sense, you're counting things twice.
If you count it as a heart and a face card, you've counted it twice.
That's why you subtract off the three out of 52.
Here's a picture of the situation.
We have sort of two sets here.
One set is the set of hearts, and one set is the face cards.
But these sets intersect each other.
They have some common elements, the jack, the queen, and the king of hearts.
And so there's an overlap here.
That wasn't true when we were dealing with the king and the queen problem.
They didn't intersect.
Those two sets were, as we say in math, disjoint.
All right, so let's answer the question.
The probability of getting a heart, we discovered, was 13 over 52.
The probability of a face card was 12 over 52.
And the probability that it's both a heart and a face card, the overlap is three out
of 52.
There are three cards that have both properties.
So the probability of being a heart or a face card equals the probability of the first
event plus the probability of the second event minus that overlap.
So it's 13 over 52 plus 12 over 52 minus 3 over 52.
That equals 22 over 52, which is about 0.42.
That's your probability of getting a heart or a face card.
Kind of nice, and kind of interesting how that overlap comes into play.
And I hope you see the reason for it is you've counted those three cards, in a sense, twice.
And so you have to subtract them off.
Okay, let's talk about the birthday problem.
This is a great problem.
And in order to get a handle on it, we have to first talk about one more probability idea.
It's called the complement of an event.
And it's very simple.
So don't worry, do much.
The collection of all outcomes that are not in an event, not in the set A, is called the
complement of A. And it's usually denoted A prime.
And the probability of A prime is one minus the probability of A. So a complement is everything
else.
Let me show you a quick example.
What's the probability of not rolling a seven when I roll two dice?
Not rolling a seven.
Well, we don't have to add up all the possibilities.
We calculated previously the probability of rolling a seven.
It was one out of six.
So the probability of not rolling a seven would be one minus one over six or five-sixth.
Wow, pretty simple, isn't it?
It's everything else.
One minus one over six.
All right.
Let's do the birthday problem.
And to set it up, let's talk about birthdays.
So here's Fred.
And the probability that his birthday is today is one out of three hundred and sixty-five.
I'm assuming that the year is three hundred and sixty-five days.
So the probability that Fred's birthday is today is one out of three hundred and sixty-five.
And the probability that it's not his birthday today is the complement.
That would be one minus one over three sixty-five or three hundred and sixty-four over three
sixty-five.
A pretty high probability that it's not his birthday.
So here's the setup that I've done this in class many times.
You have a classroom, say, of 36 students.
Okay, so they're out there, these 36 students.
What's the probability that at least two of them have the same birthday?
And again, we'll assume the year has three hundred and sixty-five days.
And you can do this with a class of students.
It's kind of a neat experiment to do.
They all tell you what their birthday is, and you find out whether or not two of them
have the same birthday.
Well, let's calculate the probability of that happening, that two students out of these
36 students have the same birthday.
And to do it, we'll calculate the probability of the complement that no two students have
the same birthday.
Here we go.
You have this first student here, and then you look at the second student.
And the probability that that second student has a birthday different from the first one
is one out of three hundred and sixty-four over three hundred and sixty-five.
In other words, let me say it better.
The probability that the second student has a birthday different from the first one is
three hundred and sixty-four over three hundred and sixty-five.
In other words, one birthday is already taken.
That's the birthday of the first student.
So the second student has three hundred and sixty-four other days that could be his or
her birthday.
How about the third student?
The third student has a birthday different from the birthday of one and two with a probability
of three hundred and sixty-three divided by three hundred and sixty-five because two of
the days are taken, so there's three hundred and sixty-three left over that could be different.
The fourth student, I think you get the picture, now it's three hundred and sixty-two over
three hundred and sixty-five, and you keep going down to that thirty-fifth student.
A thirty-sixth student, and thirty-five have already been taken, that leaves three hundred
and thirty over three hundred and sixty-five that the student number thirty-six has a birthday
different than the other thirty-five.
So you have this giant string.
The probability of the complement is nothing more than the product of all these probabilities
we just calculated.
Three hundred and sixty-four over three hundred and sixty-five times three hundred and sixty-three
over three hundred and sixty-five all the way down to three thirty over three sixty-five.
That's the probability of the complement that no two students have the same birthday, and
that turns out to be on a calculator about zero point one six eight.
So the probability of the event that two do have the same birthday, the complement of,
we calculated the complement that nobody had the same birthday.
So the probability that two of them actually do have the same birthday is one minus this
number, and that turns out to be about point eight three two.
In other words, the probability is about point eight, or eighty-three percent is your, your
odds here, eighty-three percent of the time two students will have the same birthday in
this class of thirty-six students.
Pretty high probability, even though there were so few students.
In fact, if you do this analysis in a, in a group of twenty-three students only, in twenty-three,
if you have twenty-three students out there, twenty-three people, the probability that two
of them have the same birthday is slightly over fifty percent.
And if you have, say, fifty-seven, a pretty big classroom, the probability is over ninety-nine
percent.
So that's a great bet to make.
You walk into the, into the classroom, and you say, you see sixty students out there,
and you go, I'll bet you thousand dollars against one dollar of your money that two
of you had the same birthday, and you've got pretty good odds you'll win.
Okay, let's finish off with some practical questions, fairly simple, with counting principles.
You walk up to the ATM machine, and you've forgotten your ATM number.
What's the probability that you can guess it?
That you'd punch in four numbers, the four number ATM number.
What's the probability that you'll guess it right?
Well, yeah, there are ten to the fourth possible numbers, and your odds of guessing it are
one out of ten to the fourth.
And if you happen to know the first two digits, then of course it'd be one out of a hundred,
one out of ten squared, or point oh one.
Good, okay, kind of a fun class, I think.
I really enjoy probability.
I think it's got great problems.
It's got some subtleties, but it's a lot of fun, and I hope you'll find the chance
to study some more probability if you have some free time.
It's again a vast area of mathematics.
So what are we going to do in our final 36, lecture 36?
I'd like to do two things in that lecture.
One is look at a really neat device, the magic device I think, the global positioning system
device, a GPS device.
I've got one in my car.
How does it work?
I'll try to explain that next lecture.
And then I'll also turn to a little bit of calculus.
Remember, this course is called pre-calculus.
So what's calculus about?
Now we've seen some calculus ideas already.
I've tried to slip some in here and there.
We've seen this idea of limits and stuff like that.
Well, I'll show you another calculus idea next lecture to try to whet your appetite and
to encourage you to go on and study calculus.
So see you next time.
Thanks.
