Hello again, and welcome to our final lecture.
I'd like to do two topics today in this lecture.
I'd like to begin with a promised topic of how GPS systems work, the so-called global
positioning system, and we'll spend some time talking about how these magic devices
can tell us where we are on the Earth.
And then in the second half of the lecture, I'd like to wet your appetite a bit and give
you a taste of calculus.
We'll look at a very famous problem in calculus called the tangent line problem, and this
problem will use a lot of the pre-calculus skills we've developed so far in this course.
So what is the global positioning system?
What is the GPS system?
It's a system of 27 orbiting satellites around the Earth, and at any one time, 24 of them
are active and three of them are backups in case one of them breaks.
But if you have a GPS device in your hand or in your automobile, at any one time, that
device has contact with at least four of those orbiting satellites, and those satellites send
off signals, and the GPS device receives those signals and is able to calculate the distance
from the satellite to the device.
And magically, or not magically, using mathematics, the device is able to calculate the precise
location where you're standing.
It's an amazing use of mathematics and these four satellites that allows this device to
pinpoint your location on Earth.
Let's see how it works.
I'd like to try to explain how this GPS system works.
First of all, it's really hard to describe in three dimensions.
We're talking now about satellites and we're talking about distances in what we call three
space, three dimensions.
And that makes the explanation quite difficult and the mathematics gets even worse.
But it's possible to show the heart of the issues, the core ideas, within the plane,
within two space.
And so what I'd like to do is simplify the problem and consider a planar GPS device.
In other words, we can imagine, let me be more specific, imagine there's a satellite
in Atlanta, Georgia, and it's sending out signals all around itself in Atlanta, Georgia.
And I have a GPS device and it tells me that I'm 500 kilometers from Atlanta.
So my device can measure that distance to Atlanta, Georgia.
And the device will say, oh, he's 500 kilometers from Atlanta.
So where am I at that moment?
Well, I think you can see that I'm somewhere on a circle of radius 500 kilometers around
the center Atlanta.
So I know somewhat where I am.
The device has given me some information as to my location.
But now let's take it another step.
Suppose there's a second satellite.
Let's put it over there in Jacksonville, Florida, near my hometown.
And suppose that satellite sends a signal to my GPS device.
And suppose it says I'm 90 kilometers from Jacksonville.
So the device is now receiving signals from two different satellites, 500 kilometers from
Atlanta, 90 kilometers from Jacksonville, Florida.
Where am I?
What can the device conclude with this new information?
Well, let's look at a picture.
Here is that circle of radius 500 around Atlanta and the other circle of radius 90 around Jacksonville.
And we see they intersect in two points.
So we've really narrowed it down, haven't we?
My location is one of those two intersection points, isn't it?
I'm in one of two spots now.
How can we find out where I am?
Well, let's take a third satellite.
Remember in the global GPS system, there are four satellites.
We need three here in the plane to fully pin down my location.
So let's assume there's a third satellite sending off signals from Tampa, Florida.
And suppose it says that I'm 200 kilometers from Tampa.
Okay, now we've got three circles, don't we?
We have the large circle in Atlanta, the smaller one with center in Jacksonville, and a third
circle in Tampa.
And my device is telling me the distances to each of those centers, each of those satellites.
And there's one intersection point now.
That's my exact location that the device calculates.
And I've fixed this problem, so it's actually my hometown, Gainesville, Florida.
I think you can see sort of how this works now.
We have to do some intersecting of circles in order to find out our location.
And that's kind of the magic that goes on inside these GPS devices.
We have to find the intersection points of a system of circles.
In the global positioning system, you would have a system of spheres, and you can see
how complicated that could be.
So let's actually do an example.
Let's pin some numbers down and have fun with a particular example.
And as we do this example, you'll see some of the pre-calculus skills that will come
into play as we carry through the calculations.
We'll be talking about circles.
We'll solve some equations.
And we'll do some graphing.
All of these skills we've been developing in this course.
Again, I'll set up an example with fairly nice numbers.
In real life mathematics, in real applied mathematics, the numbers generally aren't
very nice.
They aren't integers necessarily.
But let's simplify things, because our goal here is to understand the idea not to be drowned
by some ugly numbers.
So let's suppose we have three satellites.
One of them will be located at the origin at 00.
The second one will be at 80.
And the third one will be at the point minus 25.
So we have satellites A, B, and C located at three points in the plane.
And what's going to happen is, in this example, suppose I have my receiver here, and it says
that I'm five miles from receiver A.
Receiver A was at the origin.
So again, what does that say about my location if I'm five miles from receiver A?
Right, I'm on the circle of radius five and center of the origin.
So I'm on, I'm an ordered pair x, y satisfying the equation x squared plus y squared equals
25.
We sort of know where I am, don't we?
We know we're, we know I'm on that circle.
OK, but there are two more satellites to work with here.
Suppose the receiver also says that I'm five miles from receiver B. And let's add in also
that the third receiver tells me I'm 10 miles from it.
So I'm five miles from B and 10 miles from C. That's what that GPS device can measure.
It can measure the distance to those satellites.
So what does it mean to say that I'm five miles from B?
You'll remember that B had center 8, 0, it was on the x-axis.
And if I'm five miles from it, then I'm somewhere on the graph of the equation x minus 8 quantity
squared plus y squared equals 25.
So I'm on that circle too.
And furthermore, that third satellite says I'm on the circle x plus 2 quantity squared
plus y minus 5 squared equals 100.
That circle was radius 10.
So what do we have to do now?
My location is pretty much pinned down because I'm on the intersection point of three circles.
We have three circles here.
And I am the intersection point, the unique intersection point of those three circles.
Here you can see a picture of those three circles, and then you see that they intersect
in exactly one point.
Well let's do the algebra to find that intersection point in this example.
This will be kind of fun because we'll be doing some pre-calculus skills that we learned
to love in this class.
So why don't we consider the first two circles, x squared plus y squared equals 25, and the
second circle, x minus 8 quantity squared plus y squared, also equals 25.
Is there anything we can do with these two equations to eliminate a variable?
What can we do to simplify the situation here?
Well one idea would be to subtract the two equations.
And if you subtracted them, the y squared term disappears, doesn't it?
Equivalently you could do this.
In the first equation you could solve for y squared, and then plug that into the second
equation.
That would be equivalent to what I'm going to do.
I'm going to subtract the two equations.
So here we go.
When I subtract the left hand side, it's x squared plus y squared, and I subtract off
x minus 8 squared plus y squared.
The y squared terms die off, and I'm left with x squared minus the quantity x minus
8 quantity squared.
What happens to the right hand side?
Ah, pretty nice, 25 minus 25, zero.
So I've boiled this down using the first two equations to a single equation involving x.
Let's find out what x is.
So we have x squared minus 8 minus x squared, let me expand that, and we have x squared
minus the quantity x squared minus 16x plus 64, and all of that equals zero.
Something nice happens here.
The x squared terms cancel, and I'm left with 16x minus 64 equals zero, or x equals 4.
If you solve that for x, you get x equals 4.
So now I know my x coordinate of my location.
What about the y coordinate?
I want to know my precise location.
Well, take this x value and put it back into either of those two equations we started with.
If I put it into the first equation, for instance, instead of x squared, I would have 4 squared,
so that's 16 plus y squared equals 25.
That means 25 minus 16 is y squared.
So y is equal to the square root of 9, you have to be careful here.
It's really plus or minus the square root of 9.
There are two solutions here, unfortunately.
So y could be 3 or minus 3.
You might recall back when we were doing some of these pictures, when we had the two circles,
remember that there were two intersection points.
Well, this is what's happening here.
I'm either at the point 4, 3, or at the point 4 minus 3.
I'm not sure which one.
We've narrowed it down to two points, but we haven't used the third circle yet, have we?
Let's bring that into play.
The third circle was x plus 2 quantity squared plus y minus 5 squared equals 100.
And I know the x value, don't I?
Let's plug that in.
So I get 4 plus 2 squared, which of course is 6 squared, plus y minus 5 squared equals 100.
6 squared is 36.
100 minus 36 is 64.
So I have a simpler equation, y minus 5 all squared equals 64.
Let's solve that equation.
And there's a couple of ways of doing it.
You could expand y minus 5 squared and then bring the 64 over and get a new quadratic equation that you could factor.
But let me show you another trick.
Take square roots of both sides.
And so y minus 5, that's the square root of y minus 5 squared, is plus or minus the square root of 64 or plus or minus 8.
It could be minus 8, it could be plus 8.
Let's analyze both of those answers.
If y is, if it's the plus 8, then the equation is y equals 5 plus 8 or 13.
Uh-uh.
That wasn't one of the points that we had under consideration.
What about the other value?
What if it's y minus 5 equals minus 8?
Then it's y equals 5 minus 8.
That's minus 3.
That was one of the two points under consideration.
That's my precise location.
The unique answer here is the point 4 minus 3.
That's the intersection of those three circles.
And again, the idea of the global positioning system in space is in principle similar to this.
Except instead of intersecting circles, you have to intersect spheres.
And the computations can be a lot messier.
But I think you see in a vague way how GPS devices work.
Okay, what now?
Well, as I said at the beginning of the lecture, I'd like to turn and look a little bit at calculus.
Remember that the name of the course that you're finishing is pre-calculus.
And there's a reason for calling it pre-calculus because the material we've studied prepares us to take calculus.
And I'll bet you're saying to yourself, well, what is calculus?
Why should I take it? What is it?
So let me give you a taste as to what calculus is all about.
And then we'll actually do a specific example of a very important calculus problem.
So what is calculus?
And many people say the following, that it's the mathematics of change, of motion.
And I like to illustrate that with the following example.
Suppose I'm driving from Atlanta, Georgia, I'll use Atlanta again, and over to Miami, Florida.
And that trips about 600 miles.
And suppose it takes me 10 hours to drive that in my car.
What's my average velocity?
I did 600 miles in 10 hours.
Ah, 60 miles an hour was my average speed, my average velocity on that trip.
But what did my speedometer show as I was driving to Miami?
Well, it didn't always show 60 miles an hour, did it?
It was up to 70, down to 50, et cetera.
Well, calculus talks about that instantaneous velocity, the kind of velocity that a speedometer shows.
Calculus is the science of motion.
And it's not necessarily just averages, but rather instantaneous motion.
There are many, many applications of calculus.
It's a tremendously broad field.
You'll see applications in all the sciences, engineering, many of the social sciences, business, geology, all over the place.
In fact, some of the problems we did in this pre-calculus course are extended in a calculus course.
You might remember we talked about carbon dating.
Well, in a calculus course, you would talk more about carbon dating.
We talked a lot about compound interest in this course.
And in calculus, you can continue that discussion of finance.
We talked about motion.
Remember, we talked about vectors and vector-valued functions, functions that have both direction and magnitude.
Well, that can be extended to calculus.
We talked about finding, say, areas and volumes.
And in calculus, you're able to calculate areas and volumes of quite complicated regions or complicated solids.
Unlike the simple examples we can do in a pre-calculus class.
Another example we know in pre-calculus, we can calculate the distance between two points, the length of the line segment joining two points.
Well, in calculus, you can actually calculate the length of a curve, kind of neat.
You can calculate, you have a complicated curve in space even, and you can figure out its length using calculus.
Volumes of spheres and cubes are very simple in pre-calculus.
But in calculus, you can find volumes of very odd-looking solids.
And to lead into the problem I'd like to focus on now,
in pre-calculus, you can calculate, say, the tangent to a circle.
If you have a circle, you could draw a radius out from the center, and the tangent line is perpendicular to that radius.
So that's a pretty simple idea of a tangent line. Notice that it touches the circle just once.
Well, how would you find the tangent to a more complicated curve, not necessarily a circle, but perhaps, say, a parabola?
And that's the problem I'd like to look at.
I'd like to look at how you find the tangent line to a parabola.
And in a minute, we'll be very specific as to the parabola under consideration.
But before I begin, let me add that this tangent line problem is a classic problem of what's called the differential calculus.
And it's the foundation of a concept called the derivative.
This will illustrate a lot of core ideas of calculus, but better yet, we'll see as we develop this how pre-calculus comes into play.
We'll talk about slope of a line, equations of lines, the behavior of functions, factoring.
All of these ideas will come into play as we develop the tangent line to a parabola.
Let me add that this problem is fairly new in the history of mathematics.
It was around the 1600s that mathematicians began to study how do you find the tangent line to a curve.
And in fact, Leibniz and Isaac Newton, Godfried Leibniz and Isaac Newton, were the so-called founders of calculus.
They really put a lot of the calculus ideas together that were floating around in the 1600s.
And they formalize this tangent line problem.
So let's do it. What is this tangent line problem?
Again, the tangent to a circle is pretty easy to describe, isn't it?
It's a line perpendicular to a radius and touches the circle just once.
So how would you find the tangent to a parabola, say?
Or any other curve, but let's focus on a parabola.
In fact, let's take my favorite parabola, y equals x squared.
And here you see a picture of a tangent line drawn to that parabola.
It touches the parabola once and only once.
How would you find the equation of that line?
Let's be very specific. Let's really be specific.
The curve will be y equals x squared, and I'll select a point, the point 2, 4.
So let's call that point p. It's on the curve, coordinates 2, 4.
This problem, by the way, is my favorite problem.
Every time I teach calculus, I do this problem.
I do it right in the beginning of the course, and in fact, I do it pretty much the way I'm going to do it right now.
We're going to find the slope of this line and then its equation.
And as we go through, again, we'll mark those moments when pre-calculus comes into play.
Here's a picture of what we're looking for.
We're looking for the equation of that tangent line that comes in and just kisses the curve at the point 2, 4.
How could we do that?
Well, I'm going to step back and review a pre-calculus topic, slope.
What's the slope joining two points?
Let's remember that's the change in y over the change in x.
And for a specific example, let's take the point 3, 9 and the point 2, 4, our point p.
What's the slope joining those two points, p and q?
Well, it's the difference in the y values divided by the difference in the x values.
So it's 9 minus 4 over 3 minus 2 equals 5 over 1 or 5.
So that's the slope joining two points.
But our problem's slightly more complicated.
We have the point 2, 4.
And I'd like to find the slope joining of the line segment, joining that point with another point on the curve.
So let's call that other point q.
And what would its coordinates be?
Well, if it's on the curve, if its x coordinate is x, then its second coordinate, its y coordinate, would be x squared.
Because it's on the curve, y equals x squared.
So what's the slope of the line segment joining p with coordinates 2, 4 and q with coordinates x, x squared?
Well, it's the same concept, change in y divided by change in x.
Here we go.
The y values are x squared minus 4 and the x values are x minus 2.
So that would be the slope joining of the line joining p and q.
For instance, you could plug in an x value here.
If x is 3, what do you get?
9 minus 4, 3 squared is 9, 9 minus 4 divided by 3 minus 2, 5 over 1 or 5.
That, by the way, was the previous example we looked at.
So for every x value, except for 2, because you can't divide by 0 in math, can you?
But for every other x value, you could compute the slope of that line segment, p, q.
Let's do it.
Let's compute that slope for various x values.
And I'm going to start selecting x values that get closer and closer to p, closer and closer to 2.
Here we go.
If x is 3, what's the slope?
Well, we just did that.
The slope is 5.
What if x is, say, 2.5, so I'm getting slightly closer?
Well, you would plug 2.5 into that formula, and the answer comes out to be 4.5.
All right, let's get even closer.
How about 2.1?
Now my x value is very close to 2.
What's the slope?
It turns out to be 4.1.
All right, let's really push it.
How about 2.0001?
I am right next to the point p now.
q is right next to p.
What's the slope?
Well, you would plug it in, and you get 4.0001.
And how about on the other side?
Suppose I'm approaching p from values less than 2, say 1.999.
Well, plug that number into the formula, you get 3.999.
So I ask you.
I ask you the fundamental question here now.
What do you think the slope is at 2?
Or in other words, what number are we getting really close to here when we calculate these
slopes?
I think it's pretty obvious, isn't it?
We're getting closer and closer to 4.
And calculus tells us that the slope of the tangent line at p is 4.
That's the slope of the tangent line.
So again, as x gets closer to 2, the slope of pq gets closer and closer to 4.
OK, algebraically, you can see how this works by noticing that the equation x squared minus
4 over x minus 2 can be simplified.
You can factor the x squared minus 4, oh, precalculus, into x minus 2x plus 2 divided
by x minus 2.
And you get that the slope is x plus 2 as long as you remember that x cannot equal to.
And again, you see that as x gets nearer and nearer to 2, that slope gets nearer and nearer
to 4.
And you might remember that we saw a notation earlier in this course using limits.
So let me show you that notation once again.
We were talking about x squared minus 4 over x minus 2, and we were asking what happens
as x gets closer and closer to 2.
Well, that's called the limit as x approaches 2 of that rational function, oh, remember
rational functions, of x squared minus 4 over x minus 2.
That simplifies to the limit of x plus 2.
It equals 4.
So the slope of the tangent line at 2 is 4.
And by the way, we just calculated something called the derivative.
The derivative of the function x squared at x equals 2 is 4.
Kind of nice, wasn't it?
And once you know the slope, the game's pretty easy to find the equation of the line.
You know a point, you know the slope, using our precalculus skills, we can use the point
slope formula, y minus 4 equals 4 times x minus 2.
The y minus 4, that's the difference in the y values, x minus 2 is the difference in those
x values, the 4 in front there is the slope.
You simplify that to 4x minus 4.
And here's what I invite you to do with your graphing calculator.
Left the parabola x squared and that straight line 4x minus 4.
And you should see a picture much like the one here.
You'll see that the line goes up and just touches the parabola at a single point and
then keeps going.
And if you zoom in at that point of tangency, you'll observe that after a while, you won't
be able to distinguish between the curve and the line.
They're very, very close together.
So again, this is a typical problem of calculus.
And as I said, it's a problem I love so much that I tend to do every time I teach calculus.
So let me finish by first saying, bravo, congratulations.
You finished a precalculus course.
And in my teaching experience, the hardest part of calculus is often the precalculus.
And I think now, having gone through this course and hopefully worked a lot of problems
in the workbook, you're ready to take a calculus course.
And I encourage you to do so.
In fact, some good news, the teaching company has calculus courses.
And if you were able to, how should I say it?
If you enjoyed my presentation of this precalculus course, I invite you to continue with me in
my teaching company calculus course.
And finally, let me close by saying a very heartfelt thank you.
Thank you very much for joining me on this journey through the field of precalculus.
