Hi, welcome. My name is Kimia Grigoryev and I'm the founder and president of HESPSS. Before
we get started, I just wanted to take a moment to thank you all for being here, and I also
want to thank our amazing team for working tirelessly to put this event together. I also
want to thank Dr. Michael Levin for agreeing to do this event with us. We are incredibly
honored and could not thank you enough. It is my honor to introduce Dr. Max Krasnow.
He is a highly respected and esteemed professor, speaker, researcher,
and we're fortunate enough to call him our wonderful faculty advisor for the Harvard
Extension School Psychology Student Society. We are truly honored to have his invaluable
guidance, support, and advice. With a decade of teaching experience at Harvard in the college,
graduate school of arts and sciences, and in the Extension School, his expertise is vast and
invaluable. Prior to joining Harvard, Dr. Krasnow earned his PhD in psychology from UC Santa Barbara
with a focus on developmental and evolutionary psychology. His background and expertise make
his insights incredibly valuable to our society and its members. Additionally, Dr. Krasnow is known
for consistently going above and beyond for his students to ensure their academic and professional
success. Please help me welcome Dr. Max Krasnow. Thank you, Kimia. So it is my privilege today
to introduce Dr. Michael Levin. Michael Levin attended TAPS University, where he received dual
bachelor's degrees in computer science and biology. He earned a PhD from Harvard University
for the first characterization of the molecular genetic mechanisms that allow embryos to form
a consistently left-right asymmetric body structure in a universe that doesn't distinguish that for
them. This work is on nature's list of 100 milestones in developmental biology of the past
century. He's the distinguished professor and Vannevar Bush Chair in the Department of Biology
at TAPS University, where he also serves as the director of the Center for Regenerative and
Developmental Biology. After a career as a software engineer in the field of scientific computing,
Professor Levin earned his bachelor's in both computer science and biology, like I said,
before coming to Harvard for his PhD. Later in his postdoc and up to his current positions,
he's won numerous other awards that I won't take more time to mention,
nor the journals that he serves as editor for, and so on and so on, because I'm too excited to get
straight to letting us all hear from him. Let me present to you now Dr. Michael Levin,
who will be telling us all about bioelectricity, body intelligence, and the future of regenerative
medicine. And I'll say that right one of these days.
All right, thank you so much. Really appreciate the opportunity to share some ideas with you.
I hope you will see how all of this relates to psychology, because I think it really does.
So, if you would like to find any of the materials, the software, the papers, everything
is at this website, please feel free to get in touch with me afterwards if you have questions
or ideas or anything else. So I want to start off with this idea that all of us made this amazing
journey from quote unquote, just physics to cognition. We were all at one point
an unfertilized oocyte, so a little blob of chemistry and physics, and through this amazing
process of embryonic development, we became one of these complex body structures, or in fact,
maybe a complex metacognitive human being. And so this is really important, because for this
reason, I think that developmental biology is maybe one of the most remarkable and magical
of all sciences, because there you can see right in front of you, right in front of your eyes,
how physics becomes mind. And it's a slow, gradual process. There's no special lightning flash that
turns a mechanism into meaning or anything like that. It happens slowly and gradually.
And so here we are trying to understand the process and the ramifications of that process.
But and often we think, well, okay, so we undergo this journey. But in the end,
we are some sort of a unified single intelligence. We're not like these so-called collective
intelligences like ants and termites and bee colonies and so on. But actually, if we think
about it, we are also an interesting kind of collective intelligence, because for example,
René Descartes really liked the pineal gland, because he said that in the brain, it's the one
structure that isn't duplicated. And so it's fitting that a unified human intelligence,
in some way, lives in that pineal gland. But if he had access to good microscopy,
what he would have found is that actually, there's not one of anything. He would have found that
that gland is actually full of cells. And if he were to look inside of these cells,
he would see something like this. This is what's actually inside of the most cells. And this is,
of course, is only a partial accounting of what's in there. So in an important sense,
we are all collective intelligences. And it's very likely that all intelligence is
collective intelligence, because all intelligence is made of parts of some sort. So this is the
kind of thing we're made of. Here is a lacrimaria. This is a free living unicellular organism.
What you'll notice here is that there's no brain. There's no nervous system. There are no stem cells.
All of its needs, metabolic, physiological states, anatomical control, all of its needs
are handled at the single cell level, very, very expertly, without the need for a brain or other
cells or anything like that. And so this is the kind of material that we're made of. It is not
where we don't consist of some sort of passive components. I sometimes give a talk called
why robots don't get cancer. And the answer is because current technology is largely,
not exclusively, but largely made at a single scale, where the overall machine might be competent
and intelligent, but it's usually made of pretty dumb parts that don't have agendas of their own.
But that's not true for us. We are made of an agential material because we are made of components
with competencies and agendas in various problem spaces. And so that gives rise to a number of
interesting biological phenomena. I'm going to just describe a few that are kind of unique,
and that many people don't often think about, that will set us up for the next part of the talk.
So for example, here is a soft-bodied creature, which has a brain appropriate to driving a kind
of soft-bodied embodiment, where it likes particular kinds of leaves and so on. And
this creature, which lives in a two-dimensional world of leaves, has to turn into this creature,
which is a now hard-bodied kind of system, completely different controller you need for that.
It lives in a three-dimensional world, doesn't care about leaves anymore, it wants nectar,
and it has a different brain. And there are data showing that during this process of metamorphosis,
which is this remarkable process in which the brain pretty much is dissolved, most of the cells
are killed off, the connections are broken, and then reassembled into a new kind of brain,
and yet memories that the caterpillar forms are retained in the moth or butterfly. And so
not only is there a very practical question here, which be because we don't have any kind of
memory medium in our computer technology or anything else that is this robust, where you
can basically take it apart and reshuffle all the components and kill off most of it,
and then you still have the original information. Not only that, but there's really a very
fundamental philosophical question here, and people sometimes ask,
what's it like to be a bat or a butterfly or something else? But this is one step further.
What's it like to be a caterpillar slowly changing into a butterfly? So this sets us up to start to
think about the intersection between body shape and the shape of our minds and our cognitive
systems, and the idea that we change not only on an evolutionary timescale, but also on an
individual timescale. This happens, this amazing transformation happens within the lifetime of
this individual. Memories actually can be even more robust. So this is a creature known as a
planarian flatworm, and I'll talk much more about this in a few minutes. But one of the things that
is known is that these guys regenerate. So you can cut them into pieces, each piece makes a
perfect little worm. And what was shown in the 60s, and this was James McConnell found this,
he got a lot of flak over it, but he was actually right. We confirmed this with modern
techniques about 10 years ago. If you take this planarian and you train them, for example, to
recognize that this bumpy region in this dish contains food as you feed them on this bumpy
kind of region, you can then amputate the brain, and they have been in fact the whole head,
the tail will sit there doing nothing for about eight to 10 days, and they slowly regrow a new
head. And then you can find out that the resulting worm actually still remembers the original
information. So it's a place preference assay, and you can show that they still remember.
So kind of a place conditioning paradigm there. And so what you see is that memory,
first of all, is not necessarily just stored inside the brain, but also can be imprinted onto
a new brain by the rest of the tissue. And so now once again, you have this very fundamental
philosophical experiments, such as the malfunctioning transporter from Phil 101, where
this transporter that makes a copy of you and then erases the original,
but what happens if it fails to erase the original, which one is the real you? Well,
planaria can do this all the time, right? You can cut them up into pieces, and all of them
have the memories of the original. So now moving to a vertebrate system, that kind of plasticity,
we showed something interesting in tadpoles, which you'll notice. So this is a tadpole of the
frog Xenopus lavas. You'll notice that here's the mouth here, the nostrils, the brain and the gut,
and here's the tail. And so what you'll see is that there are no primary eyes, we prevented
those from forming. But what we did do was cause an eye to form on its tail. And when you do this,
the eye makes an optic nerve. Well, first of all, the cells are perfectly happy to make an eye,
even though they're sitting next to muscle instead of up here next to the brain where they belong.
But also, they make this one optic nerve, the optic nerve goes and it synapses onto the spinal
cord that does not go all the way to the brain. And then we can show using this machine that we
built that these animals can see. So even though they have a, we can, we can train them in visual
assays. And so even though we've radically changed the sensory motor architecture of this creature,
with no period of evolutionary adaptation to it immediately in the first generation,
the animal can use this novel configuration in its adaptive behavior. So that plasticity,
you know, this ability to adjust to novel, novel architectures and novel circumstances
is really critical and we're going to, we're going to see why. So the, the, the, what, what
underlies all of these amazing abilities is in part something we call the multi-scale competency
architecture. This is the idea that not only are we this kind of nested dolls where molecular
networks and then subcellular components and then tissues and organs and whole bodies and even
swarms of organisms, not only are we a set of nested dolls structurally, but also functionally.
In other words, every, every layer of, of organization has its own competency to solve
problems in different spaces. So it's not all about traditional behavior in three-dimensional
space of movement. There are also transcriptional spaces, physiological spaces, metabolic spaces
and so on. And so the competency of all these different components simultaneously solving
these problems and interacting with both, both laterally and with levels above and below
is what enables the whole body to have this incredible kind of robustness and, and
creative problem solving capacities. And, you know, as humans, we're, we're very good at
detecting intelligence of in three-dimensional space, medium-sized objects moving at medium
speeds on, on our human time scale through three-dimensional space. And so we see primates
and we see crows and, you know, things like that. And, and we can, we can recognize intelligent
behavior. But there are these other spaces that we're really not very good at recognizing. And
it's towards the end of the talk, I'll show you some tools that we've developed to help us think
about this. But I firmly believe that the three-dimensional space that we're used to is not
privileged in some sense, but rather it's, it's a, it's a construction of our, of our
sensory motor architecture. And then if we, for example, had a primary perception of our blood
chemistry, let's say you could, you could feel some number of chemical states in your, in your
blood, the way that we do with vision and sight and smell and taste and so on. I think we would
have no trouble visualizing that we live in a kind of physiological state space, a high-dimensional
physiological state space. And in particular, we would recognize our, our liver, our kidneys,
our various organs as navigating that state space on a daily basis and doing very intelligent things
to get us across various problems and novel scenarios that come up. So what I'd like to do
today is to talk about one, we could talk about all of these, they're fascinating examples in them
all. But I'd like to spend today talking about morpho space, which is the space of possible
anatomical configurations. It's a kind of a, you know, pick a body structure or in fact the entire
body. And you can think about the space of all possible variants of that, of that structure
and how they topologically relate to each other. So let's talk about this. In order to talk about
that, and I'm, in particular, I'm going to propose this idea that we can fruitfully think of morphogenesis
of the generation of biological shape as the behavior of a collective intelligence of cells
in anatomical morpho space. In other words, embryonic development, regeneration, cancer
suppression, remodeling, metamorphosis, all of these kinds of things are a kind of behavior
there are kind of behavior of a collective intelligence that navigates that space in the
way that we typically think neurons are a collective intelligence that help us navigate
three dimensional space. So let's ask, let's ask this question. Here's, here's where we end up in
morpho space as adult humans. Here's a cross section through a normal human body in the torso.
Look at the incredible order of the structures. Everything is in the right place, the right
size, oriented correctly relative to the right thing. Amazing degrees of order.
Where does that order come from? Where is it recorded? And many people at this point would
say, well, it's in the DNA, of course, it's in the genome, but we can read genomes now. And we know
what's in the genome. It's protein sequences. So the tiniest hardware available to every cell,
the genome doesn't have a plan of a large scale anatomy as far as which side is left,
which side is right, how many eyes are you going to have eyes? All of these things have to be
constructed on the fly by cells that use the hardware given to them by the genome to make
all kinds of computations. And this structure is no more, quote unquote, in the DNA anymore than
the structure of a termite colony is in the termites DNA, or the shape of a spider's web
is in the spider's DNA. It's all an emergent computational process that requires a lot of
collective intelligence from the pieces. And so as workers in regenerative medicine, we would like
to know if a piece of this is missing, how do we get the cells to rebuild and repair?
For cancer, we might want to know how do they know when to stop building? And as engineers,
we'd like to know what else is possible? With the cells from the exact same genome,
what else are they willing to build if we knew the right signals? And so these are all the kinds
of questions that we're interested in to understand that navigation through morpheus space.
Now, as we think about what would a finished solution in this field look like? We don't know
what's the end game, when can we all go home? I think it's useful to visualize that, right? What
does it look like when it's solved? And I think what it looks like is something we call an anatomical
compiler. The idea here is that someday you'll be able to sit in front of a computer and draw
the plant or animal that you wanted. So you could draw this schematic of a three-headed
flatworm. And so you would draw at the level of anatomy, not at the level of molecular pathways
or anything like that. And if we had such a thing, if we knew what we were doing,
the system would compile our anatomical description into a set of stimuli that would have to be given
to specific cells to get them to build whatever we want them to build. Now, this is really important
that this device would not be a 3D printer. The point isn't to micromanage the position
of every cell. The point is to communicate your anatomical goals to the collective intelligence
of cells and get them to build. Why is this important besides the basic importance for
developmental biology and evolution and so on? Most problems in biomedicine boil down to
the control of shape. In other words, if we had a way to tell groups of cells what to build,
we would simultaneously be able to solve birth defects, traumatic injury, cancer, aging,
degenerative disease. All of these things would go away if we had some ability to
communicate anatomical goals to cells. Now, one issue is why don't we have such a thing? I mean,
molecular biology and genetics have been around for a long time, amazing progress. Why don't we
have this yet? Well, I'll just give you a very simple example. So this here is a baby axolotl
and baby axolotls have little four legs. This is a tappel of the frogs and a mislevis
at this stage. They do not have any legs. One thing we do in our lab is we make frog
allotls. So these are a combination of some axolotl embryonic cells, frog embryonic cells,
and you get a frog allotl. And so now I pose the question. We have the axolotl genome.
We have the frog genome. So you have all the genomic information. And so now I ask,
could you tell me if a frog allotl is going to have legs or not? And the thing is that we can't.
We have no idea because while we're pretty good at the molecular machinery, we really do not
understand how collectives of cells make decisions. We don't know if frog allotls will have legs.
We don't know if they do have legs. There is no theory that will tell you whether those legs
would consist of frog cells or only axolotl cells. These are all completely open questions.
So where we are in biomedicine is this. We're very good at manipulating cells and molecules,
and we make models like this of which proteins and which genes interact with each other.
But what we'd really like to do is to control form and function. And so I'm going to make the
claim that where we are in medicine today is roughly where computer science was in the 40s and 50.
And so you can see what she's doing here. She's programming this computer by
physically rewiring it. Back in those days, you had to interact with the hardware. That was the
only option. And I think today, molecular medicine, so CRISPR, genome editing, protein
engineering, all those kinds of things, all these exciting approaches are all focused on
the hardware. And I think that really transformative biomedicine is going to appear when we add to
this the really critical way to understand control and communicate with the software of life or
AKA the collective intelligence of cells and their problem solving abilities.
So when I talk about intelligence, I'll probably mention that many times in this talk, what I
mean is this William James definition, which is the ability to reach the same goal by different
means. Very interesting definition. It doesn't say anything about brains. It doesn't say anything
about whether you were evolved or engineered or some combination thereof or how you got here.
It focuses on this kind of very cybernetic notion of being able to navigate a space towards a goal
and having some degree of competency to do it by different means when your standard way of
going about it is blocked in some way or perturbed. So what kind of collective intelligence do
these cellular swarms deploy? What can they do? Well, let's see. We know that developmental
self-assembly is very reliable. So most of the time, this single cell will give rise to this
amazing three-dimensional anatomy, this target morphology. But we know that it's not hardwired
because if you cut these, for example, in half, you don't get two half bodies. You get two perfectly
normal monozygotic twins. And so there's this and there are many other these types of perturbations
that the idea is that in the system from different starting positions, and so this is a very vastly
simplified morpho space down to two axes, you can get from different starting positions, you
still manage to get to the same ensemble of goal states corresponding to normal human variations.
And in fact, in various ways in development, you can go around local optima such as this local
minimum and so on, and still get to where you need to go despite starting off from different
positions. So that's interesting. It has some degree of flexibility of its surroundings.
And this isn't just for embryos. For example, this, this is that ax law that I mentioned.
These guys regenerate their limbs, their jaws, their eyes, their spinal cords, portions of the
heart and brain. And what you'll see here is that if they lose some part of this limb, and it can
be down here, it could be here, it could be up here anywhere, what they will do is they will rapidly
regrow and remake the limb, and then they stop. And that's perhaps the most amazing thing about
regeneration that it knows when to stop. When does it stop? It stops when a correct salamander
limb has been completed. So what you have here is a kind of error minimization scheme,
where, where the system will attempt, despite these kind of injuries and deviations, will attempt
to keep to this target pathology. So this idea of anatomical homeostasis, the ability to take action
repeatedly to make up for perturbations that push you out of the correct region of morphos
based down to this region, they can work their way back. So, of course, salamanders and worms
aren't the, aren't the only ones that can do this. The human liver is actually highly regenerative,
even the ancient Greeks knew that, I have no idea how they knew that, but they did.
Every year, year, which are a large adult mammal, they regenerate their, their antlers, so that
means bone, innervation, skin up to a centimeter and a half of new bone growth every day. So,
so kind of remarkable regenerative ability as an adult mammal, and even human children can
regenerate their fingertips. So below a certain age, a clean amputation will regrow with, you
know, cosmetically very, very reasonable results. So one final example, this is something that we
discovered a few years ago, which is, which is this, tadpoles, of course, need to become frogs,
and in order for a tadpole face to become a frog face, things have to move. So the jaws have to
come out, the eyes have to move forward, the nostrils move, everything moves. And it used to
be thought it was assumed that this is some kind of hardwired process. After all, every tadpole looks
the same, every frog looks the same. And so if you just, if every piece of the head just remembers
which direction and how far to go, then you go from a normal tadpole to a normal frog. So that
was the assumption. So we decided to test that assumption, and this is really important, because
as we talk about this field of basal cognition, diverse intelligence, looking at these kind of
protocognitive capacities and unfamiliar embodiments, it's very important that we cannot simply make
armchair pronouncements about what we think, which systems we think have what degree of intelligence
we have to do experiments, because it is often not obvious. So what we did in this particular case
is we made what's called Picasso tadpoles, and Picasso tadpoles have everything scrambled. So
the eyes on the top of the head, the jaws are off to the side, everything is moved around.
And what we found is that these tadpoles make largely perfectly normal frogs,
because everything moves around from novel position. Sometimes it actually goes too far and has to
come back a little bit. It makes these movements, and then it settles into a correct frog face.
So in fact, it has more intelligence than you would initially assume, because it has the
ability to overcome a novel problem of being located in the wrong place that typical embryos
don't have to deal with. So the genetics doesn't specify a hardware, the hardwired rearrangements,
it specifies a system that executes an error minimization, a way to keep acting until you
get to the correct state. So that raises an obvious question, how does it know what the
correct target morphology is? And so this is the standard story of developmental biology told in
the textbook, which is that you have gene regulatory networks. Some of these genes make
effector proteins that do things, they're sticky, or they diffuse, or they signal us somehow.
And then there's this process of emergence where lots of this happens in parallel, and voila,
at the end you get some sort of complex outcome. And this is true, of course, there is this process
of emergence of complex form from simple rules. But this isn't the whole story, there's a really
important aspect of this, which we study by putting these feedback loops on here, which is that
when you deviate the system from its correct target morphology, and that could be large-scale
injury, it could be aging, it could be teratogens, or various other mutations. What happens is there
are loops that kick in, both in terms of physics and genetics, we're going to talk about the physics
one, that try to get the system back to where it was. Okay, so this is the anatomical homeostasis
part. So now, if this is true, well, this has a couple of components that you may think, well,
these are just feedback loops, biologists know all about feedback loops, so there's feedback
everywhere. And this is true, but the typical way of thinking about this, first of all, is
it's something like, for example, a temperature control loop, or a hunger loop, or a pH regulation,
is the set point is a scalar, it's a single number. This isn't the case, here you need a set point that
in some, to some level of detail, tells you what the correct shape is going to be. And
so that's unusual. And the other thing is that, typically in these kind of developmental molecular
biology approaches, when people don't like to think of any kind of a final goal towards which
the system is moving, it's supposed to be sort of this feed forward open loop kind of thing,
where whatever happens happens, but there isn't a goal towards which it's going. And I think
that's fundamentally incorrect, it leaves a lot of useful things on the table to think about it
that way. So what we wanted to do was to follow the predictions of this kind of way of thinking
about it, and it makes some very strong predictions. What it says is, if this is true, then there's
going to be a target morphology encoded somewhere, it's going to have a physical encoding somewhere,
the way that you can find the encoding in your thermostat for where the set point is recorded,
which is going to be an encoding that. And what we'd be able to do is learn to read it,
to decode it, and thus to rewrite it. Because if we can do that, what that means is that you
can change what happens out here by changing the set point, not just by controlling the genes and
then hoping that this process gets you what you want. Because working this backwards to ask,
which genes do I edit to make specific changes here is incredibly difficult. It's a very hard
inverse problem. It's what's going to limit applications of CRISPR and things like that.
It's very hard. So it would be much nicer if much like with your thermostat, you could change the
set point and let the cells do what they do best, which is rebuilt without you having to
micromanage from the lowest level. So those are the predictions and this is what we've been working
on for some years now. So I'm going to show you this. In order to start to think about how a
collection of cells could store some sort of goal that it's going to move towards, we use the nervous
system as a source of inspiration. Because it's very clear that there you have a great example
of a system that can store goals and memories and work towards them. So how does it work? Well,
the hardware looks like this. It's a network of cells, each of which has little ion channels
that allow the cell to generate a voltage potential by segregating positive and negative charges.
And those voltage potentials may or may not get propagated to neighboring cells via these
regulated electrical synapses known as gap junctions. And so that's how the hardware looks.
What that allows the networks to have is this very active electrical
set of electrical processes. And here you can see here, this is a zebrafish being this group
made an amazing video of this zebrafish while recording all the electrical activity as this
animal is thinking about whatever it is that zebrafish think about. And the commitment of
neuroscience is that you should be able to do something they call neural decoding, which is
that if we were to able to get all these data, and if we understood how to decode them through
these computer models, what we would be able to do is read out the contents of the animal's mind.
What is it thinking about? What are the memories, the preferences, the behavioral repertoires?
So the idea of neural decoding is that the information is literally encoded in the physiology.
All of the kind of cognitive aspects of this animal are encoded in these electrical signals.
Well, it turns out the amazing thing, it turns out that that kind of trick is ancient.
It is not just something that is used for brains because
every cell in your body has ion channels. Most cells have gap junctions to their neighbors.
And it turns out that evolution figured out the benefits of this kind of architecture
oh, back around the time of bacterial biofilms long before nerve and muscle came along.
And so it turns out that these tricks that the nervous system uses are really based on
some of these very ancient ways to process information in electrical networks.
And so we thought, wouldn't it be remarkable if we took a lot of concepts from neuroscience
and behavioral science? And this is what it means to consider morphogenesis and intelligence.
It's not just a metaphor of speaking. It's something that actually says take seriously
the isomorphism between these fields and take techniques from a completely different area
that have never been applied to developmental biology and apply them to a different medium
in a different problem space and see what these tools give you. And I think they give you a lot.
And so that's how you cash out these claims like that. And so what we decided to do was to say,
okay, could we use the same kind of tools to read all the electrical conversations that
body cells are having with each other? And from that extract or decode,
what are the anatomies that they're trying to build? What are their competencies and so on?
And so we made the first tools to read and write the electrical information in cells outside of the
nervous system. And so I'm going to show you these tools. I'm going to show you what we can do with
them. So this is a voltage sensitive fluorescent dye. And this allows us to noninvasively, over
time lapse, see what all the bioelectric patterns are. And then we can do a lot of
quantitative computer simulations to relate that to the different channels and pumps that are
expressed and really gain an understanding of what the physiological dynamics here.
So here's an example of what you see when you do this. This is a video of a frog embryo putting
its face together. It's grayscale, but that doesn't matter. You can see it's quite dynamic.
But what you'll see here, we call this the electric face. This is one frame of that movie.
It basically shows you that long before the organs of the face are patterned and long before the
genes come on that control some of these things, already this anterior ectoderm has a map
represented within it, this bioelectrical map of all the organs. So here's where the mouth is going
to go. Here's where the eye is going to go. The placode's out to the side. Here's where everything
is going to be. So this is an endogenous pattern. And I'll show you in a minute. It's actually
required for normal face development. It's required for the morphogenesis that actually
creates the face. If you interfere with this pattern, the gene expression will change and
the anatomy will change. So that's a normal endogenous pattern. Here's a pathological pattern.
What you can do is you can misexpress a human oncogene and then eventually you'll get a tumor.
But before the tumor becomes apparent, you will already see that there are some
bioelectrical changes where these cells are basically electrically disconnecting from their
neighbors and they're going to go off on their own and that's metastasis. And so there's some
obvious applications here to monitoring birth defects, to cancer diagnosis, and so on. But
more important than the characterization tools are the functional tools. So we don't use any
applied fields. There are no frequencies, no waves, no electromagnetic radiation, no magnets.
What we do is we control the native interface by which cells control each other. That is the
electrical side of electrical controls on their cell surface that they expose to each other.
And the way we can do that is all the techniques of neuroscience. So we can target these electrical
synapses to either open or close them. We can target all the ion channels to change directly,
not just the connectivity, but also the actual voltage states. And you can do this with drugs
and you can do it with ion channel mutants and with optogenetics and various other techniques.
And so we have the ability now to go in and with significant specificity to change which
cell talks to each other's cell and what voltage, in fact, they're communicating to each other,
which corresponds to synaptic and intrinsic plasticity, respectively. So I'm going to show
you an example of one of my favorite all-time examples, originally discovered by my very first
student back when I was at Forsythe Institute at the Harvard Dental School.
We had this amazing finding, which is that we decided to start to manipulate some of these
voltages to ask what will happen. These were very early days. No one knew what was going to
happen. In fact, people thought that voltage was a housekeeping parameter. They said, well,
if you mess with the voltage of these cells, they'll die. You'll get an uninterpretable phenotype.
But we decided to try. And so what she did was to interpret, in the first person to see this,
was Ivy Chen. And then several other people in my group worked on this, Shariao and Vipafai,
more recently. And so what she did was to inject RNA encoding a particular potassium channel
into some cells that were going to be something other than I. And what happens is that when you
establish a little spot of voltage that is the same shape and the voltage pattern as that I spot
in the electric face I showed you, you can induce eyes anywhere else. You can get them on the gut,
you can get them on the tail, you can put them anywhere on the animal. And these eyes will often
have all the correct internal layers, so all the retina and optic nerve, all that stuff.
So this tells you four really interesting things. First is that the bioelectric pattern is
instructive. When you change that pattern, it just doesn't just screw up normal development.
It's not permissive. It actually tells the cells build an eye here. That's functionally what it does.
Second is the amazing modularity. We didn't have to tell all the cells where the stem cells go,
how to build a lens, how to build a retina. We didn't have to do any of that. In fact,
we have no idea how to do that. We couldn't possibly give it all the information how to
build a whole complex eye. What we found is a very high-level subroutine call that basically
just says build an eye here. The animal's tissues already know how to build an eye. We found a trigger
for it. So very modular, and that's good for regenerative medicine. Also, what's remarkable
is that if you probe this animal with what was considered to be the PAC-6 master eye gene,
only the anterior norectoderm, which is this tissue up here, is competent to be eye. And so in the
developmental biology textbook, there's a story about ectodermal competency, and they tell you
that only these regions are competent to become eye. And that's true if you probe them with a PAC-6
signal. But if you go upstream and probe this system with a voltage signal, in fact, all of them,
you find out that all of the cells, including gut endoderm, which is really crazy,
are actually competent to make eye. And so the whole issue of how competent are these cells
is really predicated on how you pose the question. And this has direct implications for
prompting and AI and other kinds of systems. You have to have the right prompt to really
learn what the system is capable of. Also, something else that's interesting, this is a lens
sitting out in the flank of a tadpole somewhere. And what you'll notice is these blue cells,
this is beta galactosidase, and these blue cells are the ones that we actually injected with the
channel. All the rest of this was never directly injected by us. All these brown cells are native,
unmanipulated cells. But what happened is that something that happens in other collective
intelligence is like ants. When a couple of ants come along, something they want to move,
and it's too big for them, they will recruit their neighbors. And so that's what happens here.
Two levels of instruction. We instructed these cells that, hey, you need to make an eye,
and these cells, on their own, without us having to handle size control or how many cells there are
or any of that, these cells come endeared and hijack their neighbors to participate with them
in this project of constructing this lens. Because this system knows how big the thing
is supposed to be, it knows how many of them there are, and it can do what's necessary,
which again, we didn't need to do this at all. This is a native competency,
scaling to the appropriate task, is something tissues already do. So this goes back to my claim
that for proper regenerative medicine, you really want to be working with all of these
competencies, these morphogenetic navigation tricks that the system has that are completely
not obvious from standard development. And we need to be able to exploit these.
So doing that, you can build many things. You can ask the system to make ectopic four brain.
So here's this giant brain-y tappel. You can make extra legs. So here's our six-legged frog.
You can make extra hearts, extra beating hearts. You can make extra odysses,
which are inner ear organs. Or you can ask it to make fins. Now that's interesting,
tappels aren't supposed to have fins. That's more of a fish thing. We'll get to that in a minute.
But of course, now that once we saw that we were able to induce complex structures,
we immediately started on a regenerative kind of medicine model, which is leg regeneration.
And so what we see in frogs, frogs normally don't regenerate their legs. But what we see here
is that if we provide a cocktail with a specific ionophore that changes the voltage
state of that wound cell, what we can do is we can trigger immediately within a couple
of days, you get this MSX1 positive blastema marker, and the leg immediately starts to grow.
By 45 days, you've already got some toes, you've got a toenail, and eventually you've got a very
nice leg that is touch-sensitive and motile. This, by the way, the stimulus here was only
present for 24 hours. And if you stimulate for 24 hours in our most recent paper,
you get a year and a half of leg growth. And the whole point is that we aren't there
3D printing anything. We're not there with scaffolds or control of gene expression or
stem cells. We're not trying to tell the frog how to build the leg. We provide a very simple
signal right at the beginning, which says go towards the leg-building region of morphospace,
not towards the scarring region. And that's it. After that, we don't touch it again. So again,
relying, pushing all the complexity onto the system itself. We are now attempting to do this
in mammals, in rodents. And I have to do a disclosure here, because David Kaplan and I are
scientific co-founders of a company called Morphosuticals, Inc., which tries to apply
this technology to get limb regeneration in mammals, and hopefully someday into the clinic.
Okay, I want to change gears and talk about a different organism. We're back to planaria here.
Remember that these guys can regenerate. Every part of their body, they're amazing in particular.
They also solve the aging problem. They're immortal. As far as we know, there's no such
thing as an old planarian. They regenerate everything as it is. And you've got this amazing
capacity. And so we wanted to answer a question, how does each piece know how many heads of tails
it's supposed to have? It's kind of a funny question, but if you're a piece like this,
you have to know how many heads. And it's not obvious from where you were located, because
if you take a planaria and cut it in half, this region has to make a tail. This region
has to make a head. They were direct neighbors. They were in the same location in the animal,
but they have radically different anatomical outcomes. So it's not a trivial problem. You
can't just tell what you're going to be based on where you were in the original. It doesn't work.
So how do they know? So what we discovered was a bioelectric circuit, and I'll skip all the details,
that literally controls this process and stores the information about how many heads you're
supposed to have. So the way it works is the single-headed planarium. And you can see the
anterior is where the head markers are expressed, of course. And so when you cut them like this,
very reliably, you get a one-headed form. But what you can also do is cut these guys, again,
one-headed animal, anterior gene expression in the right place in the head, not in the tail.
And so you cut them and you get a two-headed worm. And why would this be a two-headed...
And this is in Photoshop. These are real animals. And why would you get a two-headed worm? I just
told you that this is very reliable. The reason is that we were able to find this bioelectrical
pre-pattern that looks like this. And the decoding is kind of simple. I'm showing you this because
much like with the electric face, this is the simple one. There are other patterns that are
very hard. We're still trying to crack. But what you can see is one head, one tail. And what we
were able to do is use drugs to affect ion channels to change this pattern
into two heads. And it's kind of messy, but it's okay. It works. Two heads. And so
what you see here is that this two-headed... This two-headed pattern gives rise to two-headed
animals. But here's the amazing part. This is not a readout of this animal. This is a map of this
animal. And this normally... This anatomically and transcriptionally normal animal has a
different representation of what a correct planarian looks like. And if you injure him,
and not until then, so it's a latent memory, if you injure him, then the cells will go ahead
and they build what the pattern says. And then they will go ahead and they build two heads. But
until that happens, it's a perfectly normal one-headed body. So several interesting things
here. One of which is that this bioelectric... Again, of course, the bioelectric pattern is
instructive. It tells you what kind of structures you're going to have. Second, remember that at
the very beginning, I sort of promised that we were going to find a read and decode and
re-specify the pattern memories that allow a particular set of tissues to know what to build
and when to stop. This is it. You're looking at it. The question of how does the planarian
piece know what to make, this is the answer. It's because this pattern contains the information
that's needed to specify one aspect of its morphogenetic future. And the other thing is that
this is perhaps... The interesting thing is that, again, this electrical pattern is not a map of
this animal. It's a map of this animal. So in an important sense, it's a counterfactual memory.
It's a memory of what... It's a representation of what I will do in the future if I happen to be
injured. So maybe this is an evolutionary precursor of that amazing mental time travel
that the brains allow us to do, which is to imagine or remember things that are not true
right now, things that happened in the past or things that are going to happen in the future.
This is the... Perhaps this is the ancient somatic equivalent of that process. So a single
planarian body can store at least one of two different memories of what a correct planarian
should look like. So it's reprogrammable in an important sense, just like learning in the brain
and just like our computer technology, the same hardware can store different types of information.
And why do I keep calling it a memory? Because if we take these two-headed animals and we cut off
the primary head and we cut off this secondary head with no more manipulation, you might think
that, well, the genetics are untouched. You didn't edit the genome. There's nothing wrong with the
genetics. So if you get rid of this crazy secondary head, maybe the cells will just rebuild the normal
planarian. But that's not at all what they do. If you cut them again, they will continue to make
two heads in perpetuity. And this has all the properties of memory. It's long-term stable.
It's rewritable because we can shift back and forth. We know how to make two heads from one and we
can actually take these two-headed guys and put them back to being one-headed. It has conditional
recall, meaning it can store the memory until it actually gets injured. And it has two discrete
possible behaviors. And here you can see this video. You can see what these two-headed animals
are like. And the first two-headed planaria were reported in the early 1900s.
But it wasn't until 2008 that my student Larissa Bosniak first, I had asked her to
recut these things. Nobody ever recut them, to my knowledge, because it was assumed that
once you get rid of that extra structure, the genetics are normal. Of course, it should go
back to normal, which it was assumed. So it's really critical to think in broader directions
that uncover these novel capabilities of tissues. And what we're doing now is all kinds of
computational modeling to try to merge what we know about the bioelectric state of the circuit
here, where it has these attractors, one head, two head, and so on, with what connectionist
machine learning is telling us about ways in which network can store information and can
recover the entire information from partial or damaged pieces. And so I think there's a great
unification to be done here. And this paper talks about that. But it is not just about
head number. It's also about head shape. So the amazing thing is that if I take this triangular
shape planarian, cut off his head, perturb the electrical pattern in a particular way,
let them then take the reagent away, let them settle down. Sometimes they settle back to a nice
triangular shape like they should, or they sometimes give you a round head like this S.
Mediterranean or a flathead like this Pifolina. And so these animals are about 150 to 100 million
years in evolutionary distance. And not only does the head shape change, but all the internal
components, the stem cells, the shape of the brain become just like these other species.
So you can ask this hardware to visit attractors in that morpho space that typically belong to
other species, these species go there by default. But this species can be pushed to navigate space
in that way, if the navigation policies which are encoded by the bioelectrics are changed
in the right way. So the hardware is perfectly willing to visit these other
these other attractors. In fact, you can go and visit shapes that don't look like plenary at all.
So you can make this crazy spiky form, you can make the cylindrical things, you can make the
sort of hybrids. It's what Darcy Thompson was talking about in his classic, where he showed
these kind of deformations, that nowadays you would call it a kind of a latent morpho space
of possible shapes and have real real animals be the result of deformations of a coordinate
grid. And there are all these other possibilities besides the standard default that we see all the
time. So, of course, what we're what we're trying to do is put together a full stack
computational model that goes from the molecular biology of which channels and pumps are expressed
to the tissue level electrophysiology and all the voltage patterns to the organ level
stable patterns that eventually can be interpreted by humans and by AI as an algorithm
about what every piece is going to build. And here's where you want to do your interventions.
It's very hard to do them down here, not methodologically, of course, but conceptually
it's hard to know what to do. But up here, it starts to get very obvious. And so we're trying to
forge that, forge that thing, because we have we have simulators of bioelectrics and so on.
So the last story, I want to tell you about kind of this this this part of the talk has to do with
how this is going to play out on regenerative medicine. So here's a here's an example.
This is a typical tadpole brain, and you can see very nice forebrain midbrain and hindbrain
left and right halves. And there are a variety of of defects you can induce with the teratogens
such as nicotine and alcohol and mutations and so on that really wreck this the structure.
So here, the forebrain is basically gone, the the eyes are connected directly to the to the
midbrain real really problematic. And so, so we wanted to develop a proof of concept of using
what we've learned about the bioelectrics here, to, to repair this to find interventions that
repair these very complex birth defects, we don't have a hope of talking to each individual cell
and controlling where all the stem cells go and what the pattern is. And I don't think in our
lifetime, that's that's going to happen. But we thought, could we, could we find high level
controls that let us leverage the competencies of these of the system. So what we did was, was,
and this is the work of Alexis Pytak with Viapof Pi in the lab. And so what they did was create
she made a computer model of what the bioelectric pattern normally should be and how it gets altered
by these various treatments. And then Pi was able to do the biology and do the following
thing to ask the model, if the pattern is incorrect, what channels would I need to open
or close to make the bioelectric pattern? Correct. Not going to worry about what happens downstream,
not going to worry about whatever the gene expressions are that are induced by this,
but how do I fix the bioelectric pattern? So what I'm showing you here is perhaps the most
kind of the most amazing example, which is never mind the chemical
teratogens. Let's let's look at a mutation. So this is a mutation in a gene called notch
introduced into it's a dominant active mutation introduced into these animals.
Their brains are completely wrecked as a result of this. It's a very important neurogenesis gene.
Forebrain is gone, midbrain and hindbrain are a bubble. These animals lay there,
no behavior, you know, which is just profound, profoundly defective. And so the model said
something very interesting. It said there's this, there's this HCN2 channel, which kind of has this
special property. And what it will do is it's predicted to sharpen gradient. So it's like a,
like a sharpen filter in Photoshop. It basically, it basically makes makes very sharp
bioelectrical boundaries between compartments that are not differing by enough voltage.
And so what we did was find out that whether by expressing more of this channel or by drugs,
in fact, to already approved human antiepileptics that opened up this channel, the model predicted
that that would fix it. And it was kind of an amazing, a shocking prediction. We tried it.
And sure enough, incredibly, incredibly enough, even though this animal has the mutation,
the brain is normal, the gene expression is normal, and their learning rates are
indistinguishable from controls. And so I'm not claiming that all genetic defects are going to
be fixable this way. There will be many things like missing enzymes and things like that that
are not going to be fixable this way. But at least some hard hardware defects, I mean, this is an
actual mutation in a signaling pathway, some hardware defects can be repaired in software by
transient stimulation of a drug that was chosen by a computer model. So we've gone from the very
initial early work in, let's say around 2000, where we were just probing the space of possibilities,
you know, what does the, what did the bioelectrics control down to now to the point where we are
in already in 2018, we're able to use a computer model to pick a drug for a very complex vertebrate
birth defect and repair it. And so the way that the therapeutics is going to look is basically
like this. And there's already, you can sort of play around with an early version of it here.
You'll pick some tissues that you're interested in. And what we need is to know the correct
bioelectric state of that organ or tissue, and then you'll know what the incorrect state is.
And then there's going to be a computational platform that's going to
electraceutical design environment that stands for it. And what it's going to do is help you
choose correct channels that will need to be open or closed to correct the pattern.
And from there, it's very simple to find drugs that will target that channel. And so
that's how this is going to work. And so kind of the last thing I want to say about this
part of the talk is that if we think about the whole space of biomedical interventions,
the vast majority of efforts today go under this bottom up category. So the hardware repairs,
surgery, transplants, stem cell implants, genomic editing, rewiring gene regulatory networks,
and so on. All of these things are focused on the hardware. And we all know some of the deficiencies
and limitations. So we have very few things, very few treatments that actually fix anything.
Many things, once you stop taking the drug, everything goes right back or actually gets
worse because it was targeted at the symptoms. It wasn't actually fixing the fundamental issue.
And of course, we have great variability across patients. We have lots of side effects.
And this is to be expected when trying to control a complex system bottom up.
But there are complementary techniques that we can use having to do with, first of all,
I don't have time to talk about any of this, but there's lots of interesting applications in
actually training cells and tissues and in fact, molecular networks. So using stimuli,
rewards and punishments and so on to make long term lasting changes by exploiting the memory
capacity of all of these levels. And of course, what we've been talking about now, which is the
whole field of morphosuiticals, which has within it ways to target the decision making machinery,
the morphogenetic machinery that uses mechanical, chemical, and of course, electrical modalities.
And so this is all the electrosuiticals are done here with ion channeled drugs and optogenetics
and so on. And lots more is discussed here. And I think just to speculate a little bit,
I think that future medicine is going to look a lot less like chemistry and a lot more like
a kind of somatic psychiatry, where you're going to take very seriously the memories, the preferences,
the competencies of the body cells, tissues, and organs and try to leverage those competencies by
not trying to micromanage their behavior, but trying to give them signals. And so bio electricity
is a really critical interface that normally mediates between high level cognitive information
down to molecular properties. And if that sounds weird to you, just think about how you get up
out of bed in the morning when you when you wake up and you decide that you need to go to bed,
that you need to get out of bed rather and go to work. What's happening here is that your high
level cognitive intent that that knows what work is and all the consequences of doing it or not
doing it, all of that has to has to filter down to the molecular events at your at your muscle
cells to enable you to get up out of bed. So your cognitive intent of wanting to do something
changes the way that molecules interact in your muscles. And so all of that, that that
transduction from cognition to molecular biology is done by by electrics, all of that is electrical.
And I think we can hack this for the rest of the body for some really transformative health
applications. So the last thing I want to do just for a couple of minutes is to broaden out a little
bit into into two other quick, quick mentions. One is this idea of let's just talk about cancer
for a second. So, so this is what this is what we're made of and what evolution individual cells.
And so what evolution has has given us is some hardware that allows cells which normally work
on little tiny goals. So so so little tiny metabolic and proliferative goals of single cells
to a very grandiose large scale morphogenetic goals, like we're going to work together to build
this limb. And if that's inhibited, temporarily, then we're going to do it again and then build
it again. So these are very high level goals that these cells are going after. But that process
can break down. And when that process breaks down, this is what we call cancer. So these are human
glioblastoma cells. And what happens is that if you dissociate cells electrically from each other,
they will basically revert back to their unicellular past, they will act like amoebas. And at that
point, the rest of the animals just the rest of the body is just external environment to them.
So they're not any more selfish than somatic cells, it's just that their cells are smaller. So the
boundary between self and world here, the boundaries out here, it's huge to say, you know, this this
whole thing acts as a unit to achieve a particular morphogenetic trajectory. But but once you disconnect
the cells, they don't do that anymore. Now now all the all they all they have is little tiny goals
that stop at the roughly at the cell surface. So so one. So now that's kind of a weird way of
thinking about things. But as always, it has practical consequences, which is that, if you
think this way, then then you might take take this hypothesis that if we put human oncogenes into
this tadpole, we know it's going to make a tumor. But what we'll do, we're not going to kill those
cells with chemotherapy. And we're not going to try to fix the mutation. What we're going to do is
simply force them to remain bio electrically connected to their neighbors, even though
they have the mutation. And so we've done this now with with with glee and with with nasty
k-rass mutations. Here it's the the oncogene is marked in red. You can see that there's this tumor
here. There's this very, very strong low expression of this oncogene. In fact, it's all over the place
in the body, but there is no tumor here. This is the same animal. Because even though the oncogene is
blazingly strongly expressed, if the cells are electrically connected to the rest of them, what
they do is participate in normal organogenesis, not not crawl around and metastasize. So this is
this is a way of taking some of these ideas about the the shifting boundary between self and world
and put it into a practical application. And of course, we're pursuing this now in
in in human glioblastoma and some other things. Okay, the very last I'm just going to take
about four or five minutes here just to give you a kind of a last piece. And I have to do
another disclosure here of fauna systems is a company that Josh Bond guard and I have started
around computer designed by robotics. And the idea was this. I've tried to I've tried to make the
point that morphogenesis is a navigation of anatomical space by a kind of system that
remembers where it's going and has certain navigation policies and it has certain capabilities
of getting there despite some number of things that can happen to it. But if we if we ask the
question in a in a typical animal, where where do those memories come from? In other words,
what determines the the shape of that space? And the and fundamentally the anatomy of the
and the and the the behavior of that animal? Typically, the answer is, well, evolution. So
so years of selection have shaped that space. And now and now this is the you know, this is
the morphology that that survives in the real world. And so what we wanted to ask this question
about plasticity, we said, if if we take these cells with a standard genome, and give them a
chance to reboot their multicellularity, what will they build? Like, what is the what is the
structure of the of the morpho space for creatures that have never existed before? And so this is
where synthetic biology or better yet, synthetic morphology comes in, because we can make some
creatures that have never been here on earth in that in that particular embodiment. And we can
ask what do their shapes look like? So here's a here's an example. What happens is we take a frog
embryo. And this is all the biology here is work at the work of Doug Blackiston. And this is a
collaboration with Josh Bongard's lab. And Sam Creedman was a student who did a lot of the
computational work. What happens is we can we can take off some of the dermal skin cells from
the embryo, and we we dissociate them and we put them aside in this in this set set them aside.
And they can do many things they could they could die, they could spread out and leave, you know,
go away from each other, they could form a two dimensional flat monolayer like a cell culture.
What they do instead is they actually they get together and this is time lapse they get together
and they make something very interesting, which looks like this. And the flashing is calcium
signaling. So what they make is something we call a xenobot. Why xenobot is why xenobot xenopus
lavis is the name of the frog. I think it's a biorebotics platform. So that's why it's a it's a
xenobot. First of all, they swim, and they use little hairs on their cell surface on their
outer surface called cilia. These are normally used by the frog to move mucus down the body
down its body to keep the pathogens away. But they're using it to swim they can go in circles,
they can sort of patrol back and forth like this, they can have all kinds of interesting
collective and group behaviors that you can see some tracking data here. They change their
movements as a function of time, they sort of wander around doing various things. Here's one
doing a maze. So you can see here it swims forward, it's going to take this corner without bumping
into the opposite wall. So it doesn't just go straight until it hits something, it can take
that corner. And here it shows some some kind of primitive initiative and spontaneously turning
around and going back where it came from. So these are not these are not stimulated, these are not
actuated by us in any way unlike some of the current biorebotics that exist that completely
completely spontaneous. They have if we if we track the calcium signaling like we did in that
zebrafish like that other lab did in that zebrafish that I showed you earlier, you can see that
they're very active, there's no neurons in here. But the it's just skin but the skin cells are
very active and we are now applying all sorts of information theory tools to ask if we can
decode what the cells are saying to each other, what two xenobots might be saying to each other
and so on. They regenerate so if you cut it almost in half, it'll seal up like this. So from here
they will seal themselves and perhaps the most amazing thing we discovered by the simulations
that Sam and Josh did was that in their movements they tend to they tend to have a very peculiar
effect on on their environment and so so you know they built this amazing simulator where we could
Doug could actually build various types of xenobots corresponding to shapes that that the
that the AI was suggesting. And what we found is this if you give them loose skin cells in their
environment what they do is they implement von Neumann's dream which is a robot that would go
out and build copies of itself from materials that found in the environment because we've
made it impossible for these guys to reproduce themselves. They're just skin, they don't have
all the other organs you need for frog style reproduction but within a couple of days they
figure out a new way to make copies of themselves and so what they do is they by their movements
they collect these skin cells into a little ball and they sort of polish and compact the ball
and because they're working with a in a gentle material like us we we were only able to make
xenobots because we were working with with skin cells that have certain competencies
they have the same advantage and so because it's an agential material they make the next
generation of bots and when these xenobots mature guess what they do they run around and they
do exactly the same thing and that gives you the next generation of bots and the next generation.
So this is kinematic self-replication to our knowledge doesn't no other organism on earth does
this brand new brand new kind of thing and so and so this brings us kind of to almost the end
of the story where one thing you can ask is what did the frog genome learn through all all these
you know so eons of evolution well it's certainly learned to make a frog and it learned this
developmental sequence that leads through this stereotypical stages and then some tadpoles with
behavior that's not the only thing it makes it can also make xenobots with a completely
different developmental sequence this is this is a couple month old xenobot and no idea what
this thing's trying to become and they have different behaviors including kinematic self
replication that that has never existed before so we don't know by the way what their behavioral
repertoires are like do they can they learn what do they have preferences all of that is currently
under active investigation but at least in the case of the morphology we can say a few things we
can say that there have never been any xenobots there's never been selection to be a good xenobot
so this whole lifestyle and capabilities and everything else cannot be straightforward you
you can't tell a straightforward selectionist story about it where does it come from that's
an interesting thing we can we can discuss and what it looks to me like from this and many other
experiments is that evolution doesn't give you just solutions to specific problems what evolution
makes it's problem solving machines and under default environments they always produce the
same outcome and it's sort of the development sort of lulls us into a false sense of we understand
what the system can do and evolution gives us an easy way to to sort of to explain why we see what
we see but there's actually a lot more plasticity and capability that doesn't appear until you probe
the intelligence of the system by putting it in a new environment where it has to do new things
and in particular we didn't engineer this by changing the genome we didn't put in any new
circuits the DNA is exactly the same we didn't put any weird nanomaterials the only thing we did
is liberate these cells from the rest of the embryo that normally basically
force them into having a kind of boring two-dimensional life on the outside of the organism
keeping out the bacteria that's it when you take them away from it's in this case it's
engineering by subtraction by liberation when we take these cells away from these other
instructive signals then you find out what their baseline preference is their baseline
is this to have a much more exciting life as a xenobot and so I'm sure there are many many
of these things out there in in the world that we simply don't know about yet and so
what I think the xenobot really is I mean yes it's a biorebotics platform and there will be
useful synthetic living machines and and so on but what I think it really is and the xenobot
isn't just you know to be clear the xenobot isn't just this thing the xenobot is this thing plus
the AI that was used to to to investigate it the human engineers that that prompted these cells
to do this that whole thing is is really the xenobot and what it really is is an unusual
novel tool it's an exploration tool for probing these these these morpheus spaces these other
latent spaces that we're not very good at at noticing and and what I think is that
when darwin said endless forms most beautiful he was I'm kind of amazed at all the diversity of life
all of that natural life is this tiny little corner of morpheus space that's formed by the
space of possible bodies and minds that's formed by every possible combination of evolved material
cells dna tissues designed material and smart materials implants and all that and software
life is incredibly interoperable and every combination of of these three things is probably
going to be some kind of viable being that's uh yeah hybrids and cyborgs and and some of these
all already exist of course and many more will and you know for the for the younger people in
the audience in your lifetime you are going to be surrounded by other agents that are nowhere
on the tree of life with you you cannot decide how to relate to them based on where they are on
the standard n equals one tree of life on earth so so we are going to have to this I think is
really critical now the xenobots are just the first kind of a small step in this direction
we are going to have to develop a new kind of ethics for relating to truly diverse intelligences
that don't look like you they don't share uh they don't share um uh our our our evolutionary history
and uh you know uh a different a different way to relate to beings not based on uh what do you
look like what are you made of and how did you get here meaning evolved versus engineer so um
I just I'll summarize the whole thing by saying that I think one of the most interesting things
in biology is that um all of all intelligence is collective intelligence functioning through this
multi-scale competency architecture that navigates various virtual spaces um this kind of goal
directedness the cybernetic kind not the not the mystical kind is uh really an invariant for
recognizing building and relating to very unconventional agents and and there's a lot more
about this this this cognitive boundary that we can talk about and the collective intelligence
of cells is really an excellent target for regenerative medicine and also as an example
of why this kind of approach it's not philosophy and it's not metaphors it's it's something that
that actively on a on a you know every year it generates novel discoveries and new capabilities
that we didn't have before and um just that that that's that that exploring these spaces provides
an astronomically large uh possibility for new bodies and new minds which has huge implications
not just for um biomedicine and robotics but understanding evolution understanding ourselves
ethics so um if anybody's interested in going deeper um lots of these papers uh have discussed
this stuff in in great detail i want to thank um the students and postdocs we did um we did all the
work uh lots of lots of technical support um some of our amazing collaborators uh our funders um here
Jeremy Gay of Peregrine Creative does all the illustrations um and uh most of all uh the various
model systems because the animals do um all the heavy lifting so um i will thank you uh for listening
and take questions
thank you dr love that was fantastic um and i want to thank you on behalf of the society and the
students and uh guests who are um joining us today to listen um and i thank you for taking
just a couple extra minutes to answer a few questions um i'm going to paraphrase uh some
that came in on the q and a forum um one there's often a concern when there's new breakthroughs in
medicine that the new treatments are only going to be available to the rich that there's going to
be an inequity problem um and i'm kind of intuiting what the answer is going to be but uh is there a
potential here to have a solution that can be more um widely adapted because of the form that it takes
yeah yeah there is i mean i i'll i'll say first that i'm not an expert in the economics of medicine
as far as i understand uh we have an inequity problem with water and so you know it doesn't
have to be some fancy therapeutics before you get into an inequity problem so so that that's all
that's the you know kind of baseline um but with this with this specific set of manipulations
yeah i actually think it has an extremely favorable um equity profile because um we are we are
explicitly not doing the thing that's done now which is heroic interventions at the very end
of life to try to prolong basically a sinking ship and and that and what that means is that the input
to the next stage is is is way more um you know sort of uh degraded and that means the next step
has to be more expensive and heroic what we are saying is maybe there's a way to trigger regeneration
like in planaria or like in salamanders and uh and do it uh at the whole you know during during the
whole uh life life of the of the individual i'm increasing the health span and in particular
just about everything we do is uh can be done with very cheap ion channel drugs so these are
many of them already human approved most of them are are off-patent this is uh as far as
interventions go this is this is uh this is the delivery is going to be very cheap what's super
expensive right now is uh the r&d right so so so building all the equipment building all that
and i mean none of this existed before all the software everything else everything has to be built
once we crack this i mean i call this cracking the the morphogenetic code once we crack this
the actual treatments are going to be way cheaper than anything we've seen fantastic um and uh just
maybe quickly this one question because i think it's going to be on the minds of many people
we have um you know a common intuitive ends that a lot of our minds go when we think about
intelligence in other ways beyond the standard that we imagine that we have and that is you know
creating intelligence in silicon as opposed to in our biology and and the question is
what is is there something that limits the ability of taking our understanding of the
hardware software relationship that you're uncovering and transferring essentially ourselves
into our our goals our memories into the silicon space yeah um are you are you asking about uh
creating novel uh novel agents in silicon or are you asking uh what happened are you talking about
the idea of of taking an existing person and implementing them and is that that ladder thing
it's the second that was the question essentially prolonging your um your mind's existence in a
computer yeah well look uh i mean this this is really an old philosophical thing let imagine
imagine for a minute that um uh that uh this the the whole uh you know kind of star trek
transporter thing was solved and they would basically say well we're just gonna we're
going to record a copy of you when you're when we're going to record you when you're young
and then when you get old uh we're just gonna you know beam down a copy and and he'll be you
know you'll be young again and all great so okay there's there's a couple of ways to think about
this one way to think about it will be uh well fantastic uh there's gonna be a young me running
around on earth like great they'll bring it on another way of thinking is okay you're basically
gonna make a time shift a twin and that's great but i'm still here aging and dying that's what
what good does it do me uh you know what what good do the copies do me so i think that it's it's not
an issue of technology it's an issue of what do we really what do we really value and the question
is if if there is a you know you you you i mean i don't think the technology is going to be remotely
there in in our relevant uh time frame to to make a copy of us in any way but but let's say you could
i mean ultimately i don't see why it's impossible but but we're we're not able to do it for a long
time uh but if you know that you flip the computer on and he says oh fantastic it's it's great in here
and you say yeah well good good for you i guess but what do i do so i'm not sure that that actually
solves the problem but it's fun to think about fair point and and that's all the time of yours
that we're going to take i know that you have another engagement that you need to be getting to
but if everyone you know in your own private corner of the universe will have joined me in
giving dr levin a round of applause thank you so much thank you so much really appreciate it and
anybody that's interested drop me an email i saw a couple other questions i haven't gotten to so
anybody that wants to know anything drop me an email thank you so much for that all right thank
you everybody for joining us and thank you dr levin again thank you so much dr levin and thank
you so much dr chesna for being here bye everybody
