On What There Is by Willard Van Orman Quine, published in 1948.
A curious thing about the ontological problem is its simplicity.
It can be put in three Anglo-Saxon monosyllables.
What is there?
It can be answered, moreover, in a word—everything.
And everyone will accept this answer as true.
However, this is merely to say that there is what there is.
There remains room for disagreement over cases, and so the issue has stayed alive down the
centuries.
Suppose now that two philosophers, MacX and I, differ over ontology.
Suppose MacX maintains there is something which I maintain there is not.
MacX can, quite consistently with his own point of view, describe our difference of opinion
by saying that I refuse to recognize certain entities.
I should protest, of course, that he is wrong in his formulation of our disagreement, for
I maintain that there are no entities of the kind which he alleges, for me to recognize.
But my finding him wrong in his formulation of our disagreement is unimportant, for I
am committed to considering him wrong in his ontology anyway.
When I try to formulate our difference of opinion, on the other hand, I seem to be in
a predicament.
I cannot admit that there are some things which MacX countenances and I do not, for,
in admitting that there are such things, I should be contradicting my own rejection of
them.
It would appear, if this reasoning were sound, that, in any ontological dispute, the proponent
of the negative side suffers the disadvantage of not being able to admit that his opponent
disagrees with him.
This is the old platonic riddle of non-being.
Non-being must, in some sense, be.
Otherwise, what is it that there is not?
This tangled doctrine might be nicknamed Plato's Beard.
Historically, it is proved tough, frequently dulling the edge of Occam's razor.
It is some such line of thought that leads philosophers like MacX to impute being where
they might otherwise be quite content to recognize that there is nothing.
Thus, take Pegasus.
If Pegasus were not, MacX argues, we should not be talking about anything when we use the
word.
Therefore, it would be nonsense to say even that Pegasus is not.
Thinking to show thus that the denial of Pegasus cannot be coherently maintained, he concludes
that Pegasus is.
MacX cannot, indeed, quite persuade himself that any region of space-time near or remote
contains a flying horse of flesh and blood.
Pressed for further details on Pegasus, then, he says that Pegasus is an idea in men's minds.
Here, however, a confusion begins to be apparent.
We may, for the sake of argument, concede that there is an entity, and even a unique
entity, though this is rather implausible, which is the mental Pegasus idea.
But this mental entity is not what people are talking about when they deny Pegasus.
MacX confuses the Parthenon with the Parthenon idea.
The Parthenon is physical, the Parthenon idea is mental, according anyway to MacX's version
of ideas, and I have no better to offer.
The Parthenon is visible, the Parthenon idea is invisible.
We cannot easily imagine two things more unlike, and less liable to confusion, than the Parthenon
and the Parthenon idea.
But when we shift from the Parthenon to Pegasus, the confusion sets in.
For no other reason than MacX would sooner be deceived by the crudest and most flagrant
counterfeit than grant the non-being of Pegasus.
The notion that Pegasus must be, because it would otherwise be nonsense to say even that
Pegasus is not, has been seen to lead MacX into an elementary confusion.
Subtler minds, taking the same precept as their starting point, come out with theories
of Pegasus which are less patently misguided than MacX's, and correspondingly more difficult
to eradicate.
One of these subtler minds is named, let us say, Wyman.
Pegasus, Wyman maintains, has his being as an unactualized possible.
When we say of Pegasus that there is no such thing, we are saying more precisely that Pegasus
does not have the special attribute of actuality.
Saying that Pegasus is not actual is on par, logically, with saying that the Parthenon is
not red.
In either case, we are saying something about an entity whose being is unquestioned.
Wyman, by the way, is one of those philosophers who have united in ruining the good old word
exist.
Despite his espousal of unactualized possibilities, he limits the word existence to actuality,
thus preserving an illusion of ontological agreement between himself and us who repudiate
the rest of his bloated universe.
We have all been prone to say, in our common sense usage of exist, that we have all been
prone to say, in our common sense usage of exist, that Pegasus does not exist, meaning
simply that there is no such entity at all.
If Pegasus existed, he would indeed be in space and time.
But only because the word Pegasus has spatiotemporal connotations, and not because exists has
spatiotemporal connotations.
If spatiotemporal reference is lacking when we affirm the existence of the cube root of
twenty-seven, this is simply because a cube root is not a spatiotemporal kind of thing,
and not because we are being ambiguous in our use of exist.
However, Wyman, in an ill-conceived effort to appear agreeable, genially grants us the
non-existence of Pegasus, and then, contrary to what we meant by non-existence of Pegasus,
insists that Pegasus is.
Existence is one thing, he says, and subsistence is another.
The only way I know of coping with this obfuscation of issues is to give Wyman the word exist.
I'll not try to use it again, I still have is.
So much for lexicography, let's go back to Wyman's ontology.
Wyman's overpopulated universe is, in many ways, unlovely.
It offends the aesthetic sense of us who have a taste for desert landscapes, but this is
not the worst of it.
Wyman's slum of possibles is a breeding ground for disorderly elements.
Take, for instance, the possible fat man in that doorway, and again, the possible bald
man in that doorway.
Are they the same possible man, or two possible men?
How do we decide?
How many possible men are there in that doorway?
Are there more possible thin ones than fat ones?
How many of them are alike?
Or would their being alike make them one?
Are no two possible things alike?
Is this the same as saying that it is impossible for two things to be alike?
Or finally, is the concept of identity simply inapplicable to unactualized possibles?
But what sense can be found in talking of entities which cannot meaningfully be said
to be identical with themselves and distinct from one another?
These elements are well nigh incorrigible.
By a Phragian therapy of individual concepts, some effort might be made at rehabilitation,
but I feel we'd do better simply to clear Wyman's slum and be done with it.
Possibility, along with other modalities of necessity and impossibility and contingency,
poses problems upon which I do not mean to imply that we should turn our backs.
But we can at least limit modalities to whole statements.
We may impose the adverb possibly upon a statement as a whole, and we may well worry about the
semantical analysis of such usage, but little real advance in such analysis is to be hoped
for in expanding our universe to include so-called possible entities.
I suspect that the main motive for this expansion is simply the old notion that Pegasus, for
example, must be because otherwise it would be nonsense to say even that he is not.
Still, all the rank luxuriance of Wyman's universe of possibles would seem to come to
not when we make a slight change in the example and speak not of Pegasus, but of the round
square cupula on Berkeley College.
If unless Pegasus were, it would be nonsense to say that he is not, then by the same token,
unless the round square cupula on Berkeley College were, it would be nonsense to say
that it is not.
But unlike Pegasus, the round square cupula on Berkeley College cannot be admitted even
as an unactualized possible.
Can we drive Wyman now to admitting also a realm of unactualizable impossibles?
If so, a good many embarrassing questions could be asked about them.
We might even hope to trap Wyman in contradictions by getting him to admit that certain of these
entities are at once round and square.
But the wily Wyman chooses the other horn of the dilemma and concludes that it is nonsense
to say that the round square cupula on Berkeley College is not.
He says that the phrase round square cupula is meaningless.
Wyman was not the first to embrace this alternative.
The doctrine of the meaninglessness of contradictions runs away back.
The tradition survives, moreover, in writers who seem to share none of Wyman's motivations.
Still, I wonder whether the first temptation to such a doctrine may not have been substantially
the motivation which we have observed in Wyman.
Certainly, the doctrine has no intrinsic appeal, and it has led its devotees to such quixotic
extremes as that of challenging the method of proof by reductio ad absurdum, a challenge
in which I sense a reductio ad absurdum of the doctrine itself.
Moreover, the doctrine of meaninglessness of contradictions has the severe methodological
drawback that it makes it impossible, in principle, ever to devise an effective test of what is
meaningful and what is not.
It would be forever impossible for us to devise systematic ways of deciding whether a string
of signs made sense, even to us individually, let alone other people, or not.
For it follows from a discovery in mathematical logic, due to church, that there can be no
generally applicable test of contradictoryness.
I have spoken disparagingly of Plato's beard, and hinted that it is tangled.
I have dwelt at length on the inconveniences of putting up with it.
It is time to think about taking steps.
Russell, in his theory of so-called singular descriptions, showed clearly how we might
meaningfully use seeming names without supposing that there be entities allegedly named.
The names to which Russell's theory directly applies are complex, descriptive names, such
as the author of Waverly, the present king of France, the round square cupula on Berkeley
College.
Russell analyses such phrases systematically as fragments of the whole sentences in which
they occur.
The sentence, the author of Waverly was a poet, for example, is explained as a whole as meaning
someone, better, something, wrote Waverly, and was a poet, and nothing else wrote Waverly.
The point of this added clause is to affirm the uniqueness, which is implicit in the word
the, in the author of Waverly.
The sentence, the round square cupula on Berkeley College is pink, is explained as something
is round and square, and is a cupula on Berkeley College, and is pink, and nothing else is round
and square and a cupula on Berkeley College.
The virtue of this analysis is that the seeming name, a descriptive phrase, is paraphrased
in context as a so-called incomplete symbol.
No unified expression is offered as an analysis of the descriptive phrase, but the statement
as a whole, which was the context of that phrase, still gets its full quota of meaning,
whether true or false.
The unanalyzed statement, the author of Waverly was a poet, contains a part, the author of
Waverly, which is wrongly supposed by McEx and Wyman, to demand objective reference
in order to be meaningful at all.
But in Russell's translation, something wrote Waverly and was a poet, and nothing else
wrote Waverly, the burden of objective reference, which had been put upon the descriptive phrase,
is now taken over by words of the kind that logicians call bound variables, variables
of quantification, namely words like something, nothing, everything.
These words, far from purporting to be names specifically of the author of Waverly, do
not purport to be names at all.
They refer to entities generally, with a kind of studied ambiguity peculiar to themselves.
These quantificational words or bound variables are, of course, a basic part of language,
and their meaningfulness, at least in context, is not to be challenged.
But their meaningfulness in no way presupposes there being either the author of Waverly or
the round square cupula on Berkeley College or any other specifically pre-assigned objects.
Where descriptions are concerned, there is no longer any difficulty in affirming or denying
being.
There is the author of Waverly, is explained by Russell as meaning someone, or more strictly
something, wrote Waverly and nothing else wrote Waverly.
The author of Waverly is not, is explained correspondingly as the alternation, either
each thing failed to write Waverly or two or more things wrote Waverly.
This alternation is false, but meaningful, and it contains no expression purporting to
name the author of Waverly.
The statement the round square cupula on Berkeley College is not, is analyzed in similar fashion.
So the old notion that statements of non-being defeat themselves goes by the board.
When a statement of being or non-being is analyzed by Russell's theory of descriptions,
it ceases to contain any expression which even purports to name the alleged entity whose
being is in question, so that the meaningfulness of the statement no longer can be thought
to presuppose that there be such an entity.
Now what of Pegasus?
This being a word rather than a descriptive phrase, Russell's argument does not immediately
apply to it.
However, it can easily be made to apply.
We have only to rephrase Pegasus as a description in any way that seems adequately to single
out our idea, say, the winged horse that was captured by Balerophon.
Substituting such a phrase for Pegasus, we can then proceed to analyze the statement
Pegasus is or Pegasus is not, precisely on the analogy of Russell's analysis of the
author of Waverly is and the author of Waverly is not.
In order thus to subsume a one-word name or a legend name such as Pegasus under Russell's
theory of description, we must, of course, be able first to translate the word into a
description.
But this is no real restriction.
If the notion of Pegasus had been so obscure or so basic a one that no pat translation
into a descriptive phrase had offered itself along familiar lines, we could still have
availed ourselves of the following artificial and trivial seeming device.
We could have appealed to the ex-hypothesis unanalyzable, irreducible attribute of being
Pegasus, adopting for its expression the verb is Pegasus or Pegasizes.
The noun Pegasus itself could then be treated as derivative and identified, after all, with
a description, the thing that is Pegasus, the thing that Pegasizes.
If the importing of such a predicate as Pegasizes seems to commit us to recognizing that there
is a corresponding attribute Pegasizing in Plato's heaven or in the minds of men, well
and good, neither we nor Wyman nor MacX could have been contending thus far about the being
or non-being of universals, but rather about that of Pegasus.
If in terms of Pegasizing we can interpret the noun Pegasus as a description, subject
to Russell's theory of descriptions, then we have disposed of the old notion that Pegasus
cannot be said not to be without presupposing that in some sense Pegasus is.
Our argument is now quite general.
MacX and Wyman supposed that we could not meaningfully affirm a statement of the form
so-and-so is not, with a simple or descriptive singular noun in place of so-and-so unless
so-and-so is.
This supposition is now seen to be quite generally groundless, since the singular noun in question
can always be expanded into a singular description, trivially or otherwise, and then analyzed out
of Russell.
We commit ourselves to an ontology-containing numbers when we say there are prime numbers
larger than a million.
We commit ourselves to an ontology-containing centars when we say there are centars.
And we commit ourselves to an ontology-containing Pegasus when we say Pegasus is.
But we do not commit ourselves to an ontology-containing Pegasus or the author of Waverly or the round
square cupula on Berkeley College when we say that Pegasus or the author of Waverly
or the cupula in question is not.
We need no longer labor under the delusion that the meaningfulness of a statement containing
a singular term presupposes an entity named by the term.
A singular term need not name to be significant.
An inkling of this might have dawned on Wyman and McEx even without benefit of Russell if
they had only noticed, as so few of us do, that there is a gulf between meaning and naming.
Even in the case of a singular term, which is genuinely a name of an object, the following
example from Frege will serve.
The phrase evening star names a certain large physical object of spherical form which is
hurtling through space some scores of millions of miles from here.
The phrase morning star names the same thing, as was probably first established by some
observant Babylonian, but the two phrases cannot be regarded as having the same meaning.
Otherwise, that Babylonian could have dispensed with his observations and contented himself
with reflecting on the meanings of his words.
The meanings then, being different from one another, must be other than the named object,
which is one and the same in both cases.
Confusion of meaning with naming not only made McEx think he could not meaningfully repudiate
Pegasus, a continuing confusion of meaning with naming no doubt helped and gender his
absurd notion that Pegasus is an idea, a mental entity.
The structure of his confusion is as follows.
He confused the alleged named object Pegasus with the meaning of the word Pegasus, therefore
concluding that Pegasus must be in order that the word have meaning.
But what sorts of things are meanings?
This is a moot point, however, one might quite plausibly explain meanings as ideas in the
mind, supposing we can make clear sense in turn of the idea of ideas in the mind.
Or Pegasus, initially confused with a meaning, ends up as an idea in the mind.
It is the more remarkable that Wyman, subject to the same initial motivation as McEx, should
have avoided this particular blunder and wound up with unactualized possibles instead.
Now let us return to the ontological problem of universals.
The question whether there are such entities as attributes, relations, classes, numbers,
functions, McEx, characteristically enough, thinks there are.
Speaking of attributes, he says, there are red houses, red roses, red sunsets.
This much is pre-philosophical common sense in which we must all agree.
These houses, roses, and sunsets, then, have something in common, and this, which they
have in common, is all I mean by the attribute of redness.
For McEx, thus, their being attributes is even more obvious and trivial than the obvious
and trivial fact of their being red houses, roses, and sunsets.
This, I think, is characteristic of metaphysics, or at least of that part of metaphysics called
ontology.
One who regards a statement on the subject as true at all must regard it as trivially
true.
One's ontology is basic to the conceptual scheme by which he interprets all experiences,
even the most commonplace ones.
Within some particular conceptual scheme, and how else is judgment possible, an ontological
statement goes without saying, standing in need of no separate justification at all.
Ontological statements follow immediately from all manner of causal statements of commonplace
fact, just as, from the point of view anyway of McEx's conceptual scheme, there is an
attribute, follows from, there are red houses, red roses, red sunsets.
Judged in another conceptual scheme, an ontological statement which is axiomatic to McEx's mind
may, with equal immediacy and triviality, be a judged false.
One may admit that there are red houses, roses, and sunsets, but deny, except as a popular
and misleading manner of speaking, that they have anything in common.
The words, houses, roses, and sunsets are true of sundry individual entities which are
houses and roses and sunsets, and the word red, or red object, is true of each of sundry
individual entities which are red houses, red roses, red sunsets.
But there is not, in addition, any entity whatever, individual or otherwise, which is
named by the word redness, nor, for that matter, by the word househood, rosehood, sunsethood.
That the houses and roses and sunsets are all of them red, may be taken as ultimate and
irreducible, and it may be held that McEx is no better off, in point of real explanatory
power, for all the occult entities which he posits under such names as redness.
One means by which McEx might naturally have tried to impose his ontology of universals
on us was already removed before we turn to the problem of universals.
McEx cannot argue that predicates such as red or is red, which we all concur in using,
must be regarded as names, each of a single universal entity, in order that they be meaningful
at all.
For we have seen that being a name of something is much more special feature than being meaningful.
He cannot even charge us, at least not by that argument, with having posited an attribute
of Pegasizing by our adoption of the predicate Pegasizes.
However, McEx hits upon a different stratagem.
Let us grant, he says, this distinction between meaning and naming of which you make so much.
Let us even grant that is red, Pegasizes, etc., are not names of attributes.
Still, you admit they have meanings, but these meanings, whether they are named or not,
are still universals, and I venture to say that some of them might even be the very
things that I call attributes, or something to much the same purpose in the end.
For McEx, this is an unusually penetrating speech, and the only way I know to counter
it is by refusing to admit meanings.
However, I feel no reluctance towards refusing to admit meanings, for I do not thereby deny
that words and statements are meaningful.
McEx and I may agree to the letter in our classification of linguistic forms into the
meaningful and the meaningless, even though McEx construes meaningfulness as the having,
in some sense of having, of some abstract entity which he calls a meaning, whereas I do not.
I remain free to maintain that the fact that a given linguistic utterance is meaningful,
or significant, as I prefer to say, so as not to invite hypostasis of meanings as entities,
is an ultimate and irreducible matter of fact, or I may undertake to analyze it in terms
directly of what people do in the presence of the linguistic utterance in question,
and other utterances similar to it.
The useful ways in which people ordinarily talk or seem to talk about meanings boil down to two,
the having of meanings, which is significance, and sameness of meaning, or synonymy.
What is called giving the meaning of an utterance is simply the uttering of a synonym couched ordinarily
in clearer language than the original. If we are allergic to meanings as such, we can speak directly
of utterances as significant or insignificant, and as synonymous or heteronymous, one with another.
The problem of explaining these adjectives significant and synonymous with some degree
of clarity and rigor, preferably as I see it in terms of behavior, is as difficult as it is
important. But the explanatory value of special and irreducible intermediary entities called
meanings is surely illusory. Up to now, I have argued that we can use singular terms significantly
in sentences without presupposing that there are entities which those terms purport to name.
I have argued further that we can use general terms, for example predicates, without conceding
them to be names of abstract entities. I have argued further that we can view utterances as
significant, and as synonymous, or heteronymous, with one another, without countenancing a realm
of entities called meanings. At this point, mcx begins to wonder whether there is any limit at all
to our ontological immunity. Does nothing we may say commit us to the assumption of universals,
or other entities which we may find unwelcome? I have already suggested a negative answer to
this question, in speaking of bound variables, or variables of quantification, in connection with
Russell's theory of descriptions. We can very easily involve ourselves in ontological commitments
by saying, for example, that there is something, bound variable, which red houses and sunsets
have in common, or that there is something which is a prime number larger than a million.
But this is essentially the only way we can involve ourselves in ontological commitments,
by our use of bound variables. The use of alleged names is no criterion, for we can repudiate their
namehood at the drop of a hat, unless the assumption of a corresponding entity can be spotted in the
things we affirm in terms of bound variables. Names are, in fact, altogether immaterial to the
ontological issue, for I have shown, in connection with Pegasus and Pegasize, that names can be
converted to descriptions, and Russell has shown that descriptions can be eliminated.
Whatever we say with the help of names can be said in a language which shuns names altogether.
To be assumed as an entity is, purely and simply, to be reckoned as the value of a variable.
In terms of the categories of traditional grammar, this amounts roughly to saying that
to be is to be in the range of reference of a pronoun. Pronouns are the basic media of reference.
Nouns might better have been named pronouns. The variables of quantification,
something, nothing, everything, range over our whole ontology, whatever it may be,
and we are convinced of a particular ontological presupposition if, and only if,
the alleged presuppositum has to be reckoned among the entities over which our variables range
in order to render one of our affirmations true. We may say, for example, that some dogs are white
and not thereby commit ourselves to recognizing either doghood or whiteness as entities.
Some dogs are white says that some things that are dogs are white, and in order that this statement
be true, the things over which the bound variable something ranges must include some white dogs,
but need not include dogness or whiteness. On the other hand, when we say that some
zoological species are cross-fertile, we are committing ourselves to recognizing as entities
the several species themselves, abstract though they are. We remain so committed,
at least until we devise some way of so paraphrasing the statement,
as to show that the seeming reference to species on the part of our bound variable
was unavoidable manner of speaking. Classical mathematics, as the example of
primes larger than a million clearly illustrates, is up to its neck in commitments to an ontology
of abstract entities. Thus it is that the great medieval controversy over universals
has flared up anew in the modern philosophy of mathematics. The issue is clearer now than of old
because we now have a more explicit standard whereby to decide what ontology a given theory
or form of discourse is committed to. A theory is committed to those and only those entities to which
the bound variables of the theory must be capable of referring in order that the affirmations made
in the theory be true. Because this standard of ontological presupposition did not emerge clearly
in the philosophical tradition, the modern philosophical mathematicians have not on the whole
recognized that they were debating the same old problem of universals in a newly clarified form.
But the fundamental cleavages among modern points of view on foundations of mathematics
do come down pretty explicitly to disagreements as to the range of entities to which the bound
variables should be permitted to refer. The three main medieval points of view regarding
universals are designated by historians as realism, conceptualism, and nominalism. Essentially,
these same three doctrines reappear in 20th century surveys of the philosophy of mathematics
under the new names, logicism, intuitionism, and formalism.
Realism, as the word is used in connection with the medieval controversy over universals,
is the platonic doctrine that universals or abstract entities have being independently of the mind.
The mind may discover them but cannot create them. Logicism, represented by Frege, Russell,
Whitehead, Church, and Carnap condones the use of bound variables to refer to abstract entities
known and unknown, specifiable and unspecifiable indiscriminately.
Conceptualism holds that there are universals but they are mind-made. Intuitionism, espoused in
modern times in one form or another by Poincaré, Brower, Veil, and others, countenances the use
of bound variables to refer to abstract entities only when those entities are capable of being
cooked up individually from ingredients specified in advance. As Frankel has put it,
logicism holds that classes are discovered while intuitionism holds that they are invented.
A fair statement indeed of the old opposition between realism and conceptualism.
This opposition is no mere quibble. It makes an essential difference in the amount of classical
mathematics to which one is willing to subscribe. Logicists or realists are able on their assumptions
to get Cantor's ascending orders of infinity. Intuitionists are compelled to stop with the
lowest order of infinity and as an indirect consequence to abandon even some of the classical
laws of real numbers. The modern controversy between logicism and intuitionism arose, in fact,
from disagreements over infinity. Formalism, associated with the name of Hilbert, echoes
intuitionism in deploring the logicist unbridled recourse to universals. But
formalism also finds intuitionism unsatisfactory. This could happen for either of two opposite
reasons. The formalist might, like the logicist, object to the crippling of classical mathematics.
Or he might, like the nominalists of old, object to admitting abstract entities at all,
even in the restrained sense of mind-made entities. The upshot is the same. The formalist
keeps classical mathematics as a play of insignificant notations. This play of notations
can still be of utility, whatever utility it has already shown itself to have as a crutch
for physicists and technologists. But utility need not imply significance in any literal
linguistic sense. Nor need the marked success of mathematicians in spinning out theorems,
and in finding objective basis for agreement with one another's results, imply significance.
For an adequate basis for agreement among mathematicians can be found simply in the rules
which govern the manipulation of the notations. These syntactical rules being, unlike the
notations themselves, quite significant and intelligible. I have argued that the sort of
ontology we adopt can be consequential, notably in connection with mathematics, although this
is only an example. Now, how are we to adjudicate among rival ontologies? Certainly, the answer
is not provided by the semantical formula to be is to be the value of a variable.
This formula serves, rather conversely, in testing the conformity of a given remark
or doctrine to a prior ontological standard. We look to bound variables in connection with ontology,
not in order to know what there is, but in order to know what a given remark or doctrine,
ours or someone else's, says there is. And this much is quite properly a problem involving language,
but what there is is another question. In debating over what there is, there are still
reasons for operating on a semantical plane. One reason is to escape from the predicament
noted at the beginning of this essay, the predicament of my not being able to admit
that there are things which MacX countenances and I do not. So long as I adhere to my ontology,
as opposed to MacX's, I cannot allow my bound variables to refer to entities which belong
to MacX's ontology and not to mine. I can, however, consistently describe our disagreement
by characterizing the statements which MacX affirms, provided merely that my ontology
countenances linguistic forms, or at least concrete inscriptions and utterances,
I can talk about MacX's sentences. Another reason for withdrawing to a semantical plane
is to find common ground on which to argue. Disagreement in ontology involves basic disagreement
in conceptual schemes, yet MacX and I, despite these basic disagreements,
find that our conceptual schemes converge sufficiently in their intermediate and upper
ramifications to enable us to communicate successfully on topics such as politics,
weather, and, in particular, language. Insofar as our basic controversy over ontology
can be translated upward into a semantical controversy about words and what to do with them,
the collapse of the controversy into question begging may be delayed.
It is no wonder, then, that ontological controversy should tend into controversy over
language, but we must not jump to the conclusion that what there is depends on words. Translate
ability of a question into semantical terms is no indication that the question is linguistic.
To see Naples is to bear a name which, when prefixed to the words C's Naples,
yields a true sentence. Still, there is nothing linguistic about seeing Naples.
Our acceptance of an ontology is, I think, similar in principle to our acceptance of a
scientific theory, say a system of physics. We adopt, at least insofar as we are reasonable,
the simplest conceptual scheme into which the disordered fragments of raw experience
can be fitted and arranged. Our ontology is determined once we have fixed upon the
overall conceptual scheme which is to accommodate science in the broadest sense,
and the considerations which determine a reasonable construction of any part of that
conceptual scheme, for example, the biological or the physical part, are not different in kind
from the considerations which determine a reasonable construction of the whole.
To whatever extent the adoption of any system of scientific theory may be said to be a matter
of language, the same, but no more, may be said of the adoption of an ontology.
But simplicity as a guiding principle in constructing conceptual schemes is not a clear
and unambiguous idea, and it is quite capable of presenting a double or multiple standard.
Imagine, for example, that we have devised the most economical set of concepts adequate to the
play-by-play reporting of immediate experience. The entities under this scheme, the values of
bound variables, are, let us suppose, individual subjective events of sensation or reflection.
We should still find, no doubt, that a physicalistic conceptual scheme purporting to talk about
external objects offers great advantages in simplifying our overall reports.
By bringing together scattered sense events and treating them as perceptions of one object,
we reduce the complexity of our stream of experience to a manageable conceptual simplicity.
The rule of simplicity is indeed our guiding maxim in assigning sense data to objects.
We associate an earlier and a later round-sensum with the same so-called penny,
or with two different so-called pennies, in obedience to the demands of maximum simplicity
in our total world picture.
Here we have two competing conceptual schemes, a phenomenalistic one and a physicalistic one,
which should prevail. Each has its advantages. Each has its special simplicity in its own way.
Each, I suggest, deserves to be developed. Each may be said, indeed, to be the more fundamental,
though in different senses. The one is epistemologically, the other physically fundamental.
The physical conceptual scheme simplifies our account of experience because of the way
myriad scattered sense events come to be associated with single so-called objects.
Still, there is no likelihood that each sentence about physical objects can actually be translated,
however deviously and complexly, into the phenomenalistic language.
Physical objects are postulated entities, which round out and simplify our account of the flux
of experience, just as the introduction of irrational numbers simplifies laws of arithmetic.
From the point of view of the conceptual scheme of the elementary arithmetic of
rational numbers alone, the broader arithmetic of rational and irrational numbers would have
the status of a convenient myth, simpler than the literal truth, namely the arithmetic of
rationals, and yet containing that literal truth as a scattered part. Similarly, from a
phenomenalistic point of view, the conceptual scheme of physical objects is a convenient myth,
simpler than the literal truth and yet containing that literal truth as a scattered part.
Now, what of classes or attributes of physical objects, in turn?
A Platonistic ontology of this sort is, from the point of view of a strictly physicalistic
conceptual scheme, as much a myth as that physicalistic conceptual scheme itself is for phenomenalism.
This higher myth is a good and useful one, in turn, insofar as it simplifies our account of physics.
Since mathematics is an integral part of this higher myth, the utility of this myth for physical
science is evident enough. In speaking of it nevertheless as a myth, I echo that philosophy
of mathematics to which I alluded earlier under the name of formalism. But an attitude of formalism
may with equal justice be adopted toward the physical conceptual scheme, in turn, by the pure
ascete or phenomenalist. The analogy between the myth of mathematics and the myth of physics is,
in some additional and perhaps fortuitous ways, strikingly close. Consider, for example,
the crisis which was precipitated in the foundations of mathematics at the turn of
the century by the discovery of Russell's paradox and other antinomies of set theory.
These contradictions had to be obviated by unintuitive ad hoc devices. Our mathematical
myth making became deliberate and evident to all. But what of physics? An antinomy rose between the
undular and corpuscular accounts of light, and if this was not as out and out a contradiction
as Russell's paradox, I suspect that the reason is that physics is not as out and out as mathematics.
Again, the second great modern crisis in the foundations of mathematics, precipitated in 1931
by Gertl's prove that there are bound to be undecidable statements in arithmetic,
has its companion piece in physics, in Heisenberg's indeterminancy principle.
In earlier pages, I undertook to show that some common arguments in favor of certain ontologies
are fallacious. Further, I advanced an explicit standard whereby to decide what the ontological
commitments of a theory are. But the question what ontology actually to adopt still stands open,
and the obvious counsel is tolerance and an experimental spirit.
Let us by all means see how much of the physicalistic conceptual scheme can be reduced to a
phenomenalistic one. Still, physics also naturally demands pursuing, irreducible in Toto, though it
may be. Let us see how, or to what degree, natural science may be rendered independent
of Platonistic mathematics. But let us also pursue mathematics and delve into its Platonistic
foundations. From among the various conceptual schemes best suited to these various pursuits,
one, the phenomenalistic, claims epistemological priority. Viewed from within the phenomenalistic
conceptual scheme, the ontologies of physical objects and mathematical objects are myths.
The quality of myth, however, is relative. Relative, in this case, to the epistemological
point of view. This point of view is one among various, corresponding to one among our various
interests and purposes.
