Recorded books is pleased to present the Modern Scholars Series, where great professors teach
you. My name is Richard Poe, and I'll be your host.
Today we begin a course entitled Fundamental Cases, the 20th Century Courtroom Battles
that Changed Our Nation. Your instructor is Alan M. Dershowitz, who has been described
by Newsweek as the nation's most peripatetic civil liberties lawyer and one of its most
distinguished defenders of individual rights. Professor Dershowitz has been a pioneer in
making the legal profession accessible to the general public. More than a million of his
books have been sold worldwide. Professor Dershowitz has published hundreds of articles
in magazines and journals, and has written more than 1,000 op-ed articles.
Over the course of his 35-year career as a lawyer, Professor Dershowitz has won more
than 100 cases. He takes half of his cases on a pro bono basis and continues to represent
numerous indigent defendants and causes. He has been a consultant to several presidential
commissions and has testified before congressional committees on numerous occasions, including
as a witness against President Clinton's impeachment. He has advised business leaders,
presidents, United Nations officials, prime ministers, governors, and members of Congress
about legal and political issues. The courtroom trial has fascinated human
beings from the beginning of recorded history. Trials are theater, trials are history, and
the great trials of the 20th century provide a unique insight into the developments in
American culture that have made the country what it is today. Every great and hotly contested
issue in American politics eventually comes before the courts. Their decisions, especially
those rendered by the Supreme Court, set the precedent for how our society will function.
With this in mind, esteemed professor and civil liberties lawyer Alan Dershowitz looks
at history through the prism of the trial and sets out to discover what makes a great
trial. When asked this question, people will often reference the trial of the moment, but
those trials are often not enduring. The focus of this course, then, is on landmark
cases and the impact they have had on life in the United States.
For more information on this course, please visit its webpage at www.modernscholar.com.
We all have access to links to related sites, a seminar room to share your thoughts with
other students, and yes, of course, a final exam.
And now we begin fundamental cases, the 20th century courtroom battles that changed our
nation.
Lecture 1, The Scopes Trial
