The book itself was a dangerous application of Darwin's theory of evolution.
It explicitly accepted what has come to be called the naturalistic fallacy.
In other words, the fallacy that says that moral conclusions can be drawn directly from
descriptions of nature.
And the book repeatedly drew implications for civic society from mischaracterizations
of Darwin's evolution.
For example, in discussing the Five Races of Man, the textbook, Civic Biology, assured
the all-white, legally segregated high school students that were taught by scopes that quote,
the highest type of all, the Caucasians, are represented by the civilized white inhabitants
of Europe and America.
The book, the avowed goal of which was the improvement of the future of the human race,
then proposed certain eugenic remedies.
After a discussion of the inheritability of crime and immorality, the author of the book,
proposed the following analogy, quote, just as certain animals or plants become parasitic
on other plants or animals, certain families have become parasitic on society.
Not only do they do harm to others by corrupting, stealing, or spreading disease, but they
are actually protected and cared for by the state out of public money.
Only for them, the poor houses and the asylums exist, continued the quote.
They take from society, but they give nothing in return.
They are the true parasites, end quote.
From this flawed analogy grew the even more dangerous remedy, quote, if such people were
lower animals, we would kill them off to prevent them from spreading.
But then the book says humanity will not allow us to kill them off.
But we do have the remedy of separating the sexes and asylums in other places and in various
ways preventing intermarriage and the possibility of perpetuating such a low and degenerate
race.
Guess who they were talking about.
Remedies of this sort, it claims, have been tried successfully in Europe.
He's talking about Germany now, which was in very much the frenzy of eugenics and are
now meeting with success in this country.
These remedies, he said, included involuntary sterilizations, and of course we now know
they eventually laid the foundation for involuntary euthanasia of the kind practiced in Nazi Germany.
These views were not limited to the textbook that was being used in Dayton, Tennessee in
1925.
Similar views were being held at the very same time by eminent institutions of higher
learning, including indeed and especially the university that I teach at today, Harvard
University.
