At the time, it had a racist president, named Abbott Lawrence Lowell, and he was a strong
believer in eugenics and in forms of euthanasia that could improve the race and turn it essentially
more Caucasian and more like he was and his friends were.
Even so distinguished to Supreme Court justice as Oliver Wendell Holmes upheld a mandatory
sterilization statute on the basis of a pseudo-scientific assumption about the inheritability of insanity
and mental retardation.
His widely quoted rationale that, quote, three generations of imbeciles are enough was later
cited by Nazi apologists for mass sterilization.
It's interesting too that one of the journalists who followed the Scopes trial and reported
on it and indeed paid for part of the defense was H. L. Menken, a famous journalist, the
editor of the Baltimore Mercury, and himself a racist.
He didn't deny his racism, he proudly proclaimed it.
He called himself, as did Lowell, a racialist, but the extra couple of letters doesn't change
the meaning of what they really were.
They believed very strongly that racial differences mattered and wanted to prove that at this
trial as well as in the general public opinion of the day.
So it shouldn't be surprising to anybody who understands the career of William Jennings
Bryant that he would not favor the teaching of this kind of abuse and misuse of evolutionary
theory to segregated school children in Dayton, Tennessee in 1925.
He thought it was wrong.
He thought it was wrong morally and he also thought it was wrong religiously.
Interestingly, the only justice who dissented from the mandatory sterilization decision
rendered by the United States Supreme Court was also a deeply religious man, the only
Catholic on the Supreme Court at the time and because Catholic teaching was against sterilization,
even sterilization of the unfit, he decided to dissent in that case.
So there was a very strong view held by many moral people that evolution, that social Darwinism
at least, was being misused.
Now that doesn't mean that evolution should be banned in the school, of course not.
It did mean, however, that evolution should not be viewed uncritically in all of its applications
and misapplication.
Now William Jennings Bryant was not a know-nothing literalist, not the person he's portrayed
as in the movie Inherit the Wind or the play Inherit the Wind.
In fact, in many respects, and this is going to be surprising to a lot of people, he got
the best of Clarence Darrow because Clarence Darrow knew nothing about the Bible.
He was an acknowledged atheist and despised biblical teachings and really was not very
knowledgeable about the Bible.
The interesting side point is that Clarence Darrow decided to call as one of his witnesses
in the case a leading expert in the Bible, none other than William Jennings Bryant, and
that's what made for the dramatic courtroom fireworks.
Imagine a lawyer calling his opposing lawyer to the witness stand as his own expert in
the Bible, but that's what Clarence Darrow, who was always known for his kind of judicial
chutzpah, his willingness to do things differently and to provoke the system, that's what he
did.
He called William Jennings Bryant to the witness stand and he said, you claim to be an expert
in biblical interpretation, fine, now you're my expert, answer my questions.
He really expected to completely befuddle this fundamentalist fool, this literal interpreter
of the Bible, and he asked him a lot of questions.
For example, do you think the earth was made in six days?
After all, the Bible says that in six days God created the earth and on the seventh he
rested, the Ten Commandments say therefore the seventh day shall be unto you a day of
rest.
