But sometimes winning a case doesn't give you the historical verdict of history.
Eventually, the historical verdict for many, many years went against the banning of evolution
in the schools in Dayton. And if you asked people who won the case, most people would probably tell
you, oh, of course, Clarence Darrow won the case. He was much better than William Jennings Bryant.
They forgot that the verdict went against Clarence Darrow and in favor of William Jennings Bryant.
And that the teaching of evolution was, in fact, banned. Scopes literally had to pay a fine
and had to stop teaching. Evolution in the school, less
worse before him, he could actually have been imprisoned. Years later, the Supreme Court of
the United States, in an aside, essentially, overruled that verdict and said you could not
ban the teaching of evolution or ban the teaching of any kind of science in the school.
Now, of course, what's happened recently is that religious fundamentalists have gotten
much, much smarter. They don't want to ban the teaching of evolution. What they want to do is
simply criticize it, question it. And so in some school systems around the country now,
stickers have to be placed in the school books that teach evolution, saying, essentially, look,
students, evolution is not a fact. It's just a theory. And you should view the teaching of
evolution with an open mind and consider alternative explanations. Well, what are these
alternative explanations? Plainly, what the people who put the stickers in the books have in mind
is creationism, namely a variation on the theme that William Jennings Bryant was playing during
the trial of scopes in Dayton, Tennessee in 1925. Namely, the alternative to evolution
is that human beings were created as human beings. They were not preceded along any evolutionary
scale by ape-like figures or other figures, and they did not evolve from single cell beings,
but rather were created fully by God on a certain day of creation,
approximately 6,000 years, epics, eons ago, consistent with the Bible and consistent with
modern interpretations of the Bible. There are today, of course, some literalists who literally
say they can date the day on which the earth was created. It was 5,700 and something years ago.
That's not mainstream, but there are some in many parts of the country who believe that.
But the William Jennings Bryant's of today are much smarter. They're not trying to ban evolution.
What they're trying to do is include the teaching either of creationism
or of this new theory called intelligent design. Now, the courts held several years ago
that the teaching of creationism could not be permitted in public schools. It could be done
in private schools, of course, and religious schools, but it couldn't be done in public schools
under the establishment clause of the First Amendment to the Constitution, which prohibits
any law respecting an establishment of religion. And teaching one form of religious view of creation
is a form of establishing religion. It's a form of preferring religion over non-religion, and that's
prohibited.
