What does the Scopes case teach us in terms of what is likely to happen if this case would
be presented to the United States Supreme Court?
Hard to know, because it's hard to know how the justices themselves today think about
the Scopes case, and even those who think that the Scopes case came out wrong, that
is the banning of evolution, was a mistake, might today take the view that banning evolution
is very different from teaching it as a theory and trying to introduce an alternative to
it.
So, although I think you can learn much from looking at the past, and perhaps the past
is one of the better predictors of the future, as Oliver Wendell Holmes once said, the great
judge who made the mistake of sustaining sterilization ban, but as he once said, the job of the lawyers
to predict what the courts will do in fact, and that's my job as a lawyer and as a law
professor, I try very hard to predict what the courts will do in fact.
But before you can predict what courts will do, you have to not only know the history
of the past, but you also have to know the personalities, you have to know the ideologies,
you have to know the views of the judges who sit on the courts.
In the old days, judges would wear wigs and robes, and they were made to all look the
same because judges were supposed to be the embodiment of the law, of the impersonal law.
The expectation was if you put down a hundred judges in the same room, they would all come
out the same way, because the law is the law is the law.
Legal realism, I think, has overtaken that theory, and we now know that the law is what
the judges say it is, and modern judges might very well uphold the teaching of intelligent
design in the public school, even though they didn't uphold the teaching of creationism
in the public school.
So it's not possible to know for sure, A, how a Scopes case currently would come out,
and B, even if a Scopes case would come out differently today than it did in 1925, how
the modern variations of the Scopes cases would come out.
So I think the Scopes case is a very, very important exercise both in legal history and
in American history in general, and also in understanding how courts work.
It helps us understand the period of time between the Second World War and the First
World War.
It helps us to understand the clash between biology on the one hand represented by evolution,
and religion on the other hand represented by the book of Genesis.
It helps us to explain what was going on in America during that period of time, a period
that followed massive immigration of different groups into this country.
We were before the beginning of the 20th century, largely a white, Protestant, male-dominated
country, an aristocracy in many ways, blacks couldn't vote, women couldn't vote, and there
were very, very few Catholics, Jews, Muslims, and others in the United States.
The last part of the 19th century, the early part of the 20th century, opened the doors
to immigration.
It was a very, very different country, a very different country religiously.
We became the most multicultural, multi-religious, multi-linguistic, multi-racial country in
the history of the world in the 1920s was a testing period, and the Scopes case was part
of that test.
