It juxtaposed religious fundamentalism of one kind against modernity, science and cynicism
of one kind as well. It also teaches us much about where the court is likely to go and where
the courts in general are likely to go in the future. But times change, people change, the law
changes, it's never static. And in the weeks to come and in the lectures to come, we will look at
a lot of other cases, cases that also reflect the periods at issue, but cases that tell us something
about what we face in this country today. We'll look at other cases during that period of time.
We'll look at the trial of Leo Frank, the first case in which a Jew was lynched in America
and he was lynched based on the testimony of an African-American, a very, very interesting
interplay of race, religion and politics. We'll look at the trials of Sacco and Vanzetti,
Italian-American anarchists whose religion and race played a role in their conviction.
We'll look at the trial of Leopold and Loeb. We'll look at the Nuremberg trial, which
eventuated perhaps from the misuse of eugenics and other forms of racism. We'll look at the
trial of the Rosenbergs for spying against the United States. We'll look at cases like the
trial of Mike Tyson, the heavyweight boxing champion of the world for rape, the trial of O.J.
Simpson, the impeachment trial against Bill Clinton. We'll move finally into the 21st century and look
at some of the major trials that our century began with, the trial of Bush v. Gore for the
presidency of the United States in 2000, the Texas Sotomy trial, which finally legalized
homosexuality between consenting adults after years in which that was criminalized. Finally,
the trials of the future, the trials involving detainees, alleged terrorists, people from Al-Qaeda,
and we'll ask ourselves whether the lessons of the past will give us insights into the future.
The one thing that remains clear and will remain clear throughout all of our study of trials is
that the trial is very significant as a prism into the history and attitudes of a country.
And as we look at the trials, we look at ourselves. As we look at the trials in America,
we look at America. So I look forward to further trials, further discussions,
and some good, hard thinking about America and the trials that make us and the trials that challenge us.
This ends lecture one.
