There was not much of a chance that he was going to get a fair trial and he didn't get
a fair trial.
There were people standing outside calling for him to be lynched, calling for him to
be executed, crowds were demanding, justice, crowds were demanding revenge.
What made the case so interesting is that the major witness for the state, in fact really
the only witness for the state, was the janitor who worked in the factory and he was an African
American man named James Conley and Conley testified that he saw Frank kill the young
girl and that Frank then ordered him to dispose of the body and then dictated notes that
were designed to place the blame on the quote negro written in kind of language that would
be more typical of an uneducated black man than of an educated white man who was the
supervisor of the factory and when the jury convicted Leo Frank it was the first time
in memory that a white man was ever convicted on the uncorroborated testimony of a black
man you might call that racial progress.
The problem is that it was, as it turned out, a false conviction.
But even at the time it wasn't seen as progress for racial justice because this is the way
it was explained by a local observer, quote, that wasn't a white man convicted by that
N, he then used the N words, testimony, it was a Jew.
It has even been written that prosecutor, you Dorsey deliberately chose to prosecute
a Yankee Jew rather than and then the N word again for purposes of sensationalism regardless
of Frank's innocence.
Frank was described as a pervert and as a sodomite and lots of anti-Jewish stereotypes
were used by the media and by others and tried to confirm the kind of theory that a man
like that, a man from the North, a man who didn't believe in Jesus, a man who had come
down to the South to exploit young women at his factory is precisely the kind of man
who would commit this crime.
Well that's where the story begins but it surely doesn't end there.
After he was convicted and sentenced to death a number of groups got formed around this
case.
The first group that was formed around the case was the reincarnation of the Ku Klux
Klan.
They were first called the Knights of Mary Fagan and the Knights of Mary Fagan eventually
evolved into the Knights or devolved into the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan and became
the second incarnation of the Klan following the immediate post-Civil War incarnation of
the Knight Riders and the Klan that were mostly Civil War veterans.
This second Klan became very influential in American life, eventually moved up to many
northern cities and was centered in Indiana for many years and there was a famous march
on Washington where a million Klansmen marched in the streets of Washington and there was
a time when a Democrat could not get nominated for president or for high office in many states
without having the support of the Klan.
