The conviction of the death sentence, though, was merely the beginning of the case.
What happened is prominent civil liberties and civil rights lawyers from all over the
country began to raise questions about Leo Frank's guilt.
The case went to the Supreme Court and some of the justices in the Supreme Court raised
questions about the guilt of Leo Frank.
And finally, a very, very interesting incident not much reported on and not much known affected
the case.
And I want to tell you about it because it raises one of the most profound questions
of legal ethics that anybody can ever confront.
Okay, picture the scene.
Leo Frank is on death row, sentenced to be executed.
There is a prominent lawyer in town.
His name is Powell, is a big law firm named after him now in Atlanta and Washington Powell
and Goldstein.
But at this time it was a relatively small but distinguished firm.
A lawyer named Powell, somebody comes to see him and says, I need you to be my lawyer
and I need to tell you something in absolute confidence.
Powell says, sure, that's what we lawyers do.
We have confidentiality.
We're not going to disclose what you tell us as long as it's not a future crime as long
as it's only a past crime.
And the person says to him, my name is John Conlon.
I was a witness against Leo Frank and I'm very worried that all these Jews are now coming
from New York and are going to try to reopen the case and try to persuade people that I'm
the murderer rather than Leo Frank and I need you to represent me.
And the lawyer said, well, what do you need me if you're innocent?
And Conlon said, that's the problem.
I'm not innocent.
I'm guilty.
I did it.
I killed Mary Fagan.
Leo Frank did not.
He has been falsely accused and he's going to be executed.
Well, Powell obviously turned to the person and said, well, I can't be your lawyer.
I'm not going to help you get somebody executed who's been falsely executed.
Get out of my office.
I'm not going to represent you.
But Conlon then turned to him and said, all right, you're not going to represent me.
That's fine, but you certainly can't turn me in.
What I told you, I told you in confidence, imagine what must have been going through
Powell's mind.
On the one hand, he has a person who tried to become his client and who gave him a deep
dark secret based on a promise that he would never reveal that secret.
On the other hand, there's a stranger, somebody he doesn't know who's on death row, who's
innocent and who is now going to die.
What should Powell do?
If he goes to the authorities and reveals the secret told to him by the man who wanted
to be his client and who's covered by the lawyer client privilege, he breaches his promise
to that man and violates his oath as an attorney, never, ever to disclose a legal confidence.
