On the other hand, if he doesn't disclose the legal confidence, he is complicit in an innocent man dying, being executed.
Well, you might say to yourself, it's a no-brainer. Life is more important than telling the truth.
He therefore should break his promise to the guilty murderer and should free the innocent stranger.
Alright, that seems easy. Let me ask you to change roles now.
Now you're no longer a lawyer. You're a priest. You're a Catholic priest.
And somebody comes to you during the rite of reconciliation, gets on his hands and knees and says,
Father, I have sinned. Forgive me. Can I tell you in confidence my sin?
And the priest says, yes, of course, my son, anything you tell me remains in this confessional. I will never tell anybody.
And the man says to the priest, I killed the person for whom an innocent man is now on death row.
Should the priest disclose that? Would the priest disclose that?
Well, I have to tell you, I've asked a lot of priests, including friends of mine who teach at seminaries and who teach the confessional.
And they all unanimously have one clear answer. No, absolutely not.
There are no exceptions to the obligation of the priest to keep a secret, even if it means an innocent person will die.
And then they go on and explain, of course, since we as priests believe in heaven and believe in hell,
we believe ultimately the innocent person who's executed here on earth will go to heaven.
And his period here on earth and his execution will only be a transition to a better life.
And the person who is the actual killer, even though he may live a long life here on earth,
will eventually go to hell and be punished in purgatory forever and ever and ever.
So it's an easier question.
But what should the lawyer do? Should the lawyer break his oath and do the right thing?
Or should the lawyer maintain his oath and maintain his obligation to the bar and do the wrong thing, namely not protect the life of an innocent person?
Well, let me tell you what Powell did.
First, we don't know for absolute sure because he put his records in a secret file and he said that someday when he dies,
the records will be made public and nobody's ever been able to find the records.
But we have a pretty good idea of what he did from history.
What he did is he went over to the governor of the state, who was a friend of his, and he said to him,
