Sir, as one Christian to another, I am telling you I know for absolute certain that Leo Frank
is innocent.
I cannot tell you how I know.
I cannot tell you who told me the information, but I want you to look me in the eye.
You know me to be an honorable and honest person.
I am telling you for certain that he's innocent.
You must spare his life.
And the governor believed him.
And the governor said, you're making a terrible problem for me.
I will spare his life, but I can't tell the public why I'm doing it, and I can't tell
the public who the guilty person is, and this will destroy my career.
And the lawyer said, that may be the case, and I'm sorry for putting you in this position,
but I must tell you what I know, and I can't tell you what I can't tell you.
And the governor then wrote in his diary, very, very interesting.
He wrote a statement in which he said, 2000 years ago, a governor in a different part
of the world allowed an innocent man to be crucified, and that governor has always gone
down in history as an infamous person, as Pontius Pilate.
He said, I will not allow that to happen to me.
I've learned the lesson of the gospels, he said, and I'm going to save this man's life,
even though it will destroy my career.
And that's exactly what the governor Slayton did.
He saved Leo Frank's life.
He issued a statement commuting his sentence from death to life imprisonment.
He didn't go all the way.
He didn't say, I'm freeing him.
He didn't think he could get away with that, but he said, I'm saving his life, and then
let the legal proceeding go forward, and maybe the legal proceeding will prove his innocence,
in which case he'll be freed from prison.
Well, two things happened as the result of that.
Number one, Governor Slayton was driven out of the state and had to give up his governorship
and had to move to California, which in those days was like moving to Australia.
It was so far away.
And second, the good people of Atlanta and Marietta, Georgia, the good people, the sheriff,
the ministers, the business people formed a lynch gang, and they went up to the jail
where Leo Frank was now serving his life sentence, and probably with the cooperation
of the warden of the jail, broke him out of prison and lynched him and hanged him.
And hundreds of people came to the lynching.
It was a big popular that photographs were made, postcards were distributed of the lynching,
and it became a famous picture of Leo Frank hanging with his neck broken.
The rope was cut into hundreds of pieces, and souvenirs of the rope were sold for lots
of money, and everybody proudly bragged of having been in the lynching party.
The lynching party only consisted of perhaps a couple of dozen people, but if you went
back to Marietta and Atlanta at that period of time, hundreds of people would have told
you openly they were part of the lynching party.
Of course, a grand jury was convened, and the grand jury concluded that they had no
evidence of any person in particular who participated in the lynching party, even though
there were photographs, and there were admissions and boasts and bragging of people because
this was part of the South in the second decade of the 20th century.
