But, in years to come, there were future tests, and there were many other tests.
And Leo Frank stood as an object lesson in how not to conduct trials.
The Supreme Court's decision, even though it was against Leo Frank, sent out a very
powerful message that having trials inside of a courtroom with crowds outside of the
courtroom demanding blood and crying for vengeance was not the way to conduct a trial in America.
And trials today are not conducted in that way.
Although if you look at some of our trials, you might say, although there are no crowd
shouting for blood, if you do public opinion polls, people would be very disappointed if
they were in acquittal.
And it's very, very difficult to be a judge or a juror in a situation where people care
deeply about the outcome of a case.
The other important point about the Connolly conflict with Leo Frank is how the dominant
society will sometimes play groups against each other.
Here the Jewish community was juxtaposed with the African-American community.
African-Americans were very interested in seeing that John Conlon was not prosecuted
for the crime.
By the way, if he had been thought to be guilty, he never would have been prosecuted, he simply
would have been lynched.
In those days blacks were not prosecuted for raping or killing white girls, they were
simply taking out and lynched.
And so the black community understandably had an interest in protecting the welfare of
an African-American who may have been guilty or not guilty of a crime they didn't know
at the time.
The Jewish community was concerned because they thought they were welcome in America,
a country with streets paved with gold and opportunity, no more pogroms like in Poland,
no more lynchings.
And suddenly they come to America and the most visible trial involving a Jew involves
a Jew who's falsely accused.
In fact, the Leo Frank case was called the American Dreyfus trial or an American pogrom
because Jews began to fear what it meant to be a Jew in parts of America and the Anti-Defamation
League of the Maybryth were founded around the tragedy of the Leo Frank case.
But again, Leo Frank now stands not for what happened to Leo Frank, everybody understands
that to be a terrible, terrible tragedy and a miscarriage of justice, but as an object
lesson in how to avoid such misjudgments and miscarriages of justice in the future.
So Shakespeare once said, it takes a small lie to tell a big truth, sometimes it takes
a major injustice to teach us how to avoid injustices in the future.
We'll see in future lectures that these injustices cannot always be avoided, that we've had other
injustices in our history.
Some of them involve racial and religious bigotry and discrimination, sometimes they
involve only the passion of the times.
But nobody can really understand the history of America in the 20th century without fully
understanding the Leo Frank case, and that's why the Leo Frank case has been the subject
of books, of motion pictures, even of a musical called Parade that played on Broadway.
It captured the imagination of Americans, both at the time it occurred and also in years
thereafter.
Today, even today, when one hears about miscarriages of justice, one hears analogies being made
to the Leo Frank case.
Another very important point that Leo Frank taught us is that having good lawyers involved
in the case at the earliest possible time is absolutely essential in avoiding injustice.
In the Leo Frank case, the lawyers that were involved in the very beginning on behalf of
Leo Frank were not the kinds of lawyers one would expect to be involved in high profile
cases of this kind.
