It was only later when it was too late when too many people had a stake in the outcome of the case
that good lawyers were introduced into the case. But even then the lawyers were from the north
and it became therefore a we versus them attitude. And it's very hard to win a case far away from home
if you try to put the entire community on trial, which is why as a lawyer when I get involved
in cases out of town, I always associate myself with local counsel, with counsel who well understand
the culture, well understand the politics, well understand the interplay of people in the society.
And so in the end, Leo Frank stands for many aspects of our history, mostly negative,
mostly dark sides of our history. The hope is that we've grown out of that part of our history
and the trials that are coming, trials that occur in the 20s, the 30s, the 40s, the 50s,
up through modern times will reflect learning from the tragedy of the Leo Frank case. We will have to
see as we look at some of these future trials. After listening to lecture two, a student posed
this question to Professor Dershowitz. How did events outside the courtroom affect trials
in the early part of the 20th century? Let's listen to the professor's response.
In many of the great cases of the 20th and really in other centuries as well,
the significance of the case is often as much what went on outside the courtroom as what
went on inside the courtroom itself. Some of the cases, the trials themselves were insignificant.
If you read the transcript of the Leo Frank case, for example, it reads like an ordinary murder case.
There's nothing greatly significant about it. The lawyers were ordinary. The arguments were
ordinary. What was important is the setting, what was going on outside the courtroom, the pressures
outside the courtroom, the organizations that grew out of the case, the lynching, which was
obviously extra judicial and extra legal, the racial, religious, ethnic elements, the
political elements, the man who ran for the Senate Watson after having basically turned his
newspaper into an anti-Leo Frank broadside. These are what make the case of Leo Frank,
one of the great cases of the 20th century, had it resulted in an acquittal, as it should have,
nobody would remember this case. It would just be yet another trial in which an innocent person
was acquitted. It is the fact that there was a false conviction and that the efforts were made to
have the governor intervene, the lynching, the organizations, the racial tensions that make
this into a great case. So cases are won and lost outside the courtroom and they also assume great
significance outside the courtroom. This ends lecture two. If you borrow this course from a
public library and would like your own copy of the course guide for future reference,
call recorded books at 1-800-636-3399 and we'll send you a free copy. A shipping charge will apply.
