Fundamental Cases, Lecture 3, Leopold and Loeb In this lecture I'm going to talk
about a very ordinary trial that had no real racial or religious or political
overtones and yet for reasons that will become obvious has become a signature
case about the middle of the 20th century. The case involved the murder of a young
man by two neighbors. The two murderers have gone down in infamy. Their names are
Leopold and Loeb and the murder victim, a little boy named Bobby Franks who was in
fact selected quite by accident. The murderers had in mind actually killing
somebody else but he was not available that day and so Franks was killed and the
trial became only significant because of who the lawyer was and what his approach
to the death penalty was. But the case itself was so insignificant because the
people selected the victim just almost at random. They committed the crime just to
see whether or not they could commit a perfect crime. These were two very bright, very well
educated, very wealthy young men from Chicago who had misread Nietzsche and various other
philosophers and thought of themselves as supermen, as men who were so intelligent and
so above the constraints of law that they could do anything they wanted. They were
too smart to get caught and they were too smart to be punished and they were too smart
to have to comply with conventional rules of law. They were above it all. They were
in the words of Nietzsche, ubermenches. They were supermen. Well it turned out they were
fairly stupid and easily caught, easily prosecuted and easily convicted. They were very, very
fortunate, fortunate because they were wealthy and their parents were able to hire at the
time the world's greatest lawyer, Clarence Darrow, the same lawyer who conducted the
defense of scopes in the Famoscopes Monkey Trial and the same lawyer who was to conduct
many, many other defenses that went down in American history. You might ask yourself why
an ordinary murder case involving an insignificant group of people should have become the
subject of so many movies and so many books, The Rope by Alfred Hitchcock, A Compulsion
starring Orson Welles, were all based on this one trial. It was called The Trial of the
Century, but Clarence Darrow had at least seven trials of the century that he conducted
in the 20th century alone. So the phrase trial of a century tends to be more likely trial
of the decade or trial of the five year period or trial of that lawyer's career.
