Well, there was no technical insanity, they were not psychotic.
They were just, in his words, crazy, diseased.
He continues his argument, quote, they pull the dead boy into the back seat, they wrap
him in a blanket, and this funeral car starts on its route.
If ever any death car went over the same route, or the same kind of route driven by sane people,
I have never heard of it, and I fancy no one else has ever heard of it.
The car is driven for twenty miles, first down through thickly populated streets, where
everyone knew the boys and their families, and had known them for years.
They go down to the midway through the park, meeting hundreds of machines, meaning cars,
in sight of thousands of eyes, with this dead boy.
For what?
For nothing.
The mad act of the fool and King Lear is the only thing I know of that compares with it,
and yet doctors will swear that this is a sane act, they know better.
So again, what he's doing is he's attacking professionals, and saying you, the judge,
you, the audience, you're people of common sense.
You know better than the professionals.
You know a crazy person when you see one.
You know a crazy act when you hear about it.
And before long, Darrow easily has you agreeing with his conclusions.
By the time you finish listening to his argument, you wonder whether any fair-minded judge could
impose the death penalty on these two confused boys.
Darrow was there not only on behalf of these two boys, obviously they were his clients,
and he was receiving a very, very substantial fee for representing them simply on the sentencing
phase of the case.
But he had a bigger picture in mind.
He thought that if he could get this judge to refuse to impose the death penalty on these
defendants, perhaps he could change the atmosphere involving the imposition of the death penalty
throughout the country.
So here's what he said to the judge.
I am not pleading so much for these boys as I am for the infinite number of others to
follow, those who perhaps cannot be as well defended as these have been, those who may
go down in the storm and the tempest without aid, in other words, people without lawyers
like him.
It's a hard argument for a lawyer to make, you know, a lawyer like me, well, I'm better
than the other lawyers, but he makes it in such an elegant way, and he continues, it
is of them I am thinking, and for them I am begging of this court not to turn backwards
toward the barbarous and cruel past.
And then he finishes his argument with the following eloquent plea, I know your honor
stands between the future and the past.
I know the future is with me, and what I stand for here, not merely for the lives of these
two unfortunate lads, but for all boys and girls, for all of the young and as far as
possible for all of the old.
I am pleading for life, for understanding, for charity, kindness, and the infinite mercy
that considers all.
I am pleading that we overcome cruelty with kindness and hatred with love.
