I know the future is on my side."
Now he was right about the short-term future.
He won the case.
The judge refused to impose the death penalty and imposed life imprisonment on these two
young men.
But tragically he was wrong about the long-term future.
A speech like this would not resonate with many judges and juries.
Today the death penalty is increasingly popular even though we have seen evidence of some
innocent people being subject to the death penalty.
An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, the demand for vengeance seems very prevalent
in the air today.
But in those days he was able to win that case and it was thought to be a major setback
for the forces that wanted to increase the use of the death penalty, particularly against
young people.
It was also at a time when we were increasingly becoming sophisticated about mental illness.
Now I myself am not sure that you can diagnose these two young men as mentally ill.
We've learned a lot more about them since the trial.
I mentioned before that the word Jew or Jewish never came up in the trial.
It was another word that never came up in the trial, homosexual or gay.
The evidence seems overwhelming that Leopold and Loeb were gay and were lovers and in fact
Loeb eventually was killed in prison, stabbed to death in a homosexual encounter just a
few years after he went to prison.
Leopold on the other hand became asexual in prison as far as we know to the extent that
is possible in a prison setting and became a major research scientist and helped to develop
cures for various illnesses.
In fact, he was eventually released from prison toward the end of his life because he volunteered
to become a subject for experiments in how to cure various illnesses, malaria among others
and his life was considerably shortened as the result of that and he got out of jail
and spent the last few years of his life living in solitude in Puerto Rico and making
talks about justice, about science, if ever there was a case proving that rehabilitation
can at least sometimes work, the Loeb case doesn't demonstrate that but Leopold case
probably does demonstrate that.
Okay, now there's a dark side to the story and the dark side to the story is only speculative
but I think it's speculation that has to be put out on the table.
Clarence Darrow was a great, great lawyer.
He was a very political lawyer.
He was also, I'm sorry to say this to the many people who regard Clarence Darrow as
as close to achieving legal sainthood as anybody has ever achieved.
He was also a corrupt lawyer, corrupt in the spirit of his own times.
