A referendum taken in any state, even the most liberal of states, will favor the death
penalty.
Politicians who run against the death penalty do so at considerable risk to reelection.
It's no accident that almost all liberal Democrats in the United States Senate and House favor
the death penalty.
That's the one issue on which they move toward the center.
And I think part of the reason for why the trend against the death penalty, which is
captured the imagination of virtually every other country, virtually every European country,
every westernized country, Australia, Canada, Israel, virtually all of Europe, has abolished
the death penalty.
And the United States stands alone in favor of not only imposing the death penalty, but
seemingly imposing it more and more frequently on a wider range of potential defendants despite
the Supreme Court's narrowing the range.
The Supreme Court has now said you can't impose the death penalty except for murder, perhaps,
for treason and terrorist related crimes.
You can't do it any longer for rape or for armed robbery, but yet we have thousands of
people on death rows in America.
Well, that overstates it a little bit to say on death rows in America.
It's on death rows in about 10 or 12 states in America.
The dominant percentage of people on death row in America are on death row in California,
in Texas, in Alabama, in Florida, in Mississippi, in Georgia, and a number of other states.
It's called the death belt.
And it's the south of the United States, ranging from the west all the way to the east.
The northern United States does not impose the death penalty regularly.
It's very rare that a northern state will impose the death penalty.
Why is that?
It's a very, very interesting sociological, legal, religious question.
Justice Scalia, one of the great minds on the Supreme Court and one of the most controversial
justices, recently condemned Europe for abolishing the death penalty.
He had an interesting argument.
He said the reason Europe has abolished the death penalty is Europe is now a post-Christian
society.
Religion plays a very small role in Europe.
And he said America is a Christian society.
And he says to a Christian, death is no big deal.
That's a direct quote from Justice Scalia, because to a Christian death is merely a roadway
to another life.
But for an atheist or an agnostic, death is a terrible, terrible thing.
It's the end of everything.
And in Europe, where agnosticism and atheism have taken major hold, he says the death penalty
is regarded more negatively than in America, where Christianity promises a better life
after death.
Now this comes from somebody who was in favor of the death penalty and in favor of a Christian
America.
So it's a very, very interesting perspective on the death penalty.
