Today, the Leopold and Loeb case, and particularly Clarence Darrow's eloquent speech, is still
quoted as one of the strongest statements against the death penalty, though it's now
been replaced more by arguments in favor of innocence.
Yesterday's Clarence Darrow has become today's Barry Sheck, who is the founder of the Innocence
Project in America, and who's helped bring about the vindication of dozens of people
who were on death row and who were proved to be innocent, sometimes just before they
were about to be executed.
The nature of the campaign against the death penalty has now changed.
It's changed from Clarence Darrow's appeal to emotion and appeal to science in terms
of mental illness and appeal to goodness and charity.
It's changed from that to an appeal to what is a country that risks executing innocent
people.
And I think that, tactically and strategically, that's probably a good direction for the argument
to go.
I think most Americans would be deeply, deeply offended by the knowing execution of innocent
people.
And it's interesting, and I'm going to end this lecture with a reference to the Bible,
how long ago I think we understood this.
My favorite story in the Bible is Abraham arguing with God over the sinners of Sodom.
And Abraham says to God, what if there are 50 innocent people?
And God says, if there are 50 innocent people, I'll save the whole city on their behalf.
And Abraham, the good lawyer, says, but for lack of five, would you kill?
What if there are 45?
And he bargains God down, and he gets God down to 10.
And God says that there are 10 innocent people on death row, essentially, in Sodom.
I will save the entire city.
And then Abraham stops.
He stops at 10.
And I interpret the argument this way.
What God could easily have said to Abraham was, look, Abraham, you're right.
If there are 50 innocent people, I'll save the 50 innocent people.
But why are you asking me to save the whole city?
Why would he save guilty people as well as innocent people?
And my interpretation is God was really saying to Abraham, because he was telling him how
to build a legal system, a human legal system, if 50 innocent people are sentenced to death,
there must be something wrong with the whole system.
If 40 innocent people are sentenced to death, there must be something wrong with the whole
system.
And therefore, you have to take a step back and look at the whole system.
Look at whether you're doing something wrong.
And that's what the former governor of Illinois recently did when he found 13 innocent people
on death row.
He said, I'm not just going to spare the 13.
I'm going to impose a moratorium on the death penalty until we can figure out what we're
doing wrong.
And so the great issue raised in the Leopold and Loeb case, not the issue of innocence
or guilt, but the issue of whether anybody deserves the death penalty, whether we ought
to be stepping back and thinking hard about whether an America in the early part of the
21st century should be joining the rest of Europe and most of the rest of Westernized
countries and abolishing the death penalty, or whether we ought to be continuing to impose
the death penalty, is still a daunting question that challenges us and confronts us.
And throughout this course, I will be mentioning other cases involving the death penalty and
asking questions about the legitimacy of the death penalty and whether we actually do
ever execute innocent people.
In at least one case I'll discuss in this lecture, I will demonstrate to you that an
innocent person was executed.
After listening to lecture three, a student posed this question to Professor Dershowitz.
Was Darrow's religious plea based on his own personal beliefs?
Clarence Darrow was the quintessential advocate.
In his plea for keeping Leopold and Loeb alive, he certainly came close to appealing to religious
sensibilities, hate the sin, love the sinner, forgiveness, charity.
These were not views that came from any religious beliefs on Darrow's part.
He was a self-proclaimed atheist.
But he understood the judge and he understood the other people who were listening to his
argument, the judge's friends and the judge's colleagues would find a religious argument
somewhat appealing.
So Darrow would never, ever hesitate to make an argument that was religious in nature if
that would be what would appeal to the finder effect to the person who had to make the
ultimate conclusion.
And there's nothing wrong with that.
An advocate is an advocate for somebody else and he's not supposed to be expressing necessarily
his own personal views.
