When I was growing up in Brooklyn in the 1950s, certainly the most important case of that
era was the trial of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg.
After all, they were accused of stealing the secret of the atomic bomb and giving it
to the Soviet Union.
We were kids who were terrified of the Soviet Union dropping an atomic bomb on our neighborhood.
We were always exposed to these duck and cover operations in which we hid under our
desks and there were wardens in our neighborhood and some people had built bombs, shelters.
I remember having very few nightmares as a kid, but the frequent nightmare that I did
have was planes flying over the horizon and dropping atomic bombs.
We had no idea what an atomic bomb was, all we knew was it would kill a lot of people,
and that the Rosenbergs were the ones who gave the atomic bomb to the Soviets, the bad
Russians, and in my neighborhood most of us were very, very anti-communist and very frightened
of the Russians, and we were pleased to see that the people who stole the atomic secrets
from the United States and gave them to the Soviet Union were being prosecuted.
I was 13 years old when the trial took place and I followed it very, very, very closely.
In my neighborhood and for years thereafter, division was great.
There were two groups of people.
There were groups of people who said the Rosenbergs were guilty, they got a fair trial, and they
deserved to be executed, and there was the other group that said the Rosenbergs were
absolutely innocent, they got an unfair trial, and they didn't deserve to be executed.
Not surprisingly, years later when I grew up and became a lawyer, I looked very, very,
very closely into the Rosenberg case.
By that time, a lot of the secret documents had been revealed, a lot of the classified
information had been declassified, and a lot of the Justice Department files had been made
available to the public.
As the result of my research and the research of lots and lots of other people into these
documents, I came to the following conclusion which has never made anybody happy.
I now firmly believe, in fact I'm absolutely certain, that Julius Rosenberg was guilty.
He was an atomic spy.
He tried to steal the secrets of the atomic bomb from the United States and give them
to the Soviet Union.
He did it out of pure ideological considerations.
He was a fervent communist who ideals believed that the Soviet Union should have an atomic
bomb and that if both the United States and the Soviet Union had atomic bombs, it was
less likely that there would be war, and if there were a war, more likely that the Soviet
Union, which in his view were the good guys, would prevail.
