And I think there's no question at this point that he was guilty.
There are all kinds of wiretaps and other evidence that now conclusively show that there
was a spy that fit the description of Julius Rosenberg and that spy conveyed certain information
from Los Alamos and from the Manhattan Project to the Soviet Union.
Of course, it turned out the Soviet Union had already stolen the secrets of the atomic
bomb.
And earlier from another spy in England named Klaus Fuchs and the material that was provided
by Julius Rosenberg didn't help the Soviet Union develop the atomic bomb.
They would have developed it without his material and his material wasn't particularly useful.
It was pretty sketchy and pretty amateurish, but in his mind he believed he was stealing
atomic secrets and he was committing a terrible disloyal act against the United States and
clearly deserved to be prosecuted, convicted, whether sentenced to death or not, is another
question.
Having concluded that, however, it did not follow for me automatically that he got a
fair trial.
He did not get a fair trial.
His trial was riddled with unfairness, but even more serious is the conclusion that I've
reached and a number of other people have now reached that Ethel Rosenberg was innocent,
that she was not guilty, that she was not involved in her husband's spying and at the
most she may have known about it and maybe conceivably have typed a paper or document,
but her role in any crime was minimal and the United States government exaggerated her
role in the case precisely in order to get the death penalty imposed on her as leverage
against her husband.
In other words, the goal of the prosecution was not only to convict Julius Rosenberg,
who they knew was a fervent communist and would take his punishment without revealing
who his superiors were and what the spy network in the United States looked like and there
was an extensive spy network in the United States, but that if his wife, his innocent
wife, was also convicted and sentenced to death and he was offered her life and his
in exchange for giving the secrets, he could not resist.
It was an offer he couldn't refuse.
If it was only him, he could refuse it.
If it was him and the mother of his two children, he could not refuse it.
They underestimated the fervency of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg's commitment to the Communist
Party and as we all know, they both died and were executed because they refused to disclose
any information that would have saved their lives.
And so to the question that has been always asked whether Rosenberg's guilty and therefore
received a fair trial and a fair punishment or were they innocent and therefore received
an unfair trial and an unfair punishment.
