And so I think the Rosenberg case, in many respects, represents both the truths of some
of the underlying arguments that were made by those who supported various aspects of McCarthyism,
and the truths of the critics who thought McCarthyism went way beyond any legitimate concern about
Soviet spying in America. So the facts of the Rosenberg case were fairly simple. The Rosenbergs
had a relative. It was Ethel Rosenberg's brother, who was in fact a low-level operative working
at Los Alamos on the Manhattan Project. And he, in fact, did get some sketchy, primitive drawings
and give them to Julius Rosenberg, who then conveyed them to his chain of Soviet spies,
and it eventually got to the Soviet Union. I think they could have made a convincing case
that he was guilty of espionage and perhaps other crimes as well. The problem is that they
uncovered this net of spies by using means that they were not prepared to publicly disclose,
the tapping of some Eastern European embassies, other surreptitious activities. But the people
who prosecuted the Rosenbergs knew for sure that Julius Rosenberg was guilty. By the way,
they also knew for sure that Ethel Rosenberg was not. Her name appears in none of the correspondence.
Indeed, the best proof that they knew Ethel Rosenberg was not guilty is that the very end,
when they were giving the Rosenbergs their last chance to save their lives, they presented
Julius Rosenberg with a list of questions about who his sources were, who the other spies were,
and said that if he could answer those questions, his life would be saved and Ethel's life would
be saved. They never presented a list of questions to Ethel Rosenberg because they knew she didn't
have any answers. They knew she didn't have any information. They knew she was innocent,
or at most may have known about her husband's involvement, but not guilty of a conspiracy
to steal atomic secrets from the United States and give them to the Soviet Union.
Their strategy was a very simple one. By threatening to kill her along with him,
he would fold, and they would then be able to save her life, perhaps his life too. He would be able
to disclose the names of the other spies, and they could be arrested, and then perhaps Julius
Rosenberg could testify against them, and that's not what happened. In order to carry out the promise
or the threat, they went forward with the execution of Ethel Rosenberg knowing she was innocent.
This is the only case I know of in American history. There may be others. It's the only
case I know of where the United States government deliberately and knowingly executed an innocent
defendant.
