I have absolutely no doubt that that's exactly what happened. How do I know it?
I know it not only from reading the literature and the records of the case.
I know it because Roy Cohen, who was one of the main prosecutors in the case,
told me just before he died. He knew he was dying. He would never tell me that he
had AIDS because he always denied that he was gay. I knew him because we were both
involved in the same case. I was representing Klaus von Bülow, a case which I will talk
about later in the course. He was representing Klaus von Bülow's daughter in a civil case.
So necessarily we had to meet on occasion. There was a lot of downtime when the clients
weren't there. It was toward the end of his life. He was so proud of what he had done.
He told me that he had framed a guilty person. That is, he had introduced false evidence
against Julius Rosenberg in order to get him convicted of a crime that he, Roy Cohen,
knew Julius Rosenberg had committed, but couldn't use the evidence that would have proved his guilt
conclusively. Then he told me that although he thought Ethel Rosenberg was involved in typing
up material and knew about her husband's crime, clearly she was not a spy. Clearly she was being
sentenced to death in order to put leverage on Julius Rosenberg. Now nobody could imagine
that Julius Rosenberg would allow his innocent wife to die simply as a matter of principle. They
all miscalculated. In fact, there's another very interesting vignette in the case. The president
of the United States at the time of the Rosenberg execution was Dwight D. Eisenhower, a very humane
and decent man. Dwight Eisenhower expressed concern to some of his friends and colleagues
about signing a death warrant, essentially, for a woman. He didn't think women should be executed.
Men? Fine. He had no problem with Julius Rosenberg, but he had a real problem with allowing the
execution of Ethel Rosenberg. Now remember, it was absolutely essential to the FBI's plan,
which was personally approved and authorized by J. Edgar Hoover. It was absolutely essential
to J. Edgar Hoover's plan that they threatened to kill Ethel Rosenberg in order to make sure that
the president didn't, in any way, ameliorate the threat and commute the sentence of Ethel Rosenberg.
The FBI had to concoct a story, and the story they concocted and told the president of the
United States, and this is all in documents that are now publicly available, was that Ethel Rosenberg
was really the brains behind the operation, that she was more guilty than Julius Rosenberg. Now that
was an out and out lie. Everybody knew that that was a lie. J. Edgar Hoover knew it was a lie.
Roy Cohen knew it was a lie. The judge who imposed the death sentence knew it was a lie.
