But it was an important lie, a lie designed to prevent the president from commuting the
sentence of Ethel Rosenberg, a president who was reluctant to impose the death penalty on a woman.
And they sold the bill of goods to President Eisenhower. President Eisenhower wrote a note
to his son, who was then serving in Korea, explaining why he was not going to commute the
death sentence of the Rosenbergs. And in it he explained that Mrs. Rosenberg was
guiltier and also if he commuted the sentence, the Soviets would simply now start recruiting more
women to be spies. So they totally persuaded him of the fact, the false fact, the false allegation
that she was a spy. So what happened then was the Rosenbergs went to their death.
Another personal aspect of the story is that a cousin of mine, not a close cousin, but somebody
I knew, was the rabbi at Singsing. And he actually administered the Jewish equivalent of the last
rights to the Rosenbergs. And it looked for a while as if the Rosenbergs might have their sentences
reviewed or the conviction challenged in the Supreme Court of the United States. And the
maneuvering that took place not only to not have the Supreme Court intervene in the case,
the Supreme Court refused to intervene several times, but to speed up the execution. They
actually moved it forward instead of moving it backward in order to keep maximum pressure and
leverage on Julius Rosenberg. I think when Julius and Ethel were executed and Ethel died very hard,
it took two jolts of electricity from the electric chair to kill us. She survived the first jolt.
When she died, I think there were a lot of unhappy people in the Justice Department,
their bluff had failed. They did not really intend to execute Ethel Rosenberg. I think
some of them probably had guilt feelings about it. I think they knew they were executing an innocent
person. A few years ago, when I first came upon this research, I gave a talk about it
in Town Hall in New York. At the talk were Julius and Ethel Rosenberg's children,
who were very young at the time of the execution, and were adopted by a family. I stated my thesis
at the time that I thought Julius was guilty, Ethel was not, and that they both received an
unfair trial. The children came up to me afterward furious. They regarded me as a liberal and a
civil libertarian, and I was undercutting their cause. How dare I suggest that Julius Rosenberg
was guilty? Well, it was clear to me he was, and I urged them to change their view as well,
that they would be much better off making an argument that would have credibility rather
than trying to persuade an unsympathetic America to the fact that their father was entirely innocent.
They rejected that. But then more and more documentation came out, and over the years now,
I think virtually everybody, including the staunchest defenders of the Rosenberg,
including their own children, now have to acknowledge that Julius Rosenberg was guilty.
That doesn't in any way vindicate the United States government, which acted terribly, atrociously,
in this case. I think this is one of the worst cases of knowing intentional inflection of an
injustice, in this case the death penalty, on an innocent woman in order to try to achieve a result.
Now, it has implications for us today, because yesterday's threat was atomic warfare from
the Soviet Union, today's threat is terrorism. And we do hold hostages today. When we arrested
Sheikh Khalid Mohammed, reportedly according to press accounts, we also took his nine-year-old son
into custody. Nobody has heard since what has happened to that child. More importantly,
