What have we told Sheikh Khalid Muhammad? We are doing to that child.
Hostage taking is a common technique in fighting terrible enemies, whether they be atomic enemies or terrorist enemies.
And if the Rosenberg case stands for anything, it stands for the proposition that the FBI believe that the ends justify the means.
They believe they had a legitimate end, and they did have a legitimate end. I don't dispute that.
The legitimate end was breaking up a very dangerous Soviet spy ring in America. Very dangerous ring.
It could have ended the existence of the United States had the Soviets taken a preemptive strike against America with their new nuclear weapons.
We only learned later that their nuclear weapons were not as powerful and their delivery systems as sophisticated as we thought they might be.
But at the time, we had a very legitimate fear in the Soviet atomic capacity.
And we were willing to do anything to end the spy system in this country, and anything included the miscarriage of justice perpetrated by the United States against Ethel Rosenberg in this case.
So I think there are a lot of lessons that can be learned from the Rosenberg case.
Number one, the atmosphere of the times matters greatly, and the atmosphere of McCarthyism made it very, very difficult for any lawyers to stand up and defend the Rosenbergs.
In fact, the Rosenbergs had terrible lawyers. I'll just talk briefly about two of them.
One of the lawyers was a labor lawyer named Block, who was a communist and who had no experience as a criminal lawyer.
And going into a complicated criminal trial without experience as a criminal lawyer is like performing cardiac surgery if you've been a podiatrist for all your life.
You just can't do that. And Block messed it up to a fairly well. He didn't make the proper motions. He didn't present the best possible defense.
He didn't significantly or substantially differentiate between Ethel and Julius Rosenberg. He didn't raise some important constitutional and statutory issues.
He didn't focus enough on the fact that when the secrets were stolen, the United States was not an enemy of the Soviet Union, but rather an ally of the Soviet Union.
There were many, many defenses that could have been raised far more effectively than they were raised.
In fact, he was selected to defend the Rosenbergs by the Communist Party.
And there are those who believe, and I am among them, that there were those in the leadership positions of the Communist Party, particularly in the Kremlin,
who thought it would be to the advantage of communism to have the Rosenbergs executed for several reasons.
Number one, executed Rosenbergs are not capable of disclosing the names of other spies.
Number two, executed Rosenbergs became martyrs to the system and martyrs to communism.
