Pablo Picasso drew pictures of the Rosenbergs and lithographs, and they're still currently
on the art market.
They were heroes.
They were marches all over the world in favor of the Rosenbergs, and every city in the world
practically, and they became great, great martyrs and great heroes.
So there is some suspicion, I think a legitimate suspicion, that those at the top leadership
positions of the Communist Party were just as happy to see the Rosenbergs die at the
hands of an unjust capitalist America than to have the unjust capitalist America suddenly
show the world it had a fair legal system that could differentiate between Julius and
Ethelin between the death penalty and other longer sentences.
Had the Rosenbergs gotten life imprisonment, for example, the Soviet Union never would
have been able to breathe safely about the possibility of their spy network being exposed
because an alive Julius Rosenberg after a year or two years or three years of suffering
in prison might have been believed to be somebody who might have been willing to turn into an
informer and save himself and his wife for exchange of information.
Dead Rosenbergs didn't in any way create that risk.
Then the most interesting part of the case is a great civil liberties lawyer, a lawyer
that today is still regarded as very, very well-known, very, very good lawyer, a lawyer
who was one of the general counsel to the American Civil Liberties Union.
His name is Morris Ernst and his name appeared on the letterhead of one of the great firms,
Greenberg Ernst and something or other in New York and he volunteered to join the Rosenberg
defense team and everybody was thrilled this great lawyer was joining the Rosenberg defense
team.
Unbeknownst to the Rosenbergs, he was secretly meeting with J. Edgar Hoover and telling J.
Edgar Hoover the secrets of the Rosenberg defense.
He was a traitor.
Yes, there was a traitor.
It wasn't Ethel Rosenberg, it was Morris Ernst.
He was a traitor to his legal oath.
He was a traitor to his clients.
He was a traitor to the American Civil Liberties Union and he was providing information.
Not only that, he was the one who actually wrote this memo which suggested that Ethel
Rosenberg was really the brains behind the operation, really the leader of the gang,
really the person who was most culpable and it was Morris Ernst's memo that gave Eisenhower
the basis for not commuting the sentence of Ethel Rosenberg.
Now, Morris Ernst, who died in 1976, has never been able to respond to these serious charges
of perfidy, the legal analog of espionage and treason, and it's of course possible that
the FBI memorandum don't accurately reflect his motivations or his precise words.
It's conceivable, though I think unlikely, that he was using unorthodox measures in a
desperate effort to save the Rosenbergs life.
