by good and decent people who were prepared not to stand up to the indecency of people
who didn't understand the difference between proper and improper means.
I think it was Burke who said that all that is necessary for evil to succeed is for a
few good people to remain silent.
That's the history of McCarthyism.
I think that's the history also of the Rosenberg case.
There were too many good people, too many justices of the Supreme Court, too many judges
of the United States Court of Appeals, too many honest prosecutors who were prepared to
close their eyes to what they had to know was a major injustice.
Now, having said that I know for sure that one innocent woman was executed knowingly
by the United States of America has positive aspect to it too.
I know of only one such case and I've been studying many, many cases for years.
I know of no other case where I am absolutely convinced for certainty that a state or a federal
prosecutor or judges allowed the execution of a person who they knew was innocent.
Is it possible?
It is possible.
The Supreme Court has recently said that innocence alone may not be enough to find
a conviction unconstitutional.
You may have to find in addition to claims of innocence, you may in addition have to
find constitutional violations which raises the question again, can you ever have a fair
trial which produces the wrong result?
Can you have a constitutional trial which produces a conviction of an innocent person?
The answer to that question tragically is yes, you can.
That's why claims of innocence should never be foreclosed in cases and one of the strongest
arguments against the death penalty is that a case that appears to involve guilty people
today or even tomorrow may five years from now or ten years from now look very, very
different.
DNA was not developed when many people went to their deaths in America and there's no
way now of retrieving the evidence and subjecting it to DNA analysis.
It's a rare case, that's why it's so important in American history, a rare case like the
Rosenbergs where we now can prove conclusively that an innocent person was sent to her death
for reasons that may be understandable but that could never, ever be justifiable.
In the next lecture of this course, I'm going to focus on a kind of mirror image of a falsely
convicted woman and talk about a case, a case that I personally was involved in, in
which many Americans, most Americans, certainly most white Americans believe that a guilty
murderer was falsely acquitted.
I think you get where I'm going, I'm going to talk about the O.J. Simpson case and how
Americans respond when they believe that somebody who in their heart of hearts they
believe or know is guilty is acquitted by a jury and what the response is and what the
response has been along racial lines, along legal lines, what lessons can be learned from
that case, whether Americans truly believe what our motto says, better 10 guilty be wrongly
acquitted than even one innocent be wrongly convicted.
Do Americans really believe that?
Was the response to the O.J. Simpson case, was the response to the Rosenberg case consistent
with that motto or in reality, do Americans really not care if guilty people are convicted
but care deeply if people who they think are innocent are wrongfully acquitted in my next
lecture?
