Fundamental Cases, Lecture 5, O.J. Simpson In this lecture, we're going to jump forward
to the end of the 20th century and the O.J. Simpson case.
And the reason I want to jump forward is in the last lecture, we talked about a case in
the early 1950s in which an innocent woman was almost certainly executed for a crime
that she did not commit, certainly one that she was not centrally involved in.
And yet the outcry from Americans, even when they learned about it years later, was not
all that great, scholars and people who had a particular concern cared deeply about it.
In the O.J. Simpson case, for many, many Americans, there was a grave injustice because most Americans,
certainly most white Americans, strongly believed that O.J. Simpson had murdered his
former wife and her friend Mr. Goldman, and that the jury verdict was wrong, was racially
biased by a predominantly black jury in favor of a famous black defendant, and that the
lawyers, and I was one of them, played an ignoble role in helping to free a guilty defendant.
And so what I want to talk about in this lecture is how Americans respond when they
believe that a guilty person has been falsely acquitted, and whether Americans do truly
believe in the notion that it is better for 10 guilty people to go free than for one innocent
person to be wrongly convicted.
Because the O.J. Simpson case is close to our current memories, many of you will probably
remember roughly the facts in the case, but I'll go over them briefly. O.J. Simpson had
been married to a beautiful woman, and it was a troubled marriage. He had been accused
once previously of having struck her, and the police had been called to their home,
they got divorced, and then she was found brutally murdered along with another man with whom
she had only a casual friendship, and O.J. Simpson immediately became the primary suspect
in the case. The police went to his home in the middle of the night. Mark Furman, the
young police officer, climbed over the wall and found a glove that later turned out to
have telltale blood on it. They were also blood spots. DNA evidence matched some of the
blood with the defendant and the victims, and it seemed like an open and shut case. Perhaps
not open and shut on what the degree of murder was. Was it premeditated? Was it impulsive?
Was it done without any real foreplanning? Those were fair questions in the minds of
some Americans, but did he do it? Was he the one who wielded the knife that killed these
two people?
