That seemed to be foreclosed for many people, especially when he got into his car van and
engaged in the famous slow speed chase in California, which was shown live nationally
on television. I remember it well. I was not at that time yet involved in the case, but shortly
thereafter, I received a phone call from Robert Shapiro, who I had worked with on one or two
other cases, but didn't know very well, asking me if I would join the defense team. Well,
I was of two minds. On the one hand, it was a death penalty case, and I generally don't turn
down death penalty cases. Simpson was facing execution in California for double murder.
On the other hand, I had been on television after the killings, but before I was asked to
become part of the defense team, and I had expressed my own personal views, not my views as his lawyer
or anybody else's lawyer. My own personal views and my own personal views was that based on the
evidence I had then seen, I thought he was guilty and that I thought he would be convicted, and
that I thought he might come up with some kind of an abuse, excuse defense to justify or
mitigate the crime that he would eventually plead guilty to. That was my personal view,
and I expressed it on the Charlie Rose show, and I expressed it on a number of other shows,
so that when Bob Shapiro called me and asked me to become involved in the case,
I had to tell him that and express my hesitancy about becoming involved in a case where I'd
personally expressed views that would be antagonistic to the position that we would probably be
taking at trial. Bob Shapiro went back and looked at my television appearances, checked with O.J.
Simpson, and came to the conclusion that they very much wanted me to join the defense team, that
everybody believed what I had expressed. There were very few people who didn't share that view,
that's because we hadn't yet done the evaluation of the evidence, and it was a death penalty case,
and my expertise on the death penalty and on scientific evidence was needed, they claimed,
and so I did join the defense team. I was the, as O.J. Simpson put it, the God forbid lawyer,
the lawyer who would have to come in and do the appeal in the event that he lost the trial. I was
the parachute, the insurance policy, I would not play an active role in the trial itself,
but I would be the backup person to provide all the legal memorandum and the legal arguments and
fly to Los Angeles on occasion to make legal arguments, but there would be a trial team
that was headed by first Bob Shapiro and then Johnny Conkrant, and an appellate team that would
be headed by me, which I was asked to start putting together, and I did so. But I also was
very interested in the forensic aspects of the case, the DNA evidence, the scientific evidence,
Barry Scheck was brought on board because of his great expertise in DNA evidence,
but I played an active role in helping to formulate some of the arguments relating
to the forensic evidence. And in the end, I can't obviously, much as I would like to,
share my current views of the case with my students that I'm not allowed to do,
but I can tell you what I did in the case and what conclusions I reached.
