In some respects, much like in the Rosenberg case, where the prosecutor, in that case Roy
Cohn, believed he was framing a guilty person.
He believed that Julius Rosenberg was guilty, but he would never be convicted based on admissible
evidence because they couldn't use some of their best evidence.
Therefore he contrived to plant other evidence and concoct other evidence that would prove
the guilt of a guilty person, in other words he framed a guilty person.
I believe that some of the police officers on the LAPD had the same frame of mind.
They believed to a certainty that O.J. Simpson was guilty indeed, I think you can state their
frame of mind as they knew he was guilty.
That's their frame of mind, I'm not expressing my state of mind or the jury state of mind.
They believed they knew he was guilty, but they also believed he might get away with
the search that they conducted of his home that morning was an illegal search, an unconstitutional
search.
They had no probable cause, they had no warrant, they broke into his house on a false excuse
that they were looking to see if O.J. Simpson was safe from the real killer.
Well they in their mind had already decided who the real killer was and they were clearly
climbing the fence in order to find O.J. Simpson before he got lawyered up and before he could
get rid of the evidence which they believed he had, unbeknownst to them he had taken an
airplane to Chicago that night and was already in Chicago or close to Chicago, were in the
air when they climbed over his wall and went and found the evidence.
They found the glove, the bloody glove, but they were worried that the bloody glove would
not be admitted into evidence.
And so, this is my opinion, but it's backed by hard facts and we certainly argue this
to the jury.
They concocted a piece of evidence.
They took a sock out of O.J. Simpson's hamper, Simpson was a fastidious man, he always put
his socks away and never put them under the bed the way I do, and he put them in the hamper,
they took the socks out, they poured blood from the vials they had collected of O.J.
Simpson's blood and the blood of the two victims on the sock and then they took the
sock and they laid it out where it could be easily found on a white rug in O.J. Simpson's
room, the sock itself being black.
And this became a crucial piece of evidence, you couldn't get a better piece of evidence,
it had the blood of the victims, the blood of the defendant on it, unbeknownst to the
jury early on in the case, all three of their blood was in the possession of one officer
who had them in vials of blood.
Well that's where the forensics came in.
