We understood that blood, when it's in a tube, being collected for forensic purposes, has a chemical in it that prevents it from coagulating.
That chemical's initials are EDT. It's a long, complicated scientific word, but it's EDT.
And that chemical is only in blood samples that are being collected. It's not in the human body.
And we were able to demonstrate that all the blood on the sock had EDT on it.
The telltale chemical that proved it was poured from vials rather than having occurred naturally in the course of committing a crime.
Also, the way in which the blood lay on the sock demonstrated that blood had been poured on the sock and seeped through from one side to the other.
Whereas if it had been worn on his foot at the time it was sprinkled with blood, his foot would have prevented it from seeping through from one side to another.
And third, we were able to come up with a videotape taken earlier that morning by the police, which showed clearly the white rug and no black sock on it.
Demonstrating that the black sock had not been left there before, Simpson went for Chicago, but had been placed there after the first videotape and before the second videotape.
So, our argument to the jury essentially was that the prosecution had tampered with evidence, that the prosecution had planted evidence.
Of course, we took the position that our client was not guilty. That's the position you have to take when your client asks you to take that position.
But our essential position is you could not trust the government's evidence. As one of the great forensic experts that was hired by our team, Dr. Lee put it, he's a man from Formosa, China.
He said, if you find a cockroach in your bowl of spaghetti, you don't look for other cockroaches, you throw out the whole bowl of spaghetti.
And that was the argument that was made to the jury. If one piece of evidence was tampered with by the prosecution,
if the prosecution falsely planted one piece of evidence, how can you trust any other evidence?
So instead of going after the DNA on the merits of whether DNA is accurate, because of course it is, we went after the evidence-gathering methodology that the police had used, accusing the police of planning evidence.
In other words, we put the police on trial. We directed the finger of accusation at the police.
Now, a very important part of that strategy was, first of all, to get the jury to have questionable views, to have views about the policemen that, after all, most people respect policemen, most people like policemen.
And so part of that strategy was to try to prove that Officer Furman was a racist, that he had used bad words to describe African Americans.
And that became a very, very important part of the case, whether the jury would hear tape recordings he had made, in which he had used the N-word, after having denied that he had used the N-word.
And so that kind of softened up the jury and made them more receptive to A, believing that Furman would lie, B, believing that he had animus toward black people, and C, believing that he was not a trustworthy or praiseworthy policeman.
We also had to prove that the other officers were capable of planting evidence and capable of tampering with evidence and using evidence that was in their possession to create a fake piece of evidence, namely a sock with a telltale incriminating blood on it.
It was a difficult job, obviously, and it required one more tactical decision that was absolutely essential.
