Namely, it was absolutely essential for this defense to work for O.J. Simpson not to take
the witness stand.
Why?
Because, you'll recall I said a minute ago, we were putting the police on trial.
Our defense was purely experts.
We didn't put on a single factual witness who would testify where Simpson was, where
he was, and what kind of a person he was.
All we put on were people who didn't know O.J. Simpson, who had no stake in the case,
and who could testify objectively about science.
If O.J. Simpson took the witness stand, it would no longer be a trial of police.
The focus wouldn't be on Furman's conduct, it wouldn't be on Office of An Adder's conduct.
All of that would be forgotten.
The only thing the jury would have focused on was O.J. Simpson's conduct.
They would have looked him in the eye and they would have said, do we believe this man is
telling the truth?
Do we think he is capable of having killed his wife?
Do we think he is capable of having done all the terrible things that he was accused
of doing?
The case would no longer have been a science case, no longer would have been a case about
planted evidence, no longer would have been a case about the credibility of the police,
it no longer would have been a case about whether or not Furman was a racist, it would
have been the case about whether you believe O.J. Simpson and think he's the man capable
of killing his former wife.
I can tell you now, although generally you can't reveal this kind of thing, but it's
been revealed by other lawyers in books that have been written about the case that there
was a big fight within the defense team about whether O.J. Simpson should or should not
testify at his trial.
O.J. Simpson desperately wanted to testify.
He wanted to tell his story.
I was strongly opposed to that.
I flew out to Los Angeles solely to participate in a meeting urging him not to testify.
And I think the proof of the pudding is in the eating because he did testify eventually
at the second trial, at the civil trial, and we all know that the civil trial, the jury
immediately rendered a verdict that he was liable and that he was responsible for the
killings.
There may be other reasons for why that second jury rendered a different verdict than the
first jury, but at least part of the reason in my view was that Simpson did not testify
at the first trial and testified at the second trial.
Now, what does that tell us about the provoking and self-incrimination?
It's part of our Constitution.
It's in the Fifth Amendment, nor be compelled to testify against oneself as a witness in
any criminal trial.
So it is a fundamental right of the Bill of Rights not to have to testify in your own
criminal case.
But most people who don't testify, because if they were to testify, they would have to
disclose their guilt or they'd have to lie about it.
If you're totally and completely and unequivocally innocent, wouldn't anybody want to testify?
But lawyers know better than clients in this case, because we've seen too many people go
down after they've testified.
You can be convicted because you're unlikeable.
You can be convicted because you lied about one small thing that didn't really affect
your guilt, but that was designed to avoid embarrassment by somebody.
You can lie because that's your nature.
You just don't know how to tell the truth about things.
And therefore, it's almost always a good policy to keep your clients off the witness
stand, particularly if you have other defenses that you can raise.
And in this case, our best defense was a good offense.
Our best defense was putting the police on the defensive, striking out against them,
proving what they had done wrong, proving that they had tampered with the evidence, proving
that they had motives to convict O.J. Simpson without regard to whether or not the evidence
proved his guilt, and that succeeded.
