They decided, instead of starting with the dead body the way you usually start in a criminal case,
dead body, who killed Cock Robin, let's work backward, they started instead by trying to
prove that O.J. Simpson had abused his wife previously. And therefore, because he abused his
wife, it's likely that he murdered her. Well, there are millions of cases of abuse every year
in the United States and very, very few cases of interspousal murder. So the point is that a
very, very, very, I could go on very, very, very, for a long period of time, very tiny percentage
of men who abuse their wives ultimately kill them. So the evidence that he abused her is not
particularly compelling that he killed her. Now you might take it to its next step. What about
husbands who abuse their wives and then their wives end up dead? What percentage of those deaths
are attributable to husbands who abuse their wives and obviously a much higher number. But
even without the history of abuse, when a wife is been killed, it is always very likely that the
husband may have been the one who did it. Most women as distinguished from men in our society,
most women are killed by people with whom they have a closer intimate relationship. A much higher
percentage of men are killed by strangers. But how much can you really derive from this kind
of statistical evidence of a general nature? Either O.J. Simpson did kill his wife or he
didn't kill his wife. It's not a matter of probabilities. The jury in the first case concluded
he did not or at least there was a reasonable doubt whether he did. The jury in the second case
concluded he did by a preponderance of the evidence. Do these two verdicts show that the
system is broken or do the two inconsistent verdicts or at least apparently inconsistent
verdicts show that the system really is working? In some respects, it shows the system is working.
It should be harder to convict somebody of a crime than to find him civilly liable.
That difference is reflected by the different burdens of proof. In a criminal case, you have to
prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. That is, you have to exclude any conceivable reasonable
doubt. In a civil case, all you have to do is prove guilt by a preponderance of the evidence,
which means only that you have to prove it's more likely than not that he was liable that he
did it. In a criminal case, the defendant has a lot of rights. He doesn't have to take the witness
stand. He doesn't have to produce evidence that might be incriminating. Whereas in a civil case,
there are no privileges like that. He has to take the witness stand. He's just another witness.
You can introduce all kind of evidence against him. You can subpoena evidence against him. So
it's much, much easier to prove liability in a civil case than to prove liability in a criminal
case. But I don't think that's what made the difference in this case. My own view is that
that jury, the second jury in the civil case, would have found O.J. Simpson guilty,
even if they had to find it beyond a reasonable doubt. They were a different jury at a different
time. They had seen the media reaction.
