They had seen the criticism that other jurors had gotten for finding the defendant in that
case, not guilty.
He took the witness stand.
He didn't make a particularly good witness.
And I think all of these factors combined to make it much easier.
Also the prosecution learned from its mistakes.
Remember the first case, the terrible mistake I happened to be in the courtroom that day,
when they asked O.J. Simpson to try on the glove.
It didn't fit.
You could see it didn't fit.
And he walked in front of the jury and he said, it's too small.
It doesn't fit.
They didn't make that mistake the second time around.
They didn't have him try on the glove.
They could have avoided the mistake the first time around.
They could have had Simpson try on the glove outside the jury before they decided whether
to have him try it on in front of the jury.
They didn't do that.
They were overconfident.
They thought they had too easy a case.
And as the result of overconfidence, as the result of presenting the case wrongly to the
jury, they lost.
I say they lost.
I don't think the defense deserves as much credit for winning the case as the prosecution
deserves blame for losing the case.
And people who complain about me, oh my God, how could you have participated in such a
miscarriage of justice?
I respond by saying, look, you're pointing the finger in the wrong direction.
You ought to be critical of the prosecution.
They were the ones who were trying to bring about a verdict of guilty and they couldn't
do it.
And they had all this evidence.
They did something wrong.
Obviously, we helped them do something wrong because that's our job as defense attorneys.
This raises the fundamental question that I get asked everywhere I go and every lecture
I give, can you defend somebody who you believe is guilty?
And the answer to that has to be yes, why?
The vast majority of people charged with crime in America are guilty.
Thank God for that.
Would anybody want to live in a country where the vast majority of people tried for crimes
were innocent?
That might be Iraq under Saddam Hussein or Soviet Union under Stalin or Germany under
Hitler.
But in America, of course, the majority of people charged with crime are guilty and we
want to keep it that way.
And the way we keep it that way is to make sure that criminal defense lawyers zealously
defend the guilty as well as the innocent.
I have to tell you, in my experience, mostly I don't know when I take a case.
I hear the charge.
I presume the person might be guilty.
I'm not sure.
I start out thinking the defendants probably guilty.
But in several of the cases I've had, I've come away persuaded that the defendant was
not guilty.
I wish I can share with you which those are and which those aren't.
I can't do that.
But I can tell you, in some cases, I've come away convinced of the defendant's innocence.
In some cases, I start by thinking the defendant was innocent and I come away convinced of
the defendant's guilt.
But I would never turn down a case merely because I thought the defendant was guilty.
Any more than as a doctor, I would turn down surgery on somebody who I thought was a bad
person or somebody who I thought was going to, if he recovered from the surgery, go out
and do something else.
I've never had a case in my life where a client who was guilty got off and then went
and did it again.
I've never had that case.
If I ever did, I know I would lose a lot of sleep and I would be miserable about it.
I've been fortunate, but surely I've defended people who have been guilty and I do it proudly.
I wish all my clients were innocent.
Well, do I really?
That means I would live in a country where lots of innocent people are tried for crimes
they didn't commit.
I guess I'd rather live in a country where only very few people who are innocent are
tried for crimes.
But because I want to keep it that way, I'm going to continue to defend people who are
charged with crime, whether I believe they're innocent or guilty, especially if they face
the death penalty.
So I come back to the question I asked when I began.
Do Americans really want to see guilty people acquitted more than innocent people convicted?
Is it really better for ten guilty to go free than for one innocent to be wrongly convicted?
I don't believe Americans think that way.
