I think Americans believe it's just as bad to acquit a guilty person as to convict an
innocent person.
Now that's not what the Bible says.
The story of Abraham and the sentences of Dom suggests it's much worse to convict an
innocent person than to convict a guilty person.
That's not what Blackstone said.
That's not what my monody said.
That's not what our Supreme Court says.
But I think that a lot of Americans don't want to see guilty people acquitted.
Now if you don't want to see guilty people acquitted, then we ought to change our standard
of proof.
Because the standard of proof today is proof beyond a reasonable doubt, which translates
probably roughly to 90%.
You have to be 90% certain, whatever that means, 90% certain.
It means that if you think a defendant probably did it, you should acquit.
If you think that the defendant very probably did it, you should acquit.
We tell the jury to acquit when they think the defendant probably did it, because that
shows a preference for always acquitting the guilty over convicting the innocent.
You must have virtually no doubt, no reasonable doubt, that the defendant is guilty before
you can convict.
That means that guilty people go free all the time, and it means that innocent people
are only rarely convicted.
Innocent people, however, are sometimes convicted.
That's why we have appeals.
That's why we have habeas corpus.
That's why we never, ever stop looking at people or never should stop looking at people
in prison and asking, did we make a mistake?
No system of justice is infallible.
Even God's justice in the book of Genesis, with the argument between Abraham and God
over the synapses of Dom, even God acknowledged that divine justice is not always perfect.
After listening to lecture five, a student posed this question to Professor Dershowitz.
Which side does money benefit more in a trial?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
Money skews illegal cases in a lot of different ways.
The most obvious way a rich defendant gets access to good counsel and good investigators,
and often the victim and the victim's family has to rely solely on the prosecutor.
Prosecutors are often inexperienced and young and low paid, and so very often they can't
get the kind of justice they want.
On the other hand, they also have access to the police department, if it's a federal case,
the FBI, and enormous investigative resources.
Sometimes it favors one side, sometimes it favors the other.
His wealth and celebrity is a negative.
For example, I think if you're rich and famous, in a close case you're more likely to be indicted,
but more likely to win.
Michael Jackson would never have been indicted if he weren't Michael Smith on the basis of
the evidence that was presented there, and probably William Kennedy Smith would never
have been indicted had he not been a relative of the Kennedy family for a very, very questionable
sexual encounter.
Once indicted, that is, once having the disadvantage of fame and wealth foisted upon them, they
were then able to get, in both cases, excellent lawyers and win their cases, but you're much
better off not having been indicted than having been indicted and having won, because many
people out there still think that you're guilty even though a jury has acquitted you.
This ends lecture 5.
