In previous lectures in this course, I've talked about cases of miscarriage of justice.
Cases where clearly innocent people were convicted, the Rosenberg case, Mrs. Rosenberg, and cases
where people were acquitted who the vast majority of citizens think were guilty.
In fact, the O.J. Simpson case where a civil jury eventually found him liable.
Today I want to talk about a case which was very divisive in American history and reflected
an enormous number of problems in the American experience.
But to date, and it's 80 some odd years since this case, we still are not closer to solving
it than we were when it took place in 1921.
And I'm talking about the Sacco and Vanzetti trial that took place between 1921 and 1927.
It started in Dedham and Braintree, Massachusetts, and continued of course to Boston, where the
defendant Sacco and Vanzetti were both electrocuted amidst tremendous protests about their innocence.
The fact of the case again are very simple, it was a robbery, and during the course of
the robbery, shooting took place and deaths occurred.
And the only question was who were the people involved in the robbery, what was the motive
for the robbery, not even who fired the shots because if anybody was killed in the course
of a robbery, all the robbers are equally guilty of conspiracy and felony murder.
So the question was who were the robbers?
Suspicion immediately fell on two anarchists from Italy, extremely left wing socialists,
anarchists, nihilists, call them what you want, communists in today's jargon perhaps,
namely two working class people, and they were named Nicolò Sacco and Bartholomew Vanzetti,
a fishmonger and a shoemaker, and people who spoke with thick Italian accents and were
not religious, they were immigrants, and they reflected the times.
This was shortly after the Palmer raids when the Attorney General of the United States
under Wilson had conducted raids against Americans of ethnic backgrounds from Europe
and arrested large numbers of socialists and syndicalists and you name theists, they
were arrested, all on the left, not on the right, interestingly enough, there were plenty
of Bundists in America, but there were no raids at that time conducted against them.
Sacco and Vanzetti were proud anarchists, they were card carrying, leaflet distributing,
each making anarchists who hated American capitalism and supported the overthrow of
the government, but that's not what they were charged with, they were charged with being
the two people who robbed the company, killed the people, and were therefore guilty of first
degree capital murder.
