They adamantly, adamantly opposed their guilt and adamantly insisted on their complete and total innocence.
They didn't claim they were pacifists, one of them carried a gun,
and they did advocate violence and might very well have justified robbing a store in order to earn money to promote the cause.
Would they advocate killing a poor working class person? Probably not deliberately,
but as other radicals have said, you gotta break some eggshells to make an omelet.
And certainly revolutionary movements and anarchist movements were prepared to kill,
and there had been other experiences in American history, the Haymarket cases,
and others where clearly radical elements were prepared to kill in order to bring about what they regarded
as ultimate justice and to raise the money necessary to support their cause of justice.
But this was a simple who done it at one level.
The problem was that the judge appointed to try the case wasn't really so interested in who'd done it.
He was interested in seeing these horrible people who he hated and wished wouldn't have ever come to America,
put in jail, deported, executed, anything to get them out of the mainstream and off the streets
and stopped them from preaching their anti-American, which to him was anti-Brahman hatred.
The judge in the case, Judge Webster Thayer, was a Brahman bigot.
He hated Italians, he hated Catholics, he hated Irish people, he hated Jews, he hated blacks.
He was an equal opportunity abuser, but I think the particular focus of his wrath were Italian socialists and syndicalists.
He presided over the trial like a despot or a martinet.
He made all kinds of rulings that were unfairly unfavorable to the defendants and pushed the jury very hard toward conviction,
and sure enough they were convicted and were sentenced to be electrocuted, sentenced to die.
As soon as the conviction occurred and the sentences were imposed, there was a worldwide outcry
from people by the way of all backgrounds.
Unlike the Rosenberg case, this was not a situation where only communists or people on the left were outraged at the conviction.
People representing every stream of political opinion were outraged at Massachusetts injustice,
at the railroading of these two working class people who were being held responsible for what syndicalists,
what radicals had probably done, but they may not have been the one to do it.
There was such an outcry that the governor of the state decided he could not handle this alone,
so he appointed a very distinguished committee of university presidents and others to advise him as to whether or not to commute the sentence.
