The problem is that he appointed as chairman of the committee and the moving force one
of the most anti-Italian bigots in the history of Massachusetts.
The president of Harvard, Abbott Lawrence Lowell.
The same president of Harvard who favored eugenics and sterilization and who started
quotas against Jews at Harvard and who didn't want to see anything change in the Brahmin
aristocracy that governed Massachusetts at the time.
The Lowell spoke to the Cabots, the Cabots spoke to God, all of that.
And he was not only a Lowell, he was the Lowell.
So he was the chairman of the committee and he had no interest, particularly in the facts.
He had only interest in justifying Massachusetts justice.
Fortunately for Sacco and Vanzetti, there was a young professor at Harvard Law School named
Felix Frankfurter.
I'm honored now to hold his chair.
I'm the Felix Frankfurter professor at Harvard Law School.
Felix Frankfurter was a young, he was the only Jewish professor at Harvard Law School at
the time.
And although not a radical, he himself was an immigrant from Vienna who had come to
this country at a very young age and had had a brilliant, brilliant record and was one
of the most brilliant professors at Harvard Law School.
He did not believe that Sacco and Vanzetti were guilty.
He had no sympathy for them.
He was very anti-syndicalist and very anti-socialist.
But he didn't believe they were guilty and he wrote a stirring article, one of the best
popular articles ever written by a lawyer for the Atlantic Monthly, which was eventually
published in a small pamphlet, trying to prove that Sacco and Vanzetti were innocent, were
not the people who committed the crime, and that the trial was rigged and an injustice.
And when he agreed to do this, there were movements to try to get him fired from Harvard
and efforts to try to get him disciplined and President Lowell was furious at him because
now he had two Harvard people, one the president and one a distinguished professor at the Law
School on different sides of the case.
And Frankfurter wrote a very, very persuasive brief in effect in favor of Sacco and Vanzetti
and Lowell could not respond to it.
But he basically said the trial had been fair and he whitewashed the entire event and he
gave the governor cover to persist in the execution of Sacco and Vanzetti.
Well that still didn't end the case because there was all kind of forensic evidence that
had been produced since the trial, ballistics evidence, other kinds of evidence which cast
real doubt on the conviction.
And in fact the ballistic evidence that favored the conviction was very, very weak indeed.
The best they could say was that the bullet that killed the victim in the robbery was
consistent with coming from the gun of either Sacco or Vanzetti.
The problem was many, many, many bullets would be consistent with it and it was consistent
with many, many, many guns.
Ballistics was not a science at the time.
It was not even really a high art.
