And, ultimately, it was proved that the ballistics evidence was essentially worthless.
And there was some other evidence, but not particularly compelling.
When the judge finally dismissed the ballistics evidence, he said, look, it wasn't the ballistics
evidence that really convicted the defendants.
It was instead evidence of their own consciousness of guilt, the way they behave.
They looked nervous.
They looked this.
All about consciousness of guilt, but, of course, here you had a Brahmin judging ethnic
Italian Americans who were immigrants.
And certainly the Brahmin judge would not be in a position to make these kinds of cross-cultural
judgments about how somebody would behave when they were falsely accused of a crime
they didn't commit.
So the persuasiveness of consciousness of evidence guilt in a murder case carrying a
capital punishment is certainly very, very questionable.
You don't set in somebody to death and execute them because they were sweating or because
their palms were sweaty or because their eyes were shifty or they looked nervous.
There's no real hard evidence that any of that is ever persuasive of guilt, although
many of us use that kind of evidence in making judgments about people, whether they're telling
us the truth or lying to us, but how many people would actually want to see somebody
executed based on that kind of very subjective evidence.
Like with the Rosenberg case, opinions were very sharply divided.
Many people were sure Sacco and Manzetti were guilty.
Many people were sure they were innocent.
On August 22nd, 1927, about seven years after the murders, they were finally executed.
It's interesting, I got a whole of the warrant of execution one day when I was doing research
on this case, and the warrant of execution, the warrant of death, the death certificate
designates that the cause of death was, and I quote, judicial homicide.
Now we think of judicial homicide as my God, a judge pulling out a gun and killing somebody,
but judicial homicide was actually the way in which executions were described in those
days.
It was a homicide.
Homicide simply means the killing of a human being.
Side means killing, homo means human, the killing of a human being.
Not all homicides are culpable or crimes.
In this case, it was not a crime because it was a judicial homicide, but there were many
who believed that it was a judicial homicide in the broader sense of that term too, that
judges actually killed two innocent people.
And the controversy certainly did not die with their executions.
After they were executed, there were parades and marches, their funeral was an event attended
by many, many prominent people, poets, artists, politicians, all around the country and indeed
some from different countries.
And the dispute still hasn't died years and years after their own execution.
A few years ago, two books came out at about the same time, revisiting the SACO and Venn
Zeddy cases.
Both of them claimed that they had looked at the evidence, they had reconsidered the
forensics, they had new information, they had reviewed the trial transcript.
