And each claim to resolve the question with finality, and in the words of one reviewer,
to bring to a close six, it's now more than seven, decades of controversy.
The remarkable thing about the two books, each of which said it was the definitive resolution,
is that they came to diametrically opposite conclusions.
One of the books proved conclusively that Sacco and Vanzetti were quote, irrefutably
guilty, and the other one proved conclusively that they were irrefutably innocent.
To complicate matters even more, there have been recent suggestions that maybe Sacco was
guilty and Vanzetti was innocent, or maybe Vanzetti was guilty and Sacco was innocent.
This is truly a case that will never, ever be solved.
The sides have become too rigid, the evidence too old, the memories too faded, and we will
have to be satisfied with reevaluating whether or not the trial and the process by which
they were executed was in any way fair.
There I think the evidence is clear beyond any dispute.
Fair trial, unfair review process, unfair governor, unfair president of Harvard, none
of whom seem to look hard at the case.
Indeed, I think that whoever has the burden of proof historically loses in a case like
that.
If the burden is on those who would try to prove innocence, I don't think you can today
prove innocence beyond a reasonable doubt.
If the burden is today to relook at the evidence and try to prove guilt, I don't think you
can prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
How then are we to think about a case in which we will never know whether the defendants
were guilty or innocent or somewhere in between or whether one of the defendants was guilty
and one of the defendants was innocent?
History will continue to look, but it won't learn anymore.
There are certain cases where history, the passage of time, makes it easier to come to
truth.
There are other cases where the passage of time makes it more difficult.
This falls into the latter category.
We will learn more probably with the opening of files and the opening of papers about the
unfairness of the trial.
We will learn more about the bigotry of the times.
We will learn more perhaps about the motivations of the participants, about the ineptness
of some of the lawyers, about the bigotry of many of the people in the country and particularly
in the city of Boston who were determined to see Sacco and Vanzetti executed.
We will probably also learn more about the people who were on Sacco and Vanzetti's side.
All of these will come out.
What we will not learn essentially is who pulled the trigger.
We will not learn from whose gun the bullet emanated, which resulted in the death of the
victim in this case.
