The anti-Italian establishment decided that these were the two sacrificial lambs,
these were the two defendants who had to be blamed for this murder.
It became clear that the process toward their death was going to be inexorable.
There was no way in which that train could have been stopped, because to stop that train,
to derail it, to move it away from execution, would be to put the entire Massachusetts system
of justice on trial, the entire Brahmin way of life on trial, to empower Italian Americans.
This was a time when Italian Americans couldn't get jobs in law firms, when Irish Americans couldn't
get jobs in law firms. Interestingly enough, in Boston, the discrimination against Jews was in
some ways less than the discrimination against Irish Americans and Italian Americans, because
there were fewer of them, fewer Jews and many more Italian Americans, many more Irish Americans.
They posed the threat to the establishment and a particular threat was posed by those Italian
Americans who saw America not as a golden land, not as a place where they can fit into and become
assimilated, no, but rather a new target for their change, a new place to export what their
enemies called Bolshevism or Syndicalism or Socialism. And these people genuinely thought that
Boston and the urban working classes in Massachusetts were rife for conversion to this kind of radical
reform movement. So again, as with McCarthyism, the enemy was real from the point of view of the
Brahmins, but the means used to stifle the enemy, deportation, suppression of free speech, and
ultimately the willingness to falsely accuse and falsely convict people of the most serious crimes
murder, raise the most daunting of questions about means and ends. And so what lesson can we take
away from a case like Sacco and Vanzetti? Today, it won't be a trial conducted against two possibly
innocent, possibly guilty Italian Americans. Today, it's more likely to be Arab Americans,
Muslim Americans, Southeast Asian Americans. Every generation has its vulnerable groups. Every
generation has those defendants who are less likely to obtain a fair trial than other defendants.
I think what can be said categorically is if a Brahmin defendant had been put on trial
for killing an Italian working class person based on exactly the same evidence as existed in the
Sacco and Vanzetti case, number one, he never would have been prosecuted. Number two, no jury would
have convicted him. And number three, the process would have cleared him. The best proof of the
bigotry of the system and how selective the system can be, depending on who the defendant
happens to be, is another case that took place in Massachusetts, not far from where this case
took place. But it took place about 30 years earlier, in 1893, in Fall River, Massachusetts.
And of course, everybody knows of that case. It's the trial of Lizzie Borden. We all remember the
little ditty that was sung about Lizzie Borden. Lizzie Borden took an ax and gave her mother 40
weks. When she saw what she had done, she gave her father 41. Well, everybody knew that Lizzie
Borden murdered her father and mother, and yet Lizzie Borden was acquitted.
