Why was she acquitted? Well, she was a good kid who came from a good family, in a good
town. She was one of the town folks. She herself was a white Anglo-Saxon Protestant. And could
she really benefit from being put in jail with all those thugs and all those real criminals?
It really turns out that who you kill and who you are may be as important in predicting
the outcome of a case as what the evidence against you is. In the Lizzie Borden case,
the evidence was, I would say, conservatively speaking, ten times stronger than it was in
the Sacco-Vanzetti case. They had motive. They had opportunity. They had means. They
knew she had gone to a pharmacy. They knew she had tried to get weapons to murder her
parents in a different way. They knew about the difficulties. They had all the physical
evidence, and yet the jury acquitted this good girl from this good town. But the bad
men, Sacco and Vanzetti, had no chance of being acquitted, even though the evidence
against them was much, much weaker. And so we have to ask ourselves, how do you create
a legal system that protects against the rule of man and woman rather than the rule of law?
I think it's very difficult to do, particularly difficult for us to do in the United States
because we have trial by jury. And trial by jury is a two-edge sword. It can protect,
obviously. It democratizes justice. It allows every individual person to have a chance to
sit on a jury. I just got my jury notice recently, and I'm looking forward to perhaps serving
on a jury. Massachusetts has universal jury service, no excuses, no matter who you are,
one of the justices of the Supreme Court, Stephen Breyer, recently served on a jury
in Massachusetts. Nobody even knew who he was, and he helped administer justice. Well,
that's the benefit of the jury. Everybody can serve, everybody gets a chance to administer
justice, but it also will reflect the biases of the time, particularly in a time and place,
like in Massachusetts, at the time of the Sacco-Vanzetti case, where all the jurors were white
Protestants, or for the most part were white Protestants, and many of the defendants,
like Sacco-Vanzetti, came from different backgrounds. So one of the ways of protecting
against that kind of jury bigotry and jury bias is to require diversity in juries, to have juries
that in some ways reflect the populations from which they come. Unfortunately, we've not achieved
that in many parts of our country, and juries are not as diverse as they should be. Of course,
diverse juries lead often to hung juries, because when you have different jurors with different
backgrounds, it's more likely you'll get division among the jurors, and it's less likely that you'll
get uniformity and unanimity. And indeed, it's not an accident that at about the same time,
then we started getting diversity among jurors, and we started getting three or four or two
African-Americans on juries. Some states moved away from unanimous juries.
