Some states moved toward nine to three votes in juries.
Oregon, for example, did not require unanimous juries.
They permitted nine to three verdicts in criminal cases,
which meant that if you had two or three African Americans on a jury,
their views did not have to be listened to.
They could be ignored.
If the vote was taken and there were nine whites in favor of one result
and three blacks in favor of another result, the verdict was nine to three.
If you have unanimous juries, then you need to persuade each other.
Is the absence of a jury trial a safeguard?
Well, some people think so.
Some people think that the European system, the continental system,
where professional judges decide facts and you don't get amateur lay jurors
making these decisions is more protective, more likely to impose the rule of law
and less likely to impose the whim of human beings.
Well, there's some questions about that because judges often come from
elite backgrounds and they consciously or unconsciously reflect their own
elitism in their backgrounds.
They can also reflect racial biases.
Clearly that happened in the South in the 1930s, 40s and 50s.
Juries and judges were equally biased and equally bigoted and cases reflected that.
You had all white juries in Mississippi imposing the death penalty on blacks
who killed whites, even when there was a very grave question about the quality
of the evidence.
That's if the case ever went to trial.
So the Sacco and Vanzetti case is a very interesting experience to read about
or to delve into the transcript.
Because today we don't think about bigotry and bias against Italian Americans.
There is some.
I brought a lawsuit some years ago in favor of an Italian American who was
denied a partnership in one of New York's big firms because of his ethnicity.
But today we tend to think of discrimination primarily against people of color,
against people of different religion and racial and ethnic backgrounds.
But there was a period of time in our history when bigotry against Irish Americans,
against Italian Americans, against Greek Americans, against Jewish Americans
was rampant in this country and when our system of justice was dominated by
just a small group of people or a small group of ethnicities that were dominant
in the legal system, Massachusetts was among the worst offenders when it came
to not allowing diversity and openness in the legal system during the time
of the Sacco and Vanzetti case.
So Sacco and Vanzetti goes down in history as a case of uncertainty,
a case of continuing doubt, a case of reasonable doubt.
If you apply the standard of reasonable doubt and believe that nobody should be
executed if there is a reasonable doubt, then of course they were improperly
executed.
