If you apply a standard, is it plausible, is it possible, is it realistic that they did it?
Sure it is. There is equally compelling evidence on both sides. It's a case that it seems to me
is an absolute equipoise on the facts, and therefore the verdict of history will always be
the verdict that Scott jurors render in their cases instead of the verdict of acquittal.
They render a verdict called not proven. Not proven. That's their way of saying,
maybe he's guilty, maybe he's not. We don't have a view on it. All we can tell you is that the
evidence presented in the case doesn't make us comfortable that it was proven to the satisfaction
of whatever standard we have. In history, there are going to be many events that are not proven.
Not even criminal trials. I'm talking about events in history, events relating to how you
evaluate Jefferson's role in history, Lincoln's role in history, Roosevelt's role in history,
Reagan's role in history, the role of our current leaders in history. In many instances,
the verdict of not proven, the verdict of uncertainty, the verdict of we'll never know,
the verdict of we'll always have some doubts, remains as closest historians can come for the
truth. It's rare that in a criminal case of such notoriety, after so many years, we're not any
closer to the truth. But that's the reality with the Sacco and Vanzetti case. We just don't know.
And we have to live with that. Sacco and Vanzetti were not permitted to live with that. They died
with that. They knew on the eve of their death, whether they had done it or whether they had
not done it. They certainly didn't share any indication of guilt with anybody. They left
nothing behind, which would suggest that they were guilty. Is that itself evidence of innocence?
I leave it to you. I wish I could tell you that I knew what the right verdict in that case was.
I wish I could tell you whether or not I believed Sacco and Vanzetti did it. I just don't know.
In my next lecture on the course, I'm going to show how sometimes the legal system can correct
its own errors. How the appellate process, something that most Americans know very little
about, can sometimes serve to correct errors committed at trial. The case we're going to discuss
is the prosecution of Klaus von Bülow, the socialite from New York and Newport, Rhode Island,
who was convicted of trying to kill his wife, and then the conviction was reversed on appeal and
at a new trial, he was then acquitted. And so we'll see how the appellate process works to preserve
justice in our next lecture. After listening to lecture six, a student posed this question to
Professor Dershowitz. Do the cases you discuss represent a good sample of how the law actually
works? Let's listen to the professor's response. When you listen to me lecture in this course,
you might ask yourself, is justice ever really done? Well, of course, great cases, the ones that
are the subject of this course, are likely to be the controversial ones. I could give a course of
lectures on how justice is done and take 10 or 15 mundane routine cases where a person is accused
of murder, properly convicted of the murder, sentenced to prison, and then ultimately released,
then is rehabilitated. And that would show that justice is often done. The cases that I've chosen
to focus on are the ones where there are real doubts about whether justice has been done.
And so you can't generalize from these cases and try to come to firm conclusions about how
the system operates on a day-to-day basis.
