Fundamental Cases, Lecture 7, Klaus von Bülow.
Most cases that deserve the title great or profound or influential cases tend to be trials.
Sometimes they're Supreme Court decisions, but rarely are they appeals from criminal
convictions.
The case I'm going to talk about today was probably the most famous appeal in a criminal
case, certainly in the last half of the 20th century, and it was the appeal of Klaus von
Bülow.
That was a case that took place in the early 1980s, 1981, 1982 through 1985.
Klaus von Bülow was a socialite, a prominent, very wealthy opera lover who had been embarrassed
during England and had married one of the world's wealthiest and most beautiful heiresses,
and eventually was accused of trying to kill her by injecting her with insulin.
It was a case that had everything.
It had lust, he was having an affair.
It had money.
It had secrets.
It had wealth.
It had royalty.
The children were all vans and fancy princes.
It allowed Americans who have a craving for this kind of thing to peek inside the high
walls of royalty, nobility, and wealth and to voyeuristically get a sense of what it
must be to live among the beautiful rich.
I was involved in the case as Klaus von Bülow's appellate lawyer.
As I once said to him, Klaus, as far as I'm concerned, you can have the rich, and he responded
by saying, I do all the time.
He was a very funny man, is a very funny man.
He's still living in England, happily taking care of his grandchildren, but he wasn't a
happy man when I first met him.
He called me on the phone one morning.
It was April Fool's Day, I remember very vividly, because he said this is Klaus von
Bülow with a British accent, and I had followed the trial, not closely, but followed the trial
enough to know that he was Danish by background, and I immediately thought it was an April
Fool's joke because he wasn't speaking with a Danish accent.
He was speaking with a British accent, but it turned out it was not an April Fool's
joke, and he was asking me to please represent him on appeal.
I agreed to do so, not knowing at that point whether I thought he was innocent or guilty,
only knowing it was a very interesting case, a case that everybody was following, and a
case that everybody told me could not possibly be won, because the evidence of his guilt
was overwhelming.
They had found insulin on needle in a case that belonged to him.
They had found insulin in her body in abnormal amounts that could only have been injected
extrinsically.
The medical testimony was that she had died of an insulin overdose.
It seemed conclusive that he was to be convicted based exclusively on the medical evidence.
Well, I love medical mysteries.
