And so, for me, it was a great challenge to take the case.
I had another agenda in taking the case as well, too, and that's the agenda I want to
talk about in this lecture today.
And that is, at the time, I decided to take the von Bülow case.
I think most Americans thought of appeals as technicalities.
If you win an appeal, well, you've gotten the conviction reversed on a technicality.
You're guilty, to be sure, but the judge made some mistake.
Maybe he gave an improper instruction or the government admitted evidence that they had
gotten improperly, but there was no doubt about guilt.
And I wanted to try to use this case to demonstrate to the American public that appeals are very,
very important, that sometimes an appeal can vindicate an innocent person who has been
falsely convicted.
Now, I wasn't sure Klaus von Bülow was innocent at the time.
I took the case, though we were ultimately able to prove, I think, beyond any doubt,
that not only was he innocent, but that there was, in fact, no crime committed at all.
That Sonny von Bülow, his wife, had gone into two comas as the result of her own actions
and her own indulgences and her own self-administration of barbiturates and other pharmaceuticals,
rather than the extraneous or exogenous injection of insulin into her body by a murderer or
an attempted murderer.
But we're a long way from having proved that at the time I decided to take the case.
And the case looked like it was hopeless because the medical testimony was so conclusive.
What I decided to do was start the investigation from scratch.
I found that nobody else had conducted an investigation and just look at the case from
the very beginning.
And so what we did is we challenged all of the forensic conclusions.
They had been proof that there was insulin in her body.
We challenged that and we found out it was a mistake.
There had been, in fact, three readings of her blood insulin.
One was inconclusive, one was very low, and only one was high.
And the rule of medicine is that if there are three readings, you only accept one of
them if it's corroborated by another.
And so there was no corroboration that she, in fact, had a high level of insulin in her
blood.
Well, what about the insulin on the needle?
We were able to demonstrate that the needle itself did not have insulin that had ever
been injected into any human body.
Why?
Because when insulin is injected into a body, the body acts as a swab, essentially, and
the insulin is spread all over the needle.
The insulin that was found on the needle, in this case, was encrusted on the very tip,
which proved to the satisfaction of all of our medical experts that the needle had been
dipped in insulin rather than injected with insulin into a body.
And there were other things we were able to prove as well.
Finally, and conclusively, we were able to prove that the coma was not caused by insulin,
that it was caused by an overdose of barbiturates coupled with an overdose of sugar by a woman
who was hyperglycemic and would react in this way to this, for her, nearly lethal combination
of drugs.
We were also able to demonstrate by doing our own medical investigation from the very
beginning that this was a woman who abused pharmaceuticals very badly.
She had taken, on one occasion, more than 80 aspirin at one sitting and had taken other
drugs in large voluminous amounts that endangered her health greatly.
She had smoked cigarettes while she was in an oxygen tent.
This was a very self-destructive person who caused her own medical problems and they were
not caused by anybody else, including her own husband.
