And so here you had two trials, perfect control experiment.
You had one trial before the appeal and one trial after the appeal.
The first trial resulted in a unanimous verdict of conviction.
The second trial resulted in a unanimous verdict of acquittal.
What was the difference between the two trials?
Same jurors essentially, both jurors consisted of people from Providence, Rhode Island, same
ethnic background primarily, same wealth, same geography, same newspaper publicity.
And in one case, the jury had no difficulty convicting unanimously.
In the other case, the jury had no difficulty acquitting unanimously.
The difference was the appeal itself.
The appeal itself gave us an opportunity to set the court right on what would be admitted
into evidence, what would not be admitted into evidence, what the proper instruction
was.
It also gave us an opportunity to think hard about the new evidence.
Because when I do an appeal, I never just do an appeal based on the trial below.
What I often try to do is combine the appeal with a new trial motion based on a new investigation.
Because my own sense, and I've heard this from many appellate judges, is that appellate
judges are much more likely to reverse a conviction if they have a doubt in their own mind that
the defendant is guilty.
If they are sure the defendant is guilty, they will find technical reasons for affirming
the conviction.
If they have a doubt that maybe the defendant is innocent, and maybe he'll be found innocent
at a new trial, they are much more likely to seize on the same technical arguments,
the same legal arguments, and find that those arguments require reversal.
There is a lot of discretion that appellate judges have in viewing the legal issues and
viewing the totality of the evidence.
And therefore, if you're going to do an appeal, you better be able to persuade the judges
and their spouses and their friends, because you're always arguing to more than one person.
You're not arguing only to the judges in a high profile case.
You're arguing to their peer groups.
You have to persuade the judges and their peer groups that there is at least some realistic
possibility that this defendant is innocent, that this is not just an exercise in futility
or in technicality.
Once you can overcome that barrier, then legal arguments take on a much more powerful impact,
and judges are more likely to give weight to a legal argument.
So if you have the same exact legal argument, and I've actually had this happen, I've had
the same legal argument in two cases, the same exact argument, but in one case there
is some plausible evidence of innocence, and in the other case there's no plausible evidence
of innocence.
You would think the cases should come out the same way.
It's the same legal argument, equal strength in both cases, and yet in one case, even in
front of the same court, the court will rule favorably to you in one case, unfavorably
to you in the other case.
And that doesn't get taught in law school.
In law school they teach you that the strength of the legal argument will determine the outcome
of the appeal.
