But in my experience, and I certainly believe all of the Wendell Holmes that the life of
the law is experience as well as other factors, in my experience, unless you can shake a little
bit the certainty that the judges come into an appeal, believing the defendant is always
guilty or almost always guilty, unless you can shake that, you have very, very little
chance of winning your case.
Now, we hear a lot about cases being reversed on appeal.
But people don't realize how infrequent that is.
I bet if I asked you to guess, what percentage of criminal appeals are granted?
That is, what percentage of trials, convictions are reversed on appeal?
I bet some of you would guess 50%, 30%, 20%, if you read some of the scandal sheets, 60%,
and you would be very shocked to learn that it's in the range of 2%.
That is, only 2 out of 100, and in some jurisdictions, 1 out of 100 appeals are reversed.
Appeals are very, very rarely granted, and convictions are very, very rarely reversed.
That's why you have a very heavy burden to demonstrate to an appellate court that this
defendant, this particular defendant, this 1 out of 100, this 2 out of 100, this 5 out
of 100, he's a defendant that really was falsely convicted.
There is a chance, a possibility, that maybe this defendant can be a subject of an injustice
that can be rectified in this appeal and on retrial.
I have to tell you that in almost every case that I've won reversal on conviction, there
has not been a conviction the second time around.
When I've won the appeal, something happens, either there's an acquittal the second time
around, as occurred in this case, the Vanduulo case, and more recently in another case that
I had, the defendant was convicted of murder, got the reversal on appeal, the second trial,
the defendant was acquitted of murder, in that case it was a woman who was convicted
of killing her husband through a drug overdose, almost parallel images, but she also got
acquitted after a reversal of the conviction.
There are some cases, to be sure, whether reversal of the conviction results only in
a second conviction, then you have to appeal again, and it's very rare that a second reversal
will occur or a second appeal will be granted.
But most Americans know very, very little about how the appellate process works, because
appeals are, for the most part, lack the drama of the criminal trial.
There are no juries, there's almost never television, the media rarely covers appeals,
the Vanduulo case, interestingly enough, was covered live on television, the appeal itself
was covered live on television, gavel to gavel, in fact there's an interesting story, because
on an appeal you get to have a half an hour of argument and the other side gets a half
an hour, and so what you generally do if you're the appellant, that is if you're representing
the person who lost below the criminal defendant, you generally reserve 10 of your 30 minutes
for rebuttal.
