Then, if you've raised the federal issue, you can take the case all the way up to the
United States Supreme Court.
People think the United States Supreme Court actually reviews lots and lots of cases because
we read about them.
They actually review only about 75 cases a year out of more than 10,000 that are brought
to their attention.
A very, very tiny number of cases get reviewed in the Supreme Court and most of them are
not brought by criminal defendants who claim that they've been subject to injustice.
Many of them are brought by governments who lost the cases below, large corporations.
In fact, many argue that today the Supreme Court has become a court of last resort for
the powerful and for the government rather than for the individual.
I think those framers of our Constitution who set out the Supreme Court of the United
States in Article 3 would be surprised to see how the jurisdiction of that court has
changed over time.
But it is the highest appellate court and appellate courts are essential to keeping justice
uniform and to maintaining some control over errant judges who might very well, if they
were left free, decide cases without regard to the rule of law.
Was Klaus von Bülow innocent or was he guilty?
Did he benefit from a technicality or did he win his case because injustice had prevailed
below?
This is one of those few cases where I feel very comfortable expressing my personal view
because my personal view coincides with the medical view and the medical view is now,
I think, clearly established in the medical literature and by most forensic experts namely
that a terrible mistake took place at the first trial.
But honest, good, decent people, including some very prominent doctors, thought that
Sonny von Bülow's coma was caused by an injection of insulin.
The truth is it was not and at the second trial that was proved conclusively.
Her coma was caused instead by an ingestion of barbiturates, the kind of barbiturates
you cannot force somebody to ingest but can only be ingested by oneself, kind of oral
ingestion of barbiturates.
So we had a mistake at the first trial, a mistake that never would have been corrected
had there not been a second trial.
A second side show was even more fascinating.
One day I got a call from a man also with a strange accent and an accent that I vaguely
recognized.
It was Truman Capote, the famous writer who had written many, many famous books and many
books about crimes and trials and had helped a Harper Lee edit to kill a mockingbird and
was at the time one of the greatest literary figures alive in the United States and he
called me in with his very telltale accent and he said, Alan, I have some good evidence
for you.
And I said, what's the evidence?
He said, Alan, I taught Sonny von Bülow how to inject herself.
