If they try the case in the court, I'm in the court. On the court has steps. On the court has steps.
On Larry King, I'm on Larry King. In the op-ed pages of the newspapers, I'm on the op-ed pages
in the newspapers. A criminal defense lawyer must always be responsive. And the prosecution
calls the tune. If they hold press conferences, we hold press conferences. If they file briefs which
are designed to be picked up by newspapers, we file responses that are designed to be picked up by
newspapers. And so is that a good system? Would it be better to adopt the English system where
trials are not allowed to be conducted in the press, where it is against the rules to give
interviews during trials, where even the press can't cover trials? I don't know which is better.
I can only tell you this. The English system would never work in America. We are a media
saturated society where trials are a central focus of the media concern. Half the successful
shows on television these days are trial shows. You open up any newspaper, any day you find trial
stories. You watch the news. There are trial stories on the news. To ignore that reality
is to provide a client ineffective assistance of counsel. To be a good lawyer today,
one must be sensitive to the media. One must use the media to the extent it's permissible ethically
and morally to try to present your case. Trial by media may be good or bad. It's not
the role of the defense lawyer to make that judgment. It's the role of the defense lawyer
to defend his or her client wherever the prosecution takes the case. We did that in the
von B端low case, and I think we did that with some success. In my next lecture, I'm going to
present a case that some of you may know about, but all of you will be interested in. It's the
case of Bernard Getz, the man who was called the subway vigilante. This case took place on the
New York City subway when Bernard Getz carrying a gun on the New York City subway was confronted
by a group of young African-American kids who came to him and demanded that he give them
money. Instead of giving them the money or taking other actions, he pulled out his gun
and he shot several of them. Fortunately, no one died, but he became both a hero and a villain
in New York, and the case raises fundamental issues about self-defense in a modern,
urban society. That will be our next lecture.
After listening to lecture seven, a student posed this question to Professor Dershowitz.
Was celebrity always what drove public interest in this case? Let's listen to the professor's
response. The grabber for the public in the von B端low case at the beginning was clearly the
celebrity of the participants, the royalty, the wealth, the high walls, Newport, Fifth Avenue in
New York. That was the grabber, but eventually the public got a little bored with that. It then
became a great who done it and it became a medical mystery and it became a question of do doctors
make mistakes and the public was hooked by the celebrity and then didn't get unhooked basically
until after it was solved. Once it was solved, once the crime was solved, first to the satisfaction
of the public by a guilty verdict, but then after the appeal, great doubts were cast on the guilt
and ultimately it was resolved with a not guilty verdict. I think the public was fascinated more
by the Sherlock Holmes who done it. Can we solve this case? And in the end, the somewhat unsatisfactory
resolution. My god, there was no crime at all. What were we so fascinated with? This is a woman
who just put herself into a coma by ingesting barbiturates and too much ice cream. But once hooked,
it's very hard for the public to let go. But people to this day, it's now 20 years,
people still approach me about the von B端low case. Of course, the fact that it was made into an
Oscar-winning major motion picture, reversal of fortune, with Jeremy Irons, who won the Oscar
for Best Actor, kept the case alive for many years after it might otherwise have sunk into
oblivion. Klaus von B端low wanted the case to sink into oblivion and he's now living a very
anonymous life in Great Britain. This ends lecture seven.
