It was the Saturday before Christmas, at high noon in the city of New York, on a subway.
An event occurred that riveted the country and specially focused attention on New York
City, on urban crime, and on vigilante justice.
What happened of course happens every day in the New York City subway system.
A man gets on a train, he sits down next to a group of other people, and one of the other
people starts to hassle him.
In this case, it was somewhat different.
There were racial tensions, it was the height of the New York crime wave, particularly urban
crime and racial crime, and the man who sat down, his name was Bernard Getz.
He became known thereafter as the subway vigilante.
He didn't just come to sit down on the New York subway, he came prepared for battle.
Several years earlier he had been mugged, he claims, by a group of African American youths.
After that he went and he got an illegal gun, a fast draw holster, bullets specially prepared
for combat, and he went down into the subway virtually every day, waiting to get even with
quote, them.
He knew who they were, and he was ready for them.
He was not going to be victimized, he was not going to take it, and in that respect
he was like a lot of other New Yorkers during that period of time.
Well, his dream, their nightmare, came true on that Saturday at noon time.
A group of African American kids got on the train, they had screwdrivers in their pockets,
they were heading downtown probably to try to break open some vending machines and collect
a few dollars in petty cash, and Bernard gets sat down among them, probably quite deliberately
and quite provocatively, although the evidence of that is not so certain.
Immediately thereafter one of the African American kids turned to him and said, how
are ya?
And another one said, give me five dollars.
Now at that point Bernard gets had a lot of options, he could have simply taken out the
five dollars and given it to him, that's probably what many New Yorkers at that period of time
would have done.
He could have tried to ignore them and nobody knows for sure what would have happened, he
could have gotten off at the next subway stop.
He didn't do any of those things, instead he pulled out his gun from his quick draw
holster and simply lined up all of the people who had provoked him, the black kids, and
shot them all.
Fortunately, none of them was killed, but one of them was permanently injured.
Bernard gets then walked out the back door of the train, walked onto the train tracks,
something that New Yorkers are always told not to do because of the third rail, and escaped
into the darkness of the subway tunnel.
This only enhanced his reputation as the subway vigilante, because no one knew who he was.
