He went up north and gave an interview in New Hampshire, Vermont, and he bragged about
what he had done and claimed that he had acted justly and essentially acted for all the people
of New York, and then he surrendered himself and came back to New York ready to stand trial,
expecting a hero's reception. Well, what he got was more of a mixed reception. He was a hero to
some. Interestingly enough, including some African Americans and some African American
leaders who said, look, crime, black on white crime, black on black crime is really a serious
matter in New York, and it's about time somebody responded. But for the most part, the responsible
black leadership and the responsible white leadership condemned the action as disproportionate,
as overreactive, and as taking the law into one's own hands instead of using the New York
City police and the justice system. The stage was therefore set for one of the great trials
of the 20th century, a trial in which the very defense of self-defense was put on trial,
in which vigilante justice emerged as a household word in the city of New York,
and in which Bernard Getz became a symbol for the collective frustration many New York City
residents had with the New York City subway system. Indeed, it was shortly after this case
that Rudolph Giuliani ran for mayor of New York on the platform of cleaning up crime,
stopping the kind of activities that frequently occurred in the New York City
subway system, and basically making New York City livable in its subways, rideable. But that was
to be in the future. Back now to the trial of Bernard Getz. He was put on trial for a variety
of crimes ranging from attempted murder, to assault, to carrying an unlawful weapon. The
prosecutor in the case was the venerable New York City prosecutor. People hardly remember New
York City without Robert Morgenthau. He's been the prosecutor for so many years and is regarded
as a kind of legend among prosecutors. He brought the case. Initially, the grand jury had refused
to indict, but then when pressures mounted for at least a trial, the grand jury was reconvene
and an indictment ensued. Bernard Getz had an equally formidable lawyer on his side, a man
named Barry Slotnick, who was ideologically committed to the actions taken by Bernard Getz.
He believed to the core of his heart and soul that what Bernard Getz had done
had been the right thing, that it had been good for Bernard Getz that otherwise Getz would have been
victimized and seriously injured, perhaps killed, and he believed it was good for New York City
to see somebody stand up to the thugs on the subway system. But the thugs, too,
had a formidable lawyer in their corner. The most seriously injured one retained William
Kuntzler, the legendary radical lawyer on the left, who saw this as simply a murder or an attempted
murder and as racism, claiming that the people of New York would never have been as sympathetic
if the person's shot had been whites rather than black young people.
