Of course, both sides, all sides had a point, and there was a lot of luck involved in the case for Bernard Getz in some respects.
He had shot fairly promiscuously, and several of his bullets ricocheted through the crowded subway train.
Fortunately for him, none of the ricocheting bullets hit innocent bystanders.
Imagine how different the case would have appeared if some little old lady or little old man reading The New York Times or The New York Post had accidentally been shot and killed or seriously injured by a stray bullet.
Everybody would have regarded the cases very different. Getz's actions would have been seen as utterly irresponsible, and he would not have been a hero to anyone.
But he was fortunate his bullets only hit the black young men and injured only one of them very seriously, and for many in New York, these kids just got what had been coming to them.
Rumors spread that the screwdrivers in the pockets of the victims had been sharpened, that they were anti-personnel rather than simply burglary weapons, that they were intended to be used to hurt people, perhaps kill them.
That Bernard Getz could tell that they were armed with screwdrivers, although the evidence did not show that he was aware that they had any screwdrivers in their pocket.
And in a very, very controversial ruling in the case, the judge allowed the jury to learn what the defendant himself had not known at the time he acted, namely that these kids had screwdrivers in their pockets.
The theory, an interesting one, was that I guess if somebody has screwdrivers in their pockets or any kind of weapons, they will behave more aggressively, and a perceptive person looking at them will be able to see the aggression in their eyes.
A stretch, perhaps, but a crucial ruling that permitted the jury to see the actual danger that Bernard Getz faced rather than the apparent danger he faced.
One of the most interesting issues in the case was how the jury should be instructed.
Self-defense is the oldest defense known to human beings. It appears in the Bible. John Adams used it in his defense of the British soldiers who committed the so-called Boston Massacre.
Every society in the world has the defense of self-defense, and for the most part, the defense says that a person is entitled to defend himself from aggression that threatens his life or that risks great injury to him.
But only if the threat is imminent, only if it's real, and only if his actions are reasonable and proportional to the threat he faces.
