Looking at the facts, even in the light most favorable to Bernard Getz, it's a very, very
hard case for self-defense on all of the actions that he took.
Sure you might say in the beginning he was scared and maybe he was justified in shooting
one shot at one of the alleged assailants to make sure that they were all frightened
away.
But that's not what he did.
He lined up his gun and he aimed it directly at all of them and when one of them was hit
and began to stand up again he said, well I guess you haven't been hit enough, here's
another one for you and shot him and caused the very, very serious injury.
The law of self-defense requires that you stop when the threat against you has abated
and is no longer imminent.
But again, juries make decisions of this kind often not based on the actual law of self-defense
but more on, there but for the grace of God, go I.
What would I have done if I had been faced with a similar situation?
How would I have responded?
What would I have done?
What would I have wanted my children to do?
What would I have wanted my parents, my friends to do?
And in a situation like that, doubts are likely to be resolved in favor of the, quote, innocent
victim who became the self-defender rather than the guilty thugs who brought it on themselves.
After all none of this would have happened, they reason, but for the aggressive action
of the kids on the train, the black kids on the train.
Now of course the black kids on the train didn't do anything that was illegal.
All they said according to the evidence in the case was how are you and give me $5, beggars
all the time on trains ask for $5.
But presumably these kids didn't ask for the $5 as if they were beggars, they asked for
it in a much more aggressive way, sending the subtle message give me $5 or else there
will be consequences and the consequences will be quite serious, at least the jury
saw it that way.
The lawyer for the defendant Bernard Getz did a brilliant, brilliant job in conveying
the fear that an average New Yorker would have in a subway.
He literally recreated in the courtroom a darkened New York subway car, showed how narrow it
actually was, how close together the people are, how quickly the train was moving and
rocking and how difficult it would have been for Bernard Getz to retreat to escape.
Because the New York law at the time required that if a person is threatened and can easily
withdraw or easily retreat from the threat, he would be obliged to do so.
In other words, taking the case outside of the subway system where it's very difficult
to retreat, particularly from a moving train.
