Let's assume that a person was in his car and somebody came over to him and said,
give me five dollars or even said, give me five dollars or I'll beat you up.
The law in New York at the time was that the person in the car had the obligation simply
to put his foot on the gas and drive away if he could do so with safety.
Now, if the person threatening him had a gun, that might be different.
If the person in the car had his own gun, he would be entitled to draw it and try to
out-shoot whether that would be smart or not is a different question.
Out-shoot the person who was threatening him.
But if the person who was outside the car merely had a knife or was threatening him with fists,
then the obligation under the law at that time was always to retreat.
Why? Because the courts have said that the law prefers preserving life, even the life of guilty
assailants to dignity or self-respect.
Sure, it might not be the macho thing to run away, but the law requires you to run away.
Well, in most places, recently in Florida, a new law was passed at the behest of the gun lobby,
eliminating the obligation to retreat and imposing instead the right to stand one's
ground. The law in Florida now says that if you're threatened and you can easily
leave and avoid the threat, but you have a gun, you're entitled to pull your gun out and blow
away your assailant instead of simply getting in your car or walking away. Now, that's very,
very controversial, obviously. Very popular in many states and the legislature in Florida passed it
overwhelmingly and the governor signed it. But now some people from the gun control side
are opposing this new extension of the law of self-defense and are handing out leaflets to
tourists coming into Florida saying Florida is a dangerous place. You may find yourself in the
middle of a shootout that the new Florida law encourages kind of vigilante justice and the
result might be that you'll be hit by a stray bullet. You might consider vacationing in a place
where the law is more protective of civilians than it is in Florida. Self-defense is very,
very controversial today for these and other reasons. It's the favorite defense of criminal
lawyers because you can claim self-defense without in any way admitting you did something wrong.
In fact, you don't claim self-defense, you proclaim self-defense because self-defense
is kind of the John Wayne defense, what any good American would do when confronted
with a threat to a person or a person's family.
