and it affected presidential elections. Presidents ran against crime. It affected, of course,
elections for district attorney. It affected elections for president of the United States,
governor, mayor. Virtually everybody had to support strong actions against criminal defendants.
Everybody running for office had to favor the death penalty. Everybody running for office had
to favor broad definitions of self-defense. You didn't have to embrace Bernard Getz, because there
was a racist element there. But at the very least, you had to show sympathy. America became
really the only country in the Western world where crime became a major issue in politics.
Very few other countries have crime issues on the agenda. The death penalty, for example,
is not a political issue in England or Canada or Australia or Israel or New Zealand or France
or Germany, for that matter. Those are issues that are regarded as to be decided professionally
by professional prosecutors. But professional prosecutors really don't exist in most parts
of the United States. Prosecutors are elected. And as the old saw goes, what is a prosecutor?
A prosecutor is somebody who wants to be a senator. And if you look at the United States Senate,
for example, you will find almost every lawyer in the Senate, and most American senators are lawyers,
had been a prosecutor. So the being a prosecutor is a road to higher office. And we elect our
prosecutors. No country in the world elects prosecutors other than the United States.
We elect our judges in about half of our states. And so crime and justice have become political
issues. Presidents run on being tough on crime. Supreme Court nominees get nominated because
of their attitudes on law and order and justice. In my next lecture, I will be talking about how
Supreme Court justices get elected also on their attitudes toward important issues like abortion
and Roe versus Wade. But for now, I want to focus for the next few minutes of this lecture on crime
as a political issue. It's hard to imagine how important that is in the way crime is treated
in the United States, why sentences are higher in this country than in any other country. No
politician can ever run claiming that his platform is to reduce sentences because then the opponent
will say, clearly, I'm running to increase sentences. I'm on your side. I'm on the victim's side.
And the opponent is on the side of the criminals. The ACLU is called the criminals lobby. That's
the American Civil Liberties Union. Those few candidates who try to run based on civil liberties
principles are tarred with the label of being pro-criminal. This was all part of a period of
time that started a long time ago during the Jacksonian period of American history, the 1830s,
when President Jackson tried to popularize almost every part of American life and try to introduce
into American life elections where elections had never previously been held. And so we vote for
dog catcher. We vote for prosecutors. We vote for so many officials that in other jurisdictions
people don't vote for. I think the most bizarre election that I've ever seen in the context of
law and order and justice is elections that occur every few years in Florida in which people not
only run for prosecutor, that's at least conventional now in the United States, but in Florida they also
elect public defenders. That is the people who are assigned to represent
