Poor defendants who cannot afford to have a lawyer, and the Supreme Court has decided
in a case called Gideon v. Wainwright, that all defendants facing felony charges must
be represented by a lawyer.
A lawyer must be appointed for them.
And so in Florida, they elect the public defender.
Can you just imagine what an election must be like for public defender?
Well I graduated Harvard Law School, and I took all of the sophisticated courses in
criminal procedure and constitutional law, and criminal law, and I was first in my class,
and I am a very experienced prosecutor.
And if you vote for me, I will win all of my cases, and the streets of Florida will
be filled with criminals who have been freed as the result of my great talent.
Now who is going to vote for such a candidate?
Consider candidate B.
He gets up and says, duh, I graduated last in my class from Joe's Law School, an uncredited
and uncertified law school.
I never took a course in criminal law.
I've never won a case.
You don't have to worry about me.
If you elect me, your public defender, I will never free anybody.
The streets will be safe.
All the criminals will be locked up.
Well who would you vote for?
The absurdity of having elections for public defender is so manifest when you just think
about it for a minute, but I think it's just as absurd to have elections for prosecutors.
After all, the job of the prosecutor shouldn't be to please the public.
It shouldn't be to pander to the public.
It should be to do justice.
And when prosecutors and judges are elected, it's awfully hard to see objective justice
being done, and that's why so many countries in the world laugh at the American system
of justice and its democratic nature.
Criminal trials should not be exercises in democracy.
They should be exercises in justice.
But when criminal trials become exercises in democracy, and inevitably they do when you
have elected prosecutors, elected judges, and jurors selected from among average folks,
then what happens is the will of the people, the temporary will of the people, the passion
of the people begin to prevail in jury trials.
And I think that explains every aspect of the Bernard Getz case.
First of all, the decision to first not prosecute Bernard Getz when he was a hero, and then the
decision to change and prosecute Bernard Getz clearly reflected the attitude of the people.
And the prosecutor plainly was influenced.
The grand jury plainly was influenced by what the people wanted.
First they wanted Bernard Getz to be a hero, then when he became something of an embarrassment,
they wanted him to be prosecuted.
Then look at the jury verdict.
Basically reflected the attitude of the people.
They split the difference.
Yes, he was guilty of carrying a gun.
We don't want people to carry guns on the New York City subway system.
We don't want people to engage in the premeditated, planned, deliberate, willful act of going
into the subway with a fully loaded gun, an unlawfully possessed gun, a fast draw holster,
and bullets that are designed to kill people as quickly as possible.
No, no, no.
That's not acceptable.
On the other hand, we can't second guess what happened to Bernard Getz once he was in the
middle of that encounter there, but for the grace of God, go we.
And so the jury acquits him on the charge of attempted murder and convicts him on the
charge of gun possession.
As is typical in cases of this kind, the jury verdict didn't end even the legal proceeding.
There were then civil lawsuits brought, and civil lawsuits brought on the part of the person
who was most seriously injured.
And here it really becomes interesting because the original trial was in Manhattan, which
is very much a mixed borrow and an upper class borrow in many ways.
But the lawsuit that was brought against Bernard Getz was not brought in Manhattan.
It was brought in the Bronx, which has a dominantly African-American jury pool and the
dominantly African-American jury pool years and years later when the heroism had faded
from Bernard Getz, quickly rendered a verdict against Getz and held him liable financially
for the injuries he had caused.
And so the Getz case will go down in history as a period piece about vigilante justice
at a time when many people thought that was the only kind of justice you could get in the
New York Subways.
