Why would the trial of Mike Tyson be among the most important trials of the 20th century?
After all, Mike Tyson was just a boxer who was accused of raping a young woman from Rhode
Island at a black pageant in Indiana.
He was convicted.
He served his time, it ruined his career, and he never managed really to come back
and be the great heavyweight champ he was previously, but why should that case be among
the most important cases of the 20th century?
Well, the reason is this.
Rape is today one of the most important and quickly changing and controversial crimes
that we prosecute today.
It's the crime that probably has changed more dramatically in my lifetime and in my career
as a lawyer than any other crime, and the Mike Tyson case reflects both the benefits
of the change, and there are many, and some of the disadvantages of these changes, and
raises at least the possibility that in the current climate, people can be convicted of
rape based on very questionable evidence and very questionable circumstances.
So let's think hard about the Mike Tyson case.
There are actually two Mike Tyson cases.
There was the one that was presented to the jury, and that was an extremely compelling
case for guilt.
After all, the jury learned about a young woman who was inexperienced, a virgin, who
had come to Indiana to participate in a black pageant, and had left Indiana a rape victim.
They learned about a young woman who had no interest in publicity, indeed her name was
kept from the public during the trial, and a young woman who didn't want to collect any
money, didn't hire a lawyer, didn't want any movie to be made or books to be written about
the case.
They learned about a young woman who had resisted Mike Tyson's advances and kisses, and who
simply wanted to go out with the celebrity and perhaps go to a movie or go to a party,
but certainly had no interest in engaging in any kind of sexual activity.
And therefore, it was entirely the result of Mike Tyson's force in the hotel room at
three o'clock in the morning that resulted in the sexual encounter, which the prosecution
called rape, and which the jury agreed, beyond a reasonable doubt, unanimously was rape,
resulting in Mike Tyson being sentenced to a prison term in the Indiana Youth Facility.
But then there was the real case, the case that I learned about when I became involved
as one of Mike Tyson's appeals lawyers, I had not been involved in the trial itself.
But the case I learned about was a very, very different one.
It involved a young woman who had been sexually active, well before coming to Indiana, who
had previously falsely accused an athlete of raping her and had to withdraw that false
accusation, who had been examined for possible venereal disease because of her sexual activity
prior to coming to Indianapolis, who had hired a lawyer, a money lawyer, immediately upon
reporting the rape, which she reported a day later.
