When this testimony was revealed in the press that she had rebuffed his kisses, several
women came forward who had been actually standing right near the limo at the time, who didn't
know either Tyson or Washington, and called Tyson's lawyer and said, wait a minute, we
read in the newspaper that Desiree Washington testified that she rebuffed him and moved
away.
We were actually there.
We were watching through the window, and we saw what was happening, and she was all
over him, and she was kissing him and hugging him, and then they walked out together, and
they were holding hands, and they walked to his hotel holding hands.
Well, you would think the jury would be very much influenced by that kind of testimony,
A, because it shows that Desiree Washington was lying, not telling the truth about the
encounters leading up to the ultimate sex.
But even more importantly, it would show that she was into at least the romantic and physical
aspects of the encounter, rather than, as she said, rebuffing it.
But the jury never heard the testimony of those women, even though they were objective.
They had no stake in the case.
They were able to see through the glass, tests were conducted to show that, and they had
very clear views of what happened, and were prepared to testify.
Why did the jury never hear their testimony?
Because the judge ruled that it came in too late, that it was not presented early enough
in the case, and as the result of that extreme technicality, the jury, in its, quote, search
for truth, was denied some of the most crucial evidence that it could have heard, which might
have influenced its judgment.
In fact, it was that testimony which led some of the jurors to say, if we had heard this
testimony, we would have come to a different verdict.
So they then go up to their hotel room, and she, and this is her own testimony, she goes
to the bathroom.
The bathroom had a phone, and the bathroom had a lock.
So if she feared anything, she could have simply locked the door, used the phone, and
called for assistance.
She did not.
Instead, she removed her panty liner and her pad, something which she would not do if she
was planning to go out to a party and dance for several hours, because it would have ruined
the dress she was wearing, left the panty liner in the bathroom, and came out passing
a door, which she could have left through, came out to Mike Tyson's room, where the bed
was, wearing only her panties and her dress, but not the panty liner and the protection
from her menstruation.
At that point, the story diverges, and she claims that Mike Tyson forced her, he claims
that she consented completely to the sexual activity.
But interestingly enough, she acknowledges that in the course of the sexual activity,
he asked her, would you like to get on top now?
And she responded by saying, sure.
And she proceeded to get on top and continue the sexual encounter.
She explained that by saying she wanted to be on top, because it would be easier for
her to escape and leave if she was on top.
Of course, she never made any effort to escape or leave.
And the sexual encounter was completed.
He then asked her, do you love me?
And took her home, and there was no evidence of any bad will or ill will at that point.
And she then learned that her parents were coming the next day.
And all of her friends knew she had had a sexual encounter with Mike Tyson.
And what happened then was she went back in her mind and remembered what had happened
several years earlier, when she had had voluntary sex with the quarterback of the football team
in her high school.
