The interesting story about the affirming of the conviction is also telling about Indiana justice. Indiana justice is unlike any other justice that I have experienced in my 41 years of practicing law.
First of all, the judge in the case was a former rape prosecutor. Now, you might say, what remarkable luck for the prosecution to have drawn a judge who was a former rape prosecutor who had prosecuted over 50 rape cases.
It helped draft some of the rape statutes, refused to concede there was such a thing as date rape, didn't recognize the difference between violent rape and rape that might result from a misunderstanding.
What a wonderful choice for the prosecutor to have luckily come upon to be the judge. Well, that's not the way it happened. In Indiana, and I think it's the only state in the country, the prosecutor gets to pick the judge in the case.
And of all the judges in Indiana, the prosecutor picked, as the judge in a rape case, a woman who had been a rape prosecutor, who had helped draft the rape statutes, who had been a rape counselor, and whose sympathies were completely and one-sidedly against anybody accused of rape and in favor of anybody who claimed rape.
And it was that judge that kept out the evidence of the four women who had seen the necking and the willing kissing just moments before the alleged rape occurred. It was that judge who kept out the evidence of the lawyer who said that he could testify that his own client had testified falsely.
It was that judge that eventually kept out evidence that she had previously falsely accused someone of rape, another athlete of rape, back in her hometown in Rhode Island.
So you would think then that the court of appeals would look a scans at some of the rulings made by this judge. The judge, by the way, after she made her rulings, and the rulings were very controversial and very questionable, ruled that the appeal itself would be entirely frivolous.
There would be no basis for bringing an appeal and therefore put Mike Tyson in jail prior to his appeal being decided. So Mike Tyson went immediately to jail and was not able to fight to regain his championship or to become a successful boxer again because he immediately went to jail where he remained for the next several years.
But one would think that the appeal would have a good chance of succeeding and it did have a good chance of succeeding and the appellate decisions split. The ultimate decision was two to two, two in favor of reversing the conviction, two in favor of affirming the conviction.
Well, what happens when there's a two to two vote? Interestingly enough, when there's a two to two vote, the lower court decision is upheld. And so a two to two tie favors the prosecution when they won below. How did the case come to have a two to two tie?
Therein lies another fascinating story which tells you something very important about Indiana justice. And I'm part of that story. While the case was pending on appeal, I went to my class reunion from Yale, a law school.
