And they do class reunions by every five years or ten years, and I was the class of 1962,
and so the people were there from the class of 1967, 1972, 1977, 1982.
One of the people in a class after mine happened to be the Chief Justice of the Indiana Supreme
Court.
I had no idea of that, and his wife was there as well, and she had a different last name.
I was standing around talking to my own wife and to a friend of mine from my own class
who was the president of George Washington University, and we were just chatting and
gossiping about the old days at Yale Law School, when suddenly a woman tapped me on the shoulder.
One of these annoying taps when you're involved in a conversation and you want to continue
your conversation, and I said, excuse me, I'll be with you in just one minute.
And she said, no, I just want to tell you that the kind of arguments you New York lawyers
make don't always work that well in Indiana.
I just wanted to tell you that.
I said, excuse me, ma'am, I'm not a New York lawyer, I'm a Boston lawyer, but who are you?
How would you know anything about Indiana lawyers?
She said, well, I'm married to the Chief Justice of Indiana, and I said, well, excuse me, ma'am,
there's a case pending, and I can't have any discussion with you.
If I knew you were the wife of the Chief Justice, I wouldn't even have said hello to you.
This conversation is over, and I walked away.
Two weeks later, the Chief Justice of Indiana issues an order saying, I hereby recuse myself
from any participation in the Mike Tyson case.
So we wonder why would he recuse himself?
First of all, a conversation of the kind I had with his wife would not be something
that was a basis for recusal.
I didn't say anything.
I just listened to her make a foolish statement about New York lawyers, and it was a very,
very general statement.
So we began to do some research on the Chief Justice of Indiana and found a fascinating
story.
The Chief Justice of Indiana was running for reelection several years earlier.
You run for reelection as Chief Justice in Indiana, and he was accused by a fellow judge
of sexually harassing law clerks in the office, male law clerks.
He was a man, and he was accused of sexually harassing male law clerks in the office, and
it became a big front page story in the Indiana newspapers.
First of all, accusing the Chief Justice of being a predatory homosexual, secondly of
being a predatory homosexual in the context of work and exploiting his relationship with
law clerks, and it became a big, big story.
Nonetheless, he won the election, quickly married, and many in Indiana thought the marriage
was not a real marriage, but a marriage to protect him from future accusations.
But the important point is, the last thing this judge wanted was to cast the deciding
vote that allowed an accused rapist to go free for fear that it would resurrect the story
about his own predatory actions.
