Should rape accusations have to be corroborated in the old days before our new sensitivity
toward the rights of rape victims became manifest, a person could not get a rape prosecution
to succeed by simply testifying that she was raped.
She had to have corroboration because women's testimony was not believed in rape context
as one of the old writers of law, Wigmore had said rape is a crime easy to charge and
difficult to disprove even though the defendant is innocent therefore you need corroboration
but it was the only crime essentially for which you needed corroboration and that's
been changed now and to the better.
There's no reason why a woman's testimony should not be believed so long as all the
evidence comes in on all sides and so long as the jury can fairly assess the credibility
of the complaining witness, the credibility of the defense witness, the credibility of
the defendant and the entire total credibility of the case.
My own view and this is a controversial view and when I teach it in my classes at Harvard
I get a lot of criticism for it.
My own view is that rape is one of the most difficult crimes to prosecute accurately and
fairly.
I think it's the crime in which along with child molestation which is another crime that
is bear some similarities to rape in this respect.
I think there are more cases of actual rapes and actual child molestations that occur and
that aren't prosecuted than any other crime.
Virtually all murders are prosecuted, virtually all armed robberies are prosecuted but many,
many, many rapes are not prosecuted because it's so difficult to bring a rape prosecution
and it's so embarrassing often for the victim to come forward.
She has to disclose her relationship with the man to her family.
Oftentimes the person's married by the time it happens very, very difficult to do and
I think most people would agree that there are many instances of real rapists being acquitted
and getting away with one of the most serious crimes imaginable.
But then there's the other side of the ledger.
I think rape and also child molestation but the two are rather different but in this respect
they have similarities.
I think rape is one of the crimes which has the largest number of false convictions as
well of people who actually are not guilty of rape being falsely convicted for many
reasons.
Number one, we live at a time, the pendulum is shifting very dramatically from where it
was many years ago against the rape victim to where it is today very much in favor of
the rape victim and against those accused of crime whether truly or falsely accused
of crime.
These will likely err on the side of finding guilt in close cases.
