Second of all, many of these cases are very close cases.
We're not talking about the stranger rape with a guy jumps out of the bushes with a gun or a knife
and forces a stranger to have sex with him at the risk of her own life.
I'm talking about cases where the two people dated, where they went out, where they had dinner,
where they had drinks, where they then went back to his or her apartment and where sex happened.
And in the morning, the woman does not believe that she consented.
And in some cases, she didn't consent and she was raped in some cases.
She did consent. In some cases, there was an intermediate position.
And the law is unclear what level of consent is required.
Is failure to object consent or is affirmative consent required?
Does it have to be specific affirmative consent?
Can the affirmative consent occur simply by action or inaction?
Or must it be as it was in Antioch College a few years ago, where before you could have sex with somebody,
you had to get a written permission, written approval, and that every step along the way had to be agreed to,
otherwise it could constitute a form of sexual assault?
Are we moving in that direction?
When I teach rape at Harvard Law School, it's always the most difficult and contentious series of classes I have.
Because in the class, there will be some women who have probably been raped.
There will probably be some men who have been guilty of what under the law is rape.
It becomes a very, very personal and difficult discussion.
I was not in the hotel room with Mike Tyson and Desiree Washington on that morning at two o'clock.
Only the two of them know what went on in that hotel room.
The rest of us never will.
But the jury in this case was deprived of important, relevant information,
which could have allowed them to come to a more honest and fuller and better decision about what happened there.
As I say, only the two of these people know.
And it's certainly possible that even the two of them have different perceptions of what happened.
It is certainly possible that in an encounter like that, late at night, particularly when alcohol is involved,
and in the Tyson case, there was no evidence that alcohol was involved.
But it's very difficult sometimes to deconstruct all of the elements and to figure out precisely what happened.
Therefore, juries will be wrong, and judges will be wrong, and prosecutors will be wrong.
And it goes back to the question that we've been raising throughout this course.
When there's a doubt, should it be resolved in favor of the defendant, or should it be resolved in favor of the prosecution?
Is it really better for ten guilty rapists to go free than for one possibly innocent non-rapist to be wrongfully prosecuted and wrongfully convicted?
What do you think? What do most Americans think? What do most jurors think?
Thank you.
