I think we're in a transition state now, and for many people, that's a very, very uncertain
question with very, very clearly different answers depending on who you are and what
your experiences may be.
So the trial of Mike Tyson, which was very important obviously to Mike Tyson, very important
to Desiree Washington, also kind of stands for where we are and where we're going in
this extremely complicated area of rape, a crime which goes back to the earliest period
of time, a crime which will never be completely abolished so long as passions dominate over
reason, and a crime that is among the most difficult to prosecute.
The trial of Mike Tyson, a trial which in my view resulted in an unfair verdict, will
go down in history as an important turning point and an important reflection of the changing
nature of our attitudes toward rape in America today.
After listening to lecture nine, a student posed this question to Professor Dershowitz.
Why has it become so difficult for a court to determine whether or not a rape occurred?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
One of the reasons it's become so much more difficult in recent years to decide whether
a rape occurred or some kind of a consensual sexual activity occurred is that the social
mores have changed dramatically.
In the old days, no woman would dream of going to a man's hotel room at night unless there
was a chaperone or unless they were married.
And today, of course, those barriers have been broken down.
And that's why often in rape cases, defense attorneys select as their jurors older women.
For example, in the case of William Kennedy Smith, a jury of older women acquitted him
and interviews thereafter suggested that many of them said, well, the woman went back to
his place alone after meeting at a bar.
Well, what did she expect?
In the Mike Tyson case, older women jurors might also have come to a similar conclusion.
But the mores have changed now and younger people will say, well, she was entitled to
go to his hotel room.
She was entitled to watch television.
She was entitled to neck with him.
But she was entitled to say no at any point in time.
And at that point in time, he was obliged to respond by not moving forward.
And that is the law, and that should be the law.
And we should have this kind of more liberated attitude toward sexuality, which doesn't mean
that a man can just proceed at his whim.
No means no.
But it also imposes an obligation on the woman to say no when she means no and not to kind
of leave it to chance.
So the breakdown of social mores and social barriers and clear fences that used to exist
that would make it easy to determine whether a rape occurred have made it much, much more
difficult to decide what went on in a room where a man and a woman were consensually
together, perhaps even consensually on a bed together, consensually necking together.
And then it, quote, went too far.
You may be asking too much of the law to really probe into that very complicated sexual encounter.
There are, of course, easy cases.
And the easy cases the law does better on, as Oliver Wendell Holmes once said, hard cases
make bad law, and hard rape cases make especially bad law.
This ends lecture nine.
