In many ways, one of the most significant cases of the entire 20th century, certainly
from a political perspective, is the Supreme Court's decision in Roe v. Wade, the decision
gave women the right to choose whether to have an abortion or to give birth to a child.
Why is Roe v. Wade so significant?
Well, it became the focal point for so many political battles.
Political battles in elections, people running for high office, senate, presidency, but also
it became a significant litmus test for appointment to the United States Supreme Court.
Probably Robert Bork, who was nomination to the Supreme Court ended in defeat, was defeated
in large part because it appeared as if he would not support a woman's right to choose
abortion and other kind of alleged privacy interests, which became hot button issues
in the 1970s when the case was first decided through the 80s, 90s, and well into the 21st century.
So why is Roe v. Wade so important?
After all, a woman's right to choose abortion was becoming acceptable in most parts of the
world even before the United States Supreme Court rendered its decision in 1973.
Most European countries had legalized abortion.
Many other countries in the world, even some Catholic countries, had permitted abortion
to go forward, even abortion which had no medical basis, simply the choice of the woman.
What would have happened in the United States had Roe v. Wade not been decided in 1973 by
a divided United States Supreme Court.
Would the legislatures in most American states have validated a woman's right to choose?
Would the Federal Congress have supported an amendment to the Constitution or broad legislation
granting a woman a right to choose?
No one will ever know the answer to that question because in 1973 the Supreme Court of the United
States constitutionalized the issue and ruled that a woman, at least during the first trimester,
has a constitutional right, an unequivocal right to abort her own baby for any reason
whatsoever.
The circumstances leading up to the famous case of Roe v. Wade are very, very interesting
and although they don't raise questions about the legitimacy of the decision itself, certainly
raise questions about the legitimacy of the process by which the case came before the
Supreme Court.
The woman in the case who was the subject was named Roe, but that's not her real name.
They called her Jane Roe to protect her privacy.
