And they concluded that it was, and they did it by finding a right of privacy,
of marital privacy, of procreational privacy, and they did it gradually.
The first case involved a married couple in New Haven, Connecticut, that wanted access to
birth control information, and believe it or not, the liberal state of Connecticut
prevented married couples from getting birth control information because the Catholic Church
was against birth control clinics, and the Catholic Church had sufficient influence in
Connecticut to prevent birth control clinics from opening. And the Supreme Court held,
in a decision called Griswold v. Connecticut, that there was a privacy right, a constitutional
privacy right, that married couples had to have birth control information given to them
without fear of criminal prosecution. Today, almost no one disputes that. There are still
arguments within certain churches that birth control is improper, but no one today or very
few people would dispute today the right of a married couple to disregard the teachings of
their church or to, if they belong to another church or religion that doesn't have those teachings,
to simply use birth control as a way of preventing conception and pregnancy. But that was the
starting point of the Supreme Court's journey toward validating a woman's right to choose abortion.
And it's hard even to find that right in the Constitution. The Constitution doesn't mention
a right of privacy. In fact, the word privacy was not a common word at the time the Constitution of
the Bill of Rights were enacted in the last part of the 18th century. But there is a word in the
Constitution that has some relevance. In the Fourth Amendment, the right of the people to be secure
in their person's homes and affect secure. Secure was another word for private and words change
meanings over time. Today, we use the word privacy. In the old days, they use the word security. Does
the Fourth Amendment incorporate a right to make private choices about birth control?
One can make that argument. There's another way of making the argument as well. The Ninth and
10th Amendments to the Constitution basically say that this is a government of limited powers and
the rights not given to the government, expressly by the Constitution, are reserved to the people.
It says to the people in the States, respectively, but the people come first. And therefore,
the question should not be asked, is there a right of privacy in the Constitution? But instead,
the question should be asked, where does the government get the power to intrude into the
private decisions of citizens?
