And if you ask the question that way, a negative constitutional right develops.
That is, the absence of power by the government to tell a married couple whether or not they can use birth control in the privacy of their home.
Well, the next step was if a married couple could use birth control, how about an unmarried couple?
Well, it seemed illogical to preclude an unmarried couple who you don't want to have children from using birth control when married couples have the right to use birth control.
And so the Supreme Court held that there was a constitutional right even of unmarried couples, even in states where it was then a crime for unmarried people to have sex with each other.
Hard to believe that as recently as 15 or 20 years ago, some states had statutes making fornication of crime, making it a crime for an unmarried couple to have sex.
But even in those states, there was a right to practice birth control.
All right, now comes Roe versus Wade, and the court makes this leap from birth control to abortion.
And think about it for a minute. It is a dramatic leap.
Birth control obviously involves privacy. There's no human being involved. There's no third party. There's no fetus.
It's an attempt to practice sex in a way that prevents pregnancy from occurring.
That, it seems to me, and it seems to a lot of other legal scholars, is very, very different from saying that a woman has the right to terminate a pregnancy once it occurs.
Why? Because for many people, perhaps a majority of people, and maybe this should be left to majority decision, not to the Supreme Court,
but for lots of people, once conception occurs and once a fetus exists, it is no longer simply an issue of privacy.
It becomes an issue of the woman's right of privacy juxtaposed against the fetus's right to develop into a human being.
And to prove that we all believe that fetuses have certain status different from, for example, a sperm or an egg,
we would all agree that if a woman were pregnant and desperately wanted to have the child and a man attacked her and beat her stomach
purposely in order to kill that fetus, that that would be an extremely serious crime.
Even if the mother wasn't herself hurt, killing of the fetus would be a serious crime when done against a woman who wanted to give birth to the child.
So we know that the fetus in the body of a woman who wants to bear it as a child has a protected legal status and ought to have a protected legal status.
Now, does it follow from that that the fetus is a live human being and that the woman herself can't abort that fetus?
No, that doesn't follow. You can easily see a rational distinction being made, which goes along the following lines.
It's a woman who determines whether or not the fetus is to be born or not to be born.
If the woman decides the fetus is to be born, it's then a life and deserving protection.
If the woman decides the fetus is not to be born, it then is an appendage and can be removed as easily as a person can remove an appendix.
Now, that may trivialize the issue for those who believe that the fetus is always life, but at least it's a rational distinction.
