And it's precisely these kinds of distinctions that are generally made by the legislature
and not made by the Supreme Court as part of constitutional law.
So there were many scholars, two of my colleagues, very famous constitutional scholars, Archibald
Cox, who was one of the most eminent scholars of constitutional law and had been the solicitor
general of the United States and the special prosecutor in the Watergate proceedings.
He believed in a woman's right to choose, but he did not believe that Roe v. Wade was
properly decided because he did not think that the issue of abortion should be made
a constitutional issue.
He believed it should be left to the states and to the legislatures.
Another friend of mine, John Hart Ealy, who was an eminent constitutional scholar, came
to the same conclusion.
And I myself had grave doubts about Roe v. Wade when it was decided, even though I strongly
support a woman's right to choose.
And I personally don't think that a fetus is a live human being with a soul.
And if my daughter or my wife or my relative or anybody had an unwanted pregnancy, I would
have no moral inhibitions about supporting a decision to have an abortion.
But I find it difficult to discern a constitutional basis for so controversial a decision about
which reasonable people can honestly disagree and which has a strong basis in religious
law and in philosophy.
It seems to me that the issue of when a woman should have a right to have an abortion, under
what circumstances, when the fetus becomes a human being deserving of protection by the
law, are all matters more properly left to the legislature than left to the judicial
system.
So I join a group of people, I think an increasing group of people, who support a woman's right
to choose but who don't necessarily think that constitutionalizing that right was the
right decision for the Supreme Court.
Certainly many would agree we wouldn't want to see the opposite right constitutionalized.
There are some, the United States Senator now, Senator Braunbach, has argued that there
is in the Constitution the right of a fetus not to be aborted.
That is, there is a constitutional right not to permit abortion.
I would obviously dispute that as well.
But those who think there is a constitutional right to have an abortion have to respond
to the argument, well, if the Constitution deals with abortion, what if someday a majority
of the courts say, yes, it deals with abortion, but it deals with it in a way that prevents
legislatures from allowing women to have abortions, wouldn't it be better to leave the entire
issue to the legislature?
And there's a political dimension to this case as well.
Now Supreme Court justices are not supposed to consider politics, but inevitably they do
and when we talk about Bush vs. Gore in a subsequent lecture, we'll see how courts can't
possibly be immune from the realities of political pressures that are brought to bear
on judges as human beings and on judges as former Republicans or former Democrats, they're
not supposed to be Republicans and Democrats when they sit on the bench.
But there clearly was a political dimension to Roe vs. Wade, which I want to explore with
you now.
And that is this.
