And they didn't need pro-choice Republicans, they could vote for anti-choice Republicans
because it didn't matter.
The anti-choice Republicans were only posturing.
They couldn't take away a woman's right to choose abortion because the Supreme Court
had constitutionalized that issue.
It caused a major, major change in the dynamics of the American political system, strengthening
the right wing of the Republican Party, the social conservative wing of the Republican
Party, and weakening the moderate, non-social conservative economic wing of the party.
There was no longer a branch of the Republican Party that was pro-choice.
There was no longer a branch of the Republican Party that was pro-gay rights, and we'll talk
about that issue when we come to Lawrence v. Texas.
The Supreme Court decision finally legalizing and constitutionalizing the right of gays
to practice their sexual preferences in the privacy of their homes.
The Republican Party became easily captured by the religious right, and a culture war
ensued in the United States, and that culture war could be fought over abortion rhetorically
because a woman's right to choose abortion was protected constitutionally, at least until
very recently.
That proved to be a disaster for the Democratic Party and for liberals in general, because
what they had done is turned over to the courts an issue on which they would have won elections,
and they took that issue out of politics and put it in front of the court, put their own
people to sleep, energized their opponents, and the end result, in my view, was not good
for women.
It was not good for choice.
It was not good for the nature of politics in America.
So on balance, I think Roe v. Wade had been a considerable net loss, not a net gain.
Another issue, and another reason why it has been, I think, a negative in American political
and legal history, it has become the litmus test because the Supreme Court is now so important
in fact it's the only game in town when it comes to abortion, legislatures can't do anything
about it, presidents can't do anything about it, the only way to change that is to overrule
Roe v. Wade, and therefore overruling Roe v. Wade has become the primary focus of the
religious right in this country and the cultural conservatives in this country, and therefore
it has become a silenced litmus test for appointment to the Supreme Court, particularly when a
Republican's are in power, it's also become a litmus test when Democrats are in power.
Today, you can't get Democratic votes for confirmation unless you support Roe v. Wade,
and it's hard to get Republican votes for confirmation unless you oppose Roe v. Wade.
So what has that led to?
It's led to a bunch of people coming up for Supreme Court nomination who refuse to disclose
what their positions are in Roe v. Wade.
The most extreme case, of course, was Justice Clarence Thomas, who when his nomination to
the Supreme Court came up, he was asked about his views on Roe v. Wade, and under oath with
a straight face, he said he had never thought about it since he graduated from law school
and had no views on Roe v. Wade.
Of course the minute he got on the Supreme Court he became a strong opponent of Roe v.
Wade, voting in every single case against Roe v. Wade, every possible time he could
to overrule it.
Was he telling the truth when he said he hadn't thought about it, did he have a quick conversion
when he got on the court, or would he have been more candid had he said his strong inclinations
are against Roe v. Wade?
