The same process has occurred with subsequent judicial nominations to the point where today
it's impossible for a nominee, certainly a nominee of the Republican Party, to express
either support for or opposition to Roe v. Wade. They have to speak in code words. Well,
this nominee belongs to a church that opposes Roe v. Wade. That nominee believes in judicial
restraint, and Roe v. Wade perhaps is an opinion that didn't show judicial restraint. On the
other hand, this nominee believes in precedent, and Roe v. Wade is a precedent. Not only is
he a precedent, it's a super precedent. So, the code words down, hints, winks to the
guy, and efforts to communicate to both faces, totally contradictory messages. Don't worry
about this candidate. He or she will clearly support Roe v. Wade, or don't worry about this
candidate. He or she will clearly oppose Roe v. Wade. So, in many instances, Supreme Court
nominees become pigs in a poke, and you're buying them and you're confirming them without knowing
how they're going to vote on important issues of the day. The comet says that prophecy ended
with the destruction of the second temple, and only fools or naves ever prophesied. But
with the risk of being considered either a fool or a nave, I will offer a prophecy
on Roe v. Wade. I'm putting my reputation on the line, but here's my prophecy. Roe v. Wade
will not be overruled. It will not be overruled because it would be bad for the Supreme Court
to overrule Roe v. Wade. It would be bad for the Republican Party for Roe v. Wade to be overruled.
It's good for the Republican Party to seek to overrule Roe v. Wade, but I think actually
overruling Roe v. Wade would be bad for the Republican Party because it would give the
Democrats a great issue. In all upcoming elections, vote for the Democrats and support a woman's
right to choose. Vote for the Republicans and vote against a woman's right to choose.
So, it will not be overruled in my view, but it will be chipped away at every opportunity to
stand Roe v. Wade in the future will, I think, be rejected. And every opportunity to cut back
slightly on Roe v. Wade will be seized upon unless to do so undercut the core of Roe v. Wade.
We will see a very interesting choreographed dance around Roe v. Wade, but it will stand as
an important precedent. Will it serve as a bulwark for other decisions? Will it serve as
a precedent for new decisions? Probably not. Probably it will stand in splendid isolation
as a unique statement by a court about a woman's right to choose in a setting where the public
still remains deeply divided at the periphery. Another prediction. I believe that science
will narrow the debate over Roe v. Wade. The morning after pill, which clearly will be
permitted to be used widely and will be used widely, will end the issue of very, very early
abortion. That will become no longer an issue of abortion. It will become an issue of birth control,
post-sex birth control to be sure, but the majority of Americans will see the morning after pill,
not as an abortion, but as a mechanism of birth control. That's at the early end. At the late end,
it seems to me, the right to life people will prevail.
