Why? Because we'll be able to move back further and further the time in a woman's pregnancy
when the fetus is viable and when a person can actually produce a live baby capable of surviving.
And the American public does not support very late term abortions, particularly very late term abortions,
where the fetus can be removed from the woman safely and healthfully without risk either to the mother or the child.
So I think science will give a victory to the right to life people at the late end of the abortion continuum
and science will give a victory to the right to choice people at the early end of the continuum.
What will be left is that middle point, that second trimester.
And during the second trimester the debate will still continue.
Sonograms will show that during the second trimester the fetus is very much alive and can grasp and maybe can feel pain
and people will understand that aborting during the second trimester has real costs
and perhaps shouldn't be done promiscuously or for no cause whatsoever.
But I believe the Supreme Court will continue to permit second trimester abortions.
More and more will see politicians moving toward the center on this issue as well,
saying we have to reduce the number of abortions without diminishing a woman's right to choose abortion.
When it comes to the health of the mother, abortion will be permitted, whether it be the psychic health of the mother or the physical health of the mother.
So Roe vs. Wade stands for one of those cases, which was very important in its time.
Continues to have some importance as a political standard, as a political target in some respects
and as a political symbol, but will probably have decreasing importance on the actual issue of abortion.
An issue that will continue to divide, an issue that will continue to challenge,
and an issue that will continue to frustrate many people.
So Roe vs. Wade stands as a very important case in 20th century America,
but will I think lose its significance in 21st century America?
This ends Lecture 10.
Remember to visit this course's website at www.modernscholar.com,
where you'll find additional information about the lectures that you just heard.
If you borrow this course from a public library and would like your own copy of the course guide for future reference,
call recorded books at 1-800-636-3399 and we'll send you a free copy.
A shipping charge will apply.
