But then early in the 21st century, in a case that really has its roots in the 20th century,
the Supreme Court resoundingly and without any ambiguity struck down all remnants of
anti-gay legislation and made it absolutely clear that the right to practice homosexual
sex in the privacy of one's home by adults is a liberty interest protected by the United
States Supreme Court and that no state and no Congress and no federal government could
in any way interfere with that right.
It was one of the most dramatic and quick changes that the Supreme Court ever brought
about in a case.
Not only did they overrule Bowers v. Hardwick, the Georgia case that had said that you can
criminalize homosexual behavior, but they declared that, quote, Bowers was not correct
when it was decided and it is not correct today.
It went out of its way to delegitimate any effort to criminalize homosexual conduct.
The case that gave rise to this Magna Carter for gay and lesbian Americans was a very,
very simple case that originated in Texas.
What happened was the police got a report of a weapons disturbance.
It was a fake report.
Nobody knew there were no weapons, but it gave the police a justification for breaking
into the home of somebody who was known to be a homosexual.
And when the police came to look for the so-called weapons, they found two adult men engaged
in sex in the privacy of their own bedroom.
Lawrence was arrested and charged with the Texas misdemeanor of sodomy and brought to
trial.
Now it's interesting that the state law of sodomy makes a distinction between the kind
of conduct men can engage in with each other and the kind of conduct that a man can engage
in with a woman.
In Texas, a man and a woman may lawfully engage in sodomy, which is defined as contact between
the genitals of one person and the mouth or anus of another person.
But two people of the same sex who do the same thing are criminals.
Several other states do not make that distinction.
They've criminalized all sodomy, including oral genital contact between a husband and
a wife.
Now, plainly, that kind of statute would never sustain constitutional attack if a couple
has the right to practice privacy and practice birth control in their home.
Surely, the state can't tell them how to engage in heterosexual sex.
They can't dictate what is, quote, normal.
If they could, you can imagine a state requiring all couples to engage in the missionary position
or to engage in sex with a certain degree of frequency, not more frequently and not
less frequently than that.
No state's going to do that, but there still are laws on the books in states that would
prohibit married couples from engaging in what is defined as sodomy, namely oral genital
contact.
