So, the case came before the Supreme Court on the issue, not of discrimination between
homosexuals and heterosexuals, it could have been decided on that ground, but on a more
profound basic issue, namely whether or not there is a right, a liberty, interest in engaging
in homosexual sex.
In the Supreme Court, in a decision written by Justice Anthony Kennedy, interestingly,
the man who was put on the Supreme Court when Robert Bork was kept off the Supreme Court,
and Robert Bork clearly would have come out the other way, Robert Bork had said in his
writings that there is no right to privacy in the Constitution, and he mocked concepts
of liberty as derisive of basic constitutional jurisprudence.
But Justice Kennedy wrote what many have called a Magna Carta for gay and lesbians Americans,
here's what he said.
He said, quote, liberty protects the person from unwanted governmental intrusions into
a dwelling or other private places.
In our tradition, the state is not omnipresent in the home, and there are other spheres
of our lives and existence outside the home where the state should not be a dominant presence.
Freedom extends beyond spatial bounds.
Liberty presumes an autonomy of self that includes freedom of thought, belief, expression,
and certain intimate conduct.
The instant case involves liberty of the person, both in its spatial and more transcendent dimensions.
In other words, there are two basic reasons why the state could not prohibit what went
on in the home of Mr. Lawrence.
Number one, it was his home, and in the home, the police have limited rights to intrude.
Now that doesn't mean they have no rights.
They certainly can come in and examine or investigate whether or not a person was using
drugs in the privacy of one's home.
It'd be interesting to see how the court might distinguish a private use of drug case from
a private sex case, and the court does that, and I'll get to that in a minute.
It does it by moving to the next phrase in the opinion, the more transcendent dimensions.
And I think what Justice Kennedy was talking about there is the suggestion that sex is
different, that sex is intimate, that it's transcendent, it relates to love, although
it doesn't always relate to love, and it's different than the use of drugs, for example,
or other forms of prohibited conduct in the home itself.
The court then proceeded to set out a general rule, and the general rule is very significant
and has enormous implications for the future.
The rule counsels against any attempts by the state or a court to define the meaning
of the relationship or to set its boundaries absent injury to a person or abuse of an institution
the law protects.
That's a very interesting phrase.
The injury to a person is very easy to understand, clearly you're not allowed to hurt somebody
even if you think it's part of your essential right as a man, you can't beat your wife even
though you think a man has an inherent right to beat a woman, no, because that involves
injury.
