But the second phrase talks about abuse of an institution the law protects.
Well, you know, you might say heterosexual conduct is an institution the law protects,
and it might be argued that it begs the question to say that prohibiting homosexual conduct isn't an attempt to protect an institution.
Justice Scalia in dissent certainly takes that view.
But Justice Kennedy continues, quote,
It suffices for us to acknowledge that adults may choose to enter upon this relationship,
namely a sexual relationship,
in the confines of their homes and their own private lives and still retain the dignity as free persons.
When sexuality finds overt expression and intimate conduct with other persons,
the conduct can be but one element in a personal bond that is more enduring.
The liberty protected by the Constitution allows homosexual persons the right to make this choice.
Now, that is a very, very broad ruling.
It goes beyond just the home.
It goes beyond sexual activities.
It basically says that homosexuality as a lifestyle, as a way of life,
is a protected liberty under the privacy due process rights of the United States Constitution.
That's right.
I don't think that any reasonable person today could argue that the state should intrude on the private lives of adult homosexuals.
But the real question, and the question that engendered a stirring dissent by Justice Scalia,
is whether that right is a constitutional right, or whether it's a right that should be enforced by legislation.
After all, gays in America have considerable power.
They are disproportionately wealthy.
They are disproportionately influential to their numbers.
At least their numbers as defined by those who are openly gay.
Perhaps this ought to simply be relegated to the political process in the way that many people think
that abortion should be placed in the political process.
But it seems to me there is a real difference, and the difference has to do with the phrase
that Justice Kennedy used in terms of absent injury.
One can make a plausible argument that abortion injures.
One cannot make a plausible argument that private homosexual conduct between consulting adults injures.
There is simply no plausible claim to that.
You can argue that the institution of marriage is dependent on two people of opposite sex,
uniting for procreative purposes.
But remember the Lawrence case doesn't deal with gay marriage.
It explicitly leaves that out, although I find it very hard to distinguish the right of gays
to engage in important relationships.
As the court says, the liberty protected by the Constitution allows homosexual persons the right to make this choice.
Why not another choice?
Why not the choice to marry?
Why not the choice to legitimate their sexual relationship through the state?
The court goes out of its way to say they're not deciding that issue.
And the court indicates that there are many other issues.
It's not deciding.
Let me read one other quote from the Supreme Court's decision, because it's so important.
The present case, the court says, does not involve minors.
It does not involve persons who might be injured or coerced or were situated in relationships
where consent might not easily be refused.
That deals with sexual harassment or children.
It does not involve public conduct or prostitution.
