It does not involve whether the government must give formal recognition to any relationship
that homosexual persons seek to enter.
In other words, explicitly it does not involve civil union, it does not involve marriage.
Why it doesn't involve that?
The court has a difficult time explaining because the broad scope of its reasoning would
seem to encompass conduct of this kind which legitimates the private conduct itself.
And then the court says what the case does involve.
The case does involve two adults who with full and mutual consent from each other engage
in sexual practices common to a homosexual lifestyle.
The petitioners are entitled to respect for their private lives.
The state cannot demean their existence or control their destiny by making their private
sexual conduct a crime.
Their right to liberty under the due process clause gives them the full right to engage
in their conduct without the intervention of the government.
It is a promise of the Constitution that there is a realm of personal liberty which the government
may not enter.
The Texas statute furthers no legitimate state interest which can justify its intrusion into
the personal and private life of the individual.
So there are two essential issues that the court focuses on.
One of them is pure privacy.
It occurs in the privacy of the home, no one has to watch, it isn't gays kissing in public,
it isn't gays engaged in a marriage ceremony on the steps of town hall, it isn't gays buying
sex from prostitutes, it involves none of those activities, it isn't minor children,
it's adults in the privacy of their home, it's the privacy interest.
That's one and that might not extend to marriage and it might not extend to other kinds of
public conduct.
But the court talks about something else, it talks about the nature of the relationship,
the nature of being a homosexual and seeking solace in the arms of somebody who is of
your same sex and it says that the state has no legitimate interest in denying that liberty
interest to the two individuals.
How then could it then come back and say that the case does not involve potential marriage?
Potential marriage is simply a public acknowledgement of the legitimacy of what is done in private,
the same way heterosexual marriage involves a public acceptance of sexual activity and
other activities in private.
The state by not allowing marriage seems to be delegitimating one lifestyle or preferring
one lifestyle over another and yet the American public is so clearly divided along that very
same line.
The vast majority of Americans favor the Supreme Court decision in Lawrence v. Texas.
They support the right of homosexuals to engage in homosexual conduct in the privacy of their
own bedrooms, but they do not support gay marriage in most states.
They do not support public expressions of a gay lifestyle.
What they essentially support is being homosexual in the closet or maybe a little bit beyond
the closet, namely in the privacy of one's own bedroom.
And that explains why in the same society at the same point in time you get gay marriage
being delegitimated.
