But the implications of the decision are very, very broad.
Now, the Supreme Court could have decided the case on a very narrow basis.
It could easily have rendered the following decision.
It could have said that Texas permits sodomy between a man and a woman.
That is, it doesn't say that sodomy is inherently wrong, namely the contact between the genitals
of one person and the mouth of another person is inherently wrong.
They say it's only wrong when it's done by men and men or women and women.
It's not wrong when it's done by a man and a woman.
So they could have decided the case on equal protection grounds, saying there's no difference.
It's the same act.
It's precisely the same act.
In fact, if you do a close-up of it, you probably couldn't even tell what the combination of
people were.
You have to really look carefully to see.
But the act itself is identical, and therefore the state could not prohibit one without
prohibiting the other.
The problem with that is then the states would move toward a more general prohibition of
all sodomy.
They would simply enforce it only against homosexuals and not enforce it against married
couples.
So they would say it's prohibited, but the right of marriage trumps other powers of
the government.
Moreover, I think the court was very anxious, just as Kennedy was very anxious, to set out
a broad right, a right of homosexuals to practice their sexual conduct in the privacy
of their homes.
What does the future hold?
Well, it's hard to know.
The Supreme Court of Massachusetts rendered a decision permitting gay rights about several
months before the election in the year 2004, and many people felt that that Supreme Court
decision was certainly a tremendous help to the Republicans in beating the Democrats
in that national election.
Because immediately a number of states, particularly pivotal states in the national election, put
referenda on their ballots prohibiting gay marriage.
And all of those referenda prevailed.
The vast majority of Americans are opposed to gay marriage.
They think of marriage as a sacrament.
They think of marriage as biblical.
They think of marriage as between only a man and a woman.
In fact, shortly after the decision, I wrote an article in which I said I agreed with that.
Marriage is a sacrament.
Marriage is a religious exercise.
It's just like baptism, or to take it a little further, just like circumcision.
And you surely wouldn't want the state to get into the business of baptizing or circumcising.
You leave that to the churches and the synagogue.
You leave that to the rabbi or the person who performs the circumcision or the priest
or the minister.
And so I argue that marriage should be the same thing.
Only religious institutions should be allowed to marry.
But the state should have civil unions for everybody.
So anybody can get a civil union, a gay person, a straight person.
You get a civil union.
If you then choose to be married, you go to your church, your synagogue, or your mosque.
And if your rabbi, your imam, or your priest, or your minister will marry you, that's fine.
But if you're a Jew who wants to marry a non-Jew, don't go to an Orthodox rabbi and
expect him to marry you.
That's prohibited by Orthodox Jewish law.
Go to a reform rabbi.
That person will marry you.
If you're a Catholic and you want to marry another man, if you're a man, don't go to your
local priest.
Find a Catholic priest somewhere who feels that that's consistent with his interpretation
of Catholic law.
Convert and become an Episcopalian where gay marriage is permitted or join another church
or form your own church.
It seems to me that making the distinction that way, saying the state should be involved
in those aspects of unions that have implications for civil society, namely insurance, being
able to visit sick people in bed, adoption, all of that should be done by the state.
But the word marriage should be reserved for religious institutions.
