That way, you don't get any interference by the state in religion.
You can't, the state can't tell the Catholic Church to marry two men, and it can't tell
Orthodox Jews to marry a Jew to a non-Jew, that would be prohibited.
But it will allow a Jew to marry a non-Jew, of course.
It will marry a black to marry a white.
It will allow a gay man to marry a gay man, a lesbian woman to marry a lesbian woman,
as long as they don't use that word, marry.
As long as they use the word civil union or something else.
But the key to making it equal is that nobody gets to marry by the state.
The state never marries anybody.
It doesn't marry heterosexuals, and it doesn't marry homosexuals.
It only gives civil union.
And then the religion adds the sanctity of marriage for those who want to get married.
Many people would choose not to get married.
Others would choose to marry in a church of their choice.
And that would, it seemed to me, render to Caesar what was Caesar's, and render to God
what was God's, which is an essential aspect of Christian faith, and essentially consistent
with most other religious views.
So the case of Lawrence v. Texas is a case for the future.
In much the way that I think Roe v. Wade is a case that looks to the past, Lawrence
v. Texas is a case that looks to the future.
Its implications are staggering.
It changes the nature of constitutional law when it relates to liberty interests.
But as most Supreme Court decisions do, it starts slowly.
It says this is a limited train ticket for this train and this day only.
It only legitimates the rights of adult gays to engage in sexual conduct in the privacy
of their home.
That's all we're deciding today.
But the logic of the opinion goes well beyond that.
The logic of the opinion validates the homosexual lifestyle and basically says that the Constitution
requires the state to show a compelling interest before it discriminates against people based
on sexual orientation or sexual choice.
Will the Supreme Court follow the logic of its opinion to its inevitable result?
Unclear.
The Supreme Court that rendered the decision is no longer at the Supreme Court.
There have been several new additions.
Different justices.
Justices change over time.
And when justices change, opinions change.
Will we ever move back to a point where homosexual conduct is prohibited by law and criminalized?
Absolutely not.
Never happened.
Another prediction I make with complete confidence.
But will the case be used as a jumping off point for legitimation of gay marriage?
Probably not.
Certainly not in the near future.
Will it strike down the Army's Don't Ask, Don't Tell policy?
Probably not.
Will it prevent the government from requiring universities to permit recruitment to the
Army even in violation of their own policies against allowing recruitment for organizations
that discriminate based on sexual orientation?
It probably won't even go that far.
It probably will for the moment for our generation be limited to homosexual conduct in the privacy
of the home.
But let's not diminish the importance of that.
