Even though, at the time of Lawrence v. Texas, very, very few gays were ever being prosecuted
for homosexual conduct in the privacy of their home, still the fact that a gay person had
to engage in criminal conduct to satisfy his or her emotional and sexual needs sent a terrible
message of double standard, a terrible message of discrimination, a terrible message of illegitimacy.
It made people think of themselves as criminals if they were gay.
It made people have to choose between obeying the law and obeying the needs of their psyche
and the needs of their emotional callings.
And today at least that conflict no longer exists.
The Supreme Court has said the state has no business telling you how to practice your
private sexual lifestyle as long as it's done in private.
They've legitimated the lifestyle of homosexual and lesbian couples, and it remains to be
seen whether or not this case will become not only a Magna Carta for gay men and lesbian
women in the privacy of their home, but a general Magna Carta which will finally impose
equality based on sexual orientation.
My hope is that when my great-grandchildren ask me how we could have tolerated discrimination
based on sexual orientation, we'll be able to answer well we didn't.
In the end, it was abolished.
It took time, all evils take time, rights often grow out of wrongs and a recognition
of wrongs, and it was always wrong to punish homosexuality and treat it different from
heterosexuality.
And finally the Supreme Court recognized that, and perhaps in the future, the Supreme Court
will grant broader recognition, and if the Supreme Court does not, state legislatures
hopefully will.
And so the rights of gay and lesbian couples to practice their lifestyle not only privately
but publicly and openly will be validated in the United States as it has been in so
many other parts of the world.
After listening to Lecture 11, a student posed this question to Professor Dershowitz.
How does the ruling in the Texas case affect other contested legal issues?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
One implication that really was not considered in either the Texas Sodomy trial case, the
Lawrence v. Texas, or some of the other privacy cases is the so-called right to die with dignity.
Does an individual have the right to determine the time, place, and manner of death?
People often say, well, you have no right to die.
Well, that's not the point.
People who are suffering from terminal cancer don't want to die.
They wish they didn't have to die.
They'd like to live.
The question is, will they die with dignity at a time and place of their own choosing,
or will they die with less than dignity and after great pain and suffering?
The Supreme Court hasn't definitively answered that question yet, but it seems clear that
the trend is in the direction of a constitutional right to die with dignity.
I predict that in the years to come, we will see more recognition of that right because
more and more Americans support that right when some politicians try to use the Shiva
case as a way of arguing that nobody has the right to end life, that life decision should
be a decision made by the legislature or the governor.
They were very quickly rebuked, and the polls very clearly show that most Americans do
not want governors, legislators, politicians interfering with end-of-life decisions, that
this is something they want to be able to decide with family, with doctors, with religious
advisors, but not with politicians standing in the room with them to make difficult and
excruciating end-of-life decisions.
