The most important political case of the 20th century was almost certainly the impeachment
of President Bill Clinton.
Impeachment is a very, very rare remedy invoked in our history, and it has never succeeded,
although the removal of Richard Nixon comes as close as we have come, although there was
no actual impeachment in that case.
The other two impeachments of presidents resulted in successful impeachments, but failed trials,
both failed at the trial.
And the impeachment of Bill Clinton was probably the most unusual and not contemplated by the
framers of our Constitution.
It's hard to imagine Madison and Hamilton, when they drafted the Constitution along with
so many other of our founders, contemplating the extraordinary power to impeach a duly
elected president being invoked in response to a sex fib being told under oath by a president
in an unsuccessful effort to keep secret an improper sexual relationship.
Nonetheless, the impeachment of President Clinton threatened a constitutional crisis,
and it threatened a constitutional crisis primarily because the impeachment mechanism
was supposed to be reserved for the most extraordinary derelictions of office, high
crimes and misdemeanors, referring essentially to the kinds of crimes that were crimes of
state treason, failing to perform one's duty, yet in this case, the power was so trivialized
that we became, I think, the mockery of the rest of the world.
I remember traveling through Europe at the time of the impeachment, and people looking
at me and saying, it can't really be happening, can it, that a president is being impeached
because he had a sexual encounter in the Oval Office and then didn't come forward and tell
the complete truth about it, and may have said things under oath that were less than
completely accurate, and yet, of course, that's what happened, and it happened because you
can easily elevate a fib into a serious crime when it's done under oath.
Now, the remarkable thing about the Clinton impeachment is that it didn't have to happen.
It was largely the fault of Clinton's own lawyer, and herein lies a very, very interesting
tale.
Recall that Clinton was not impeached for having had a sexual encounter in the Oval
Office.
He was impeached because he had testified at a deposition, and the allegation is that
he had not given completely truthful testimony, that he had lied or fibbed or committed perjury.
But then you have to ask yourself the question, why did William Jefferson Clinton testify
at a deposition about his sex life?
No other president in history has ever been deposed about his sex life.
In fact, there are probably a great many who could not have survived such a deposition.
Lyndon Johnson, John Kennedy, many others would never have been able to testify under
oath about their sex life and expected to A, testify truthfully, and B, survive unscathed
that truthful testimony.
