But Bill Clinton
Decided to testify under oath and decided to testify in a proceeding in which he knew his sex life would be raised
How did that come about?
Well, it came about because Bill Clinton was being sued not because of what he did as president
But because of what he was alleged to have done when he was the governor of Arkansas
namely engage in sexual
harassment with somebody who worked for the state of
Arkansas in an encounter in a hotel room during his
time as governor
She was suing him and as part of the lawsuit. He was being asked to be deposed
About that case but in general about his background because depositions are very broad and very far reaching and almost any question can be asked on
deposition
The interesting thing about the case is that he was being sued for a relatively small amount of money
$750,000 now that sounds like a lot of money to the average person
But considering the legal fees that it cost to defend against the case
Typically a $750,000 case would be settled for a fraction of that amount an amount
Which represented how much would have to be paid for legal fees or what the anticipated outcome is?
Divided by the uncertainty and a range of other factors
But Bill Clinton didn't settle this case and the reason he didn't settle it is because the other side
The people who were representing Paula Jones in the case saw it not as a simple sexual harassment case
But as a way of bringing down the president. This was very ideological and very political and Bill Clinton
thought he had no choice
Therefore but to respond to the deposition and his lawyer essentially told him he had no choice
Since settlement was not possible. The other side was unwilling to settle the only option
Was to submit to the deposition that was
Very bad legal advice in a civil case. You never have to be deposed
you can always simply refuse and
You can refuse and if you refuse then the lawsuit will go against you
And you'll lose the lawsuit, but if you cannot testify truthfully, it's always better to lose a lawsuit
There's no great stigma attached to that. It's not a crime to lose a civil lawsuit
But it is a crime to testify falsely under oath
What Clinton didn't realize and what his lawyer refused to tell him was that there was yet another option
Whenever you're sued particularly when you're sued for a certain amount of money
You can end the litigation by simply taking that amount of money in a certified check and
Depositing it with the clerk of court. That's not settling the case. That's simply submitting
You're saying you want 750,000 dollars. I'm entitled to
Litigate I'm entitled to refuse to give you the 750,000 dollars
But on the other hand, I'm also entitled to give you the 750,000 dollars. That's all you're entitled to you're not entitled to more than you've asked for
So here's the 750,000 dollars
Thank you so much
