Bill Clinton was never told he had that option because his lawyer Robert Bennett
said that it would have been a foolish option to pursue. That had President
Clinton simply submitted to the lawsuit and turned over the 750,000
laws he would have opened himself up to many many many other lawsuits. Well
that's not so clearly the case because the statute of limitations on these
kinds of lawsuits was quickly winding down and if there was so many people
out there who were willing to sue him they would have sued him already and he
was willing to settle so anybody out there who thought they had a plausible
lawsuit would have certainly come in and sought a settlement. But he was never
told about that option and as the result of that he had to testify in front of
the other side at a deposition. Now I think any good lawyer would have said
to him, look Mr. President, here is the given. The given is you're not testifying.
That's the certainty. President of the United States should not be testifying
about his sex life. Certainly President William Jefferson Clinton should not be
testifying about his sex life because there's no way you can testify completely
truthfully in a manner that will persuade the American public that you
have testified completely truthfully if you deny all sexual activities other
than those with your wife since you're married. It will not fly therefore you
are not going to testify. That should have been the bottom line message of the
lawyer. Everything else is a variable. Will we settle? Well if they want to will
we submit? Well if we have to will we simply refuse to be deposed? That's
probably not a good option because president shouldn't be seen as defying
court orders. But the options were multiple and the president picked
exactly the wrong option and his lawyer told him to pick exactly the wrong
option. We'll remember that Hillary random Clinton once famously said in a
television interview that there was a vast right-wing conspiracy out to get
president Clinton and implicitly out to get her and she may be right but when
there is a conspiracy out there to get you the last thing you do is give the
conspirators an opportunity to get you by falling into their trap and that's
precisely what president Clinton did in two ways. First of all by having the
sexual encounter in the Oval Office at a time that he knew he was under
investigation by the political right and at a time when he knew that he was
being sued for sexual harassment by someone else and that there would be
depositions. The idea of a president having an improper sexual encounter with
a White House staff member at that point in time was absolutely foolish but
then that couldn't be helped. Okay he did that. That's past. You can't if you're a
lawyer undo the past. The idea of allowing the president to submit to a
deposition about his sex life is simply inexplicable. No lawyer I know. No good
lawyer I know understands why that happened.
