Now, it raises the problem of how difficult it is to represent powerful and important people.
I teach my students all the time that a lawyer going into a conversation with a powerful and
important client has to always be prepared to be fired because you have to tell that powerful person
what he doesn't want to hear. It's like a doctor having just read the x-rays or the CAT scans
and having to deliver the bad news to the patient. You have cancer, there has to be surgery,
there's a 40% chance you'll live, a 60% chance you'll die. You have to be straight and some
patients will say, I don't like that news, you're fired, I'm going to get myself a doctor who'll
give me better news. That's not a particularly sensible patient who takes that attitude.
Clients take that attitude more often unless the lawyer is prepared to give the client good news.
The client doesn't want to hear it and doesn't want to continue with the lawyer.
And the last thing a client wants to hear from a lawyer is, I'm sorry, Mr. President, but I don't
believe your story if you tell me you didn't have any improposexual relations and nobody else will
believe your story and therefore I'm not allowing you to testify. Had Robert Bennett told that to
the President, he risked being fired. But he should have told that to the President and he
should have said under no circumstances, are you going to testify? Now, I have an interesting
personal involvement in this matter. And while President Clinton was involved in this process
and after he had testified in front of the grand jury, we were together at an event on Martha's
Vineyard and he asked me how I thought he was doing. And when somebody asked me a question,
I feel an obligation to answer it honestly. And I told him and I told him that I thought it was
very foolish for him to have testified and that he should instead have simply submitted the $750,000
and he said to me, what do you mean? You're allowed to do that? And I said, your lawyer didn't
tell you about that option? And he said, no, my lawyer never told me about that option. He told
me I had to be deposed. And the President made it very, very clear to me that had he been told
about that option, he certainly would have seriously considered it. Now, it would have been a bad
story for a day. President submits, President gives in, President doesn't fight, President
essentially admits it. But I think that Clinton could have easily gotten on television that night
and made a speech to the American public saying, look, you elected me to be your President twice.
This was after he was elected a second time. Being the President is a 24 hour a day job,
really more than that with changes in time zones. You never sleep. We are in a very precarious state
in relation to number of things that are happening in the world today. And I simply cannot take the
time that you elected me to spend on your issues, spending them on my issues. You can't go into a
deposition unless you're extremely well prepared or a lawsuit, unless you're extremely well prepared.
I just don't have the time to be well prepared. I try to get the Supreme Court to postpone the
deposition. They wouldn't do it.
