The Supreme Court had ruled nine to nothing. The president is not above the law and he has to submit to a deposition.
Well, if that's what the Supreme Court says, they don't understand my job.
Because I can't take days and weeks out of my schedule now and prepare for a silly trial, which is only about money.
Therefore, I am paying the money. I am not wasting your time and taking your time.
And I will never ever again speak about this issue in my presidency or thereafter.
If the president had made that speech, he would have gotten one or two bad days of press.
But he wouldn't have been impeached. He would never have had to testify.
He would have been called by a special prosecutor in front of the grand jury and the nation, I believe, would have been spared a
terrible, terrible trauma.
But he did what he did and his lawyer told him to do what he did.
I was asked by a magazine at the end of the 20th century to list the 10 greatest legal blunders
committed by lawyers, and I place the decision by Robert Bennett to have
Clinton testify as the number one legal blunder of the 20th century.
Some people disagree with that and he has his supporters who think he did the right thing.
Once
President Clinton testified, his lawyer compounded the problem by then writing a letter to the judge afterward saying,
I do not stand by my client's testimony and essentially undercutting his own client's testimony,
covering his own rear end at the expense of his
clients. And that put the president in a very, very difficult situation.
It made him vulnerable to the opposing party and
a vote was taken to impeach the president of the United States. Again, only twice in our history
has a vote been taken to impeach the president of the United States and the vote passed.
Now, many people confuse the concept of impeachment with the concept of removal.
Impeachment is an indictment and it happens in the House of Representatives. I testified as a witness
against the impeachment of President Clinton in the House of Representatives,
making a historical argument about what the nature of the impeachment power is and what high crimes and misdemeanors
constitutes and why what he did in this case would not normally be the subject of a criminal prosecution for perjury and
the House of Representatives along largely party lines
impeach the president. In order to impeach the president, all you need is a simple majority and
it's pretty easy to get an impeachment because if the other party is in control and the other party sticks together,
normally there'll be enough votes for an impeachment.
But an impeachment is only an indictment. Then there has to be a trial and
there was a trial and it's quite a remarkable
trial mechanism that the Constitution calls for. It calls for an actual trial, a
criminal trial in effect on the floor of the United States Senate.
There are a hundred jurors.
The hundred jurors are the hundred United States senators. They each get the cast of vote.
There is a judge. The judge is the Chief Justice of the United States at the time William Rehnquist,
who had already written a book on the impeachment process, looking at prior impeachments in American history, not only of a president,
but also of
justices and judges, several of whom had been impeached throughout our history.
The Chief Justice presides, but there are no rules set out in the Constitution other than that a two-thirds vote is
required for removal from office.
