Now, it was pretty much a foregone conclusion that if the president made no more mistakes,
did not again blunder, and this time he had a much better legal team in place, if the
president didn't blunder, he would not be removed because to remove a president you
need two-thirds of vote, and there were more than a third of the Senate was comprised of
Democrats, and if the vote was along party lines, there would be no removal.
In the end, the vote was not exactly along party lines.
My recollection is that no Democrats voted to remove the president, but that several
Republicans voted not to remove the president.
The end result was a tie vote, 50-50 tie vote, which resulted in no removal, and the president
was allowed to continue with his office and to complete his term.
Nonetheless, the process of impeaching a president and then having a trial for removal
set a terrible precedent for the future.
It sends a message that removal can be attempted, impeachment can be implemented on partisan
grounds without regard to the text of the Constitution, without regard to the intent
of the Constitution.
And there's no judicial review.
Because of our separation of powers, the Constitution provides for a mechanism of removal, and even
if, for example, the removal were improper, even if it were unconstitutional, even, for
example, if a president were to be removed because he was black, or because he was a
Jew, or because he was, or she was a woman, which would be unconstitutional, illegal,
there'd be no mechanism for challenging the constitutionality of that removal.
Because the impeachment court, the removal court, are courts of last resort, and there
is no judicial review.
You can't overrule the rulings of the Chief Justice, except by a vote of the Senate itself.
And therefore, it was a very, very strange court, and a very unusual proceeding.
And Americans who watched it, and observed it, and read about it, were startled that
this mechanism exists under our Constitution, that you could have a removal by a vote of
the United States Senate.
The trial itself was somewhat anticlimactic.
The prosecution case was presented essentially by the managers in the House of Representatives
who had brought forth the impeachment resolution.
And they essentially simply repeated what they had brought to the attention of the full
House of Representatives through the Committee on Impeachment, and presented the case in
a rather systematic way, as it had been presented in the House of Representatives.
Full charges were brought, largely growing out of the President's testimony, not his
actions, but his testimony, and the alleged perjurious nature of his testimony.
