And so I think the mechanism of impeachment and the mechanism of investigation into the president
is broken and has to be fixed. I think that clarifications are needed as to the grounds
for impeachment as to the grounds for removal. The whole concept of the special prosecutor
has been called into question. There are no longer independent prosecutors that are appointed
outside by the courts. The special prosecutors are now appointed by the justice department
that raises questions. Can the justice department be fair in investigating its own people?
But the independent counsel also raised substantial questions. Can an outside counsel be fair
if his only job is to investigate one particular person? So the mechanism is broken. It needs to
be fixed. We need an impeachment mechanism. It's impossible to contemplate a democracy with checks
and balances that doesn't include some mechanism for removing a president who clearly deviates
from his sworn role and his obligation as commander-in-chief and as the president of the
United States. But when we trivialize the impeachment process and when we allow it to be used for
partisan purposes and allow it to serve as a justification for probing into the president's
sex life, when we criminalize differences in policy as we've done on both sides, when we use
a constitutional mechanism of impeachment as a way of gaining political leverage and political power,
we know that the system is in deep trouble. And one possible result of the Clinton impeachment
is that it came off so badly for everybody. The Republicans didn't benefit. Those who
sought impeachment, many of them were removed from office. The president didn't benefit. The
country didn't benefit. The presidency didn't benefit. Maybe it sends an important lesson
to political figures in the future. Do not use impeachment, except when absolutely necessary.
Impeachment is that hammer that sits behind the glass wall, which says use only in case of
dire emergency. Do not break the glass. And I believe the impeachment of Bill Clinton broke the
glass and broke the glass too easily and made impeachment a less viable option as part of our
system of checks and balances. And that's why I think the trial of Bill Clinton, although the
trial itself was an anti-climax, the impeachment, the trial, the star report, the entire focus of
the country on Bill Clinton's alleged improprieties, both in the Oval Office and in front of the grand
jury and at a deposition, distorted the functions of our Constitution and hopefully will never be
repeated again in our history.
