After listening to Lecture 12, a student posed this question to Professor Dershowitz.
Are litigants often prosecuted for perjury?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
It's extremely rare, almost non-existent, for a litigant in a civil suit to be criminally
prosecuted for lying under oath and a deposition.
It has happened on rare, rare occasions, but almost never.
Moreover, there was insufficient evidence in this case to bring a criminal prosecution
for perjury against Bill Clinton.
Had there been sufficient evidence to bring a perjury prosecution, I think you can be
sure that Kent Starr would have brought one.
And so, Clinton was not impeached technically for perjury, but for kind of misleading answers,
for being vague and evasive, for obstructing justice, for doing the kinds of things that
didn't really rise to the level of criminal conduct.
Martha Stewart is an example of somebody who was sentenced to prison, not for the underlying
offense in her case, the claim that there was insider trading, which they couldn't make
as a criminal charge, because there wasn't sufficient evidence to demonstrate that, but
for the cover-up, interestingly enough, in her case, it wasn't even lying under oath.
She never was under oath.
The crime that she was charged with was lying to prosecutors and lying to investigators,
and one, which was dismissed, but which was very dangerous, was lying to the public.
She was charged originally with having made a statement to the press, which was, according
to the prosecution, designed to boost the value of her stock, and therefore, essentially,
was a form of manipulating the stock market.
That charge was thrown out against her, but it is certainly true that people do go to
jail for the cover-up, and the question is, is something that a person would even go to
jail for a basis for impeachment?
For example, if a president were caught speeding or drunk and driving, would that be a legitimate
ground for impeachment?
It might be a legitimate ground for prosecution, prosecution, particularly after the presidency,
were terminated, but would it be a ground for removal of morphos and impeachment?
I think perhaps reasonable people could disagree about that, but I think many would make the
argument that impeachment entailed a crime that related specifically to the performance
of the duty of the president, and that seems to me to bet the better view.
Now, you can take it to its logical extreme, if a president murdered somebody, plainly he
would not be suited to serve in office, and of course, we came close to having that happen.
We've had duels in our history.
A man who had been vice president of the United States, Aaron Burr, did kill a man who might
have been the president of the United States, Alexander Hamilton, in a duel, and of course
in those days, although dueling was technically criminal, it was not something that was frequently
prosecuted.
This ends lecture 12.
