Fundamental cases, lecture 13, Bush v. Gore.
The legal history of the 21st century began with the Supreme Court's most disastrous decision
in its more than 200-year history, namely Bush v. Gore, the decision which ended the
2000 presidential election and will go down in legal history as a self-inflicted wound
from which the Supreme Court is unlikely ever to fully recover its credibility.
I've been observing the Supreme Court for many years.
I was a law clerk myself on the Supreme Court in the 1963-1964 term, and I know several
of the justices personally, and I've argued cases in front of the Supreme Court, and I've
long admired the Court as an institution, but I surely joined the other legal scholars
who described the Supreme Court's decision in Bush v. Gore as, and I'm quoting, bad constitutional
law, lawless, illegitimate, unprincipled, partisan, fraudulent, disingenuous, motivated
by improper considerations.
Rarely has a court decision been subjected to those kinds of terms, of disrespect, and
the reason for it is very, very clear.
The test that's used to judge a Supreme Court decision, basically, is was it based on the
law or was it based on considerations outside of the law, and the best way of testing that
important question is to ask what I call the shoe on the other foot question, if the shoe
had been on the other foot.
If the decision had involved a Democrat who had been ahead in the original count, and
it was a Republican presidential candidate who had called for a recount, if the case
had been Gore v. Bush rather than Bush v. Gore, would it have come out the same way?
Would the five justices who voted to stop the count have voted to allow the count to
continue, and would the four justices who were against stopping the count, would they
have voted to stop the count?
If so, then we're talking about a judicial institution which is totally partisan.
And there's nothing worse you can say about a court than accusing it of having its decisions
based not on the law, not on the facts, but on the names of the litigants.
If the names of the litigants had been different, the case would have come out differently.
What a shocking thing to say about the Supreme Court of the United States.
And yet it seems perfectly clear that if the shoe had been on the other foot, at least
some of the justices would have voted differently.
And at least several of the majority justices, the five who stopped the count and who essentially
gave the election to Bush, Bush might have won the election anyway.
Nobody really knows that for sure.
But they didn't know it at the time either.
So in their mind, stopping the count was giving the election, a disputed election to Bush.
It's clear that at least several would have voted the exact opposite way, particularly
justices Thomas Scalia and Rehnquist and probably also Justice O'Connor.
The reason for that is this.
The decision was based on two grounds, one, an equal protection ground, namely that denied
equal protection for disputed ballots to be looked at differently in different counties.
In some counties, the chads were viewed one way, in other counties they were viewed another
way.
And this certainly was some truth to that.
And there was certainly something unfair about an election being determined by whether
or not in a particular county the votes were looked at one way and in another county they
were looked at another way.
The lack of uniformity raised some questions.
Of course the answer to that would be to impose uniformity to send the case back for account
saying you have to have a uniform system of counting, but instead they simply stopped
the election and said it was too late for...
