any further recount and so Bush was declared the winner. The problem with the equal protection
analysis is that several of the justices who joined it, three of them in particular, had very
narrow views of equal protection of the law prior to this. Justice Rehnquist, the Chief Justice,
in particular had said in previous decisions that equal protection grew out of the Civil War
and it was designed to protect black slaves who had been freed by the Civil War and the
Emancipation Proclamation and the 13th, 14th and 15th Amendments were all about race. They were
not about other factors and they were certainly not about things like how to count chads and the
equal protection clause should not be broadly interpreted to cover all manner of inequality.
Most inequalities are not unconstitutional according to Justice Rehnquist until Bush versus Gore,
but when Bush versus Gore came along he perfectly willingly joined an opinion which stopped the
election on grounds that equal protection had been violated. Similarly, Justices Scalia and Thomas
had had very, very narrow constructions of the equal protection clause and said that the equal
protection clause meant in the year, whatever it was, 2000 exactly what it would have meant in the
year that it was put in the Constitution and that there would be no change and it's very,
very clear that at the time the equal protection clause was placed in the Constitution it had
nothing to do with how you count ballots in elections and so these Justices stretched,
tugged and pulled the law to make it come out the way they wanted it to come out. Now were they
motivated by purely partisan considerations? It's impossible obviously to get into the mind
of the Justices, but there's some evidence to suggest that at least some of them were.
For example, on the night of the election we now know and it's indisputable and undisputed by
Justice O'Connor that she was at the home of a certain person and they were watching the election
returns and when it was first announced originally that Gore had won Florida and therefore had won
the election she blurted out this is terrible and got up and huffed and walked away. Her husband
that explained what she meant by this is terrible and explained that she wanted to retire from the
court which she eventually did but she only would retire if there were a Republican president
and if Gore were to be elected as it looked like he was elected after the first announcement of
how Florida went she could either not retire which was not her wish or if she did retire she would
be replaced by a Democrat which she didn't want so plainly she expressed a very strong view about
the outcome of the election and a review which dealt with the institution of the Supreme Court itself.
