I then learned from a phone call, a person called me who was a professor, and his child
had married the child of a prominent Arizona lawyer, Republican lawyer, and they were spending
Thanksgiving together, and this was Thanksgiving 2000, just in the middle of the turmoil over
who won the election.
And in the middle of the Thanksgiving dinner, this prominent Republican got up to answer
the phone and came back to the table holding his two hands and signs of these for victory,
saying I just spoke to Sandy, referring to Sandra Day O'Connor, and she said, quote,
we figured out a way of making it right, making clear to the assembled guests that they had
figured out a way of giving the election to George Bush.
And when you hear those stories, you get very concerned, as somebody who admires the Supreme
Court and somebody who cares deeply about judicial integrity to hear that justices
are calling people in the middle of the case and assuring them that it's come out the right
way.
We know that Sandra Day O'Connor was a prominent Republican operative in Arizona, that she,
at one point in time, invited Republicans who were willing to contribute $25,000 to
the Republican Party to come to Washington for a special briefing about how the Supreme
Court works from her, and she had to cancel that when the Washington Post got wind of
it, and that she also was willing to write a letter on the Supreme Court stationery supporting
the Republican Party's effort to declare that the United States is a Christian country.
And she wrote a letter saying that, yes, the Supreme Court had held that the United States
was a Christian country on Supreme Court stationery to be used by the Republicans as a way of gathering
support in areas of Arizona where they had previously been losing support.
So clearly, at least Justice O'Connor we know had very, very strong partisan interests
in the outcome of the election.
Other justices as well clearly had stakes in the outcome of the election.
Several were competing to become Chief Justice, and it was thought at the time that they knew
Chief Justice when Rehnquist retired would come from within the court, and some of the
Republican justices knew that they would never have any chance of being nominated for Chief
Justice by a Democrat.
And so they had a partisan interest in the outcome of the election.
And what are we to make then of a Supreme Court decision, a Supreme Court decision so important
that it may have affected the future not only of the United States, but of the world for
eight years being determined not by voters, but being determined by people who have been
appointed for life to the Supreme Court and wear robes of justice.
And not only did they vote to strike down the Florida election on equal protection grounds,
but the very fact that the majority, five of them granted a stay, that is, stopped the
counting of the votes.
