Even before they heard oral argument in the case was quite shocking to many legal observers.
After all, these same five justices had routinely refused to grant stays in capital cases.
For example, in one capital case, this is going to sound shocking to my listeners,
but in one case the Supreme Court had agreed to review a capital case.
Now, recall that it only takes four votes to agree to hear a case.
It's called the writ of certiorary that is an application to hear a case before the Supreme Court.
Only a small number of cases are heard every year, 75 out of many, many thousands.
And to get the case heard, you need four votes.
And so in this case, four justices had decided they wanted to review a capital case,
a case involving a man on death row who was scheduled to be executed.
He was claiming that the case and the sentence and the conviction were improper.
And four justices agreed to hear the case.
But it takes five justices, not four, to stay the death penalty.
And they couldn't get five justices to vote to stay the death penalty.
Only the four who voted to hear the case.
None of the other five would vote to stay the case.
And so this man, while his case was pending in the Supreme Court,
before his lawyers had a chance to submit briefs or argue the case, this man was actually executed.
And the case became moot.
Justice Scalia, Justice Rehnquist, Justice Thomas, Justice O'Connor, and Justice Kennedy
have routinely refused to grant stays in capital cases, meaning that people will die.
Now, if you won't grant a stay in a capital case, why do you grant a stay?
Why do you stop the counting in a case which you're about to hear?
What's the harm of having the counting go forward?
Let the counting go forward.
Let's see what the vote comes to.
Maybe the counting will moot the case, but maybe it won't.
Maybe there would be a different outcome.
But yet these five justices voted to stop the counting, stop the recount,
and declare essentially Bush to be the President of the United States elect
without having heard oral argument in the case, without having even read the briefs in the case.
And that's what shocked so many people.
So how do you explain this?
I've actually gone back and looked at the voting records of each of the justices,
not only the five who voted to stop the count, but the four who voted against it,
and have come to the conclusion in my own research that virtually all of the five justices
who voted in favor of Bush, in this case, would have voted against Gore,
had the case been the exact opposite mirror image,
that their votes were determined by the names of the candidates,
by the party affiliations of the candidates, rather than by the laws and the facts.
Would the four who voted the other way have voted differently?
A little harder to tell. Two of them are Republicans.
Justice Souter and Justice Stevens are Republicans.
Two of them are Democrats, Justice Breyer and Justice Ginsburg.
But it's not clear.
Some of them might very well have voted according to their own partisan predilections.
Two wrongs don't make a right.
