And, in fact, some of the justices in private conversation have said, and it's been reported
back to me and to others, that the reason they voted to stop the vote in the election
was because the Florida Supreme Court had been equally political.
And therefore, since the Florida Court had been political, they had to level the playing
field by being political as well.
That if the case had to be decided by a court, it's better to decide a national election
by the United States Supreme Court than by a local court in Florida.
The problem with that thinking is that that's not the way the Constitution sets out the
process for electing the President.
The process for electing the President is state by state.
Every state gets to cast a certain number of electoral votes.
And state law determines whether or not the vote goes one way or another way.
And Florida law was crystal clear.
Even before this election, Florida law was that every effort must be made to discern
the intention of the voters.
And whether it requires looking at chads or looking at other indicia of voter intent,
the obligation of the court is to discern the intent of the voter and to try to maximize
the number of voters whose intent can be carried out in this election.
Following Bush v. Gore, there have been many attempts to reconstruct the election to see
who would have won under which scenario.
And most of the media have concluded that under most scenarios Bush would have won the
election anyway under Florida law subject to any kind of a recount, although Gore probably
would have won had there been a statewide recount of all the votes.
But that's not something Gore himself had asked for.
If you ask the question more basically, less legally and more kind of politically, how
many people in Florida intended to vote for Bush?
How many people intended to vote for Gore?
How many people intended to vote for Nader?
How many people intended to vote for various other candidates who were on the ballot?
And it was a very, very full ballot with Pat Buchanan getting lots and lots of votes in
highly Jewish Palm Beach County, which was unlikely to have been the intention of the
voters in light of his record on Jewish issues.
If you look at the intentions of the voters, I think virtually every pundit has concluded
that the intention of the voters of Florida by an overwhelming majority, probably in excess
of 100,000, was to vote for Gore rather than Bush.
But there were many factors that intervened.
First the butterfly ballot in Palm Beach County, which created many, many thousands of problems.
And many voters who intended to vote for Gore had their votes disqualified, either as overvotes
or undervotes or double votes or whatever.
Then of course, numbers of African-Americans who were mistakenly disqualified from voting
because of an era about whether or not they had prior criminal records, difficulties that
occurred whether they were deliberate or accidental in preventing many African-Americans from
going to the polls.
So when the polls showed, the public opinion polls showed that not only Gore would win
Florida, but exit polls showed he had won Florida, those polls were probably not mistaken.
That is the majority or at least the plurality, which is what matters under the Electoral
College.
A plurality of voters had said they had voted for Gore.
They thought they had voted for Gore.
And now you have to turn that into what legally is the proper way of counting.
And there the dispute was much greater and under some methods of counting Bush wins and
to some methods of counting Gore wins.
