That's not the real issue, because presidents come and go, and although many are very critical
of the presidency of George W. Bush, that's something that can be taken care of at an
election.
Bush was re-elected in 2004, and there'll be other elections afterward.
The key point is the enduring decisions of the Supreme Court.
Now is this an enduring decision?
The Supreme Court in a remarkable sentence in the decision essentially said, don't use
this case for precedent.
This case decided only this election under unique circumstances, and don't expect that
we will be using this case as precedents for future cases or future elections.
Now that in and of itself is quite a remarkable statement.
Supreme Court decisions and opinions are supposed to be part of a presidential tapestry.
They're supposed to be based on prior decisions, and they're supposed to become the basis for
future decisions.
They're not supposed to be, as Justice Jackson once referred to as Supreme Court decision,
limited train tickets for this train and this day only.
They're supposed to form part of a long pattern.
That's what the common law is all about.
And yet this Supreme Court decision, Bush versus Gore, does not reflect the past.
It clearly deviates from all past decisions.
There's never been a precedent quite like it.
There's never been a decision of any court stopping a recount based on either the equal
protection grounds alleged here or the other ground that was asserted by the justices here,
the Article 2 ground that the Florida judiciary played to active a role in changing what the
Florida legislature had mandated to be the proper rule of decision making in presidential
elections.
There had never been any cases that justified stopping account, stopping a recount based
on those considerations of constitutional law, and probably there never will be another
case like this.
So this is a piece of kind of legal flotsam and jetsam floating around in the sea without
any mooring, without any root in the past and without any likely basis for future decisions.
Now what does that say about the Supreme Court when it intrudes into an ongoing election?
Well what it says to a lot of people is that results matter more than process.
Remember that this Supreme Court decision was rendered by five justices who believe
in judicial restraint, not judicial activism.
This was a case of extreme judicial activism of a court intervening in an ongoing election
and stopping an ongoing recount.
Second it's a court that believes in states' rights, not federal power.
And yet this is a Supreme Court decision that intruded federal power, the power of the Supreme
Court and overruled states' rights.
The state of Florida had a process in place for deciding how to count votes.
That process made its own Supreme Court the court of last resort in this matter and in
a number of prior decisions that state Supreme Court had ruled that discerning the intent
of the voter was the key criteria and errors should always be made favorable to including
votes rather than excluding votes.
And yet the Supreme Court of the United States intruded and overruled a state decision which
was perfectly plausible on its face and consistent with years and years of precedent.
