It's important, therefore, to probe the backgrounds of the justices, to probe their prior decisions,
to ask questions about whether or not you can justify what they said in one case by what they had said in prior cases.
And when you do that in Bush v. Gore, it's a very, very troubling exercise.
One sees many, many instances of great disparities between past decisions of the justices
and what they said was the law in Bush v. Gore.
So what does that mean? Does that mean we should no longer respect the Supreme Court?
Does it mean that we should regard the Supreme Court the way we regard legislatures and the presidency and other politicians?
Wouldn't that diminish the authority of the Supreme Court?
Is it important for people to hold the Supreme Court in very high regard to consider the justices as above reproach?
Or should the justices be questioned and criticized the way other political figures in our government are questioned and criticized?
When Justice Scalia or Justice Thomas come to a law school,
should they be asked questions about how they can reconcile their decision in Bush v. Gore with decisions in prior cases?
Or should we take them at face value and just see whether or not the decision on its face makes any sense?
It's very easy for brilliant judges, and Justice Scalia and several of the other justices are very brilliant indeed,
to find plausible justifications for what they have already decided is the right decision.
That's called result-oriented jurisprudence.
It means you come to the result first and you work backwards.
You ask yourself how you want the case to come out.
Sometimes you ask yourself in the broad general sense, should it come out in favor of poor people?
Should it come out in favor of rich people?
Should it come out in favor of separation of church and state?
Should it come out against separation?
Okay, that's understandable. That's ideological result orientation.
But if a justice ever says, this case should come out in favor of Bush, or this case should come out in favor of Gore,
or this case should come out in favor of this particular corporation, or this particular individual, that is corrupt.
That is absolutely an improper basis for the Supreme Court to decide a case.
And so the most serious accusation you can ever level at the Supreme Court,
or at any court, is that its decision was based on the names of the litigants,
the party affiliation of the litigants, and other such issues.
The Supreme Court justices has taken oath of office.
They swear that they will render justice without regard to individuals,
that they will render justice on the basis of law, on the basis of an objective view of the facts.
And if they deviate from that oath, the public has the right to call them to account for it.
