And then it got essentially forgotten, and even when the 2004 election came about, nobody
wanted to really hear about how the 2000 election had ended.
Nobody really wanted to hear much about Bush v. Gore.
So in the end, I think the Supreme Court has survived Bush v. Gore.
It survived it notwithstanding the fact that it, in many respects, didn't deserve to survive
that Justice O'Connor, who may have been one of those most subject to appropriate criticism
during her role in Bush v. Gore, when she retired from the Supreme Court, left the court with
high praise and with universal acclaim.
When a subsequent justice was nominated to the Supreme Court, no questions were asked
about Bush v. Gore.
It's almost as if the decision is so embarrassing to the Supreme Court and so embarrassing to
America that almost nobody wants to revisit it.
And so it's a case that's taught in constitutional law classes.
It's a case that's argued about over dinner and lunches among scholars of the Supreme
Court.
It's probably a case that's whispered about in Washington, D.C., but although it was one
of the most important cases in modern history in the sense of expanding the role of Supreme
Court and giving it a major place in the selection of presidents and in the operation
of the Electoral College, the case itself, although decided in the early part of the
21st century, is not a case that will endure long into the 21st century, provided the Supreme
Court never, ever does it again.
It's one of these decisions which the Supreme Court can perhaps do once and survive.
If it ever were to do it again, if it ever were to repeat its mistake, if it ever were
to inflict this wound again on itself by coming into an election and deciding it on partisan
grounds that might forever destroy the credibility of a very important institution.
Because the events of September 11th were so significant in our history and so significant
in changing attitudes toward the Supreme Court and its decision in Bush v. Gore, I'm going
to end this course and my series of lectures by focusing both on the events that followed
9-11 and the detention of people in Guantanamo and the role of the Supreme Court in trying
to decide how to strike an appropriate balance between fighting terrorism and civil liberties
and also going back to a decision, a very important decision, by the International Court
at Nuremberg, a court comprised of American judges and European judges after the Second
World War, which basically sets the foundation for all of international criminal law that
will take us through the remainder, probably, of American history.
