My final lecture in this course deals with one of the most difficult questions a democracy
can ever face.
How do you put on trial the most villainous, the most horrendous, the worst people in the
world who everybody knows are guilty of crimes against humanity?
This is a problem the United States has faced in the past and will face in the future.
In the past we faced it when the United States and Russia defeated the Nazi regime and captured
many but not all of its leaders, Hitler committed suicide in his bunker, but many of the Nazi
leaders were captured alive and the question was how to deal with them.
These were people who had killed tens of millions of civilians in an aggressive unjustified
war, had committed genocide against the Jews of Europe and against the Romani gypsy population
of Europe, had murdered mentally retarded people, had imprisoned and killed gays, had
killed priests and many, many other people.
Their guilt was manifest and apparent.
And that's why a number of people, important leaders in the United States said, look, let's
not have a trial, let's just as soon as they're captured, line them up, identify them and
shoot them the way they would have done to anybody else.
That's the traditional military way of ending a war and that's the way this war should end.
But President Roosevelt saw it differently and with the advice of Supreme Court Justice
Jackson, who was a close personal friend of his from New York State, a decision was finally
made to convene a war crimes tribunal.
But it couldn't be a war crimes tribunal convened only by the United States and because the
United States was then in a cold war with the beginnings of a cold war with the Soviet
Union, I think there was some reluctance to have just a bilateral trial, United States
and Russia, Russia would have too much power.
The decision was finally made to have four powers convene an international court at Nuremberg.
Nuremberg was a perfect choice for where the trial should occur because Nuremberg was where
the first Nazi legislation, anti-Semitic legislation had been enacted.
The Nuremberg laws were those that created a separate status for Jews and eventually
led to the gas chambers in the crematoria.
So Nuremberg was the place.
The judges were to come from the four victorious countries, really three victorious countries,
England, the United States and the Soviet Union, how France snuck its way into this.
Nobody will ever understand how France got into the Security Council, how France was
regarded as a victorious nation in the Second World War.
Nobody will understand France folded more quickly than any other country.
I'll never forget going to an event at a short cathedral to commemorate the great resistance
of the French against the Nazis.
It was in the form of a mass and the mass lasted longer than the resistance had lasted.
But for some bizarre reason, I guess a combination of factors that the United States wanted to
strengthen France, that the Gaul was a kind of heroic figure, of course, who sat out most
of the war in England.
But France became one of the four victorious nations and got to sit at the trial itself,
even though half of France should have been on trial for its complicity with the Nazis.
But that's a side story.
