Under what law should these Nazi leaders be tried?
That was the first question.
After all, they had mostly complied with German law.
They had enforced the Nuremberg Principles, Germany, even during the Second World War,
was a country in which the law was followed, horrible law, to be sure.
But everything had to be documented.
Everything had to be legitimated.
So they couldn't be tried under German law.
Could they be tried under international law?
So what was international law at the time?
Remember this was before the United Nations, and the League of Nations had been an impotent
shell.
There was no real international court of justice recognized and legitimated, and international
law in those days was primarily treaties, some of which were, and some of which were
not signed by Germany.
International law was treatises and textbooks written by academics in ivory towers.
What could be the basis?
Well what they decided was to look at a combination of factors, kind of the consensus of what
all civilized societies regarded as core values, and an indictment was drawn up, alleging violations
of these kinds of rules, again everybody knew what the conclusion of the trial was going
to be.
Indeed, there were some surprises.
There were a few acquittals.
There were a few sentences other than the imposition of the death penalty.
The major defendant in the case, Hermann Göring, was convicted and sentenced to death, but
he escaped the hangman's noose by having a soldier.
Nobody knows the exact story, but perhaps for payer in another way, smuggle some suicide
pills into him, and he took his own life before he could be hanged by the authorities.
Several of the others were hanged, and many of the others had their sentences commuted.
In fact, there is a scandal that happened following the Nuremberg trials.
What happened is the United States government appointed John McCloy to be the High Commissioner
of Germany.
John McCloy was put at simply a Nazi sympathizer, and married a German woman, and was tremendously
sympathetic to the Nazi leaders, and almost immediately commuted virtually all of their
sentences, restored them to positions of high authority in Germany.
De-nazification failed miserably.
All the companies that had been involved in the mass killings and the mass slavery got
their property back, and normalcy was restored to Germany in a relatively short period of
time by the Marshall Plan and by John McCloy's stewardship of the re-nazification of Germany
whereby many of the former Nazis took positions of high authority and power in universities,
in the medical profession, in the judiciary.
In fact, in the 1950s, a book was published of all the Nazi judges who were still judges
in Germany, and the vast majority of sitting judges in Germany had roots in Nazism and
had been Nazi judges.
Although the immediate impact of the Nuremberg trial, the hanging of a few dozen arch criminals,
had a symbolic effect and sent a powerful message to the world that there will be consequences
from crimes against humanity, the second message that was sent was a much more negative message
and one of great concern to the civilized world.
Namely, if you weren't at the very top of the chain of command, but if you were one
of those who was instrumental in carrying out the Nazi program, not only would you be
pardoned, but you would be restored to your role of authority and you would suffer virtually
no consequences, and many of the worst offenders during the Nazi regime not only suffered no
consequences, but were immediately re-enriched.
Some were welcomed to the United States to work on our program of rockets and our space
program, others went to other places and other countries around the world and a denazification
generally was a major, major failure.
