So, it's not surprising that the bottom-line message of Nuremberg was what one cynic said.
We take single murders very seriously, but mass murders are taken somewhat less seriously
by the world, because although the slogan never again was pronounced over and over again,
particularly about the Holocaust, but generally about the killing of civilians, the second
half of the 20th century, from the end of the Second World War on, was one of the bloodiest
periods of time in the history of the world.
We have had genocides in Cambodia.
We have had genocides in Rwanda.
We have had genocides in Darfur.
We have had genocides, even in Europe itself, in the former Yugoslavia.
Even although a small number of people have been placed on trial for these genocides,
certainly the message has not been effectively conveyed that all genocides will always be
punished all of the time, and all of the people who participated in it will bear heavy consequences.
That certainly has not been the message of Nuremberg.
We now have a new regime.
Various countries around the world have established a new court, a permanent court, called the
International Criminal Court, not as an organ of the United Nations, but rather as a separate
organ decided at the Treaty of Rome in which the United States was an initial signatory
and most other countries in the world were initial signatories.
Its goal was to prevent genocide and to punish genocide, to have jurisdiction to intervene
while genocides were ongoing, to be a court, not a first resort, but a last resort, a court
which would first give the authority to governments closer to the scene to try to prevent the
genocide and punish it after it happened.
But as a last resort, if the country responsible could not punish it, this court would have
jurisdiction to impose punishments of up to life imprisonment for perpetrators of genocide.
Tragically, the United States has refused to sign on to that court, and although the
court does exist and has jurisdiction, and most of the countries in the world are signatories,
most of the westernized countries in the world are signatories to that court, it remains
to be seen whether or not that court can play an effective role in trying to prevent and
if not prevent, punish the kinds of genocides that have plagued the last half of the 20th century.
