In addition to the International Court of Justice, the legacy of Nuremberg has continued
in various regional courts and specific courts.
For example, there was a special court appointed in Rwanda to look at the Rwandan genocide,
and that court has punished numerous perpetrators, including again following on the analogy from
Stryker, from Jules Stryker, the man who was the editor of Der Sturma.
No media people were punished by the Rwandan court.
Now they were punished for two reasons.
Some of them, the radio, was giving specific instructions on where to find people who were
targets of the killing.
So-and-so is leaving his house now, he's in his car, he's driving down the road.
Now clearly that would not be protected speech, and any civilized country would punish that
as being an accessory to murder.
But also some of the Rwandan people responsible for the genocide were punished because of
incitements to genocide of the kind that was punished when Stryker was hanged following
the trials at Nuremberg.
And so Rwanda, the former Yugoslavia, has had a tribunal set up in the Hague, and I've
actually been at that tribunal and was asked to represent several people who before that
tribunal have not agreed to do that at this time yet.
I have been at the tribunal, I've seen it in operation, and it's a slow and tedious process,
but punishment is being meted out and people are being given jail terms.
Now they're pretty easy jail terms, most of them are relatively short and it's easy time.
I've also been to the prison of the Hague and the international tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia and compare it to the hell that some of these people inflicted on Bosnians
and Serbs and Croatians and others, the easy time they're serving in European prisons seems
not to be proportional to the crimes that they were accused of committing.
And now of course we have the problem or the challenge of what to do in Iraq.
There will be trials there, there are ongoing trials.
Is that Victor's justice?
Can the United States government, can the new Iraqi regime fairly try those who perpetrated
years of injustice and torture and killings on the Iraqi people?
Is it possible to have justice without it being politicized?
We have seen examples of where justice has been politicized, for example an Israeli
general steps off a plane in England and he's immediately threatened with arrest for
committing war crimes in the West Bank and the Gaza when Yasser Irfad who committed many
acts of terrorism was welcomed with open arms.
The virtue of having a court, a single court, a professional court like the International
Criminal Court is that it doesn't pick and choose, it can do it neutrally objectively
on the basis of the worst offenses and it's not subject to the kinds of political pressures
that I think some governments are subjected to or may be subjected to.
And so even the United States has been subjected to arrest for crimes committed in Iraq by
a Spanish court and the problem is when every country claims universal jurisdiction against
every other country we begin to get many Victor's justice trials and that tends to trivialize
real abuses.
