That's why I think the International Criminal Court, which is not under the auspices of
the United Nations, is a court that holds great promise for the future of trying to
bring justice to a world which has been more noted for its injustice, particularly its
injustice against civilians than for the justice it's done to the perpetrators of crimes against
civilians.
That brings us to the events of 9-11 and to Al Qaeda.
And I think the events of 9-11 and Al Qaeda pose some of the greatest challenges to the
United States legal system and to the world legal system that have ever been posed to
a legal system.
After all, we're dealing now with terrorism.
And terrorism by its definition follows no rules.
Terrorism by definition has no home return address.
So you can't respond to a government when the terrorism is committed by individuals.
Of course, some terrorism is state sponsored.
The terrorism that was committed by Al Qaeda at the beginning shortly after 9-11 was appropriately
seen as growing out of support by the Taliban regime, which was then controlling Afghanistan.
So there was a home address and the United States did bomb Afghanistan and did destroy
its government and did destroy the Taliban regime and substitute another regime in its
place.
But Al Qaeda now operates outside of any countries, although it gets much of its religious and
emotional support from Wahhabism in Saudi Arabia, surely the Saudi government itself
is not today supporting the Al Qaeda regime because Al Qaeda is turning against Saudi
Arabia and there are no countries that you can literally point the finger to.
The regime in Iran clearly supports terrorism, but mostly localized terrorism, Hezbollah
and some other groups that operate out of Lebanon.
But international terrorism is very, very difficult to fight.
And when you get a difficult regime to fight and when you get threats of terrorism with
mass casualties, inevitably countries begin to look to compromise their rules of law.
And that's exactly what happened following 9-11.
The United States responded to 9-11 in many different ways.
Number one, the attack on Afghanistan.
Number two, perhaps arguably the attack on Iraq was a response to 9-11, though critics
have pointed to the lack of a relationship between the regime of Saddam Hussein and Al
Qaeda.
But most particularly, the United States government used its very elastic laws to confine very
large numbers of mostly Arabs and Muslims, some Americans, some residents in the United
States and many simply captured on the battlefields of Afghanistan and other places and held them
for long periods of time without trial and without a lawful basis in existing legislation.
They used a number of tactics.
