One tactic was to use what's called material witness statutes.
That is, they arrested people not because they had committed any crimes,
but because they may be witnesses to crimes committed by others.
Now, this was clearly a pretext.
Plainly, these were people who were suspected themselves of being active people in terrorist circles
and part of terrorist cells in the United States.
We needed a way of simply freezing the situation and detaining them for periods of time
until they could be checked out.
So we used material witness statutes, misused, abused material witness statutes.
There was no basis for the use of those kinds of statutes that were intended.
They're old statutes.
They were intended if somebody had seen a crime but didn't live in the country
and was about to travel away, you could hold them as a material witness
for a few weeks until the trial occurred so that he could not evade his responsibility
to testify as a witness.
That's not the way it was used against suspected Arab and Muslim terrorists following 9-11.
Another law that was used was the immigration law,
which said that everybody living in the United States who was not a citizen
had to have certain papers and had to be in status
and had to keep their papers up to date
and had to remain in the country only for the limited period of time
that their visa permitted them to stay.
And under these statutes, normally people are simply picked up,
held for short periods of time, and then deported.
But what happened is people were held for long periods of time
for purposes of investigation.
And then, of course, there were simply the roundups of captured people abroad,
some of them suspected of being high-ranking al-Qaeda operatives like Sheikh Khalid Muhammad,
others who were simply captured on the battlefields of Afghanistan,
others who were merely suspected of complicity with al-Qaeda.
These were not American citizens and American residents,
and so they were simply taken and put either in Guantanamo,
which is a base that the United States leases on a permanent basis from Cuba,
or replaced aboard American vessels and simply kept in ships and interrogated.
This became a black hole in the law. Nobody knew what law operated.
Could the United States government, for example, torture suspected terrorists
like Sheikh Khalid Muhammad?
There's no question we did.
He was exposed to what's called waterboarding.
That is, he was placed on a board and the board was suspended over a body of water
and that his head was lowered into the water for long periods of time
until he was almost rendered unconscious,
and then he would be popped out of the water and asked questions.
And if he didn't answer them, he would be placed back into the water,
a kind of terrifying situation which, nonetheless, the United States government
does not regard as torture because it doesn't inflict physical pain
and it doesn't inflict physical risk or risk of death on the individual.
At the same time he was arrested, also his nine-year-old son was taken into custody,
essentially held as a hostage. Nobody knows what he was told about his son.
Nobody knows, I think, what happened to his son either.
