We have no laws on the books providing for federal quarantine in the event of an
infectious disease being spread by a weaponized germ carrier. For example, a
smallpox would be introduced, which is highly contagious, or anthrax, which is
not contagious, but which by touch can cause mass casualties, or any of many
other weaponizable chemicals or biological agents. We're just not ready. The
proof of that, of course, was when we had natural catastrophes like those in
New Orleans. The system quickly broke down. We were not prepared even for a
predictable natural capacity. We are completely unprepared today for
weaponized attacks on the United States using unconventional weapons such as
pharmaceuticals, or chemicals, or nuclear dirty bombs. How would we respond? Well, we
would respond by the executive having more and more and more power. Would the
courts intervene? Unclear. The courts have generally not played a major role in
preventing the executive from acting. If you go back just a half a century, a
little bit more than a half a century, after the attack on Pearl Harbor at the
beginning of the Second World War, the executive responded by imprisoning 110,000
Japanese Americans in concentration camps in the middle of the United States,
making them all leave their homes, selling them for a nickel on the dollar. The
Supreme Court of the United States did not intervene. It legitimated the
detention of Japanese Americans. A terrible, terrible part of our history. We
didn't do the same thing after 9-11. We didn't confine thousands, or hundreds of
thousands, or tens of thousands of Arab or Muslims Americans. But we did confine
on a retail basis. Too many for too long. And the courts waited too long before
they intervened. The courts have now sent an important message. Yes, there will be
intervention. But it will be limited intervention. It will be pragmatic. We
will have to balance the needs to fight terrorism against sacrifices to our
civil liberties.
