I think it was Benjamin Franklin who said,
those who are willing to compromise liberty in the name of security deserve neither.
Well, that's a nice statement.
But inevitably you have to strike balances in the real world.
And some liberty inevitably has to be
sacrificed in the name of some security.
It's always a matter of degree.
The question is how much we're prepared to give up.
For example, we've already given up our right of anonymity.
Nobody today objects when they're asked to
show their driver's license or other forms of ID at an airplane,
or trying to go into a government building.
We no longer live the model world of
Thoreau who could go to Walden Pond and refuse to become part of society.
If you live in our society today,
society threatened by terrorism,
some rights inevitably have to be compromised.
The question is how many,
what kind, to what degree,
and by whom, and with what kind of a system of checks and balances.
Our system, our constitutional system was written for a long time.
It's the most enduring constitution in history.
We have the most enduring and the most copied constitution ever.
And one of the reasons for it is it uses
general broad language, equal protection of the law,
due process of the law, cruel and unusual punishment,
the right to confront witnesses,
no unreasonable searches.
That flexibility has allowed this constitution to endure many, many changes.
The question is, will it endure the threats of terrorism?
Will it be able to survive and keep most of our rights intact,
most of the time, if we are threatened by terrorism?
That is the great question we will
confront as we move further into the 21st century.
And so as we conclude our course on the great cases of the 20th century,
ending with some of the cases that point toward what the 21st century will look like,
I think there are several lessons we can learn.
First, history is absolutely essential.
As Santiana said, those who forget the lessons of the past are destined to repeat them.
But history is not in itself predictive always of the future.
We have to be ready for changes.
We have to be ready for unanticipated events.
The only thing certain about the future is that there will always be uncertainty.
And a great legal system is one that has roots in the past,
but has the flexibility to adapt to the future.
I hope that when somebody gives a course like this at the beginning of the 22nd century,
they will be able to look back on our century now and say,
we've learned the lessons of the past,
but we've also learned how to adapt those lessons to the challenges of the future.
This ends lecture 14.
Now that you've completed this course,
be sure to test your comprehension by taking the final exam.
You'll find the exam on this course's webpage at www.modernscholar.com.
If you enjoyed this program,
the Modern Scholar Series from Recorded Books offers courses
in a variety of subject areas taught by the world's greatest professors.
Call 1-800-636-3399 or visit the course's webpage for a free catalog.
This course produced by John J. Alexander is copyrighted 2006 by Recorded Books, LLC.
The lecture text is copyrighted 2006 by Alan Dershowitz.
The lectures were edited by Spencer Avila and Matthew Kavanaugh.
