Welcome to another edition of This Fucking Guy,
the series where we pick one fucking guy
who's making America worse and explore why they suck.
I'm Erin Ryan, host of Crooked Media's Hysteria podcast,
and I'm Alyssa Mastromonico,
the other host of Crooked Media's Hysteria podcast.
And as you can probably see by our setup,
we are in person today.
The most special of treats.
Alyssa, today we're going to dive into one
of the best embodiments of the internet adage,
nothing that only straight men like is cool.
We will be looking into the life and times
of the worst thing to come from South Africa since apartheid.
A man who despite growing evidence that he's, shall we say,
not in the headspace to control space exploration,
electric vehicle manufacturing, communications,
or the biotech industry is still being trusted
with billions in government contracts
and essentially being allowed to man the levers
of the financial markets,
all while rage tweeting fringe conspiracy theories
and cozying up to extremists.
Of course, this is Elon.
I never bought into the hype around Elon Musk.
He always struck me as a weirdo who was more full of shit
than porta-potties at the end of the New York City marathon.
That's pretty full of shit.
Elon Musk became one of the richest people in the world
by convincing enough people with power that he's a genius.
But there's no there there.
He's not a genius.
He's not a scientist.
He's not an engineer.
He's not an innovator.
He's a bullshitter.
There are so many instances of Elon exaggerating
or flat out spinning tall tales about his own prowess,
but that was hard to not turn this video
into a sprawling limited series a la Shogun.
But we love a good scam.
So let's learn about the self-perpetuating scam
that is Elon.
Strap in, Alyssa.
I'm ready.
Elon Reeve Musk was born on June 28th, 1971,
to a wealthy family of fucking weirdos in South Africa.
His mother was a Canadian dietitian and model
who has appeared on cereal boxes
in the cover of Sports Illustrated.
He has a brother, Kimball,
who was once set up with one of Jeffrey Epstein's
ex-girlfriends by Jeffrey Epstein himself.
He's got a sister and a handful of half siblings.
Elon's father, Errol, a millionaire engineer
who claims he's killed a few people,
was half owner of a Zambian emerald mine in the 1980s,
he says, and eventually fathered two children
with his own stepdaughter, Jana,
thus making him his own stepfather-in-law, I think.
I'm sorry, what?
Yes, that's right, an emerald mine.
Elon hates this story because he really wants people
to believe that he's a self-made guy
and not some Lego-headed lord
who grew up in one of the biggest houses in Pretoria.
No, no, no, no, no.
Erin, I meant the thing about a stepdaughter.
Oh yeah, right, I assumed you meant mine.
Yeah, in 1979, Elon's dad divorced Elon's mom, May,
and later married a woman who had two children of her own.
Errol helped raise them, had two kids with her,
and then had two kids with one of the stepchildren
when she was of age and he was old as fuck.
Errol once told an interviewer, quote,
the only thing we're on this earth for is to reproduce.
I can see where Elon gets his creepy reproduction fetish.
Oh, we will get to that.
Although to his credit,
according to Elon biographer Walter Isaacson,
Elon noticed and disapproved
of the suspicious amount of attention
his father was paying Jana, again,
his own stepdaughter when she was 15 years old
and Errol was 56.
Errol insists that he was equally interested
in all of his children and stepchildren.
This video has already accomplished the impossible, Aaron,
making me feel a little bit bad for Elon Musk.
Elon was reportedly a mediocre student in high school,
but somehow got high enough grades
to get into college in Canada,
where his mom lived at the time,
and while he was there,
he somehow did well enough to transfer
to an Ivy League university in the United States.
As Musk tells it, he received degrees in physics
and economics from U Penn in 1995
and then moved to California
because he got into Stanford's PhD program,
but dropped out after two days
to be a full-time business boy genius.
When the legend of Elon purports
that he was the mental heft behind PayPal, Tesla and SpaceX,
people just kind of go along with it
because the belief that Silicon Valley
is teeming with prodigies and visionaries
and not just a bunch of assholes
screwing each other over like bankers and sweatpants
is central to justifying the tech sector's very existence.
First, let's get to Elon and PayPal.
He did not co-found PayPal.
He started his first company with some help from daddy,
sold that company to Compact, remember Compact?
No, don't remember it all.
Took the money he made from selling it
and started a business called x.com.
Surely you can't mean the social media website
formerly known as Twitter
or an early version of Tesla's Model X car
or the company SpaceX
or a site devoted to documenting the lives
of one of his multiple children to whom he gave X names.
Boy, he loves the letter X.
Yeah, it's his favorite letter.
No, this was an even earlier company called x.
Can you guess from the name what it did?
Sell erectile dysfunction medicines
to impotent men in red states?
No, good guess.
It was an online bank that somehow offered a product
that was less good than PayPal,
which I have to admit is an achievement
because PayPal sucks.
Point is he named a bank after it
because nothing conveys a sense of aboveboard safety
and seriousness like a letter often used
to denote the presence of a full bush
in a film from the 1970s.
You know they call the inner circle of early PayPal
the PayPal mafia.
Was Elon really anything like a Tony Soprano
of online banking?
He was a Jackie junior at most.
Once PayPal and x.com merged and x.com
like a dutiful wife took PayPal's name,
Musk became CEO because he had the most money.
But he was so annoying that eventually PayPal founder
in Silicon Valley, Supervillain Peter Thiel
found him too irritating to work with and so he quit.
Well, the board eventually took Thiel's side
and ousted Musk and replaced him with Thiel.
Imagine being more off-putting than Peter Thiel.
I cannot imagine it.
Musk remained the largest shareholder in PayPal, however,
which ended up translating to a $165 million windfall
when eBay bought the site in 2002.
He used that money to start a company called SpaceX.
Sounds like a souvenir boner pill sold in gas stations
in Roswell, New Mexico.
From what I can tell, it started with a desire
to send people to Mars.
Elon has always dreamed of sending people to Mars.
Elon and early space ally, Michael Griffin,
traveled to Russia together to try to convince some Russians
to sell them some ICBMs so that Musk could pretend
to invent rockets.
But the Russians weren't interested
because Elon was not an astronaut,
nor did he possess any particular expertise about space.
He was just a guy who liked space a lot.
Undaunted, Musk used his PayPal money
to hire a bunch of people,
did know what they were doing space-wise,
and the company SpaceX blasted off.
Michael Griffin, that name sounds familiar.
That's because Griffin would go on to be a BFD at NASA.
Overseeing private partnership programs,
including something called
the Commercial Orbital Transportation Services,
were COTS program.
The program was designed to enlist private companies
in transporting people and supplies
to and from the International Space Station.
Under Griffin, only two private companies
were selected for the program.
One of them was SpaceX.
And thus began a long and fruitful career of SpaceX
feeding from the prolific teat of Uncle Sam.
In 2006, SpaceX was awarded a $396 million contract
from NASA.
Meanwhile, SpaceX didn't even have a rocket that worked.
Its Falcon 1 program was sucking ass
unless you think a rocket that explodes
can still be counted as a success.
Its first three launches between 2006 and 2008 failed,
putting the company on the brink of bankruptcy
at the same time as Tesla and Musk himself in late 2008.
But then SpaceX got it on the fourth try,
and as a prize for his company's one successful launch,
Elon was given a $1.6 billion NASA contract that December.
And it all blew up from there,
both literally and figuratively.
Erin, I think that when a SpaceX rocket explodes,
it's called a rapid unscheduled disassembly
when conscious uncoupling goes to space.
And we shouldn't downplay the fact
that the company has seen some success.
And progress in space exploration is by definition messy.
But Elon is not making the rockets.
He's not an engineer.
He's simply the guy who benefits the most financially
from the work of people who are building the rockets
and satellites while rage tweeting
about how NPR shouldn't get government money.
Since 2020, at least five of SpaceX's attempts
to launch its Starship into space
have ended with the experimental aircraft blowing up.
SpaceX is now worth more than $36 billion, though,
having received $15.3 billion in government contracts.
All this time, Elon won't stop yammering
about sending people to Mars,
but SpaceX has yet to demonstrate
that they're even capable of sending people to the moon,
which is a lot closer.
Easier.
NASA's plan has been to go back to the moon
by the end of 2025, but if SpaceX can't do it,
we can't do it.
Side note about Michael Griffin in 2018,
Griffin would go on to be appointed
under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering
under President Donald Trump.
One of his responsibilities was to award government contracts
to build low-orbit national security satellites.
Guess which company was one of two
to win government contracts to build these Starlink satellites?
I'ma say SpaceX.
Correct.
And we also have Starlink's, and by extension,
Musk's involvement in the Ukrainian defense
against the Russian invasion launched in early 2022.
Initially, SpaceX was awarded a government contract
by the Department of Defense
to provide satellite support for communications
for Ukrainian civilians and military entities
in their own self-defense.
But multiple reports have indicated that Musk himself
has been monkeying around with the satellites,
interrupting communications,
and thwarting attacks the Ukrainian military
was attempting to carry out on Russian targets.
The DoDs basically had to throw their hands up
and be like, well, they're a private company,
what can you do?
I don't know, stop giving them contracts,
let somebody else build the satellites?
SpaceX's entire reason to exist
is to guzzle government money.
Think of the SpaceX part of his fortune,
like a GoFundMe designed to make the worst person you know,
even richer, and you cannot opt out of it.
It's time to talk about Tesla.
Tesla, the preferred car of some of the biggest assholes
you know.
The company was founded in 2003 by Martin Eberhard
and Mark Tarpening, two actual engineers.
Elon invested $6.5 million into early Tesla
and became chairman of the company's board.
And immediately started taking credit for things.
Eberhard and Tarpening came up with the ideas,
designed the actual cars,
got all the company's ducks in a row
to revolutionize the electric car market,
and then, as thanks, in 2007, Musk ran both of them
out of the company and started calling himself
the founder of Tesla.
Kind of like an invasive species bird
who pushes the eggs out of other birds' nests
to lay their own.
Indeed, and then says you invented eggs.
Eggs, they're mine, I did it.
In 2008, Musk was forced to step down
as chairman of the board of Tesla
after falsely promising, via Tweet Natch,
that he had funding secured to take Tesla private
at $420 per share, thus artificially inflating
the share value in a way a teenage boy might.
He was fined $20 million by the SEC over the stunt,
and he agreed to have a social media minder
approve his tweets before sending them.
How'd that go?
Elon had a wild summer.
That July, Elon had offered to help the cave rescue
of a trapped youth soccer team in Thailand
with a submarine he invented.
Let me remind you, Elon Musk is not an engineer,
nor had his companies made anything
designed to operate underwater.
The actual guy who saved the kids, Vernon Unsworth,
insulted Musk's silly little idea,
saying in a TV interview that Musk
could stick his imaginary submarine up his ass.
Musk responded by tweeting that Unsworth, who again,
just saved a kid's soccer team from cave death,
was a pedo guy.
Pedo guy.
Musk got sued.
During the trial, he claimed that pedo guy
was a common insult in the English-speaking world.
Literally never heard that one before.
Me neither.
Musk ended up prevailing in that suit,
but not before wasting a bunch of his time and hours,
but back to Tesla.
The company has been in the news
for its biggest layoffs ever.
14,000 people, or 10% of its workforce,
were unceremoniously let go over email in mid-April.
But whispers around the industry indicate
that the layoff might actually be much bigger than 10%,
perhaps even closer to 20%.
The stock price is absolutely tanking.
Tesla's total valuation was once a ridiculous $1.3 trillion.
Today, that value is down to less than half a billion dollars
and dropping.
That's a stupid amount of money.
Isn't General Motors only worth like 50 billion?
Yeah, if Tesla is an auto manufacturer,
its value has a long way to fall
before it's in line with other auto manufacturers.
But it also doesn't make sense
that the stock price has stayed so high
amid all of the company's controversies.
Multiple lawsuits over much of the company's history
have accused the company of lying
about how much money it's making
in order to inflate its stock price.
Tesla has received hundreds of millions of dollars
from the government for a battery swap technology
that was never made available to the public
and turned out to be a giant scam.
It's no secret Tesla's shitty to its workers,
fighting unionization efforts here and overseas.
He's even threatened his own employees on Twitter
when he should be being CEO.
How do you find the time, my dude?
There have been tens of thousands of reports
of Tesla's being shitty from things as minor
as poor quality builds to serious issues
like sudden uncontrollable acceleration.
Don't want that in a car.
Faulty braking, that's not good either.
Range issues that the company itself has suppressed.
An operating system that can be hacked
and controlled by outside entities.
Batteries that spontaneously light on fire.
The suspension suddenly collapsing
leading to something called Wampi Wheels,
which sounds like a carnival ride,
to one tragic story of a Tesla reversing
into a retaining pond with its driver trapped inside
and first responders unable to break in as the woman drowned.
That woman, by the way, was Mitch McConnell's sister-in-law
and that just happened this year.
Jesus Christ.
Just, you don't want a car to do that.
No, it sounds like they're put together
like carnival rides.
Now I've been saying that Elon isn't the one
who's actually making the cars
because he's not a real engineer and that's true.
But Tesla, more than most companies,
lives and dies by public perception of Elon.
The company is trapped by the innovator cosplay
Elon insists on dressing himself in.
Which is why Elon's public image impacts
the price of the company's stock so much.
Exactly.
The stock market is mostly fueled
by wishes and hopes and dreams.
And if people don't believe in Elon,
they don't believe in Tesla.
If Elon is a scam, then Tesla is a scam.
And Elon is real scammy.
Scammy.
As all this stuff is happening,
a series of embarrassing public disasters
continue to make Teslas look more and more like clown cars.
Back in December, 2023, Tesla issued a recall
for an eye-watering 2,031,220 vehicles
after a National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration investigation found
that the auto steer function wasn't safe.
Cybertruck, long cheerleaded by Musk,
is an ugly, clunky embarrassment
that has publicly face planted.
Yeah.
Sure?
Yeah.
Oh my God, Elon.
Well, maybe that was a little too hard.
Should we try it one more?
Try it?
Yeah.
What?
Yeah.
It didn't go through.
So that's a plus side.
Let's try the right one.
Try that one, really?
Okay.
Sure.
Oh, man.
It didn't go through.
Yeah.
Yeah.
All right.
What?
That'll be bad.
Things only went downhill for the Cybertruck from there,
and it's a good thing too, because if it's muddy,
downhill is the only direction a Cybertruck
can go without getting stuck.
Fuck.
The Cybertruck, like many Tesla offerings,
has experienced delivery delays, systemic failures,
safety issues, quality issues, and also can't haul shit.
Its battery doesn't last as long
as Tesla's sales material promised it would,
especially in cold weather.
Some observers have pointed out that it seems like Tesla
is making consumers pay for and beta test a product
that isn't actually ready for market.
The Cybertruck is what you might call a gender-affirming car
for men who want to prove to the world
that they have $100,000 to throw away
on the world's shittiest vehicle.
Tesla recently announced that their halting production
of the electric Ford Pinto of our times.
Good night, sweet prince.
And even at its newest and shiniest,
it still looks like the Armadillos
that Bruce Willis and Ben Affleck drove on the asteroid
in Armageddon, a movie from 1998, just saying.
Meanwhile, other automakers are getting into the EV game.
And some of them are bringing cars
to market that are more attractive, affordable,
and have less PR nightmare CEOs than Tesla does.
All of this has meant that Tesla's market share has diminished,
and its share price is tanked, as its sales and production
outlook has dimmed.
Musk is betting that his company will
be able to get out ahead of the autonomous taxi market,
something that nobody outside of like 500 people in Palo Alto
fucking want.
Plus, a fully self-driving car technology
doesn't exist, right?
It doesn't.
The technology used to be called fully self-driving or FSD,
but they got in trouble with regulators
because the technology does not actually work.
Now the tech is being referred to as FSD with supervision.
Still, Musk is all in on the tech,
claiming that Tesla owners for the low, low price of $99
per month will one day be able to install the software
on their cars, which can then work as autonomous taxis when
the owners aren't using them.
Your car can be your robot slave.
I am not kidding.
That's part of his business plan, Alyssa.
OK, so if you have FSD on your Tesla,
you still have to pay a subscription to use it?
Fuck that.
No.
The thing about fully autonomous vehicles
is that they're another musky and fairy tale.
Elon has been promising that the fully self-driving technology
is right around the corner for so long,
except if you try to get around that proverbial corner
in a Tesla, the car never makes the turn,
the steering malfunctions.
Next thing you know it, you've run head
on into the broad side of a pizzeria.
So it also seems like a terribly stupid idea
to reorganize city infrastructure around a massive fleet
of robo taxis when the roads are already congested.
And by the way, public transportation already exists.
Couldn't we just use all that money
that Elon wants to pocket and improve what we already have?
One would think.
Actually, Elon has headed out for public transportation
for a long time.
Do you remember the Hyperloop?
A stupider, more expensive version of trains?
The Hyperloop is such a moronic idea
that it almost pains me to say it out loud.
Back when Elon was king shit of fuck mountain,
a.k.a. before he developed whatever condition it is
that makes it impossible for him to not run his big, fat mouth
all the time, Elon, quote, invented, unquote,
a mass transit system that moves large numbers of passengers
through low pressure tubes.
You mean like the plastic chutes at the drive-through bank?
Sort of.
I like that vintage reference.
Except bigger, more expensive with magnets
and of course requiring massive amounts of money
to be funneled to one of Elon Musk's companies.
And once again, so many people fell for it.
The boring company started as a subsidiary of SpaceX
with the stated aim of digging holes
for this stupid idea all over the place.
MIT was investigating getting involved.
There was talk of building one connecting LA and San Francisco
basically under the five, if you know California,
even though we could have just used that money to build
a high-speed rail between LA and San Francisco,
which is something that people in both cities
have wanted for decades, I don't understand.
Elon never really wanted to build
ultra-fast, large-scale mass transportation.
He simply wanted to derail discussions
of actual high-speed rail that actually worked
because he owns a car company
that depends on people not having
comfortable, affordable mass transit options available.
So this whole plan was just to stop
public transportation from getting better
so he could sell more cars,
like the bad guy from Who Framed Roger Rabbit.
Exactly like that bad guy.
Now, a little over a decade after Hyperloop Mania
took Silicon Valley by storm,
all we have to show for it is a puny little tunnel
that connects part of the Las Vegas Convention Center
and some plans in other cities
that will likely soon quietly disappear from the internet.
So you dread the annual physical
with the guilt-tripping lectures like I do?
More greens, choose organic,
eat five cups of fruits and vegetables a day.
I admit I could eat better, but I don't have time.
That's why I started taking Field of Greens
by Brickhouse Nutrition.
Field of Greens is whole organic fruits and vegetables.
Real food, not extracts.
Each fruit and vegetable in Field of Greens
was medically chosen for a specific health benefit.
Some support vital organs like heart, liver, and kidneys,
while others give your metabolism and immune system a boost.
I'm so busy and I don't always eat like I should.
The powerhouse blend in Field of Greens fills the gap
so I stay energetic, focused, and healthy.
And if you don't feel the incredible difference like I did,
you can return it for a full refund.
Let me get you started with 15% off and free shipping.
Visit fieldofgreens.com and use promo code TFG.
That's promo code TFG at fieldofgreens.com.
Now that he's done his part to fill the highways
and atmosphere with vehicles that sometimes explode
and digs subterranean tunnels to nowhere,
Musk has moved on to technology.
Meant to be installed directly into the human body.
If I wouldn't get into one of his driverless taxis,
why on earth would I let one of his companies
install a chip into my brain?
The trillion dollar question.
In 2016, along with a handful of actual scientists,
Musk co-founded Neuralink after buying the trademark
from the two neuroscientists
who had actually founded Neuralink the year prior.
The company's aim is to produce technology
that can be implanted into the human brain.
Neuralink has been under fire
for killing an awful lot of the primates
that's been testing on, but nevertheless,
its chip was approved for human trials in 2023.
Earlier this year, Musk claimed
that a successful human trial had been conducted.
I have yet to see a single piece of reported media
that confirms this claim by somebody who isn't Musk himself
or someone Musk is paying,
but Elon girlbossed a little too hard when he bought Twitter.
It really has been something to watch the whole world
get wise to his bullshit at the same time.
Enough ink has been spilled
about Musk's disastrous takeover of Twitter
once a flawed but functional town square,
now the social media equivalent of an abandoned blockbuster
video that has been taken over by flea-infested raccoons.
So let's not get bogged down by the details.
What's most important is that thanks to his pathological
desire to force people to like him,
Elon's ineptitude has been on full display,
calling into question his genius and business acumen
in the rest of his portfolio.
The acquisition of Twitter was characterized
by drama and erratic behavior by Musk.
In 2022, he first tried a hostile takeover
of the company before winning the board's approval.
But then when he realized that $44 billion he'd offered
to pay was way too much for a company
that wasn't great at making money, he tried to back out.
The board threatened to sue but Musk relented
and the shotgun wedding between Elon and Twitter
happened in October, 2022.
Elon financed the deal with some creative leveraging
that ended up resulting in him having to sell
a bunch of Tesla stock, driving the share price down,
and thus his overall wealth down.
Elon, it turns out, is not good at running Twitter.
He fired or chased away 80% of the staff,
likely violating several labor laws and doing so.
He reinstated several accounts that have been banned
for hate speech, relaxed rules around anti-trans speech,
and COVID-19 misinformation,
gave a handful of doofus reporters access
to internal Twitter files, plopped his cottage cheese ass
into a dust chair, and tweeted as hard as he possibly could.
And who can forget the blue check mark fiasco?
Blue verification check marks were long viewed
as a class signifier in old Twitter,
which made a lot of people wearing wrap-around sunglasses
and their user picture angry.
So Elon got rid of the blue checks.
The problem is that the checks also verified
that people on the site were who they said they were
and that so-called official accounts were not imposters.
And so, in the first days of the program's elimination,
somebody pretending to be the official account
of drugmaker Eli Lilly declared that insulin was now free
among other imposter shenanigans.
That was actually quite funny.
That was really, it was one of the best days
in Twitter history.
It was great.
Bleeding money, Elon tried to get Twitter users
to pay $8 for the check marks.
And people were like, fuck that you clown.
So the only people who had blue checks
were suspiciously Elon fanboys and conservative super tweeters
who would hassle anybody who complained
about the new verification system
by accusing them of being too poor or stingy
to fork over $8 to one of the world's richest men.
I am shocked, shocked that trying to use bullying
as a chief sales technique
for Twitter's verification program was ineffective.
In April of this year,
Twitter quietly restored blue check marks
to several journalists and public figures
without charging them $8.
When several prominent Twitter users started swapping tips
on how to hide the dreaded blue check of shame
next to their names,
Twitter removed their ability to hide the check.
Researchers found that under Musk,
hate speech increased dramatically on the platform,
anti-Semitic speech increased,
as did propaganda originating from the Islamic State.
Great job, Elon.
Some of the hate speech, by the way,
was amplified by Musk himself,
like the time he publicly agreed with a tweet
alleging that Jewish people hate white people.
Musk responded by revoking access to Twitter's API,
so now nobody has any idea
just how bad things have gotten quantitatively.
However, Alyssa, there is a workaround.
You can still tell how bad Twitter has gotten
by simply looking at it.
Yes.
And it turns out platforming unbridled free speech
with virtually no moderation
has meant that since Elon fired or chased out
most of Twitter's legacy employees,
the site has also become a haven
for misinformation and child pornography.
In early April,
the Brazilian Supreme Court announced
that they were investigating him
for, quote, flagrant obstruction of Brazilian justice, unquote.
The chickens have to come home to roost eventually, right?
Yeah, and I would watch a show called Brazilian justice.
It sounds like a lot of fun.
Twitter put on display how desperate Elon was
to have people like him,
despite his fundamental unlikeability.
In February, 2023,
Elon got upset that not enough people
were engaging with his tweets
and had some of his internal engineers
investigate what was wrong.
This story makes me so embarrassed.
So sad for him.
One of his engineers suggested
that perhaps public interest in Musk himself was waning,
and so Musk fired him.
A few days later,
when President Joe Biden's tweets about the Super Bowl
got more engagement than Elon's,
Elon demanded the engineers fix it or be fired.
So they changed the Twitter algorithm
so that regular users would be spammed with Elon's tweets,
magnifying the automatic reach of Elon's tweets 1,000 times.
That is the saddest shit I have ever heard.
In 2023 via Twitter,
he accused a young Jewish man named Ben Brody
of participating in a neo-Nazi brawl
as an Antifa member of a false flag operation.
Brody wasn't even in the state where the brawl occurred.
His family claims that Musk's amplification
of the fringe conspiracy theory, based on nothing,
had led to massive amounts of harassment and threats
and sued Musk for a million dollars.
Musk was deposed in March and it went poorly.
In the deposition which Musk's lawyers
unsuccessfully fought to seal,
Musk at one point does not seem to understand
what a lawyer does.
Daren, what about the people who stayed on Twitter
even after Elon turned it into a haunted shopping mall?
Well, Elon has tried to turn Twitter
into a landing pad for media personalities
who had been canceled or, in normal English,
faced consequences as a result of fucking up.
He snatched up Tucker Carlson after Tucker's ouster
from Fox News with promises that Tucker could create
Twitter exclusive content.
But the site didn't have the technology
to support the sort of thing Tucker wanted to make.
Sounds familiar.
And former CNN anchor Don Lemon
was also invited to Elon's Tiki Torch rally
only to have his contract canceled
days before Lemon's show was supposed to debut
after an interview Lemon conducted
with Musk went off the rails.
Musk keeps claiming he loves free speech,
but he doesn't like it when people talk shit about him.
Under Musk's flop sweat soaked innovation,
the value of Twitter at NowX.com, the old chestnut,
has fallen an estimated 65%.
Elon's Twitter foibles have exposed him
as an emotionally unstable, deeply weird, clueless phony
who believes that acting like an asshole
is the same thing as coming up with an idea.
He's a business bridezilla with an unlimited budget
and his employees are just the hapless wedding coordinators
trying to figure out how to bend reality
to bring his ridiculous plans to fruition.
And when he's confronted on his bullshit,
he throws a fit.
Who can forget this infamous public appearance?
If somebody's gonna try to blackmail me with advertising,
blackmail me with money, go f*** yourself.
Go f*** yourself.
Is that clear?
It's funny.
He didn't used to seem as unhinged as he does now.
I know, I kind of wonder what it is,
but there is a working theory out there.
Failing?
That theory is, it's the drugs.
According to a Wall Street Journal report from January,
Elon has been known to dabble in such substances
as cocaine, mushrooms, LSD, ecstasy, and ketamine.
But last I checked, most people who go into a K-hole
don't come out the other side of megalomaniac baby.
And to prove he's cool and tough,
he smoked weed on the Joe Rogan podcast.
Speaking of babies, doesn't he have like a million kids?
Yes, Elon Musk has 11 children by three different women.
Woo!
He had six children with his first wife, Justine Wilson,
including one set of twins and one set of triplets,
which were conceived via IVF.
He has three children with the singer Grimes,
who you may most recently remember for turning in
one of the worst performances in Coachella history.
Elon also has twins with an executive
from his monkey-murdering enterprise Neuralink,
a fact that came to light through a piece
in Time Magazine by Walter Isaacson.
News of the twins with the Canadian Neuralink
executive broke just days before news
that he'd had his third baby with Grimes broke.
Boy, that was awkward.
I've got questions about what's been going on,
and I don't know for sure that I want the answers.
In response, Elon made a weird joke
about doing his part to repopulate the world,
but he's long been weirdly obsessed with the birthrate
because he said that he's worried
there won't be enough people to move to his Mars colony.
Musk has reportedly given $10 million
to a population research project in Texas
that aims to look into ways to increase the birthrate.
So Elon wants there to be more people
so that he can send them to Mars.
Fine, fine, go.
Problem that Musk's advice
that everybody should father as many children as possible
is that like his father who came before him,
Musk kind of sucks at being a dad.
He is currently being sued over parental rights
by his ex, Grimes, and one of his two oldest children
who came out as trans at age 16
openly hates her dad's guts for very understandable reasons.
He once claimed that the word cisgender was a slur
and urged all of his followers on Twitter
to watch the Daily Wire documentary,
What is a Woman, hosted by human skidmark Matt Walsh.
But maybe the shittiest thing Elon did
in the fatherhood arena was change some key details
about a tragedy to make himself sound like a hero.
Elon's oldest son named Nevada died tragically
from sudden infant death syndrome
when he was only 10 weeks old.
Many years later in 2022 via tweet, of course,
Elon later claimed that the baby had, quote,
died in his arms and that he, quote,
felt his last heartbeat.
Nevada's mother, his ex-wife, Justine disagreed,
tweeting, not that it matters to anyone except me
because it is one of the most sacred
and defining moments of my life,
but I was the one who was holding him.
That he would claim that is just tragically deranged.
It is absolutely deranged.
It's like some of the sickest shit ever.
And while a year prior, Justine had written
a glamour magazine piece called
I was a starter wife inside America's messiest divorce
that like many firsthand accounts of Elon Musk
make him sound like a total fucking dick.
In that article, she wrote,
Elon had called her open grief over Nevada's death,
emotionally manipulative.
Emotionally manipulative.
Your child's eyes, her baby died.
No wonder that marriage,
like the hyperloop, fully self-driving technology,
the cyber truck and his version of Twitter failed.
Whew, well, that's as good a note to end on as any.
What's extra crazy to me is that we can laugh
at his awkward dancing and make fun of how unfunny he is.
Thanks to the fact that government gives his company
so much money and Tesla stock is such a huge part of the S&P,
we all kinda own a stake in his clownery.
Nobody should have as much money as Elon Musk has
and nobody should have their fingers knuckle deep
in that many industries so important to things
like communication, transportation and national security.
Alyssa, I haven't even gotten to the cherry on top.
In April, the same week that Tesla announced record layoffs,
Elon once again asked the company board to approve
a $56 billion pay package for himself
that had been rejected by a judge in Delaware
over the fact that its exorbitant size
represented negligence of his fiduciary duties as CEO.
Sounds reasonable.
Can you imagine, can you imagine asking for $56 billion
after sending so many people out into the street?
Evil as shit, absolutely not.
Evil shit.
The only way that Elon Musk is a true innovator
is in his astonishing ability to oversell and under deliver.
His career is a series of fanciful, unkeepable promises
which a gullible media takes at his word,
but maybe, just maybe, the jigs finally up.
Wow, Elon, I feel like we barely scratched the surface.
So on a scale of one to five weasels.
Ooh, where's Elon?
Oh, he's gotta be a hard five weasel for so many reasons.
One, he's getting rich off our tax money.
He's getting rich off our tax money,
not doing shit with it, being mean to his kids
and not even getting to the moon.
Yeah.
Give me my money back.
Any ruined Twitter.
Yes, I'm gonna agree with you.
Okay, five, oh, we're in sync this week.
I say a hard five weasels for Elon Musk
just because he has so much power and he amassed it
in a way that I feel like everyone is like,
oh, whoa, this guy's in charge of a lot of stuff.
I don't know if there's a world in which he is no longer
just like the crazy person driving the economy.
And that is deeply, deeply upsetting.
Aaron, that was a fun one.
Thanks so much for tuning into this edition
of This Fucking Guy.
If you enjoyed this, please like, share and subscribe.
And if you've got ideas for who should be the next subject
of This Fucking Guy, leave it in the comments below.
