Welcome back to Meaning From Data Statistics Made Clear.
In this lecture, we're going to face the big challenge of democracy, namely that the
government responds to the will of the people.
That's the basic concept of democracy.
But the question is, what do we mean by the will of the people?
Intuitively, the will of the people simply refers to the idea that we learn the opinions
of everybody who's of the voters in the country, and we somehow put them together to make a
statement about what the will of the whole society is.
But we're going to see in this lecture and the next that that idea has some very serious
and inherent difficulties.
Usually the will of the people is ascertained actually by voting, and in an election situation,
what an election really does is to take the individual opinions of each of the voters
and assembles them into a societal decision, the will of the people.
So from a statistical point of view then, what an election actually is, is a summary
of a set of data, namely the opinions of the individual voters.
So in this lecture, we're going to consider two counterintuitive realities about the election
process.
The first one is that the voters' preferences about the candidates, which you think are going
to be the only issue involved, turns out that their preferences sometimes have less to do
with the outcome of an election than what voting method one uses to assemble these votes
and make a summary.
You see, whenever you have an election, you have to assemble the opinions and choose one
winner.
Well, okay, so that choice of method is going to be a primary issue.
The second thing is that we're going to see a very unfortunate reality about voting methods,
which is that every voting method has a very serious defect in it, and we will see what
I mean by defects in voting methods, and that these are absolutely unavoidable.
So these results about election processes actually give us a cautionary tale about what
to expect when we summarize a collection of data.
There are issues which these things will illustrate.
So let's begin then with an election.
Our election, the goal is to take the opinions, the choices of every single member of the
voting population, and return one societal choice.
That's the goal of voting.
And in an election, it accomplishes this by somehow putting those opinions together.
And at first, when you think about this, it seems that there's nothing to discuss.
What's there to discuss about voting?
I mean, it's very simple.
You ask people what their opinion is, and you count up the ballots, and whoever gets
the most votes wins.
It's simple.
Why am I, it's a very short lecture today, as in the lecture.
But as a matter of fact, it turns out that we have many different methods of voting,
and that voting method, the method of simply having everybody vote for one candidate and
seeing who gets the most votes, that is the method called plurality voting.
And it works completely perfectly if there are two candidates.
Because if there are two candidates, whoever gets the more votes is the winner, and there's
no question.
The difficulties arrive when a third candidate arrives on the scene.
When the third candidate wades into the election, the waters become very murky, very muddy.
And I think the best way to start this whole discussion is just with an example.
And so let's suppose that we have a committee in which there are three candidates.
There are two Republican candidates and one Democratic candidate.
And let's assume, just for the purposes of this illustration, that on this committee
all the Republicans only prefer Republican candidates over any Democratic candidates,
and all the Democrats prefer the Democrat candidate over any Republican candidate.
So this is just hypothetical, I know, but let's just assume this for the moment.
So let's suppose that there are a few more Republicans on this committee than there are
Democrats.
And in order to actually specify our situation, let's just look at a specific chart here that
illustrates the voters' preferences.
So this table shows that there are eight Republicans on the committee, and there are three candidates.
The three candidates are Ron, Rick, and Dan.
And the names are chosen so you can easily remember who are the Republicans and who are
the Democrats.
The ones beginning with R are the Republican candidates, the one beginning with D is the
Democratic candidate.
So the Republicans, of course, prefer the Republicans before they prefer the Democrat.
The Democrat is in third place for all of these voters.
So this number up here are the voters on the committee.
So there are eight Republicans who prefer Ron first, then Rick, and of course Dan, the Democrats'
last place.
And four of the Republicans on the committee prefer Rick, the Republican Rick, over the
Republican Ron, and over Dan.
And then there are six Democrats on the committee who prefer Dan, then Rick, then Ron.
The other four Democrats, of course, prefer Dan, he's the Democrat.
So they prefer Dan, then Ron, then Rick.
You follow me?
So this chart illustrates the preferences of the 22 people on the committee, 22 because
there are, as you see, 8 plus 4, 12 Republicans, and 6 plus 4, that's 10 Democrats.
Now given these preferences, these opinions of the people on the committee, our question
is very simple.
Who should be declared the winner of the election among the three candidates, Ron, Rick, and
Dan?
Well, let's look at the chart and just see.
The simplest way to evaluate the votes would simply be to use the plurality method.
This was the method where you simply take the first place votes of each voter, and you
see who gets the most first place votes, and that person is declared to be the winner.
So in this case, we have Ron got 8 votes here, and then Dan got 10 votes.
You see?
So Dan would be the winner, because you see Rick only got 4 votes.
You see only these 4 Republicans got.
This is an example where the Republican vote was split.
Even though the Republicans had 12 Republicans on the committee, since there were two Republicans
running and one Democrat running, the Republican vote was split, and therefore the Democrat
won the selection.
Well, let's see if there are different ways to evaluate the opinions of these committee
members to come up with a societal opinion.
Maybe Dan is not the best reflection of the true opinions of this committee.
Well, here's another way.
Here's an election method where you would have everybody vote for two candidates.
They could just choose two people, so each person has two votes, and they get to vote
for two, and then we just see who gets the most of the votes under those circumstances.
In order to count up how many votes each person gets, let's just look at, say, Ron.
Well, Ron gets 8 votes here and 4 votes here for a total of 12 votes.
All of the Republicans put Ron in first or second place.
And then Ron gets 4 more votes from the Democrat, from this group of Democrats.
They prefer Ron second over Rick, and so the total is 12 plus 4 is 16 votes in the vote
for two method for Ron.
Likewise, we can look at Rick.
Well, look what happens to Rick.
Rick gets, of course, the 12 Republican votes.
They all put all the Republicans in first or second place, but Rick also gets 6 of these
Democratic votes because he's in second place in the opinions of 6 Democrats, so he gets
a total of 12 plus 6, which is 18 votes.
Dan notices, picks up no additional votes because the Republicans all put Dan in third
place and therefore they don't vote for him at all.
Consequently, the effect is that under this voting scheme, Rick wins the election.
Congratulations, Rick.
That is a perfectly legitimate way to summarize the opinions of these 22 committee members
and say that Rick seems like a good candidate as the winner.
Well, we're not done yet.
There's yet a third method for evaluating votes, and that's a way of actually waiting
the opinions.
In other words, giving two points for anybody who gets a first place vote, one point for
getting a second place vote, and zero points for getting a third place vote.
You follow me?
This makes sense that the person who's in first place should get some more benefit from
being the first choice rather than the second choice.
Look what happens here.
In this way of getting a weighted sum of the votes called the Borda count, the Borda count
is named after a French scientist Jean Charles de Borda, who was one of the pioneers in the
study of voting methods.
The opinions change yet again because let's look at, say, Ron's votes.
He gets eight first place votes, so that's eight times two, which is 16, plus he gets
four second place votes here, so that's four more, that's a total of 20, and then he gets
an additional four votes here for a total of 24, and there is his score, 24.
In this case, though, Rick, let's see what happens to Rick.
Rick gets only four first place votes, so that's four times two, which is eight, plus
eight second place votes here, so that's eight more, eight plus eight is 16, plus six votes
here, 16 plus six is 22, so Rick gets 22 in the Borda count, and counting the same way
Dan gets 20 votes.
In the Borda count method then, Ron wins the election.
Congratulations, Ron.
Now notice what we have here.
This is really quite interesting because what we have shown is with the same preferences,
we didn't change the opinions of the people.
The people on the committee's preferences were given, there they are, they're on this
list, and yet we just used three different reasonable methods for getting their votes
and making one decision, and we got three different answers.
All three of the candidates from one point of view should be viewed as the winner.
Well, this is a troubling kind of issue.
This is a troubling issue.
It's an example of a case where the method of voting has more to do with selecting the
winner of the election than the preferences of the people.
It turns out that a mathematician by the name of Donald Sorry has proved a theorem that
says that you can devise voting preference schemes like this chart up here, so that if
you have any number of candidates, for example, you have 10 candidates, you can make it so
that the plurality winner is one of the candidates.
If you have a vote for two system, you get a different candidate.
If you have a vote for three system, you get a different winner.
I should have said, if you have a vote for two method, you have a different winner.
You have a vote for three method, you have a different winner.
If you have a vote for four method, you have a different winner all the way down to nine
different winners.
And then if you have the board account, you get the 10th winner, so that every single
one of those 10 candidates would win under these different voting schemes.
Very interesting.
Let's proceed then and look at, investigate the question of runoffs.
Because maybe that runoff elections would be the solution to our problems here.
Why don't we just have a runoff?
Suppose that you have a, because the runoff would have solved the problem here of electing
a Republican at least.
The problem with the plurality election in this previous example is that Dan, although
he won the plurality vote, would have lost the election to either Rick or Tehran.
So he was, he was not the, in a way you could argue that Dan should certainly not have been
the winner, even though he was the winner of the plurality method.
But in a runoff, if there were runoff between two candidates, the Republican would have
won because all the Republicans would have voted for the Republican candidate.
But let's see a little difficulty with the concept of a runoff election.
So here's an example where we have a different election situation.
We have 31 Republicans and 25 Democrats in this voting population.
So it's either, think of it as a big committee of 56 people.
And there are five people running for office.
And again, we have the two Democrats whose names start with D and three Republicans whose
names start with R.
Suppose that the Republican vote is rather evenly split among their three candidates
and the Democratic vote is split rather evenly between their two candidates.
Look what happens if we have a runoff.
We take the top two vote-getters, which are Dan and David.
We have a runoff between Dan and David and David, or Dan wins.
We have a Democrat winning this contest.
So let's say David would win the election.
Of course, it would depend on how the Republicans voted in the runoff.
But let's suppose that David was the eventual winner under this runoff scenario.
Now look what happens if David does a little better job among his own constituency, among
the Democrats.
He does a better job.
He gets more votes among the Democrats in the first election.
In this case, the 25 Democrats vote 15 for David and 10 for Dan.
In other words, he did better, right?
David did better in that first election.
Let's see what happens.
Well, it's a runoff.
Remember, who are the contestants in the runoff?
The runoff are David and Rhonda.
In the runoff, it's very clear who's going to win the runoff election, namely Rhonda.
So Rhonda wins the runoff election because there are 31 Republicans who are going to
vote for her, and only 25 of the Democrats will vote for David.
So the consequence of David's having done better in the preliminary trial was that he
did worse overall.
He lost the election.
An interesting feature of the runoff kind of election, that doing better leads to a
worse result in this example.
That it can lead to a worse result, and it did in this example.
Now here's another method of voting that is called pairwise sequential voting.
This method of voting is a method by which you simply take two of the candidates and
you pair them against each other, and whoever wins then goes against the next candidate,
they go against each other, and then you get to the last candidate, they go against each
other, and whoever wins at the end wins the election.
Let's just see what happens if we have this election situation.
We have three voters, so this is just a small committee.
There are only three people who are going to vote, and they're going to make a decision
among four different candidates, ABCD are candidates for that they're going to maybe
appoint, maybe it's a committee that's appointing an officer in a company, and this three-person
committee is choosing among four candidates.
So the four candidates are ABCD and they decide to use the sequential pairwise voting method.
So let's just see what happens.
They first pair A against B, and you see this could very well happen when you're trying
to sift through candidates for this position.
You may say, well let's look at these two.
Which one of these two is better?
And there's a discussion and an opinion is given.
So let's look at A against B. Well, voter 1 thinks that A is better than B. See, that's
what this chart means.
Voter 2 also thinks A is better than B. Voter 3 actually thinks B is better than A, but
since two of them think A is better than B, A would win that first pairwise contest.
So then we proceed and compare A to C. You can imagine this in a committee, right?
You just go through the people and you say, well, this one's better, okay, we'll throw
out B. Now we'll go on to C. Okay.
So now let's look at A. A is still in the contest, and now A is being compared to C.
So A goes against C. Voter 1 thinks A is better than C. Voter 2 thinks C is better than A.
And likewise, Voter 3 believes that C is better than A. So C wins the pairwise contest, and
we proceed to see that now C beats A in this pairwise contest.
Now C is the remaining candidate.
We pair C to D and look what happens.
Here, D is better than C here, C is better than D here, but D is better than C here.
So two of the people think D is better than C and D beats C. So D would be the winner
and would be selected and appointed to the board or to the position.
Well, there's only one slight problem with this that is a rather major problem with this,
and that is everyone likes B better than D. Look at this.
Voter 1 thinks B is a better candidate than D. Voter 2 thinks B is a better candidate than D.
Voter 3 thinks B is a better candidate than D.
So this selection method has chosen a candidate as the winner, where all people in the voting
population think that one specific other candidate is superior.
Isn't that a strange thing?
Well, that is a rather unfortunate kind of a quality for a voting system to have,
that it could choose a candidate when there is a consensus in the population that somebody
else is the better candidate.
Well, let's see.
Now, we have then actually, we've been discussing several kinds of properties that we might
want in a voting system.
One of them is consensus.
If there is a consensus, we should go along with it.
So one desirable property of a voting system would be that we want to go along with consensus.
Another, unfortunately, the pairwise sequential voting system fails that method.
Another quality that we would really like to have is the quality that better is better,
meaning that if you do better, if more people want you and vote for you, prefer you in a
higher position, then that should help the outcome.
That should help you in the outcome not hurt you.
But remember that we saw in the case of the runoff elections that runoffs fail this property.
Remember in the runoff, in the first instance where the vote was split between the two Democratic
candidates, Dave and Dan, Dave went on to win the election because both of the candidates
in the runoff were Democrats.
Whereas when Dave did better in the preliminary vote, in the first vote, he did better and
consequently the second place person was a Republican.
And so in the runoff, he was running against a Republican and therefore the Republican
one.
In our scenario, there were more Republicans and Democrats in the voting population.
So the runoff election fails this property that better is better.
And that's a desirable property that we would want a voting system to have.
The third question, the third desirable property that we would like a voting system to have
is the idea that irrelevant is irrelevant.
What I mean by that is that suppose that you have an election and there are several
candidates and then you throw out one of the losing candidates.
You say you have a method of voting, you have an election, there's a winner and then you
discover after the election that one of the candidates maybe didn't qualify to be in the
election and you throw that person out.
They lost anyway.
Suppose it has the effect of making somebody else the winner.
You see, that doesn't seem like a good quality for an election system to have.
And yet, plurality voting has exactly that property, right?
If you threw out a losing candidate, it can change the order of the winner and the loser.
And this isn't just some abstract issue, by the way.
In the year 2000, in the presidential election, there were three candidates, Bush, Gore and
Nader.
Well, if Nader had not been in the election, Gore would have been the victor, right?
Because Gore against Bush would have won and certainly Gore against Nader would have won.
Gore would have won the election.
So the point is that plurality voting has the property that if you throw out a losing
candidate, it may change the order of who wins the election.
Of course, presidential elections are not decided using plurality voting of the popular
vote.
However, the 2000 election does give an example where eliminating a losing candidate would
have changed the outcome.
You might wonder why it is that I keep talking about all these methods that don't work.
Why don't I just come out and tell you the one that has these nice desirable features
that we've identified?
And the reason that I don't do that is, as you probably at this point have guessed, that
it's impossible.
There is no voting system that allows us to have all three of those properties in place.
This is Arrow's impossibility theorem.
It says that there is no system.
Now what is a voting system?
A voting system means a method by which you take the preferences of all the people in
the voting population and from them, assemble a winner or an ordered list of the preferences,
societal preferences.
And what Arrow's impossibility theorem says is that there is no system for summarizing
the opinions of people that satisfies all three of these conditions.
Go along with consensus, which by the way is called the Pareto condition.
Here is better, meaning that if a candidate does better, that it should advance him or
her in the outcome, the societal summary list rather than decreasing that person's result.
And irrelevant is irrelevant.
If you throw out a losing candidate, it should not have the effect of changing the order
of the other candidates.
There is no system that has all three of these, actually that's not quite true.
There is one system.
And that is a dictatorship.
If you just say there is one voter in the country and whatever it is that that voter
says goes, that does in fact satisfy all three of these conditions.
One of the implications for Arrow's impossibility theorem is on the plus side, you know, got
to have at least a little ray of sunshine in this lecture.
And that is that we never will have to worry that the bowl championship series method of
evaluating the teams of college football teams will be settled, will always be able
to argue about them because we know that any method that they choose, no matter how many
computers are involved or opinions and sports writers, no matter what method we use, one
of those three conditions is not going to be met and those issues will arise.
And believe me, people will say, how could you possibly choose a voting method that fails
to have go along with consensus or where if you throw out this losing team that it changes
the order, they will definitely bring those issues up.
So that that is a very cheerful thought that we can look forward to debates in the future.
In the next lecture, we will continue this theme of the discussion of voting methods.
And if possible, we will discover that in fact, the situation gets even worse.
This is not a happy lecture.
Why am I giving these lectures?
It gets worse.
It gets worse.
But it does have the implication that not only is it worse, but that you can apply the
same analogous situations in many different statistical applications that have nothing
to do with voting and realize that statistical summaries entail significant problems.
I'll look forward to seeing you next time.
