Welcome back. In the previous lecture we discussed voting schemes and the problems with them,
and this is a continuation of that discussion about voting problems. Last lecture we introduced
several different methods for taking the opinions of the voters from a population and choosing
the winner from those opinions. And among them were plurality voting, that's the common
one where you just see how many people voted for the first place, what candidate got the
most first place votes, that's plurality voting. And then we had vote for two methods where
every voter could vote for two candidates. We had a method called the Borda count where we
weighted the voters. If you had three candidates and a voter votes could give two points to their
first choice, one point to the second choice, and zero to their third choice, and then adding up
those numbers. And then we had yet another method, namely a runoff method. And we saw some problems
with all of these different methods of assembling the opinions of the voting population and assembling
them into a societal decision. But in real life we have to actually make a decision. We have to
decide who the winner is in a contest. So in this lecture we're going to start out with a case study
where we look at the preferences of the people and ask the question of who is the people's choice.
And this example actually is a real election. It was a real data from an important election. And so
it'll be interesting for you to see it and make your own decision about what you think really would
be called the people's choice. So let's look at this chart here. This is a chart. It's a little bit
different. It's formatted in a little bit different way from the previous charts that indicate how
the population prefers their candidates. In this chart, this is the way to read it. There are four
candidates, A, B, C, and D. And the first column here tells us the percentage of the voting population
who viewed each of the candidates in first place. In other words, this 40 means that 40 percent
of the voting population viewed candidate A as their first choice. 13 percent viewed candidate B
as their first choice. 18 percent C, 29 percent viewed candidate D as their first choice. So
in particular, A got the most votes as first place votes. The second column indicates what percentage
of the population considered the individual candidates their second choice. 14 percent A, 46 percent B,
18 percent and 22 percent. So in other words, B was a candidate where a lot of people
thought that that was a good second place person. Not too many, only 13 percent viewed that candidate
as their first choice, but a lot of people, almost half of the whole population, thought of that
candidate as their second choice. And then this column simply adds up these numbers
of the first and second place. So it really comes out of 200 because it's not a percentage anymore.
This third column is similar to this column. This column is the percentage of people in the
population who considered the candidate to be their third choice candidate out of the four.
So 16 percent viewed candidate A as their third choice, 33 percent of the population thought of
candidate B as the third choice, and so on, 3 percent for C, 48 percent for D. And then this
last column just represents the total of the percentages, those first place, second place,
and third place. So this is out of 300. And notice that in this third column, this says that
99 percent of the people viewed candidate D in one of the first three places,
and 92 percent of the voting population viewed candidate B in one of the first three places.
Okay, so you understand the meaning of this chart. It's capturing the opinions of the people.
Now let's go to the trouble of trying to think, looking at this chart, what do you think is the
will of the people? What would you look at, looking at these data, what would you say
the people really want? Which of the candidates is what you think would be described as the will
of the people? Well, let's first of all look at how different ways that you might evaluate
that societal decision. One is that you could simply look at the first column, which is the
plurality voting system. Namely, you just look and see how many people want each of the four
candidates in first place. And in that method of evaluating the societal decision,
we see that candidate A wins, because 40 percent of the people viewed candidate A as their first
choice. Now, there are different methods, as we saw in the last lecture, for evaluating the
societal decision. And another way would be to say, let's let everybody vote for two candidates.
If we did that, we have the answer here in this column. Each number in this column
tells us the percentage of the voters who would give one of their two votes to that candidate.
So we see the candidate B would win using the vote for two method, since B received more votes
than any other candidate. Now let's go on to the next possible way of evaluating the winner of
the election. And that would be to hold a runoff. In other words, we'd look at the plurality first
and second place candidates. That would be candidate A and candidate D. And then we would
have a runoff between these two candidates. Well, this chart really doesn't speak to the
entire question. You can't get from those data who the winner would be. But other information
told us that, in fact, in a runoff election, it would have been candidate D who won the election.
So in the runoff method of evaluating it, D would be the winner.
Well, remember the Bordau count, which is the count where we weight the votes. In other words,
in this case, since there are four candidates, each voter could give three to the first place
candidate, two to the second place, one to the third place and zero to the fourth place candidate.
And then adding up those numbers for each voter in the population, we would get a number. And in
the Bordau count method, we see that the numbers are 164, 164, 179. So the Bordau count winner is
candidate D. Now, I'd like you to think about this yourselves and say, who do you think should win?
You can see that we have a variety. We have A, B, and D as all potential winners for this election.
And, you know, it's a little bit hard to know which one you should choose. As I've talked
about this chart with people and had students in other groups think about it. Generally,
most people view that candidate D would be the better representative of societal choice.
First of all, in a head to head election between A and D, candidate D wins by 54% to 46% of the vote.
It's true that candidate A won the plurality vote, had more first place votes. But in the Bordau
count method, the candidate D won. And also 99% of the voters in the population at least put candidate
D in the top three. Whereas there were 30% of the people for candidate A who didn't view candidate
A as an acceptable choice. They put him in last place. Well, let me tell you now that actually
there's one more column that we should add to these methods of evaluating votes. And that is the
Electoral College. It turns out that these data have to do with a presidential election. And the
Electoral College had this result. And in fact, in the Electoral College, the winner of the election
was candidate A. And it was rather a strong victory, 180 votes in the Electoral College. And notice
interestingly that candidate C, who was really not one of the contenders, was the second place
winner in the Electoral College. Well, this is interesting. And one reason that this is actually
a very interesting result is that this was an extremely important election. This was the
presidential election of 1860. Candidate A was Abraham Lincoln. Candidate B was Bell. Candidate
C was Breckenridge. And candidate D was Douglas. We can easily imagine that if a different method
of choosing the societal preferences were employed, that the entire history of the United States would
have been extremely altered in an extremely major way. It may well have been that the Civil
War would not have been fought if Douglas had been president. Of course, we don't know that.
But the point is that these concepts of taking statistical summaries and giving an answer
have extremely serious consequences in real life.
I promised in the last lecture that if anything matters about voting would get worse. And so I'm
about to deliver on that promise by looking at this next example, which is the Condorcet Paradox.
Marie-Jean-Antoine Nicolas Carrethard, the Marquis de Condorcet, was a French scientist who
was also an early pioneer of voting theory, just like Bordeaux was. And one of the things that
he pointed out was this very interesting paradox about voting. Suppose that we have the following
voting preferences among a population. So in this case, we have 30 voters. And the 30 voters
prefer the three candidates ABC in the following way. 10 voters prefer A as first place, B as
second place, and C as third place. ABC are the order of preferences for these 10 voters.
For these 10 voters, it's BCA, just permuting ABC putting the A on the bottom,
and then permuting it once again to get CAB. So you see that these things are just a permutation,
meaning that the A is moved down to the bottom and then the B is moved down to the bottom to
get this column. You see that? So in other words, 10 people want A, 10 people want B,
10 people want C as their first place vote. Who should win this election?
Well, this election has a problem. Suppose that we were to select a winner. For example, A.
We have to choose somebody, A, B, or C. Suppose we chose A as a winner.
Well, in a way, A would be a very bad choice for a winner because of the fact that two-thirds of
the voters prefer C to A. Look at this. You see, these 10 voters prefer C. These 10 voters
prefer C. So two-thirds of the population would prefer C. So that seems like a poor choice
for an election to come out with a winner where two-thirds of the people want somebody else.
So, well, maybe B is a better candidate. Let's try B. Well, the problem with B being,
B is a bad choice. The reason B is a bad choice is, look, 20 people prefer A to B.
You see, these 10 prefer A to B. These 10 prefer A to B. So B is a bad choice. And in fact, here's
another one, C. Let's try C as the possible winner. Well, C is a bad choice because, look,
these 10 people prefer B to C. And these 10 people prefer B to C. No matter what winner we declare,
the problem is that two-thirds of the voting population will prefer a specific alternative
candidate. So this is the Condorcet Paradox. Well, in fact, it gets yet worse. This was a case of
three candidates. Suppose you had, for example, 10 candidates and it can work with any number of
candidates. But suppose you had 10 candidates and you labeled them A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J.
10 candidates. Then what you could have, some voters prefer them in that order. And then you
could do the same permutation business. That is putting the A at the bottom. Everybody slides
up one. And you have the same number of voters prefer them in that order. And then you could take
B off and put it at the bottom. So it would end with A, B. And the same number of people want
them and then put C at the bottom and so on. And so if your voting population were divided into 10
equal groups so that everyone preferred them, the candidates in this different order, no matter
what candidate you chose, there would be an alternative candidate, which 90% of the voting
population would prefer. And there's no choice, no matter which candidate you preferred, you have
that kind of outcome. This is the Condorcet paradox. In the early discussions of voting theory,
the two of the pioneers in this discussion about these issues about voting theory, as I've already
said, were Borda and Condorcet. And there was an issue between the two gentlemen.
And that had to do with what a concept called the Condorcet winner.
The Condorcet winner is a candidate who could beat any of the other candidates in a one-to-one
contest. So if there is an individual candidate who could beat every single one of the alternative
candidates pairwise, then that person might be viewed as an appropriate choice for a winner.
And many people think that if there is a Condorcet winner, which it's not necessarily
true that it's always the case that there is such a person, but if there is a Condorcet winner,
somebody who will beat every other candidate in a head-to-head contest, then you might want to
think that that person should be the election, the election should choose that person. Now,
notice, by the way, that in real life, we do not select such such people in our actual voting
practice. For example, in the Electoral College method of choosing presidential winners,
we can look at several years in which that result did not happen. In the 1992 election,
where the three candidates were George Bush Sr., Clinton, and Perot. If Perot, it was commonly
viewed that what happened was that Perot had taken voters away from Bush and that Bush would have
beaten Clinton in a head-to-head contest or Bush would have beaten Perot in a head-to-head contest.
So that Bush would have been the Condorcet winner of the popular opinion. Likewise,
in the year 2000 election, Gore would have beat Bush Jr. in a head-to-head contest and, of course,
would have beat Nader in a head-to-head contest. So Gore would have been the Condorcet winner in
that contest. So the Electoral College method doesn't choose the Condorcet winner necessarily.
Well, Borda and Condorcet were discussing these kinds of issues. And in one example,
and they were proposing different voting methods, and one of the voting methods was the Borda count
that we've already seen, where you weight the candidates and you add up different weights,
giving more value. A voter gives more points for their first choice candidate and then fewer for
the second choice, fewer for the third choice, and so on. And then you add up those points,
and that gives a weighted value of the voting. That's the Borda count. And there was a question
about whether the Borda count was a good method of voting. Well, Condorcet, and I think there was
a little bit of rivalry between these two people, Condorcet devised the following chart.
This is a chart of potential voting preferences among three candidates, ABC. And let me just
tell you what the chart involves. 30 people say A over B over C, 10 people B over C over A, and so
on. So that's the way to read this chart. It has the property that it has a, if you do the Borda
count, you see that B actually wins with the Borda count with 109. And I won't go through the
arithmetic to show that, but B is the winner. The reason the Condorcet created this example is that,
in fact, A is the Condorcet winner. In other words, A beats B in a head-to-head contest,
41 to 40, A beats C head-to-head 60 to 21. And you can go through the numbers and see
that, in fact, those numbers are correct. So the Borda count method did not select the Condorcet
winner. And this is a very famous example, centuries old, but it has an interesting
modern sequel to it. Namely, remember in the Condorcet paradox where you had ABC,
and then it was permuted BCA and permuted CAB, that what we really want to say about that is that
everyone is equal, right? If you have those three situations, the voters are saying that there's a
tie. A modern development by the mathematician Donald Sorry is that he took this classical example
and said, well, let's just remove all of those cycles where you could view those as a wash,
as equal. If you erase those cycles, you get this chart, where in this chart you see that,
in fact, B should be the winner over A, 28 to 20. Because when you erase all the cycles,
which you could view as equal, it turns out that B is the winner. So there's another way to look at
this example in which the concept of B being a better choice than the Condorcet winner in this
example illustrates that maybe the concept of the Condorcet winner as the obvious winner in
election is not necessarily correct. Isn't this interesting? I mean, there are just so many fascinating
things with these elections. So we have seen in practice that there are challenges with how to
choose the winner of an election. But of course, people have to actually choose the winner. In
trying to select the winner of the location in their bids for the year 2000 Olympic Games, there
were five major candidates near the end of the process who had submitted requests to be the
holder of the 2000 Olympic Games. And the method of voting at that time for choosing the winner
was to do the following. They started with all of the contenders, and each person who was voting
could vote for one of those cities as the winner. So each person on the Olympic Committee would
give a vote to one of those five cities. Now, in the first vote, the election came out that
Beijing was the winner of that election, 32 to 30 to 11 to 9 to 7. And then the method was that
they eliminated the last place city and then voted again on the remaining four cities. And the
election then changed to this one. In the second vote, 37 people were for Beijing. Again, Beijing
was the winner. Sydney was second. Manchester was third and Berlin was fourth. Then, since Berlin
had the fewest votes, it was eliminated. There were three contenders left. In the third vote,
Beijing again, now for the first, second, third time was the winner, 40 to 37 to 11.
Manchester was eliminated from the voting. And then in the last vote, Beijing lost the
election to Sydney. And the 2000 Olympics were held in Sydney. So this was an example of an
election procedure where Beijing, although winning the first three of those votes, lost the last vote
and in fact did not hold the Olympics. So that was an interesting example where we have to make a
choice about how to select a winner. And this particular method has had that result.
The same kind of paradoxes that we have seen associated with elections can occur in other
kinds of statistical strategies. Here's an example of a strategy by which you're trying to evaluate
the quality of an engine. A good way to do this would be to take a collection of engines
and take these engines and run the engines until they fail. And you see how many days go by before
the engine quits and then you record that number. And so after you record that number of failures,
then you have some data. So for example, and you have several different engines of the same
manufacturer, you're trying to decide whether engine made by A or B or C is the best of those
three manufacturers. And of course, an individual engine from a certain manufacturer may last a
different amount of time from a different one. And so you choose several engines to do this
experiment on. So you take four engines or five engines from each of these companies,
five engines from A, five from B, five from C, and you just run the engines until they fail.
So this engine lasted 1137 days, this one 993 days, and so on.
Now the question is to look at this data, look at these data about the time to failure of the
engine and decide which company should you buy your engine from. Maybe you're a manufacturer
of something that uses engines and you want to know what company to buy from. Well, you have
these data. A method for evaluating this is called the Kruskal-Wallis test, which is instead
of looking at the individual numbers, we simply put the numbers in order. That is, we say which
engine lasted the longest and we call that number one. And then which engine lasted the second
longest? Well, it was B's engine here who lasted 1088 days, 1088 days, and so it's number two.
And then the third longest running engine here lasted 993 days, and that's engine three. And then
the fourth one was down here, C's engine, 756 days, that's number four. Number five lasted
669 days, that's here, number six is here, and so on. Do you see what I mean? That we take all of
these days and we just ignore the big numbers, but we just put them in order and see the order
in which the engines failed. And then all we do is add up the ordinal number of these engines
for company A, B, and C. And we're looking for the company that has the smallest sum of those
ordinal numbers, because the smallest would mean that those were the ones that were closest to the
longest lasting. Well, if we do this in this case, we see that A's, the sum of the ordinal
numbers for the failure of A's engines was 37, B's 38, and C's 45, so A looks like the company
to buy engines from. But notice what happens if we do the process of eliminating the engines
from company C. Company C was a company whose engines we weren't going to buy, because look,
their ordinal numbers were quite a bit higher than the other companies. You certainly don't want
C's, so you might think, well, let's just throw out those engines from our experiment
and just look at these two rows of data. Look what happens. When we look at the two rows of data,
if we throw out these engines and then look at the ordinal numbers of the remaining engines,
what happens? It switches. Instead of A being the company that you'd buy your engines from,
you now conclude that it's B who makes the better engines. So you see that that's the
same paradox that we previously called the irrelevant is irrelevant paradox that arises in
this statistical evaluation of the quality of engines. All the examples in the last two lectures
force us to ask the question, is one analysis or one voting method correct and the other one's wrong?
And the answer is that the take home lesson is that summaries of complex situations require
contextual arguments to decide among them. The validity or the persuasiveness of data summaries
is truly a matter of opinion and judgment. Statistical and logical analyses can help us
in dealing with choosing arguments to find which are more persuasive and which systems to use in
various settings. But the point of these lectures is to say it's up to us to really think carefully
and evaluate the context of the statistical information. But statistics is a big help to
clarify what those issues really are. I'll look forward to seeing you next time.
