In the movie Idiocracy, Mike Judge imagines a world where the stupid inherit the Earth.
In this scenario, it's because the smoother brain types procreated recklessly while the
sensible practical PhD types planned and waited for the right time to have a kid, a right
time which never came, leading the dumb to simply outreproduce the smart.
So the world was a crumbling husk of deteriorating infrastructure, toppled buildings, and dead
crops watered with electrolytes.
It's become something of a meme in recent years to say that this movie belongs in the
documentary category, what with the world kind of feeling especially stupid lately.
But while Judge's premise for how the world got to be this stupid is maybe a bit flawed
and smacks of eugenics a bit, it does speak to a potential great filter that might threaten
advanced civilizations.
The civilization's technology outsmarts the civilization.
This is usually depicted as a judgement day scenario, where the computers and the robots
turn sentient and revolt against the humans, forcing them into servitude, or simply eliminating
them entirely before turning the universe into papercliffs.
But that's not how civilizations fall, it's rarely overnight, it's usually long and drawn
out and regardless of external forces, usually made possible by neglect from within.
Meaning if our technology overtakes us it likely won't just be because they got smarter,
but because we also got, well, dumber.
Here in the United States we just finished another school year and the kids are off for
summer, or whatever passes for summer these days.
These are kids that were raised with an iPad in their faces, digital natives for whom the
ability to access all the world's knowledge with just a couple of taps is second nature.
They can't imagine a world where the answer to any question they might have can't be
found right in their pocket.
And yet they go to a school every day, usually at ridiculously early hours, and have the
greatest source of information the world has ever seen taken away from them, and told
that they need to just remember things and read books.
I imagine this must be a very bizarre concept to them, you know, memory and computing.
This is a solved problem, it's all just out there, in the ether, in the cloud if you will.
Like there's no way that they could retain as much information in their heads as they
could hold in their hand in any given moment of the day.
Like what a step backward this must feel like.
And not to even mention that by the time they graduate, AI technology and robotics will advance
to the point that there'll be very few jobs for them to do.
So I'm sure the question gets asked all the time, why even learn things anymore?
It's kind of a valid question.
Now before I make the argument that the education system is going to have to fundamentally change
in the next coming decade, I should probably start by pointing out that the current education
system, the way we've been doing it our whole lives, it's not very old.
The whole idea of compulsory school, of making sure that everybody has like a baseline level
of education, that is a very, very new concept in the grand scheme of things.
For most of human history, education took the form of apprenticeships, where people
would learn a skill or trade by working underneath a master of that trade.
And that was if you were lucky, most people just toiled in the fields and rolled around
in the mud.
But even if you did become an apprentice, you learned how to perform that trade.
Maybe some business and financial stuff around it, but you didn't learn much outside of
that.
You just didn't need to.
Yeah, blacksmiths, farmers, weavers, millers, miners, woodworkers, architects, doctors,
inscribes.
Like, the whole role of the scribes was to capture and share information, and because
of that, they were pretty much the only people that knew how to read.
Even most kings couldn't read back then.
They had all their correspondence, you know, taken down and read to them by their scribes.
And as time went on, you know, literacy became a bit more of a status symbol amongst the
royals and the nobility.
It was a class thing, so, you know, institutions of higher learning became a thing after that.
But it would take hundreds of years for the idea of general schooling for everyone to
become a thing.
I bring all this up because it's starting to feel a little bit full circle when you
think about it.
Because once upon a time, we offloaded the maintenance of knowledge to a privileged
class of people, and now we're starting to do it again.
To technology.
You know, we used to not learn things because that knowledge was irrelevant to us.
Now we don't learn things because it's ubiquitous.
Like knowledge used to be power, now it's everywhere.
Now, some might argue that the purpose of school was never really about educating the
population.
It was about creating skilled workers.
It's about having people just smart enough so they can work the machines to keep the
economy going, or to make weapons to make our enemies go all-explode-y.
But even that is increasingly under threat.
Like robots have been encroaching into our factories and warehouses for decades, but
now we're starting to see, along with an explosion of AI, an explosion of humanoid robots that
are designed to be easily trainable to do anything we can do.
We'll talk more about that later, but what we're seeing right now is both knowledge
jobs and manual labor jobs facing major disruptions at the same time.
So if you're a kid in school, or maybe an adult who wants to go back to school, what
exactly are you supposed to do?
How do you prepare for this?
We're facing a literally unprecedented situation, where really the only place to look for any
kind of guidance is science fiction.
Returning to our original premise, let's look at the movie Idiocracy.
Just in case you haven't seen the movie, the main gist is that our main character, who
happens to be named Joe, gets frozen and then kind of accidentally forgotten, and he
winds up waking up in the year 2505, so 500 years in the future.
And when he wakes up, it turns out that the average IQ has fallen so much that he is now
the smartest person in the world.
His character, by the way, he was in the army and he was chosen for this experiment specifically
because he was basically the most average person in the world.
So yeah, average Joe, who is now not so average.
So the movie spends a lot of time portraying a world where everybody's gotten so dumb
that nobody can run the machines or the computers anymore.
Long as a dystopian mess, and it's just kind of basically a big send up of popular culture,
kind of a reductio ad absurdum statement on how dumb our society is today.
What they don't spend a lot of time on is explaining how the economy works in this scenario.
People do have jobs, Dax Shepard's character is a lawyer, and a terrible one.
There are hospitals and police and baristas at Starbucks that provide a little happy ending
with their caffeine.
Don't get me started on the waitstaff at Thudruckers, or what it becomes.
So people do work, and they're obsessed with money.
So it seems like in this world, they didn't quite come up with the AI and robotics technology
to put everybody out of work.
It does seem to be based on a capitalist system where people have to work for money.
And somehow the company stays afloat even though everyone's incompetent.
In fact, the only part of the movie that really gives any kind of a hint into what the economy
looks like in the world of idiocracy is when Joe, as the smartest person in the world,
convinces them to use water on their crops.
So again, for anybody who hasn't seen the movie, there's a company called Brando that
makes this energy drink that's kind of like, I don't know, it's like a mix between Gatorade
and Monster Energy drink, and it's what everybody drinks all the time.
And they've been drinking it for so long that in fact, when Joe asks for some water to drink,
they all look at him like he's crazy because water is what you put in the toilet.
In fact, they bought into the whole Brando thing so much that they use it to water their
crops, and they do so because according to their marketing, it has electrolytes, which
is what plants crave.
But Brando's got what plants crave.
It's got electrolytes.
What are electrolytes?
Do you even know?
It's what they used to make Brando.
Yeah, but why did they use them to make Brando?
Because Brando's got electrolytes.
Anyway, it turns out the electrolytes in Brando was building up in the soil and killing the
plants and was threatening a famine, so he convinces them to use water instead.
And this turns out to be disastrous because it causes Brando's stock to go down and they
wind up firing everybody, which is a problem because apparently, literally, everybody works
for Brando.
So it's depicted as an inevitable future where one corporation runs the world and everybody
works for that one company.
And this is similar to the movie WALL-E.
In WALL-E, the world is run by one company called the Buy-In-Large Corporation, who have
completely trashed the planet, leading humans to escape to giant luxury liners in space,
the mainship being called the Axiom.
In this world, humans have basically become nothing more than consumers.
Their infants, really, is what it comes down to.
They sit in floating recliners all day long with a screen in front of their faces, just
like the mobiles that hang over babies' cribs and whatnot.
They just consume entertainment all day long and buy things off of the endlessly personalized
ads, which are obviously inspired by social media.
Now, there is some debate around exactly how the economy works on the Axiom because everything
on the ship is automated.
Robots perform all the necessary labor and whatnot, but people aren't just given everything.
They seem to have to pay for it with ship credits.
Now, how they accrue these ship credits, I'm not sure.
I don't know exactly what you would call a system like this, but a user on Stack Exchange
put it like this, and I think it explains it pretty well.
It has aspects of post-scarcity combined with basic income of some sort, but it's not socialist
communists as there is a sense of property ownership.
The resources aren't communally managed and there is no labor involved.
Now, the Jetsons have an interesting take on this, and I've always pointed to the Jetsons
whenever we talk about, like, robots taking over all the jobs and stuff like that because,
you know, we all want to live in the Jetsons world, but nobody wants to make the changes
that would be necessary to live in that world.
By the way, quick aside, the Jetsons came out in 1962, literally like just a few weeks
after Kennedy announced the goal of landing on the moon, which I find crazy.
The Jetsons were basically a future version of the Flintstones, and it only ran for one
season, 1962 to 1963, with a brief revival in 1980.
The old Nostalgia Circuit.
Also, and I'll get to the point here in a second, I'm also blown away that of all
the live-action remakes of animated movies that we've seen over the years, I cannot
believe they've never done the Jetsons.
Seriously, how cool would that be?
The Jetsons features a family consisting of George Jetson, Jane his wife, daughter Judy,
and his boy, Elroy, and their dog, Astro.
It's basically just designed to pipe a bunch of bad space buns into our heads.
Now, being that this was conceived in the early 60s, the social dynamics are a bit outdated.
Women drivers, that's the problem.
You know what you need is a wife to do your cooking.
So yeah, George flies into his job every day at Spacely Sprockets while his wife tends
to the home and, you know, spends all his money.
Although she doesn't have to do a lot of tending to her home because they have a robot
housekeeper named Rosie that does most of the housework.
So yeah, George still commutes to work every day and struggles to find parking, even though
his car folds up into a briefcase.
They couldn't conceive of remote work back then, even though they do have a video phone.
So in this world, people still have to work.
But George only has to work a few hours a day, which sounds great, but he's apparently
pretty miserable in this job because, you know, a trope of the time was this hard ass
boss always on his case, threatening to fire him.
So robots do most of the heavy lifting in this world and human work is basically just
involves pressing buttons.
But it still upholds the standard of the 60s with the nuclear family and the father being
the lone breadwinner.
And even though he only works a few hours a day, he's able to support a whole family
and live a middle class existence.
So while it's never really explained in detail, probably because they were too busy
coming up with space puns, one can assume that in this scenario, George gets some percentage
of the robots productivity shared with him.
This imagines a world where the company uses robots to do all the labor and then the spoils
of that labor are shared with the employees.
I may be talking out of my butt here, but I kind of feel like this points to the ethos
of the post-war era where people were expected to get a job and stay there for all their
working years and build up a pension that they can later retire off of.
I feel like there used to be more of a sense of shared responsibility between the employer
and the employee back then, but I wasn't around back then.
So again, I may be pulling an ace ventura here, but when I say that this is a future
that everybody wants, but nobody wants to make happen, what I mean is like people have
been saying for decades now that automation is a good thing because it makes each person
far more productive.
But that's only a good thing when that person gets a share of the profits from that productivity.
You know, otherwise it's just a cost saving measure from the company and people wind up
losing their jobs, which is pretty much what actually happens in reality, because ultimately
companies are more beholden to their shareholders than they are to their employees in our world.
And exactly how they make this work in the fictional cartoon world of the Jetsons, I'm
not sure, but we've only got 38 years to figure it out because the Jetsons takes place
in the year 2062.
But maybe the most obvious depiction of a post-scarcity society in science fiction is, of course,
Star Trek.
There's an entire book on this called Trekonomics, which I have not read, but I encourage you
to check it out if you're interested in this whole thing.
But in Star Trek, the whole system of people working to produce things that people can
buy, I'll stop that now, that's all totally out the window because they've got the replicator.
If you happen to have been living under a rock this whole time and have no idea what
a replicator is, it's kind of like a molecular 3D printer that can just basically make whatever
you want.
In Star Trek, the governing body, the United Federation of Planets, they do away with currency
completely.
People don't work so that they can make money to keep a roof over their heads, but they
do work for a civilization that has no money.
People seem really busy.
But in Star Trek lore, people don't work for money to acquire wealth.
They work to feel a sense of purpose, as Picard explains in Star Trek First Contact.
The economics of the future are somewhat different.
You see, money doesn't exist in the 24th century.
No money.
You mean you don't get paid?
The acquisition of wealth is no longer the driving force in our lives.
We work to better ourselves and the rest of humanity.
This sounds great.
Also, uh, naive.
Like in the other examples that I just listed, the focus is really more on the system in
place that accommodates for full automation.
But in Star Trek, I don't know, it seems to require a much deeper transformation, like
effectively turning off everyone's natural instinct to consume and hoard.
Like in Wally, people are just turned into consumers, but in Star Trek, consuming is
not a thing.
Yeah, in Star Trek, that natural human ambition that's basically led us to wreck the planet
so far.
That's been turned away from material possessions and wealth and toward personal fulfillment.
Value is placed on meaning and purpose instead of external things.
Which again, that sounds wonderful and, I mean, I don't know, maybe in a system where
literally anything that you could possibly want could be created with the push of a button.
Maybe the whole concept of wealth falls apart and that natural drive for purpose pushes
people inward.
Maybe it's just a natural consequence of that.
But there is also something kind of yikesy about a society where everyone's natural impulses
have been, you know, rewired or redirected in the way that the state deems appropriate.
In fact, you could argue that the Borg is kind of like the flip side of that post-scare
city coin, you know, when that sort of collective thought is taken to the extreme.
Now, I know many of you are Star Trek fans and there is a lot of lore in this universe
that I'm leaving out.
So yeah, anything that I missed or anybody that thinks that I'm wrong, just go school
me in the comments.
But yeah, however you slice it, that sort of Star Trek collectivist utopia seems impossibly
far away considering where we're starting from.
I mean, unless we have a complete and total breakdown of society and have to, you know,
rebuild everything from scratch.
Also, there would need to be some technology to happen so that replicators could be a thing.
Because right now we seem to be more heading toward the whole one or two corporations running
everything model.
Whether that turns out to be more like Wally or idiocracy remains to be seen, but we better
start thinking about it because it's about to get real.
Yep, the robots are coming.
So we've all heard about the Tesla bot.
We've seen the acrobatics of Boston Dynamics Atlas robot, but these machines are progressing
fast.
So I did a video a while back about humanoid robots and why it's a different thing from
the kind of robots that have been used in manufacturing and stuff for a long time.
I was personally questioning like why humanoid robots would exist at all, like why do we
assume that the human form is the perfect form?
And you can go watch that video to see what the entire argument turns out to be, but what
it basically boils down to is that it's not necessarily that a humanoid robot is a higher
performing robot than say, you know, an assembly line kind of robot.
It's just that we live in a world that is designed for this form factor, basically.
So the humanoid robot is basically designed to function in a world that has been designed
around what we look like.
So if there's any kind of robot that's going to wind up taking over human jobs, it's one
that works and functions like we do.
And there's a lot of interesting humanoid robots on the way.
We can start with the Atlas robot.
So Boston Dynamics has been testing out the Atlas robot for years at doing.
You've seen all these videos where it's juggling and dancing and doing flips and all kinds
of crazy stuff.
Well, that was all a hydraulic robot.
This new one is an all-electric robot.
And by the way, that original Atlas was kind of more of a tech demonstrator, more of an
R&D platform.
This one is actually designed to be sold and put into work in factories and stuff.
They just revealed the new Electric Atlas.
This one video is the only thing that we've seen, but it's pretty mind blowing.
So there's not a whole lot of info about it right now, but we do know that they're
set to be used in a Hyundai plant.
Hyundai actually owns Boston Dynamics.
So it's going to get some real world views pretty soon.
Sanctuary AI is a company we haven't heard a whole lot from, but their Phoenix robot
has possibly the most dextrous hands with 20 degrees of freedom.
It's based on an AI robotics platform called Carbon that they had created separately a few
years back.
And they'll be pilot testing it with an auto parts manufacturer called Magna, who is an
investor in the company.
Another super impressive robot is from a company called Figure AI.
It's the Figure 01 robot.
And this is sort of open AI's entrance into robotics that's based on GPT-4.
And when it talks to you, it talks in an eerily human way.
Great.
Can I have something to eat?
Sure thing.
Great.
Can you explain why you did what you just did while you pick up this trash?
On it.
So I gave you the apple because it's the only edible item I could provide you with from
the table.
And in February of this year, they raised $675 million from investors, including open
AI, Microsoft, and Jeff Bezos.
And they expect to be piloting it at a BMW plant by the end of the year.
A rather unique entrance into the humanoid robot sphere is One X Technologies and their
robot called Eve.
Unlike others, this one is not bipedal.
It's actually on wheels, so it rolls around everywhere, although they are working on a
bipedal version that will be coming out later.
This can be controlled remotely or operate autonomously, and it's been working in some
warehouses since 2019.
And this is the first robot that's actually on the market and available to buy.
I think they sell it for around $16,000.
And of course, there's Tesla's Optimus Gen 2.
While this hasn't actually been put to use in any factories or anything, it's getting
close to field tests, and Tesla obviously has plenty of factories that it can put it
in.
I'm excited that they would go on sale in 2025, but let's not hold our breath on that.
While it's definitely more trendy to dunk on Tesla these days, I've got to say I'm
actually really impressed with what they've been able to do with this robot in such a
short amount of time.
And last but not least is a company called Aptronic, and their robot called Apollo.
This was developed at the University of Texas in Austin, and it's actually had some involvement
with NASA.
They plan on maybe using this in some space situations.
The company's CEO claimed that it could be useful in, quote, construction, oil and gas,
electronics production, retail, home delivery, elder care, and countless more areas.
And Mercedes-Benz plans to put them in some factories starting this year.
Okay, so what does all this mean exactly?
Like, do we need to be worried about this or not?
It kind of depends.
I think depending on what kind of person you are, it's either an existential threat that's
going to doom us all, or it's going to be the greatest thing that ever happened.
The author Tony Siba recently chimed in about the humanoid robots thing on his website,
RethinkX, and he's got a lot to say about it.
So Tony Siba, if you don't know, he's somebody who talked a while back about autonomous cars
and the EV revolution and stuff.
He points out, oftentimes in his talks, how automobiles completely displace horses between
1907 and 1922.
But his point in this blog is that we are the horses.
He talks about the humanoid robot revolution as being a disruption that's caused by the
convergence of a few different factors.
One being sensors, computer hardware and software, actuators, and battery technology.
He predicts the humanoid robots will have a cost capability of $10 an hour by 2035 and
under $0.10 an hour before 2045 and will eventually approach zero.
And you may see some of those videos and you think that they're clumsy and they're awkward
and everything, and they are, but they're quickly getting better.
I mean, keeping in mind, as always, that they are the most expensive and least capable they
will ever be right now.
But even if they are like half the speed of humans, the fact that they never get tired,
they never need breaks, that gives them an automatic edge.
In fact, on assembly line situations, they might never run out of power because they
could just probably plug in wherever it is that they're standing.
Also robots can collectively learn.
So if one robot gets taught a certain thing and knew a different way to sort things or
whatever on an assembly line, immediately all the other robots will know how to do it.
So something he's suggesting in his blog post is that this is basically going to be a turn
into a production arms race amongst countries to build this robot labor force.
So this is going to be sort of a force multiplier in terms of how fast this stuff gets adopted.
Now in this blog post, he paints it mostly in glowing terms about how this disruption
will also fuel disruptions in energy, transportation, and food.
And with birth rates declining, robots can kind of take over for a shrinking labor market
in the long run.
And he suggests that it might be more of a soft landing.
It's not going to be a really immediate thing that for the next couple of decades robots
will probably just supplement humans, kind of doing the jobs that we don't want to do,
filling in the gaps in the labor force and whatnot before, yeah, eventually just replacing
us in the labor market altogether.
We kind of have a couple of decades to figure out how we're going to do this, but it is
going to take a completely new rethinking of economics as we know it.
So we've heard about universal basic income, talked about a million times.
There is a new twist on that that Sam Altman from OpenAI kind of put out there recently.
He talks about universal basic compute.
He suggested in the future as AI kind of takes over all of our cognitive load for all the
work that we do that instead of sharing money in terms of universal basic income, we would
share in the computational processing that goes on.
So universal basic compute, kind of insinuating that computing will become currency.
And I feel like whether or not you think this is a good or a bad idea depends on whether
you trust those at the top to, you know, find solutions that work for people and not companies.
I fully understand any skepticism of that, but I say it all the time.
I think things are probably going to get worse before they get better because we've got to figure
something out and figuring things out takes a little bit of time.
And all I know is that what we're operating on right now is not going to be sufficient
in a couple of decades, talking like yourselves about that.
But anyway, let's just put the existential dread part of the video behind us and say we
do figure it out at some point.
Let's get back to the original question.
Why learn anything anymore?
I say because people will still be people.
Yes, many people will be complacent and be happy with never having to know anything.
That's true now.
That's always been true.
But many people, many of you included, I'm sure if you watch this channel, many people
are curious and they hunger for knowledge and they'll seek out understanding of things
even if there is a simpler way out there to get that information, you know.
Many people are skeptical and need to see things for themselves.
This has also always been true.
So regardless of what happens to society, there's always going to be some people out
there who just want to learn things, who experience the joy of disparate knowledge, who revel in
the ephemera of it all.
And honestly, that might be like the guiding principle of this channel when it all comes
down to it.
You know, I just think that life is more interesting when you know things, you know, that random
information that kind of just gets into your brain over time, they start to connect with
each other.
It just makes life more fun, it makes life more interesting to have all those little
connections in there.
Like, it kind of makes me think of emergence theory, you know, that knowledge isn't just
about memorizing a bunch of stuff, it's about making connections between things that you've
never made a connection with before, you know.
The human brain, after all, it's just a collection of cells.
And it's how these cells connect with each other that makes the magic happen.
That's why it's called a connectome.
You know, an ant by itself is nothing, but millions of ants working together can create
a sophisticated society and build megastructures.
You know, and pieces of information in your head work the same way.
It's just all random information.
It's only when those pieces of information connect that you get ideas and inspiration.
And ideas and inspiration are exciting, you know.
They make life interesting.
They give you aha moments where you have to rethink everything you thought you knew.
They can give you purpose.
And that's the greatest precursor to happiness and longevity, having a purpose in your life.
So maybe in the future, the education system will pivot to reflect that, you know.
Making kids how to think more than what to think, how to be critical of the information
and misinformation that they receive, and encouraging nerding out on things.
It might be based more on connecting the dots and finding inspiration in things.
There's a quote by E.O.
Wilson that I think sums this all up pretty well when he said, quote, we are drowning
in information while starving for wisdom.
The world henceforth will be run by synthesizers, people who can put together the right information
at the right time, think critically about it, and make important choices wisely.
So maybe eventually education will shift to focus on that.
So yeah, why bother learning things?
I would say because you're planting seeds, they'll later sprout into passions and interests
that you never knew you had.
And that's really important stuff.
One passion that I have is saving time, and that's why I only spend two minutes a day
preparing my lunch and dinner from today's sponsor, Factor.
Yeah, in the future they may have replicators to get your food faster, but today Factor
is about the closest thing to it.
Factor's a meal delivery service where you can tell them how many meals you want each
week, what kind of meal plan you want to be on, like calorie smart, vegetarian, Keto,
you name it, and they send you a box with pre-made restaurant quality meals that heat
up in the microwave in only two minutes.
It's like ordering from a meal delivery app except it takes less time, costs way less
money, and the best part, I think anyway, they're actually healthy.
Factor's chefs work side by side with dieticians to craft meals that are not just delicious
but low calorie, and hit your target macros and all that stuff.
They also use fresh ingredients from family farms and they're not frozen.
Like trust me, I hate frozen dinners, they're always weird, textures and freezer burn and
whatnot.
Factor's got none of that.
They've also got delicious breakfast and gourmet options if you're just too good to
eat like the rest of us please.
And don't get me started on the smoothies, they're just the bomb dot com dot org dot
net.
They fill me up, they get me through my day, I enjoy eating them, and it keeps my waistline
in check.
So yeah, that's not much more than I could ask for.
I've probably heard me mention Factor before, and if you haven't tried it, I don't know,
I'll give you the skeptical type, whatever, I respect that.
But if you're curious, there's a special deal that might get you to pull the trigger.
If you go to factor75.com or click on the link down below and enter the code JOKESCOT50
at checkout, you can get 50% off your first box and 20% off each box for the next month.
50% off, guys, that's like, that's like half off.
Math.
I really think you'll like it.
They're a sponsor I actually pay for personally because I became a huge fan of it, and now
you can try it for a huge discount.
So one more time, because if you don't repeat it, they just delete it, click on the link
down below in the description or just scan the QR code here and enter JOKESCOT50 at checkout.
You'll get half off the first box and 20% off your next month of boxes.
Give it a try.
I think you'll like it.
Anyway, I want to hear what you guys think about the whole humanoid robot thing and why
we should learn things and whatnot.
What do you enjoy learning?
Talk about it down in the comments below.
Please do like and share this video if this is the first time you've ever been here.
I just am so glad that you found the channel.
Thank you, algorithm.
Maybe you can check out this video.
They think that you might like it, and I think you might like it too, but I'm biased.
It's me.
But if you did like it, please do give it a thumbs up.
It kind of helps to get it in front of more people.
And if you haven't subscribed to this channel before, maybe check out a few other videos.
And if you like them, give me a subscribe because I come back with videos every Monday.
Anyway, that's it for today.
You guys go out there, have an eye opening, rest of the week, stay safe, and I'll see
you next time.
Love you guys.
Take care.
