For many of you who took biology 30 or more years ago, all we had was the world of the
atom.
But of course, atoms are pretty useful things to know about.
Atoms make up compounds, compounds, some are biological in nature, and eventually up the
chain you get to us.
However, if you want to understand why the atom works the way it does, you have to go
to ever smaller scales.
You leave the world of atoms and enter the world of what are called elementary particles.
So in lectures four and five, we are going to spend a substantial amount of time talking
about the world of elementary particles.
I refer to these objects as the denizens of the quantum world, and we will meet the denizens
in their properties in some fairly great detail.
Now, even after we get to elementary particles, there are going to be some problems left.
Because you see, in science and particularly in this kind of physics, we're trying to find
explanations for everything.
But in order to have an explanation for everything, you actually have to be able to describe everything.
So string theory is an attempt to do that.
But remember, we've never actually seen a string.
So the only tool we will have to explore string theory will be with mathematics.
So we're going to spend a lot of time with mathematics, trying to tie together the mathematical
properties from the objects or the denizens of the quantum world, and put those together
and achieve this picture of a broader explanation where we will understand the nature of space
and time in a more complete manner.
Now, there was this process called the power of ten, which is a convenient way to think
about where we were going.
And we carried it out ten times, and we found ourselves in the world of the atom.
I have here a typical representation of an atom.
We see a blob surrounded by other blobs.
But these pictures actually make some sense because, in fact, they are representations
of a mathematical entity called the wave function.
The mathematics of understanding the world of the atom was essentially constructed in
the 1930s through heroic efforts by many, many physicists and leads us to this thing
called quantum theory.
We will see in subsequent lectures that quantum theory describes a very bizarre aspect of
our universe, so bizarre that many, many people have a very difficult time accepting that
quantum theory can be true.
One of these people was Albert Einstein, who, even to the end of his life, expressed
grave doubts that such a bizarre kind of mathematics could be part of our universe.
From our perspective today, however, we can defend this point of view in the way that
scientists always defend their beliefs, namely, quantum theory works and we know it works
because, well, for you who are hearing these lectures, most of you walk around with cell
phones.
Those cell phones work because quantum theory works.
In fact, quantum theory with all of its bizarre aspects is the best tested piece of science
in existence.
There is a very famous experiment called the G-2 experiment that has been running now for
about 40 years and what the G-2 experiment does is rigorously test the ideas of quantum
theory.
We will be coming back to this in our next lecture when I will talk about quantum theory
some more, but this lecture is just devoted to a trip to the quantum world where we are
going to meet the inhabitants or the denizens, as I like to refer to them, because we are
going to meet many a strange entity in this world of quantum mechanics.
When we were talking about the atom, there were these blobs in our illustration and these
blobs represent the electron, but the electron turns out to be very peripatetic.
It doesn't like to sit in one place.
In fact, the way to think about it is electrons are kind of like bugs that buzz around the
atom.
Atoms, in fact, are surprisingly empty.
You want to know how empty?
Well, think about a single blood cell in your body in comparison to your entire being, very
great distance in size.
That's about the difference between the size of the atom and the size of the nucleus.
The nucleus of the atom is to the atom as a single blood cell is to your body.
So atoms are mostly just empty space, incredibly empty space, and yet we think of them as
very solid things because atoms are the building blocks for molecules.
Molecules essentially are what you need to get to us because they are our basic building
blocks.
Yet atoms are mostly empty.
The idea that the atom actually has parts is relatively new.
It starts with an electrochemist named George Johnstone Stoney who lived from 1826 to 1911.
In 1874, he was performing some electroplating experiments, you know, electroplating.
You take two metals, electrodes, you put them in a solution, you pass a current through
them and you can get molecules from one of the metals to migrate to the other, electroplating.
Stoney was in the laboratory performing such an exercise and he was watching and measuring
the flow of the materials at how fast they build up the rates from one electrode to the
other and it occurred to him that he could understand what was going on if the atom could
be broken into pieces.
And that one of these pieces had to be much, much smaller than the other piece.
Now this is actually very interesting because this is the first time in history someone
had the idea that atoms could be broken apart.
In fact, the very concept of the atom is quite old.
We can trace the notion of the atom as far back as to 480 BC.
Lucipus of Myelitis and democracies of Abduer, who was Lucipus's student, proposed that
if you started with ordinary matter and you broke it into smaller and smaller pieces,
at some point you would reach an object that could no longer be divided.
And this was the atmost, the most fundamental entity in the physical universe.
And so for the period between democracies and Lucipus to Stony, no one had ever thought
of atoms breaking apart because in fact the very definition of atom was something that
could not be broken apart.
So Stony's idea in 1874 is a revolutionary idea that atoms have parts just like machines
have parts.
And eventually after having this dream that the atom could be taken apart, the smaller
PC eventually gave a name to.
We know this name very well.
It's called the electron.
So the electron starts off as a dream to explain something.
The Nobel laureate physicist Leon Letterman has stated that roughly speaking about a third
of the economic activity in the U.S. is in some ways related to manipulating electrons.
And that's actually kind of right if you think about it because, well, we need electrons
to make computers work.
We need electrons to call our friends.
We have electronics in the communication industry.
Most of entertainment is somehow related to moving electrons around.
So electrons are pretty important things.
And yet they start from this one guy's dream in trying to understand the dissociation of
electroplating.
So that's the beginning of our journey to the small.
The world starts in the small for us with atoms and electrons.
Now of course, atoms can be disassociated.
We talked about the fact that atoms can be broken apart into electrons.
And in the interior of atoms, we find two other entities.
Here we have our representation in our animation.
We have a set of blue balls.
Those are representing the protons.
The pink balls are representing the neutrons.
And those are the other parts of the atom which were basically discovered around the 1930s.
So as we encounter this world of the denizens, we first get to a picture where in fact, coming
to a picture of the atom is a story of itself.
You see, we didn't know what atoms looked like for a very long time.
The first person to accurately give us a picture of the atom is the physicist Chadwick who
tells us that in the interior of the atom is an incredibly massive thing.
It turns out to be the proton.
Here we find out there's another object there which is the neutron.
So we come to this picture of the atom through struggle and experiment because that's the
way that science works.
But it turns out that's not the end of the story.
Around 1969, when I was graduating from high school, a set of experiments were performed
at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Facility.
Slack is the acronym.
And what was done at Slack was essentially, well prosaically, we can understand it this
way.
Suppose I had a shoe box and I wanted to know if there was something inside of the box.
What would I do?
And I was told I couldn't open it.
What would I do?
How about shake it?
Very natural thing to do.
You take it, you shake it, and listen to see if there's something rattling.
Then you say, yep, there's something inside there or not.
Well essentially, these experiments at Stanford, the deep inelastic scattering experiments,
DIS is the acronym, essentially did the same thing not to a shoe box but to protons.
Basically protons were shaken very hard to see if anything rattled inside.
And the surprising result was, yes, we heard something rattling inside.
Now these things inside, which came as somewhat of a surprise but also were expected from
another point of view, were eventually these objects inside were called quarks, named by
the physicist Marie Guilman.
So let us in our visit to the world of the microcosm.
And I understand, of course, that for those of you who have taken lectures before, there
was a nice course called Particle Physics for the Non-Physicists, a tour of the microcosmos.
So you can actually go back and review in much greater detail than I'm going to have
time to because remember for us, this is just a way stop on the way to string theory.
So we're just going someplace.
But you can review this strange world in much more detail, I'm going to make a brief run
through the world.
So let me tell you about some of the things that we know about the world of the microcosm.
Well, the first thing is that it's populated, not the copiously.
In addition to the electron, nature has copies of the electron out there.
What are these copies?
Well, look at my table here and you'll see the letter E. That stands for electron.
That's the thing that Mr. Stoney sort of gave us as his greatest gift to mankind.
Nature makes a copy of the electron.
It's an object that is 200 times as heavy as the electron.
But in all other ways, this object is an electron.
It's called a mu particle.
And then roughly 10 years ago, we found out that nature produced a second copy of the
electron.
This object is in all ways an electron, but it's 1700 times as heavy as the electron.
It's called the tau particle.
Now, in addition to these copies of the electron, which are just more and more massive, there
are also particles that constitute a different kind of copy of the electron.
These other objects have no charge at all.
They're called neutrinos.
The neutrinos seem to come as copies of the charged leptons.
The electron has a neutral copy called the electron neutrino.
The muon has a neutral copy called the muon neutrino.
And the tau particle has a neutral copy called the tau neutrino.
All neutrinos are incredibly light.
In fact, up until quite recently, we scientists were convinced that neutrinos had no mass
at all.
Through a stunning set of experiments performed principally at a facility in Japan called
super cameo kande, we've learned that in fact neutrinos have mass.
And this is a very important fact because neutrinos are by far the most numerous object
in the cosmos.
And the fact that even if they have a little mass, if they have mass, if they are so great
in number, that means that there's lots of room for neutrinos to carry the mass in the
universe.
So the fact that they're light is a big deal.
It's not a tiny deal at all.
In addition to this family of objects, which are called leptons, there are other objects.
Let's talk about, before we go to these other objects, let's talk a little bit about properties,
however.
The electron, the muon and the tau have charge.
All the neutrinos are neutral.
Every single one of these objects behaves like a little spinning ball.
It spins at a rate that you can neither speed up nor slow down.
We physicists have a special name for this rate.
We call it H-bar.
And in particular, we say that the electron spins at a rate of one-half H-bar.
But that's also true of the muon, the tau particle, and the neutrinos.
All of them spin at a rate of a half H-bar.
Here we have a different picture.
That's the other set of denizens in the world of the microcosm.
In the interior of protons and neutrons are these smaller bits of matter.
The quarks.
In a neutron, we say that there are two down quarks and an up quark.
If you look at our illustration, you'll see that there are these little balls.
There's a red-blue ball with the letters D next to them.
Those are down quarks.
And then there's a yellow ball with a letter U. That's an up quark.
So a neutron is, in fact, a composite of three objects.
In a similar manner, if we look at a proton, we see two up quarks and a down quark.
So the red ball has a U next to it.
That means it's an up quark.
The yellow ball has a U next to it.
It's an up quark.
And the blue ball in the proton has a D next to it, so it's a down quark.
So this is how we believe nuclear matter is put together.
However, the number of quarks, interestingly enough, also comes in six.
Remember in our leptons, there was the electron and two copies, and then all the neutral particles
were a total of six objects.
If you look at this table, you see that there's six objects once again.
They're the up and down quarks, which made up the interiors of the protons and neutrons.
Then there are charmed and strange quarks, and these are their names.
And then finally, top and beautiful quarks.
So there are six quarks, except that that's not right.
They're actually 18.
Well, let's see.
This times three is 18, but if you look back at our picture of the proton, I assigned a
color to each quark, and they were exactly three colors.
So quarks come in this different set of varieties that we call flavors.
As you go down this table, we say quarks change your flavor, but each flavor comes in three
colors, or a total of 18.
So these are some of the major denizens in the world of the microcosm, the quarks and
the leptons.
Now, these objects have numbers of properties, and one of the most interesting we touched
on in a previous lecture, the discovery by the physicist Dirac.
Paul Dirac set out to do one thing, but because of the power of mathematics, actually did
more than he expected to do.
He wanted to describe electrons.
He wrote an equation for this purpose, but he wound up describing electrons and their
antiparticles, the so-called positron.
You'll remember perhaps from that lecture that I said that antimatter is kind of a
mirror copy of ordinary particles with the property that if you take an antiparticle
and put it at the same location as a particle, you get nothing but energy out.
They precisely destroy each other obeying Einstein's famous equation, E equals MC square.
So for every up quark that I showed you on that table, there is an anti-up quark.
For every down quark on that table, there is an anti-down quark.
For every charm quark on that table, there is an anti-charm quark.
For every top quark on that table, there is an anti- Top Quark.
For every strange quark on that table, there is an anti-strange quark, and for every beautiful
quark on that table, well, what is anti-beauty?
It's an anti-beautiful quark.
So antimatter is real.
not just science fiction. Of course, science fiction writers have made great use of the
notion of antimatter. Starships are driven across galaxies with engines that run on antimatter.
I talked about the fact that quarks spin, and it turns out that quarks spin like electrons
spin both at the rate of h-bar. They can spin clockwise at a rate of h-bar, or counter-clockwise
at a rate of h-bar. And so spin turns out to be an important attribute of the world
of the microcosm, but it even plays a more fundamental role that we're going to get to
in string theory, so I want to pay some attention to this.
If we look at particles that have spin, then all of the ones that I've told you about so
far share a common property. They spin at the same rate. This property of spinning at
the same rate has a very interesting consequence. You're sitting comfortably in your chairs,
you're not passing through the chairs, and you probably don't think that's very remarkable,
but from the point of view of physics, it actually is a remarkable fact. So physicists
like to ask questions like, how can you sit in chairs? Well, one reason that you can sit
comfortably in chairs is that the chair supports you. That's kind of obvious, but why does
the chair support you? The answer turns out to be electricity. The electrons in your body
basically are repelled by the electrons in the chair, and that's the force that supports
you. In fact, most of the forces that keep me from pushing one hand through the other
are in fact electrical in nature. Most of the things that we see in the world around
us are contact forces, and their underlying cause is electrical. Now, suppose I could
turn off all electrical charges. Remember, for physicists, we look at the world in terms
of mathematics. So it's a set of equations. So I get a chance to change equations however
I feel. So let's assume that I can turn the charge off in my equations. What happens then?
Well interestingly enough, you still would not, well, you would dissipate for other reasons,
but let's assume that I keep you together for that purpose. It turns out the chair
would still support you interestingly enough, not because of electrical forces, but because
objects that spin at the rate of the electron have the property that no two of them can
occupy the same place at the same time. So even if you turn off the electrical charges,
there's still a residual kind of repulsion. It's called the exchange force. Now, this
exchange force is incredibly important because the exchange force is, and this fact that
no two fermions can, that's their formal name, fermions. We call these things fermions.
No two fermions can occupy the same place at the same time or more precisely have all
the same quantum numbers. That's the way we physicists like to phrase this. Well, when
I look at people, I say, well, wait a minute, you're not a soup of quarks and leptons. You're
much more interesting to look at. Why is that? And the reason turns out to be because in
the world of the microcosm, not only are the denizens we've met there, the quarks and
the leptons, there are other objects that hold these previous entities in fixed locations,
in fixed configurations. Now, these other things are called forces. So let's visit the forces
for a moment, at least in the world of the microcosm and see sort of what is there.
Well, if we go to consider the forces, there's one obvious one from our experience. That's
the force of gravity. It is responsible for you sitting in your chair. It is responsible
for galactic formation, planetary motion. We've recently started to use the gravitation
forces to take planets around stars. And of course, there's a famous story of Sir Isaac
Newton and the Falling Apple. And then there are these mysterious things called black holes
that we will be visiting yet again in the future. But they're part of the equations
of gravity as given to us by Albert Einstein. There's another force in nature called the
weak interaction. I was born in 1950. So when I try to talk about the weak interaction,
I try to relate it to my experiences as a child. When I was growing up, there were lots
of horror movies, and there were these monsters in the horror movies, and they almost invariably
glowed. They typically would have a glow associated with them because they were some kind of radioactive
mutant. Well, all of that science fiction, that's Hollywood, except for the fact that
the glow is not. Naturally, radioactive materials do glow. And so there's an energy that's responsible
for that. That's the weak interaction. Principally through a process we physicists call beta decay.
It's the electromagnetic force. Well, gee, we know about that because all of our high
technology is essentially built on the fact that we know how to manipulate electrons.
We also can explain things like static electricity and lightning, compass needles, light bulbs,
computers, all of this because we understand electromagnetic force. And then finally, there's
another form of nuclear energy, the strong nuclear force. This is a different form of
nuclear energy. This is the form of nuclear energy from which stars derive their energy
for producing light and heat, which of course, first on the planet like this, is very important.
Without our star, we wouldn't be here. So there are four forces in nature. Gravity,
the electromagnetic force, the weak nuclear force, and the strong nuclear force. And those
are the reasons why creatures like us can exist, because our leptons and quarks are
held into these nice shapes. Interestingly enough, I talked to you in an earlier lecture
about time delays. And in particular, we talked about time delays connected to gravity and
with respect to the electromagnetic force. And I told you that Maxwell was the first
person to build the time delay into physics, because he said that when electromagnetic
forces are communicated through space, there's a message carrier. And this message carrier
is the photon, the particle of light. Einstein later does the same thing for gravity, where
he introduces a metric, a message carrier. This message carrier is called the graviton
or the metric. It's another name for this same object. Well, the other forces also have
message carriers, because we've named two of them, but we still haven't talked about
the two forms of nuclear energy. The weak nuclear force actually has three message carriers.
They go by very bizarre names like intermediate vector bosons, Z0, W plus and W minus. They're
very massive objects. And because they're very massive, the weak nuclear force can only
extend over a very short range. On the other hand, the strong nuclear force, the one, the
energy source for stars, has eight message carriers. And these things are called gluons.
They're all massless, but they have a very strange property that they have the responsibility,
if we look back at our picture of the proton as a bubble with these little bits of matter
inside. The gluons are the things that make sure that those bits of matter never get outside
of the bubble. They are permanently confined to the interior of nuclear matter. So these
are aspects of what we call the microcosm. And as I said, there's been a wonderful lecture
given on this in a previous set of lectures, and I would certainly recommend that you go
and look at them. I earlier talked about the way forces worked in a previous lecture
also. So we're going to borrow this picture because it works just fine in the world of
the microcosm. The message carriers really are the objects that carry messages from one
bit of matter to another. And it's the picture that we've seen before. Namely, the blobs
of light represent electrons, and the wiggly line in the middle is the message carrier.
It's the particle of light for the electromagnetic force. But wait a minute, there are three
other forces. So do they each have message carriers? The answer is yes, we've reviewed
them. And interestingly enough, they work in exactly the same way as this picture. For
the gravitational force, instead of a particle of light being the message carrier, the graviton
is the message carrier that tells two objects they ought to be attracted to each other because
gravity always attracts. But the structure of the picture is the same, that a message
carrier is going, for example, from the Earth to the Moon. For the strong nuclear force,
these blobs of light don't represent electrons, they represent quarks. And so the quarks are
in the interior of nuclear matter, the message carrier called the gluons can find them there
by saying you ought to be attracted to each other. And these message carriers are so strong
that when you try to separate the quarks, in fact all that happens is that you produce
new forms of nuclear matter, the quarks never get free. And then finally for the weak nuclear
force, the message carriers are the z0, the w plus and the w minus. So that's the world
of the microcosm at an introduction. We've met essentially the characters that reside
there. We've talked about a number of their properties. In our next lecture we will
continue to talk about properties because there are other things that are important for us
to know about these objects. And before I end this, I want to talk about some really
astounding things about the world of the microcosm. In our world it's clear that time
flows in one way. We all move towards the future and until someone builds a time machine
which many of us think very unlikely, we won't move towards the past. In the world of microcosm
this is not true. It turns out that for our denizens, the quarks, the leptons, for the
message carrying particles, they are perfectly capable of traveling forward in time or backward
in time. This is a very great surprise. The person who figured this out first was Richard
Feynman because he wrote some equations and he noticed and they were describing the electron
and he noticed in the equations that the equations were perfectly reasonable if you interpret
an electron moving backwards in time as opposed to an electron that usually moves forward
in time. However, when an electron moves backwards in time it looks like it's antiparticle.
So time reversal at the world level of the microcosm is perfectly reasonable. Another
reasonable thing in the world of microcosm is to interchange charge. Remember we talked
about the electron in its mirror particle, the anti-electron? Well then you can imagine
doing experiments where you interchange the two and it turns out the laws of physics of
the microcosm allow that to happen. We call that charge conjugation or C parity. And now
finally you can imagine doing an experiment by looking at a mirror as opposed to the actual
device and making measurements and writing out equations of what goes under the mirror.
Even a different person might do the same thing for what's going on in the experiment.
You might decide at some point to compare the equations. It turns out that for most
of the, if you turn off the weak nuclear force, the picture of the experiment that you see
in the mirror and the data coming from the experiment will be identical. We call this
parity reversal. The physics of the microcosm, if you ignore weak nuclear energy, is parity
invariant. It says it looks the same if you look in a mirror versus looking at the experiment.
These properties can collectively be called CPT, C for charge reversal, P for parity that's
looking in the mirror, and T for time reversal. And now one of the greatest mysteries which
is still a mystery, the physics of the microcosm is such that if you do all three, so imagine
looking in a mirror at an experiment running backwards in time where you have replaced
all the particles by antiparticles. I mean, that's, you know, you can think about doing
that. It turns out that the equations that I've described for that situation are identical
for the equations of our world. This is called CPT invariance. And CPT invariance is one
of the greatest mystery of physics because we have no idea why you should be allowed
to look at a movie where particles have been replaced by antiparticles and times run back
and see our world. Thank you.
