In this lecture, we're going to talk about a crisis that developed in theoretical physics,
and it's the crisis that actually drove the community to think about quantum gravity more
seriously than it had before.
Quantum theory is presently the only known resolution of this crisis.
We won't understand this statement until further in the course, but we want to spend
some time here in this lecture looking at the crisis in some detail.
In our last lecture, we talked about the notion of quantization, that in fact energy is never
quite continuous and at a fundamental level must come in discrete packets, the quanta
of energy.
Well, there's energy associated with the gravitational field also, and therefore its energy and all
energy must exhibit universal behaviors.
It must be the case that there is a quantum of gravity.
We have never seen, however, in the laboratory the effects of this quantum.
We've begun to take steps in that direction.
In a previous lecture, I talked about the laser interferometry gravitational wave observatory.
The purpose of this facility is to begin to hear, in quotes, gravity.
If gravity is a wave, we should in fact be able to see its influence.
One way to think about what LIGO is going to do if it's successful is that the gravitational
energy is all about us, sort of like a sea.
And we, for example, in the real ocean, know that creatures like whales are capable of
communicating over tens of thousands of miles using frequencies that are tuned for such
propagation.
In fact, there's this notion of whale song, which one can come across in many, many discussions
of marine biology.
What we are going to do with the successful operation of LIGO is we will begin to hear
the analog of whale song generated by stars, by galaxies, by cataclysmic events in the
heavens.
And this communication will be brought to us because there's an ocean around us called
the graviton.
That's the quantum of the gravity energy.
So let's back up a bit and talk about gravity, because at some level, we're all scientists
and we conduct our first scientific experiments on gravity.
What do I mean by this?
Well, we learn to walk.
And so one of the first things most humans interact with our environment is we learn
how to walk.
We're doing science.
We have a model for how it works.
Well, we now, of course, as mature people, have a lot of things in our minds about how
gravity works.
If I were to have a ball here and toss it into the air, then under normal expectations,
you would expect the ball to fall back down to my hand, and that's quite normal.
If I was stronger, I can throw the ball harder, it will go higher, but eventually it will
fall back and land in my hand again.
Again, nothing unusual.
Now of course, there's a limit to how strong I am.
And because of that limit, there's a limit to how fast I can throw the ball from my
hand.
But remember, for a physicist, the way we view the world is through mathematics.
So instead of talking about me actually tossing a ball up in the air, I can imagine writing
the equations that describe the ball.
And in these equations, there is a parameter that allows me to talk about how fast the
ball leaves my hand.
We physicists call this the initial velocity.
So the larger the initial velocity, the farther the ball goes up into the air.
Well, since it's just mathematics, we can imagine that I can throw the ball so fast
that in fact it doesn't come back down.
And such a number actually exists.
If I were able to throw a ball with about a speed of 25,000 miles an hour, when it leaves
my hand, it simply never comes back.
I have given it sufficient energy that escapes the gravitational attraction of the earth.
This is the escape velocity.
Now this of course is really difficult to do.
We can't do it in real life at all.
However, there is a circumstance that where you can see a person literally throw an object
away from a celestial body.
Let's imagine that I was an astronaut on some very small asteroid.
The force of gravity on a small asteroid is much, much less than the force of gravity
on the earth.
Accordingly, if there is an astronaut on an asteroid that's sufficiently small, she
can throw an object into orbit because the gravitational energy is much, much less.
So let's imagine then that we've seen this happen, that this astronaut throws an object
into orbit and now let's again remember I'm a theoretical physicist so I can start changing
the equations.
I change the equations and let the mass of the asteroid become a little bit greater.
Our female astronaut throws with just as much energy force that she had before, but of course
the object doesn't go as far.
As I increase the amount of mass, then the object rises to smaller and smaller heights
because there's a limit on her strength just like there is on mine.
Now one of the interesting things about this number, which is how fast I have to throw
an object in order for it to leave the planet, is it depends not just on the mass of the
planet, interestingly enough.
If I were to take the planet earth and retain all of its mass, but to shrink its radius
by a factor of four, then the escape velocity would increase to 50,000 miles an hour, not
the 25,000 that we're used to.
The escape velocity depends on not just how much mass an object possesses, but it also
depends on the radius or size of the object.
And now this sets up a very interesting problem.
So here's our planet earth at its normal size, and I've already put something in orbit
about it, and now let's imagine that I could shrink the planet earth.
Now for an object in orbit about the earth already, I'm going to shrink the earth until
it's much, much smaller, but the object will continue to orbit the planet earth, even though
I have shrunk the radius of the planet.
But, remember I told you in order to get something off the planet, it depends on both the mass
and the size.
So now let me do something very extreme.
We've understood that as you shrink the size of the planet, but keeping the mass fixed,
you have to throw with harder and harder force in order to get the object to leave the earth.
That means I have to throw it faster and faster to get it to leave the earth.
But there's a problem here.
The problem is given to us by Albert Einstein.
Albert Einstein's theory of special relativity tells us that there's a maximum speed that
anything can be traveling within our universe.
If that's the case, then in my mind let me shrink the planet until the velocity required
to get something off of the earth is greater than the speed of light.
Under that circumstance, there's no way in the world that I can launch something into
orbit.
This very strange process that we've just described of taking an object and shrinking
its size until the escape velocity exceeds the velocity of light is actually a very old
idea.
In fact, it precedes Albert Einstein.
It was wondered at the end of the 17th century, what would happen if you have a very compact
body that was so compact that the velocity of escape exceeds the speed of light?
At this stage, we have reached one of the strangest objects in the universe.
It's called a black hole.
So a black hole is a body where because of the density that is the size and the mass
together is so great that in order to try to launch something from it requires a velocity
that's greater than the speed of light.
So on the surface of a black hole, if you can imagine such a thing, it is impossible
to launch objects in orbit.
By the way, for the earth to become a black hole, you would have to shrink it until its
radius is about four inches.
Keep all the mass of the earth but stuff it into a ball whose radius is four inches.
You get a black hole it that way.
So what this tells us is that black holes are not necessarily large objects.
It's not a matter of just being very massive that creates a black hole.
It's two effects.
It's how much mass and concentrate it within a certain distance.
These are the things that are important for creation of black holes.
Now a black hole, as I said, was first actually considered in 1783.
And interestingly enough, it was done not by an astronomer but a geologist by the name
of John Mitchell, was the first person who said, let me wonder about a very dense object
where the escape velocity becomes very large.
This same idea, in fact, also a few years later, occurred to the French scientist Laplace.
And so a black hole actually precedes Einstein.
People wondered about this problem even before Einstein gave us a mathematical description
of gravity.
Of course, after Newton's description because you have to know how gravity works to wonder
about this.
Now a black hole, as I said, is actually an object from which nothing can escape.
In fact, a black hole is so intense that were you to form a black hole, what we believe
would happen is that even the object that starts the black hole would ultimately disappear.
And to what we call the singularity.
The singularity is a single point.
And again, we can actually watch a movie of the formation of a singularity.
And here we are.
Think of this ball as being a star.
And as stars burn out their nuclear energy, it turns out that there's nothing that stops
the gravitational force of a star from collapsing it except its nuclear energy.
So at the end of its life, when a star has burned out its nuclear fuel, gravity wins.
And in fact, if you take a star that's about four to five times more massive than our sun,
the ultimate fate of that star is to become a black hole.
This was first worked out by an Indian physicist by the name of Shandra Shankar.
So let's watch our movie, in this movie, the formation of a black hole.
So this is a star at the end of its life.
It's cold, as you can see, it's not glowing at all, it's dark.
And we're looking at it at the instant when gravity takes over and takes it out of existence.
That's the creation of a black hole.
But it's still there.
It's just that it has no size whatsoever.
Black hole has the dimensions of a point, but a point has no dimensions.
It's a single point.
This is the mathematical notion of a point, an object that has no size whatsoever.
In addition to the singularity, however, there's another very special feature about black holes.
We're used to the idea of sending satellites in orbit around the Earth.
A black hole, in addition to having the singularity, has around it a sphere that has a very special property.
This sphere is called the event horizon.
And what's so special about this sphere?
Well, if you imagine the black hole as being a single point, and you imagine the sphere
around the black hole, if you were to shoot a light ray exactly tangent to the sphere,
it would go in orbit about the black hole.
A black hole can cause light to simply orbit about it in the same way that material objects orbit about our planet.
So this sphere about which this occurs is the event horizon.
So you should think of a black hole as actually having two parts.
It's not just the singularity, which is a single point.
Here's the sphere around it where light itself can orbit.
You can imagine shooting beams of light and simply watching them orbit around the sphere
the way that we watch satellites orbit around a real planet Earth, for example.
Now, so there's something very special.
Anything that's inside the event horizon can never get out because gravity always wins.
Anything outside of the event horizon doesn't actually know that the black hole is there.
It's the most remarkable thing in Hollywood of black holes, the kind of monster that just eats up whatever that's around it.
But in science, as long as you're outside of the event horizon, you don't know the black hole is there.
You just know that something very massive is there and allows you to keep in orbit.
So this is a difference between science and science fiction.
Black holes in science are not monsters.
They're just massive.
And in fact, in our cartoon of the Earth shrinking, if we go back, if we start with an object in orbit,
orbiting around the Earth, as we see here, part of its path, is safely in orbit around the Earth.
Now we take our equations and shrink the Earth.
The object continues orbiting around the Earth as long as it was outside of the event horizon.
It doesn't know that the Earth was compressed.
So this is how black holes work in science.
So we have black holes.
Anything inside the event horizon never gets out.
And in the middle of the event horizon is this very special place called the singularity.
And at the singularity, it is not clear even to this day that we understand the physics that goes on.
Back in the late 60s, a particular scientist started to wonder about black holes.
His name is Stephen Hawking.
He is in fact the world's most famous physicist.
And the result that he came up with is so astounding that physicists, by and large, at first discounted it.
So let me talk about the result, because the result is counter to what we just said.
We said anything inside the black hole never gets out.
Well that means you would think that any energy inside of the black hole can also not get out.
That's the implication of that statement.
Well, turns out that's not true.
But the reason it's not true is because of quantum mechanics.
So let's see if we can go through this.
As you will recall earlier, we talked about our view of forces as arising from the exchange of force carriers.
So if we go back to our basic Feynman diagram, instead of thinking about electrons on the exterior of this diagram,
you can say one of these balls is the Earth and the other is the Moon.
And instead of having a particle of light traveling between the two, which tells them they ought to be repelled,
if we replace the quantum of the electromagnetic force by the quantum of the gravitational force,
in fact the message is they ought to be attracted to each other.
The particular diagram I've shown you here is a quantum diagram.
You'll notice that there's this extra exchange on the side where we replace the particle of light by a graviton.
If we were to do the mathematics associated with those two pictures, or with a slightly different picture,
so here's two pictures again of why gravity works between the Earth and the Moon.
In the upper picture, we have a graviton traveling between the two,
and the communication of the messages you ought to be attracted one to the other.
Richard Feynman's genius was to be able to turn such a picture into an equation.
He did this with a set of what we now call Feynman rules.
For every such picture, physicists trained in relativistic quantum physics
can take the picture and give you an equation to which it corresponds.
So we're going to apply Mr. Feynman's rules to the two pictures on this slide.
We apply it to the first picture, and the result, which is very satisfying,
tells us that the force of attraction between the Earth and the Moon
is the product of the mass of the Earth times the mass of the Moon
divided by the square of the distance between the two.
But that's exactly Mr. Newton's law and description of how gravity works.
But we now recover it from the exchange of a quantum of gravity.
Well, in the quantum universe, we have argued earlier,
you can't quite say that that's the only possibility.
In the quantum universe, that's the most likely thing to have happened,
but it's not the only thing that can happen.
There is a probability that, in fact, the lower diagram is what we should be considering.
So what's different about the lower diagram?
Well, again, we have a quantum of gravity being exchanged between the Earth and the Moon,
but right in the middle of the diagram, we have a quantum process.
Remember that energy can be traded for mass,
particularly if you start off with just energy,
you can get mass, matter, and antimatter coming out, at least for a brief time.
And then, of course, because of their mutual attraction, they destroy each other.
So we consider such a process for the graviton,
and if you apply Mr. Feynman's rules to this second picture,
what you find is that the force of attraction between the Earth and the Moon is infinite.
There's only one problem with that mathematical prediction.
If the force of attraction between the Earth and the Moon were infinite,
the Moon would be right here, not 240,000 miles away.
So this problem is a showstopper.
What this problem contains, in essence, is that it tells you
that the two great pillars of modern physics, on the one hand,
one of these pillars is quantum physics, which has gotten us computers and cell phones,
on the other hand, the great pillar is relativity,
because ultimately it's Einstein's theory of special relativity that describes gravity.
What the second diagram tells us is that if you start with this fantastically successful theory
called quantum theory, as well as a second successful theory called relativity,
and you bring the two together, you get nonsense.
Well, this was actually first deduced by physicists in the 1930s.
This was not a new result at all.
But of course, theoretical physicists have a reputation at least of being very bright,
so what do bright people do when they see a problem?
Well, they pretty much do what everyone else does.
You say there's no problem.
And so, when the fact that quantum theory and relativity were found not to work to make a prediction,
the theoretical physics community said, that's not a problem.
Now, of course, we can't just say we're going to run away from the problem.
And so, in fact, if you read the physics literature, what you find is that there are very deep philosophical arguments.
One argument is, well, after all, the force of gravity has something to do with the fact that space-time can bend,
as we learned in a previous lecture, using the mathematics of Mr. Riemann.
And because none of the other forces are associated with the bending of space,
maybe you should not apply the laws of quantum theory to gravity.
This was an argument that many people in the physics community accepted.
There were other such arguments.
You will remember that when I talked about quantum theory, I said it's about probabilities.
It's not about something being definite, but a probability that something can occur.
And the most likely thing to occur is what you expect from your classical intuition,
but it's not the only thing that is allowed to occur.
Well, this also can be applied to gravity.
It turns out that these quantum processes have much smaller probabilities
than the usual classical expectation that we develop.
If you're a scientist or in particular, if you're an engineer, this has very stunning implications.
Because if you're an engineer, you always wonder about the tolerances of the instruments or the devices or the structures you're building.
And if the tolerances are large enough so that you can ignore an effect, you do.
And you do so successfully, nothing terrible happens. That's good engineering.
Quantum corrections to physics are always very small, at least under normal circumstances when we can make predictions.
And so a second way to argue that you shouldn't worry about quantum theory and gravity
was a statement that even if you had not found an infinite force of attraction,
but a small correction to the Newtonian law, if it's outside of the tolerances of any device to measure, why would you care?
So there were good reasons not to worry about quantum gravity, except that Stephen Hawking made a further observation.
It begins not with Stephen Hawking, but another physicist by the name of Jacob Beckenstein.
Beckenstein argued as follows, if you take a black hole with its event horizon around it, energy can be trapped within the event horizon.
And so you have to worry, or think about at least, what kind of energy could be trapped in there?
Well, because of gravity is so intense, it is likely to behave as quantum theory,
even though you might start with macro-soccery objects, because of the gravity, the laws of quantum mechanics likely hold.
Now one of the things about the laws of quantum mechanics means that instead of thinking about objects, you should think about waves.
And that's what Jacob Beckenstein did. He said, let me consider trapped waves inside of the sphere.
And when he did that, something really marvelous happened. You can look at these waves and their behavior.
And for a given amount of energy, it turns out that these waves act like they have an order associated with them.
Now what do physicists mean by order? I have a little story about that.
Suppose I had a box with four coins in it, and I put the four coins in the box and shake it up,
and then take the top off and look to see how many heads and how many tails.
How many different outcomes could I see? Well, there's only one way we can get four heads.
On the other hand, there are four ways that we can get three heads in one tail.
There are six ways to get two heads and two tails.
There are four ways to get one head and three tails, and then finally one way to get four tails.
And so this allows us to calculate the probabilities.
The one that we see in the fraction here in our table is because there's one way to get this outcome.
The four in the table here is because there are four ways to get this outcome.
There are six ways to get the third outcome, four ways to get the fourth outcome,
and finally one way to get the final outcome.
This is what physicists like to call statistical behavior,
and it turns out that whenever physicists observe systems that have statistical behavior like this,
they possess what we call entropy, or a physics definition, a precise mathematical way of saying there's order to the system.
But whenever a system possesses entropy, it also possesses heat.
And so, Jakob Beckenstein's discovery that the waves trapped inside of the sphere around the black hole
behave as if they have entropy associated with them means that they have to have heat.
But the first law of thermodynamics says that if an object has heat, it's got to radiate.
But nothing can get out of a black hole.
There's a contradiction here.
Now, when Jakob Beckenstein found this result, very few physicists were willing to think about this problem,
because after all, everyone knew nothing could get out of a black hole, therefore heat can't get out of a black hole.
But there was one physicist, in fact, who did worry about this very intensely.
His name was Stephen Hawking.
And what Stephen did was wrote a very famous paper analyzing these waves and asking the question,
how can the heat get out of the way, out of the event horizon?
It turns out that if you just use the laws of classical physics where you don't worry about the quantized nature of energy,
the answer is there's no way for the heat to get out.
However, if you use the equations that were the legacy of Heisenberg and Schrodinger,
the same equations that govern electrons, which give us our electronics,
if you use those equations, it turns out that the heat can escape the event horizon.
Do what process? Quantum tunneling.
Remember, we talked about the fact that electrons can, even though we don't throw them with enough energy to get over the wall,
they can actually go through the wall?
The same thing applies to the energy that is inside the sphere that we call the event horizon.
Right at the boundary of the event horizon, the vacuum acts like bubbling water.
When that happens, particles and antiparticles come into existence spontaneously.
If this happens right on the event horizon, you can imagine that a particle goes out into the world where we live
and by conservation of momentum and energy, the other antiparticle has to go inside the black hole.
If it enters the event horizon, it never gets free.
The net upshot is through quantum processes, the heat that's associated with black holes can actually get out.
And thereby, it gives us a picture about the behavior of heat, which is the one that we've been working with as a species for several hundred years.
We know that warm bodies must radiate.
A black hole, because it's probabilistic, has warmth associated with it.
This very great surprise was Hawking's gift to us, that in order to understand how black holes can radiate, you have to take quantum mechanics into effect.
Now, Hawking's paper is actually very interesting. It reminds me of homework I get from my students.
Oftentimes, you give students homework and say, prove this, you give them some equations, you ask them to derive other equations.
As a physics professor, the homework comes back into you and almost every student says, I've done it.
You begin to read the paper, but if you read from the top down and the bottom up, right in the middle of a lot of these papers, there's evidence for the existence of God.
You can tell that God must be present because a miracle occurs.
The logic going down from the top and going up from the bottom don't meet in any way reasonable.
Stephen Hawking's paper on black hole radiation has exactly this character.
However, Stephen doesn't try to pull the wool over our collective eyes.
What he does is at a certain point, inserts his intuition.
The paper is brilliant mathematics from the beginning, right in the middle, however, where the mathematics gives us no guide, Stephen puts in a set of equations we call gray-body factors.
And then he continues to derive after that.
He says, essentially he's saying, my intuition tells me this.
When a really good physicist uses their intuition to go beyond the mathematics, it's often right.
That's what Einstein meant when he said, imagination is more important than knowledge.
And so Dr. Hawking's dilemma about black holes says quantum theory comes to the rescue.
The only problem is there's no consistent quantum theory of gravity from which we can derive this result.
