Many lectures ago, we talked about a dilemma that was encountered by Dr. Stephen Hawking.
Let me remind you a little bit what was going on.
We had learned that one of the predictions of Einstein's theory of general relativity,
the one that describes the way that gravity works in our universe, was that there might
exist objects that are so strong that nothing can get away from their gravitational pull,
and these objects are called black holes.
And when we say nothing, we mean absolutely nothing, including light.
So, but a black hole is an interesting object.
It's not just a singularity, which is a single point, but it has this kind of sphere around
it.
The special property of this sphere is that if you take light, you can orbit it any place
on this sphere just like we orbit satellites about the Earth.
This sphere is called the event horizon.
Anything outside the event horizon doesn't know there's a black hole around, so physics
goes on pretty much as normal.
Another prediction of Einstein's theory of general relativity is that light can be bent
by gravitational forces.
So I have a transparency that you've seen before running here.
If you were to go out on a starry night and a black hole passed between you and the distant
stars, you would see something like what appears on our image.
You would notice that the stars would seem to move around and change their position,
and that's actually the light being bent from this black hole as it moves across your field
of vision.
Now the other thing that's really interesting about this animation is that black holes classically
are so strong that nothing can get outside of the event horizon, but in the late sixties
a physicist by the name of Beckenstein figured out that that's can't quite be true.
Namely he figured out that black holes look like they are warm objects in a sense.
And we all know what happens with a warm object, it gives off heat, so how can heat get out
of a black hole?
That was the question.
And Stephen Hawking in a brilliant piece of insight said, what's missing here is that
the usual arguments do not account for the laws that apply in the world of the quantum.
Now the paper in which Stephen did this is a marvelous example of how human creativity
and imagination are actually more powerful than mathematics because his paper doesn't
actually have a mathematical support for this idea.
So that was the dilemma and that was the dilemma we described as Dr. Hawking's dilemma.
Now Dr. Hawking's intuition is actually very interesting because it says you have to take
into account what goes on in the world of the quantum, the world of the small.
Our world is such that for example if you take two balls and throw them at each other
they bounce off with no problem whatsoever.
On the other hand, if I take two flashlight beams and aim one at the other they pass through
each other and seemingly as if one doesn't know the other's there.
So these are classical expectations.
On the other hand, even if you replace the balls by things like protons or more particularly
neutrons which have no electrical charge, neutrons would also bounce off of each other.
But the reason then would be because they each instead of carrying electrical charge
carry another kind of charge that we call the weak nuclear charge.
Now if we apply the laws of the quantum world light behaves differently.
In the quantum world as we have seen by these pictures called Feynman diagrams light can
be thought of as a wavy line.
So if you have two light beams you can think of two wavy lines that are approaching each
other.
We can draw a box in the middle of them and attach the wavy lines to the bottom vertex
of the box.
That represents the lines coming in.
Now what is this box that we've drawn in this square?
Well according to E equals MC square energy can be traded for mass and so these sides
of the square represent the motion of a particle and an antiparticle.
Let's say to be specific an electron and an anti-electron.
They move along and on the sides of the box then we have the photons again streaming away
at the upper sides.
Now this diagram is known as Delbrook scattering.
In fact in 1933 a physicist by the name of Max Delbrook predict this process.
In fact he predicted it even before Mr. Feynman's pictures had been invented.
And in 1953 an experiment was performed which found that light scatters itself.
Remember the source of the scattering is because of quantum mechanical processes.
So this is an example that shows us that our universe and the world is such that in order
to understand phenomena sometimes you have to take into account quantum mechanics and
quantum processes.
Now the pictures I've been using to talk about the quantum world and how the forces
work were actually invented by the physicist Richard Feynman.
In fact they occurred in his work that led to a Nobel Prize but the prize was not given
for the diagrams themselves it was for actually being able to understand how to make predictions
based on the laws of the quantum.
He shared this prize with two other physicists Julian Schwinger and a Japanese physicist
by the name of Tomonaga.
Interestingly enough Tomonaga had actually done his work prior to the work by the other
two but it had not been known in the west it had only been known in Japan.
In fact Tomonaga's work was done before World War II and of course we know what the intervening
period was like where there was little communication between the scientific establishments of these
nations.
So Feynman's rules and Feynman's pictures are a marvelous way to talk about mathematics
and that's what I've emphasized previously that when we use these pictures we're really
doing mathematics in a neat and cool way.
Now we've also in previous lectures talked about the idea that the force of gravity as
described by Einstein's equations does not take into account the workings of the quantum
world.
Now so if we want to include the quantum world we must go back and resort to the same sorts
of pictures that we've used before.
When that happens disaster occurs.
You find out that the force of gravity can be infinite but of course that's nonsense
if the force of gravity were infinite we would all be crushed together in a single super
black hole and that clearly doesn't happen.
The actual explicit proof that the laws of the quantum when combined with Einstein's
general relativity leads to a disaster was worked out in 1974.
First by two physicists Tuft and Weltman and then all separately in a collaborator that
included Deser, Zau and Vanneven-Huyzen.
These direct calculations concerned what the pictures tell us that when you try to do the
picture making for gravity you find out the force of gravity is infinite.
This was the problem that Stephen Hawking encountered.
There was no mathematical way to support his intuition that black holes since they're
warm have to give off heat.
So there was a problem to be solved.
He wrote this very famous paper but if you look at the mathematics in the paper the mathematics
doesn't support the ideas.
Well that's not how physics works.
We're not allowed to simply say my intuition is such that I predict this.
Most physicists doing that will find their colleagues are highly skeptical.
In the case of the black hole even though there was room for skepticism there was no
proof that Stephen Hawking had gotten it wrong.
But just as important there was no proof that he had gotten it correct either.
So there was a crisis and this crisis perhaps more than any other piece of physics is responsible
for many people starting to think about something like string theory.
Let's review this catastrophe in a slightly different way.
I have now running a diagram that at some sense explains why two electrons repel each
other.
The two balls of light represent electrons.
The wavy line in the middle is the exchange of a message carrying particle saying you
ought to be repelled.
Since we're talking about the electromagnetic force here that message carrier is the photon.
On the other hand in the quantum world we can include a more complicated picture and
here we have one.
Again the two dots of light represent electrons but you'll notice that on the left hand side
of this diagram the electron emits a little photon which it then later reabsorbs traveling
along the path of the first wiggly line and then it's an emission of a second photon that's
responsible for the repulsion.
Mr. Feynman's rules tell us how to turn this expression into mathematics and when you apply
Mr. Feynman's rules to this picture you find out that the force of repulsion between two
electrons is not what you were taught when you enter high school, class and science.
It's something quite different and then of course there are many many other pictures
that one can apply and each picture makes a slightly different prediction about the force
of repulsion between two electrons.
So that's the general process.
This process can be applied to the force of gravity.
We can take that exact same picture that we just discussed.
Instead of thinking about the little balls of light as being two electrons you can think
about one being the earth and the other being the moon.
In this case we're interested in the gravitational attraction so the wavy line in the picture
would no longer be a photon, it would be the message carrier for the gravitational force,
the object we call the graviton.
Remember the graviton?
We met it when we went to the world of the quantum.
It's an object that spins at four times the rate of the electron.
So if we try to use Mr. Feynman's rules for the graviton that's what leads to an infinity.
So there's something wrong with the mathematics here.
We've got to find a way to change it.
And in fact the statement is as of right now we have only found one other piece of mathematics
that supports Dr. Hawking's intuition about the ability of black holes to give off heat.
This other piece of mathematics is string theory.
And so we want to see how string theory is different from previous constructions and
why they seem to work.
We can begin again with an image.
These two loops that you see here represent two strings.
But you'll notice I allow them to move and join together to form a single string.
Now it's sort of complicated to see in this animation so let me put a still on up on the
screen to show the same thing.
We see the two circles at the ends on the left over here, those represent the two strings.
The two strings move together and at this point they join touching each other and then
move off as a single string or a single unit.
So that's what the picture showed.
Well if that process is allowed to occur for strings, what if we start it with a single
closed string and allow it to pinch itself off into two pieces?
Well that's what we're watching in this animation.
It will repeat itself so let's watch it again.
There's one string, it pinches down and becomes two and then the two separate pieces move
off.
Again that's kind of busy so we can draw a simpler picture which contains the same information
and here it is.
We have a single string on the far left hand side of the picture, it's moving along and
then it splits into two circles which represent our strings and then those move off on the
right hand side of the picture.
Now if those two things can happen, let's join them together to see the result of that.
So this is an animation that we see running here that carries this process out.
We begin with two closed loops, they move together and then they join and touch and
become a single closed loop which then after a while splits apart.
We can watch this process, I have it in repeat mode so we can see it over and over again
so there it is.
And now we can ask a very interesting question.
Remember we've talked about the fact that the kinds of strings that are the subject
of this lecture series are so small that when they vibrate they don't produce sound
because they're smaller than the molecules of air which cause sound to be accessible
and occur in nature.
When these objects vibrate the only way that we would detect them is as particles that
we met in our journey to the realm of the quantum.
So we can ask a question.
As the two closed strings are coming together, let's watch a single vibrational mode.
Why?
Because a single mode of vibration of the string looks to our level like a particle.
So we'll watch a single vibrational mode and draw its path and if you look in the background
of this picture that's actually what I've done.
You'll see that on the left there's a line, that's the path of a single vibrational mode.
It looks like it's V-shaped so first it comes in and then it moves away, the same is done
on the right hand side and so those are pictures of the path of a single mode.
Now in the middle when the string is a single unit, you'll see there's a wavy line and the
reason is because in order to join together to become a single string the modes of vibrations
of the strings have to change and so if you look at what's happening with a single mode
you no longer have the same object in the interior of this picture that you have in the exterior.
In fact if we're talking about the electromagnetic force the carrier in the middle must be a
photon.
On the other hand if we're talking about the force of gravity the carrier in the middle
must be a graviton.
Now the remarkable thing about these pictures is that applying Mr. Feynman's rules we can
calculate mathematical expressions from these.
So we can find out well gee from these pictures and strings what is the force between the
earth and the moon.
If we apply the classical picture which is only the simplest picture that we saw, if
you look in the upper right hand part of this diagram you'll see we've reproduced our picture
of the two closed strings moving together, moving as a single unit then splitting again
to two and compare that to the path of a single note then we find out that that's the classical
picture that for the particle leads to the 1 over r square law that we're familiar with.
Under the yellow line you'll see that there's some more pictures.
On the particle side well we've seen the exchange where there's an extra photon on one leg on
the left hand side of the diagram and we can still see that here.
When we go to consider the string the way that we reproduce that result is right on the left
side of the string diagram you should imagine that this diagram is kind of flexible it's
like a soap bubble so I can pinch it at a certain point and there is in fact a pinched
hole on the first stringy diagram that represents the effect of the photon exchange.
In the second stringy diagram we pinch the hole in a different place and the idea is
that for every diagram that we can draw for particle we simply pinch a different kind
of hole in the string diagram.
The most remarkable part of the process is that for the string when we look at the mathematics
every way that we can pinch this figure off leads to an expression for the force that's
well defined and why is that important?
Well let's continue our story about the black hole.
In order to transmit the forces what happens is that was not separate objects that are
doing it it's the string itself it's always the string either vibrating in a different
way or moving in a different way but it's not something different or new coming into
play it's just the string.
So the process that we've seen in this animation is something that represents a series of mathematical
calculations.
As early as 1980 a physicist by the name of Friedan used this kind of idea to calculate
from string theory how the forces work.
For physicists this is a calculation called the effective action.
What does that actually mean?
Well the ordinary action basically gives us the effect of all the classical pictures that's
our first diagram with no sort of complications in the middle.
Even as we begin to introduce more and more complicated interior structures to the diagram
we have to produce more and more complicated mathematical expressions and so the effective
action is the thing that keeps track of all of our pictures and by having all the pictures
built into it it's a complete description of the force.
So the remarkable thing about Friedan's work is that he showed that if you take the equations
of string theory and look at their pictures and calculate the mathematics that's associated
with those pictures remarkably enough you can derive Einstein's equations.
Now what's really strange about that is the following.
You don't have to know general relativity in order to carry out this derivation.
In fact what this work shows is that if Einstein had never lived or if Einstein had only given
us the theory of special relativity but not the theory of general relativity to explain
gravity string theory if it had come into existence is completely capable of providing
a derivation that was given to us by Einstein's genius in 1916 well maybe 40 or 50 years later
we might have bumped into it by studying string theory.
Notice that string theory follows from following the route of the quantum.
Now in the case of Einstein remember he didn't like the world of the quantum this was something
that throughout most of his life as a physicist he opposed as a concrete and fundamental description
of nature.
He thought and in fact we've often heard this quote made that God doesn't play dice with
the universe.
So apparently God does because quantum theory is the best tested piece of science our species
possesses we've checked the accuracy of the predictions of this mathematics to greater
than 10 decimal places in a certain experiment.
So the laws of quantum the quantum world govern our universe.
Now this idea of calculating the quantum corrections means that you can apply it to the problem
of the black hole radiation.
This was actually a very recent realization in fact it only occurred in 1996 when two
physicists at Harvard University Strominger and Vafa applied the picture making technique
of super string theory to trying to understand how it is that black holes can produce heat.
Now the thing that's really interesting about this story is that Hawking had to make a guess
but Strominger and Vafa simply made some calculations.
They took a very special string which is something that's called a type 2B string we're going
to meet this string in a later lecture understand what it is but it's a special string then
they took a limit of it where the mathematics was in control and then what they did was
to count the ways that the entropy remember when we talked about black holes we did this
very funny games of calculating probabilities when you have probabilities you can use those
to calculate what we physicists call entropy.
So Strominger and Vafa actually made this calculation.
And what they found most remarkably is that by simply using rigorous mathematical rules
that follow from the structure of string theory they were able to produce exactly the result
that Stephen Hawking had found but remember Stephen didn't find them what Stephen actually
did was say my intuition tells me.
And so we have an example here where the mathematics of string theory which occurs almost 30 years
later catches up with the intuition of a great physicist.
That's in fact the mark of a great physicist the ability to move beyond the equations that
we use in order to describe the way the universe works.
So the lesson here is that string theory turns out to be the only piece of mathematics that
we know that can support the idea that black holes are not totally black but are capable
of giving off heat.
Many of you perhaps have heard of rivals to string theory.
One of these rivals is known as loop quantum gravity.
Loop quantum gravity starts from a very different viewpoint.
Remember the idea in string theory is that at the very most basic level of our universe
there are these tiny filaments.
Well you hear the word loop in loop quantum gravity so it sounds like it's the same but
it's in fact very different.
The loops of loop quantum gravity in some sense can be thought of not as tiny loops that are
the fundamental entities in the universe but instead are objects that are varying plaquettes.
A plaquette is sort of a flat plate that you can use to measure the way space gets bent.
Remember Einstein tells us that gravity is really the curvature of space.
So for many years people have thought that perhaps loop quantum gravity would be a rival
to string theory.
In particular several years ago a group of physicists used the formalism of loop quantum
gravity in order to try to calculate Hawking radiation.
That's the fact that black holes are slightly warm.
Properly we should refer to this as Hawking Beckenstein radiation.
So the initial results were that loop quantum gravity was capable of doing this.
In fact most recently within the last year or so the calculations upon which this were
based were reexamined by experts in that area and to their dismay they found that the calculations
of loop quantum gravity do not agree with the idea that Hawking has given that black
holes can radiate.
So as of right now this means that one of the main competitors to string theory looks
less attractive to scientists than it did say three or four years ago.
So the basic lesson here is that we now have a quantum theory of gravity.
Well what's a quantum theory of gravity actually going to be good for?
I can't answer that question because you see in order to take advantage of loop quantum
gravity at the level of technology we're going to have to advance probably several hundred
years before that will occur.
I remind you that this is sort of like what happened with the electromagnetic force.
It was in the 1870s that Maxwell wrote his equations to describe it.
It's only in the last say 10, 15 years that we've had nice devices like cell phones.
That's on the order of 120 to say 140 years.
So the technology that flows from this will likely not be something that we can understand
or realize to make our lives better or our grandchildren's lives better maybe several
generations.
What else does this mean though about our universe that we have this quantum theory of gravity?
In one of my early lectures I talked about the fact that there's a kind of fossil that's
written in the heavens.
It's called the cosmic microwave background.
The cosmic microwave background is everywhere that we look and it represents our universe
when it was about 300,000 years old.
The cosmic microwave background kind of looks like static if you look at pictures.
If you've seen static on your television screens and of course this assumes that your TVs are
not digital but if you've seen static on the old analog television screens that's kind
of what the signals from the cosmic microwave background look like.
They're just distributed what looks like a random fashion but the interesting thing about
this pattern is that you can measure the average size of spots and get information.
Well, this process of measuring the average size of the spots in the cosmic microwave
background is something that perhaps we can use to study string theory.
Why?
Well it turns out that this fine structure in the cosmic microwave background depends
on the equations that describe gravity.
We have seen in this lecture that the equations of string theory describe gravity consistent
with the laws of quantum mechanics.
Ordinary general relativity does not do that.
And so in some sense there must be attributes in the distribution of the spots of the cosmic
microwave background that potentially can encode this different description of gravity.
So it's completely possible that instead of finding evidence for things like strings
by going to the world's most powerful accelerators such as we've discussed previously the Large
Hadron Collider, it may well be that instead we should be looking up towards the heavens
and trying to read the signs of string theory by looking at the structure of the cosmic
microwave background.
This fact that may be the answers in the heavens as opposed to looking in powerful accelerators
is an example of a marvelous coming together in our understanding of physics.
In order to understand things that are in the heavens over the last decade we have come
to understand it is absolutely necessary that we understand the world of the quantum.
We can now take this one for a step further perhaps.
If we find the signals that describe the influence of super strings on the cosmic microwave
background then we can say with some certainty that the signs of string theory, the thing
that many people dispute as being unprovable and untestable, that those signs may well
come down to us by looking up at the heavens.
I believe that would be a marvelous way for the theory to become into the world of physics,
to leave the world of mathematical speculation and become an element that we can use to begin
to understand this marvelous place in which we live, our home, the universe.
