Our universe, as we have noted on a number of previous equations, is partitioned in a
particular kind of way. Well, first of all, actually, we can set aside one part aspect
of our universe, namely space and time. They sort of play a role of a stage, and prior
to string theory, space and time really were separate things from the forces and the matter
that exist in the universe. String theory, in fact, gives us a different viewpoint where
space and time is actually part of everything else and vice versa. So we're going to concentrate
on the other stuff, namely the parts of the universe that lead to creatures like us. Well,
there are two things that we can speak on in that regard. There's matter. We've been
through a long list of the objects that make up matter. They're the quarks, up, down, charm,
strange, top, and beautiful. And then there are the leptons, the electron, the muon, the
tau particle, and they're associated neutrinos. So that's matter. And then there's the other
part that's important for constructing beings like us. Namely, you have to take these fundamental
building blocks and hold them in fixed patterns in order to get our parts. So the forces are
four in number. There's the gravitational force. It's the weakest, but in some ways the
most important because the large-scale structure of the universe is governed by gravity. There
is the weak nuclear force. The weak nuclear force, the simplest way to think about it,
is that if you take a neutron and separate it from the nucleus of an atom, on average,
after 1,013 seconds, the neutron gets replaced by a proton, an electron, and a neutrino. Now,
the neutron that you began with was neutral. The proton that you have afterwards is positively
charged. The electron afterwards is negatively charged. And so you had to have those two occur,
otherwise you would not conserve charge in this process. And then there's this other relative
to the electron, the neutrino, that also comes out of this decay. This process is called beta
decay. And the form of energy that's responsible for beta decay is the weak nuclear force. There's
an electromagnetism. We're, of course, all familiar with electromagnetism. That's what our
high technology utilizes in order to raise standards of living and basically create a way to go about
life that was unimaginable, perhaps at the beginning of the last century. And then finally,
the strong nuclear force. So we have matter and the forces that act upon them. Now, if we restrict
ourselves to only matter, and I'll call the forces energy, I'll use the words interchangeably,
there's something else that's rather obvious. All of the matter objects have the same spin rate as
the electron. They can spin counterclockwise at a rate of one half h bar, or they can spin
clockwise at the rate of one half h bar. The force carriers on the other, on the other hand,
have spin rates that are very different. The graviton spins at four times the rate of the
electron. The photon, the intermediate vector bosons, and the gluons all spin at twice the
rate of the electron. And the Higgs particle, which we haven't said very much about, but plays an
important role that we will come to, actually doesn't spin at all. It's a spinless object. Now,
the reason I point out spin is because that tells us what obeys the laws of chemistry and what
doesn't. Electrons gather around atoms and shell structures. This shell structure is governed by
spin. If you imagine, for example, gathering quarks in some kind of a structure, it would have to
look very much like an atom because the quarks have the same spin. On the other hand, if you imagine
looking at, you know, and we can imagine because we can do it with mathematics, you can imagine
trying to build an atom with photons, the shell structure disappears because anything that spins
at two or multiple of two times the rate of the electron does not obey the Pauli exclusion principle.
There's a problem that we can perhaps think about. Why is it that all the forces do not obey the
Pauli exclusion principle and can never lead to a shell-like structure? Whereas all of the matter
fields do obey the Pauli exclusion principle and would always lead to something like a shell
structure for atoms. After all, would not our universe be more balanced if some of the force
carriers obeyed the Pauli exclusion principle and others did not? While other of the matter
particles would be some obeyed the Pauli exclusion principle and others not, wouldn't that after all
be more balanced? Well, the answer is intuitively yes. So let's go back and look a bit at our
universe and its building blocks as we assemble them. There are the quarks, the leptons, up, down,
charm, strange, top, and beautiful, and we'll assemble together the force carriers. All the force
carriers are in green. We have the quarks and the leptons in either red or blue. That's what our
universe looks like. This is the modern version of the table of elements for how to build a universe
in your basement. Now, in our discussion of the string, we came across this very peculiar property
called supersymmetry, and we needed supersymmetry in order to banish the tachyon from the mathematical
structure of the string. In order to have supersymmetry for every bosonic strand of the string, there
had to be a corresponding fermionic strand of the string. If you want an analogy in order to banish
the tachyon, it's kind of like having people coming to a bar. If they come in pairs, then the
bouncer will let them in, but if they come singly, the bouncer tells them they can't come. That's kind
of how supersymmetry works. It says things must come in pairs where one member of the pair is a
boson or a boy, and the other member of the pair is a fermion, a female. So, is our world
supersymmetric? Well, that's something we can do simply by counting, because if supersymmetry is
around, it should be equal numbers. So, let's do some counting of the standard model. Well, we have 18
quarks. Remember, they come in six flavors times three colors. We have six leptons, and so that yields
a total of 24 fermions in our universe. Now, we can't actually use the number 24 because that's not
actually correct in accounting. We have to be a little bit more careful. Remember, the electron
actually comes in two varieties, spin up and spin down. So, instead of counting the electron as one
object, we should at least include the effects of spin. The other thing about the electron that we
must take into account is that it has an antiparticle. So, in fact, an electron really counts for four
different objects, spin up, spin down, particle and antiparticle, and then spin up and spin down for
the particle and antiparticle. So, that's four objects. So, really, we must take this 24 and
multiply by four in order to count what we physicists call the fermionic degrees of freedom in our
universe, and the answer turns out to be 96. So, we have 96 fermions in the universe. On the other
hand, we can count the force carrying particles. There are eight gluons, one photon, three
intermediate vector bosons, and the Higgs particle. So, we can count those. However, the
counting is a little bit complicated because the photon counts for two states. If you remember our
discussion of light, we say they could circle to the right or circle to the left. That's actually two
ways that it can count. So, we say that the photon has two degrees of freedom. This is also true for
the gluons. They have two degrees of freedom. On the other hand, the force carriers for the
intermediate vector bosons actually have three degrees of freedom. So, when you add up all the ways that
objects can spin and their antiparticles for the boson, you find 29 bosonic degrees of freedom in our
universe. Well, 96 does not equal to 29, and therefore, our universe has no hope of being
supersymmetric as we have seen in the laboratory thus far. So, it looks like we don't live in a
supersymmetrical universe. Well, there are reasons why we would want to live in such a place. One of
these reasons has to do with energy. You would like to believe, and certainly we scientists believe,
that there's a state of lowest energy. In physics, this state is called the vacuum. When you look at
the concept of the vacuum in the world of the quantum, it is not as simple as you might imagine. You might
think the vacuum means there's nothing there, but in a quantum mechanical universe, particles can
spontaneously come into existence if they come as a particle-antiparticle pair. That's what a quantum
process is all about. And so, rather than thinking about the vacuum as a state of nothingness, if you
accept the principles of quantum mechanics, you have to think of it instead as more like a rising sea,
where particles are popping in and out of existence, and that's what you mean by the vacuum. It's
something of a much more sophisticated structure. And so, the question becomes, how do you calculate
the energy of the vacuum? Well, in fact, using the mathematics of quantum theory, this is a very
difficult question, with one exception. It turns out that if the universe is truly supersymmetrical, then the
vacuum can be shown to be a state of lowest energy, absolutely a state of lowest energy. And that's what
you really would want for a vacuum. A vacuum should be a state where you can't remove any more energy for
the system. So, there's a very practical reason for thinking that the universe might be supersymmetric, but on
the other hand, I just gave you guys a count, and we found the universe is not supersymmetric. So, there's a dilemma
here. How do we resolve this dilemma? Well, it has been now about 100 years or so that physicists have been thinking
about the world in terms of fundamental particles. One of the things that has occurred is that when you see
something funny in the laboratory, we have gotten used to the idea that maybe we can imagine something that's better. I earlier
told you about the weak nuclear force as being that form of nuclear energy that turns a neutron into a proton. Well, back
when this process was first discovered, our technology was such that we could measure the neutron, we could measure
the proton, and we could measure the electron, but we couldn't measure neutrinos. Now, that leads to a bit of a problem,
because if you actually watch this process, you would watch the neutron disappear, and then out would come flying one proton
and one electron. You could measure the momentum of each because we could measure their velocity, we knew their masses. You
could also measure the energy that they contain because motion contains a kind of energy known as kinetic energy. When you did this
in the days of the original experiments, a great crisis arose because if you took the energy after the decay, it didn't add up to the energy
before. This is also true for the momentum. So, if that were true, it means that energy and mass are not the same thing, but that's
what Einstein's famous equation Equals MC Square was all about. The physicist named Pauli entered this debate and said, the reason that we think
that energy and momentum are not conserved is because something is escaping our detectors. This something we now know is the neutrino.
So, the moral of this story is if you want something to be true, we are allowed mathematically to imagine a slightly different universe, but
then we must later come back and ask the question, is this different view of the universe something that can be supported by an experiment?
So now, let me take you to a supersymmetric universe. In a supersymmetric universe, in addition to the ordinary up, down, charm, strange, top and beautiful quarks,
along with the electron, the muon, the tau particle and their associated neutrinos, there must be other objects that are their mirror pairs because
symmetries ultimately are always about some kind of a balance. Now, we have a favorite movie for showing this, it's our ladder. We know that if we have our
ladder laying flat, then we can draw two squares that represent the error, one where the ladder is the base, the other where the ladder is the top.
And so, the green ladder here has an area that's always the same as the area of the blue. But we can also take our ladder and put it precisely against the wall, in which case the
area of the green then is equal to the area of the brown. So, if you want to have a symmetry, you've got to have some kind of sense of balance.
In our supersymmetrical universe, therefore, in addition to the ordinary matter and force carriers that we've seen, we have to allow for the appearance of a new set of
objects that have never been seen in the laboratory. So, there's the graviton which we know from Einstein's equation of general relativity.
If the universe is supersymmetric, there's an object that also carries the gravitational force, it's the message carrier for the gravitational force, but it spins at the
rate of three-half. The rate of the graviton is the spin rate of two. In our world, we have an electron. The electron spins at a rate of one-half.
In a more balanced world that's supersymmetric, there must be an object which we call this electron, which spins at rate zero. In our world, there are up-and-down quarks, each of
which spin at a rate of one-half. In this more balanced supersymmetrical world, there must be up-and-down quarks whose spin rate is zero.
And so, if you look at this final picture, you can see it is balanced, and that's what we mean by a symmetry. You can think of our latter example where, once again, we saw sort of mirror
images of certain squares. So this is what a supersymmetrical universe would look like. For every piece of matter, or every particle of matter that we know, and every
message-carrying particle we know, there would be what we now call a superpartner. So the superpartner to the photon, which is the message carrier for electromagnetism, would be an object called the
Fotino. The superpartner to the electron would be the electron, and so forth. And the superparticle to the Higgs would be the, would be called the Higgs-Zeno.
So, now this is all mathematics. And this mathematics was invented in the nineteen, late sixties and early seventies. But the thing that's interesting about this mathematics is, we've
never actually seen these objects. We've never seen the things that would, if they're there, stabilize the vacuum, for example. They would also have the role of making our universe a more balanced place.
Now, energy, as I said, is a conserved quantity, and it should be conserved and have a vacuum. So what do we do about the absence of these particles? Well, there are two things. First of all, you can say that this
supposition, that the universe should be super symmetrical, is itself wrong. Now, let's go back and review the string, because we know that for the string, in order to
banish the tachyon, we absolutely had to require supersymmetry. Now, remember, that's with regard to the strands. Remember, ultimately, I have revealed that the string is not a single object. You should think of it really like a
musical instrument. So supersymmetry at the level of the string essentially says that the number of strands of the bosonic variety should be equal to the number of strands of the
fermionic variety. But the particles in our world are not the actual strands of the strings. The particles that we know are the objects that correspond to the
notes that the strands produce. So it's conceivable that even though the strands are supersymmetrical, namely come in pairs, maybe it's the case that in our universe we do not actually see the
notes in pairs. There are a few such models, a few such mathematical constructs that have this property. And some of these constructs precisely come from strings. On the other hand, most of the constructions that one can get from
string theory not only has the strands of the string coming in pairs, they also have the notes coming in pairs. So the vast majority of the community of physicists who study string theory also are committed to the
idea that we ought to, in our world, things that should be accessible to us, ultimately be able to find these super partners. But we haven't so far. Why not? Well, there are several possibilities. One is simply a matter of
mass and a matter of energy. You see, in order to see these super partners, we have to have the technology that's capable of producing them. We've never actually achieved that level of technology so far, and it also will depend on how
the mass of these objects are. Now, why does that play a role? Well, if we make a guess about the mass of these missing objects, the typical numbers are some place between 300 and 1,000 times heavier, an ordinary matter.
Now, the other thing that's interesting is how fast is our technology advancing? There's a way to estimate this, which is simply go back and look at the history of how we detect particles and plot their masses.
There is a simple assumption that we can make about making such a plot, approximate this plot by a straight line, and you get something that looks remarkably like what's known as Moore's law. I don't know if you've heard of Moore's law, but roughly speaking it says that power of computers doubles once every two or three years.
And this has been true in the computer world for over 20 years, which is why computer technology continues to improve. We can apply the same kind of logic to our ability to detect more and more massive particles.
If you look at the history, you find out that we progress at a rate of about three G.E.V. that is giga-electron volts, which is a unit of energy, on a year's basis. Now, what that means is the following.
That if super partners are on the order of say 300 times as heavy as ordinary matter, then perhaps around the year 2016, someone in a laboratory will produce one of these objects.
On the other hand, if these objects are a thousand times as heavy as ordinary matter, then it will take something perhaps like 300, 200, 300 years to actually produce them in the laboratory.
So we have to count on nature being very kind to us to reveal the supersymmetric structure of the universe.
Now, the other thing about this supersymmetric structure is that it will also depend on our rigorously supporting experimental physics.
In our nation, about 10 years ago, the community of particle physicists wanted to build a device called the superconducting supercollider.
Ultimately, it was decided that this device was too expensive to support on the scientific budget of our nation.
And this device is not coming back, as I often tell friends. It had a stake driven through its heart, so we don't have to fear the superconducting supercollider, or the so-called SSC, coming back to cause disturbances with our nation's finances.
On the other hand, the Europeans have invested in a machine, which is roughly speaking about a third as powerful as the superconducting supercollider would have been.
This device is called the Large Hadron Collider, which I've mentioned before in these lectures, and the acronym is LHC.
The LHC is in construction right now, in the year 2005, with a scheduled end date for construction to be 2007.
At some point after that time, the machine will be commissioned, that is turned on, and typically with such complicated technology, there must be a period of sort of a shakedown,
when you must verify that the machine is working as you designed it, so that's one period, and then you have to put detecting devices into the accelerator in order to look for these tiny particles.
It is perhaps ironic that to look for the tiniest things, you actually have to spend more and more money, but that's in fact the case where we need more and more advanced technology to look at these smaller, smaller objects.
Now, at this stage, our nation has made an investment. We have spent approximately $500 million to put detecting devices in the Large Hadron Collider, so in this way, we Americans will participate in the search for what lies beyond the standard model.
Many physicists are convinced that supersymmetry is one of the things that will lie beyond the standard model, and that the LHC will be the place where supersymmetry is found, but it's not guaranteed.
In the year of 1980, I was visiting the campus of Berkeley in California, and there I encountered one of the physicists that introduced the idea of supersymmetry in the western literature.
When supersymmetry began, the Cold War was still underway, and so this topic actually has a bifurcated history where it was discovered independently by Russian physicists and by western physicists.
The western physicists who made this discovery were people by the name of Bruno Zimino and Julius Vess.
In 1980, I was visiting California, and I made a stop in Berkeley. Professor Zimino was a faculty member there. Why did I pick the year 1980?
Well, 1980 was the first year that this mathematical idea of supersymmetry was applied to the standard model. Prior to that point, theoretical physicists had been studying this mathematics, but they had not applied it to the standard model.
There were some papers written that year by two independent groups, one of them at Northeastern University. They were led by physicists whose last names are Arnawitt, Chapsedine, and Nath.
And then there was a separate paper written by a group of physicists in Europe, and the second group included the Italian physicist Ferrara, who again was one of the discoverers of the mathematics of supersymmetry.
And these papers were the first time that people said, let's try to embed the standard model in a supersymmetric context. These papers were the first times that suggested that mirror set of particles that we saw on the transparencies.
So there was a lot of excitement in the physics community. And on encountering Professor Zimino, I said to him, gee, isn't this a great development? The mathematics that a number of us had been involved in for a number of years was suddenly looking as though it was going to become physics.
And to my very great surprise, this man, who is one of the fathers of this idea, looked at me and said, maybe. Sometimes ideas in physics turn out to be correct, but not in the way that we think they are.
In the standard model, we have talked many times about the gluons, the intermediate vector bosons. There's a very special set of equations to describe these things. They're called the Yang-Mills equations, named after the two physicists who invented these equations in 1954.
However, when they invented these equations, they were actually trying to understand forms of matter that are related to protons and neutrons. It turns out that these equations applied to protons and neutrons are miserable failures.
And yet, the mathematics that comes out of this attempt is so potent and itself so intrinsically correct that some 20 years later, it was used to describe the weak intermediate vector bosons in a series of papers that physicists such as Glashow, Weinberg and Salom wrote.
About 10 years after these theoretical papers were written using this mathematics, these objects were found in the laboratory. So even though the initial attempt to apply this mathematics was wrong, the mathematics ultimately came back and described something that we've seen in the world.
It is completely possible that supersymmetry might follow this route. And this is why Professor Zumino had some skepticism. Even though many people who have studied supersymmetry find its mathematics exceedingly elegant and exceedingly convincing, until we see it in the laboratory, we will not know that this mathematics is a description of our world.
It is possible that this mathematics is being applied in an incorrect way, precisely in the way that the Yang-Mills equations were applied when they were first invented. If that should be the case, I'm confident at some point in the future, 30 years, 100 years, these equations will come back and be found to describe something else in nature of very great importance.
