Well, we've come to the final lecture.
For those of you who have stuck through the grind, I hope that what we've done is to really
show you how string theory, this mysterious thing that you may have heard so much about,
the so-called super string M theory, is embedded within the fields of science and mathematics
as we've known them for hundreds if not thousands of years.
String theory we use together an amazing story where strands are contributed by researchers
in both mathematical and physical sciences who have been long dead and yet the results
that they have left behind suddenly illuminate something so complicated as string theory.
String theory, as I have tried to emphasize in these lectures, is a collection of highly
non-trivial, mutually enforcing mathematical facts.
It's not yet science, we've not seen the evidence of it in the laboratory.
And I've judged personally that this is one of the most remarkable concepts that I've
ever seen appear in the realm of applied mathematics.
The structure of super string M theory touches on incredibly large numbers of subjects in
mathematics.
Some of these include algebraic geometry, calculus, differential equations, differential
geometry, league group theory, number theory, topology, and many, many more, monogamy.
And it's amazing that this construction which starts in physics actually has started to
eat up mathematics.
Now what do I mean by that?
Normally, as you watch the progress of physics and mathematics, they're not always talking
to each other.
But periodically they do.
String theory, the last time where you can find in the literature of both disciplines,
an intense conversation was in the 1930s.
This was driven by the discovery of quantum physics.
The physicists knew what they needed in terms of mathematics to describe the world of the
small, and physicists believe or not, or not so always so fastidious in the use of mathematics.
In fact, if you watch physicists use mathematics, they just make it up.
They need a particular mathematical widget tool or device, and they say, well, this is
what I want.
I'll set a few rules down, I'll calculate with it, and if it produces a result that
agrees with an experiment, physicists are perfectly happy.
This is not the case for our mathematical colleagues.
Often times it is the case that when physicists produce mathematics, from the point of view
of real mathematicians, there's a lack of rigor, and therefore mathematicians are often
at the point of taking the suggestions that physicists have and turning it into real mathematics.
Now I've had some experience with this process recently because I will get a chance, I hope,
in a little while to tell you about what I'm doing right now.
I'm an active researcher and although I enjoy teaching, I enjoy lecturing, there is an enormous
sense of enjoyment in entering the world of mathematics and going on a hunt for an idea.
One way to define the word serendipity is the occurrence and development of events by
chance in a happy or beneficial way.
The word serendipity was created by H. Walpole and it's based on a story called The Three
Princes of Serendip.
The book is about a land in Asia where there are three princes who are constantly getting
into trouble, but they get out by the most remarkable means.
They're not wise, they're not clever, but they have lucky accidents.
And so the word serendipity itself is serendipitous because it was coined from the story.
When you look at something like super string M theory, it has an incredibly high SQ, that
is serendipity quotient.
The mathematical accidents that must occur in order for string theory to be logically
rigorous are incredibly large in number.
In fact, so much so that many of the researchers in string theory call it string magic because
things occur that you just couldn't expect.
So it's been a pattern in physics that when enormous numbers of unlikely mathematical accidents
occur, you're looking at a piece of mathematics that is tied to the real world.
We can see other examples of this.
In a previous lecture I've talked about Dirac, he was trying to write an equation which would
describe the electron that would be consistent with Einstein's rules of special relativity.
He succeeded.
However, he found something in the equations he had never put in, namely the equations
demanded the existence of an antiparticle to the electron.
So it's a mathematical accident.
Nonetheless, we now know that that accident is a part of reality.
So this is what we mean by serendipity in the mathematics that describes physics.
And it's incredibly high in string theory and it is in fact a characteristic of good
theoretical physics.
Now why did we push all the way to strings?
Because you might at any stage have asked the question, well, why don't they stop?
After all, atoms seem good enough at one point.
Well, that's true until you start probing what's in the atom.
When you take an atom and shake it, you hear something rattling aside, you've got to worry
about, well, what's that something that gets us to the world of elementary particles.
Elementary particles we've been studying for roughly 60 or 70 years.
Literally tens of thousands of pieces of data agree with the mathematical description of
elementary particles.
That description is called a standard model.
So you might say, well, why don't they stop?
Once again, there's a problem with the standard model.
You see, all of these experiments that we describe and are able to perform do not take
into account gravity.
If you try to write a theory which includes the description of quarks and leptons and
the force carrying particles and include gravity, you get a mathematical piece of nonsense.
That is, you get something that makes no prediction at all.
So that's why we couldn't stop because gravity, most apparently, is around us.
So why should not the elementary particles also be subject to gravity?
Now, Einstein, after creating the theory of general relativity, spent 30 years trying
to find its successor.
Part of the reason for that was his acute sense of what is right.
If you read about Einstein, and I've been fortunate enough this year to be forced to
read about Einstein, because it's been a topic of much discussion in this Einstein
world, your physics.
You find out that Albert Einstein was an exceptional physicist working in an exceptional manner.
Not at all what you might think.
That is, he didn't start with the mathematics.
Typically, Einstein would start with a story.
So it's this fine sense of what is right that drove Einstein to seek the theory that
he called the unified field theory.
How did he reach this sense?
Well, in his equations describing the universe, the equation like all equations have two sides.
His equation has one side that describes the curvature of space and time.
The other side of the equation is where you put matter, and the thing that disturbed Einstein
so much was the following.
You could take matter out of his equations and put a zero on that side of the equation.
The other side of the equation works just fine, and so what you wind up describing is a universe
where there is only space and time, but nothing else.
In a theory that is truly fundamental, something is wrong there, because after all in our universe,
there's not just space and time, there we're around.
So it was his sense that at a fundamental level, whatever equation was correct, it ought to
describe more than just space and time.
His equations describe a grand stage, but that stage can be empty.
More complete theory would describe a stage, talk about the actors that have to be on the
stage, and even perhaps talk about the play they must perform.
So that's the sense that's driving him to seek the unified field theory.
Strength theory is fundamentally different from Einstein's view of the as-expounded and
general relativity.
You see in strength theory, if you take the four dimensional versions, you have no mathematical
choice as to whether matter exists.
You must have matter where the equations don't make sense.
That is somehow very deeply satisfying when you start to think about the aesthetics of
physics.
After all, why are we here?
Well, if you have an explanation that says otherwise the universe makes no sense at all,
that's a pretty good reason for our presence.
Strength theory, or super string M theory, or the variety of names by which these constructs
are known, are the first time in physics when this statement could be made.
Strength theory is not a complete story.
When I got to the end of my presentation, I was talking about M theory, but you see
M theory is not the end.
Why not?
Well, if you look very carefully in my presentation, you should have caught on to a strange dichotomy.
I started talking in the language of elementary particles about particles, but then I talked
about the force carriers, but at some time you may have heard the word feel theory slipping,
and that's because, in fact, in the world of the quantum, we cannot distinguish between
particles and waves, and the way that you describe a wave is with the mathematical tool
of a field.
In all of my presentations about string theory, you probably never heard me talk about a string
feel, and the reason that I didn't talk about it is because that's the boundary of our knowledge
in super string M theory.
For the open string, there is a feel theory description.
That means something that is more general than thinking about filaments.
It was written down by Edward Whitten around 1984-85.
For the closed strings and the heterotic string that I have described for you, no one in the
world knows how to write its feel theory.
Why is that important?
Well, you see, the feel theory versions of these discussions are the analogs, the true
analogs of Einstein's theory of general relativity.
So why can't we find them?
Well, let me talk about how Einstein found his equations.
1905, Einstein had the year of miracles.
However, in 1907, he was still a patent clerk.
One day, he looks out of the window of the office and notices across the street some
workers working on a roof.
He hasn't thought.
If one of them should fall, he would not feel his weight.
Now, this is, in fact, what shows the exceptional way in which Einstein works, because you see,
he describes this scene himself later around the 1920s, 23 or so, and he called this the
happiest thought of his life.
And the reason he referred to it this way is because it's this single thought that led
to the theory we call general relativity.
General relativity is the genesis of the Big Bang.
It's a theory that begins to describe the entire history of our universe.
But it starts with a story.
It starts with a parable, and that's how Einstein works.
It doesn't come first with the mathematics.
It comes with a deep understanding of an aspect of the universe.
Now, we can see this deep understanding in a cartoon, and if you look at this, you'll
see we have a cartoon, Einstein.
He starts to be accelerated, and as he's accelerated, the acceleration feels like the force of gravity
to him.
If a ball were to travel from the side, since the elevator's accelerating upwards, the ball
would appear to fall.
By using the same reasoning with a beam of light, Einstein concludes that light must
be bent by gravity, because it would fall in this situation.
He said you couldn't tell the two apart.
This is the story that's often called the man in the elevator.
Now, the interesting thing about the story of the man in the elevator is that you can
take that story if you have a sufficient amount of mathematical training and use that story
alone to derive Einstein's equations of motion, his theory of general relativity.
You see, we have no such story for string theory, and that means even though we have
this incredibly large collection of mathematical facts, we do not have the point of physical
insight that tells us why string theory must be correct.
That's the thing that's lacking.
That's the boundary that perhaps one day, I'm certainly many of us hope, someone will
have a bright idea like Einstein's story about the man in the elevator.
In fact, I often refer to string theory or super string M theory presently as the search
for a missing man in the elevator, because if we get that story right, we will have made
an enormous leap in terms of physically understanding why these theories must be true, not because
of mathematical consistency.
Well, as I said, string theory is not at its end.
It sets sort of a midpoint.
We're still trying to push hard to create it.
Superings, string M theory almost makes some predictions.
It tells us, for example, that we should expect ordinary matter to have super partners.
These super partners perhaps are only ordered to three of 300 to a thousand times as heavy
as say the average of the ordinary matter that we know.
If we find the super partners, it's only indirect evidence of string theory.
We can also say that string theory, because of the presence of supersymmetry, tells us
that by looking at the running of the coupling constants and experiments that we can perform
within the next decade, we ought to at least be able perhaps to detect supersymmetry.
Perhaps it will come in the form of looking at something like the cosmic microwave background,
whereby studying the fluctuations and the temperature of the background, we can see
perhaps the signature of super string theory written in the heavens.
So whether we find super string theory or not as a scientific principle, I'm pretty
convinced that as a mathematical theory, it's probably here to stay.
Maybe it will make it as a description of the universe, maybe not.
But in terms of mathematics, there's nothing that I know in the history of mathematical
physics that comes even close.
So in the worst possible case, we can probably say that super string M theory will become
a branch of mathematics.
What am I doing?
Well, I'm aware of these problems.
Most of my community is our hold up, our difficulty, is we don't know how to get past these problems.
You see, genius does not show up on schedule.
Bright ideas cannot be commanded into existence.
Most of the time as a theoretical physicist, we're confused.
We're trying to find correct answers to solve problems.
So let me give you some insight into the things that are of interest to me right now.
I talked to you about the big problem of super string M theory.
That big problem is to find for string theory the equation that plays the role of Einstein's
equation in general relativity.
That's the big problem.
No one in the world knows how to solve that.
That problem's been around for about 15 to 20 years.
On the other hand, there are other problems that perhaps we can make progress in and by
studying these problems might contribute ultimately to the solution of this big problem.
That's one of the things I've been doing recently.
So let me show you a bit of research, some current research that's underway.
I'll begin by showing you a picture.
That's a picture of Susie.
Now, of course, you might say, well, what in the world does that mean?
So let me talk about this picture a little bit.
The two bluish areas in this picture represent universes which only contain bosons on one
hand and fermions on the other.
And one is to imagine that the number of bosons in one is equal to the number of fermions
on the other.
Now, there are mathematically precise ways to study these issues.
And in fact, what I've been doing for the last five years or so is to study this mathematics.
Interestingly enough, by this picture, one has led back to study the mathematics of Clifford.
And we met Clifford in our discussions some time ago.
We returned to Clifford.
You'll notice that there are arrows that are pointing back and forth in this diagram.
The arrows that go from the blue area on the left to the blue area on the right and vice
versa are the supersymmetry transformations.
Remember, we kept talking about taking ladders and lifting them from horizontal positions
to vertical and back.
Well, I have been studying the mathematics that maps between these two regions back and
forth.
And in fact, we've begun to see some interesting structures emerge.
One of the questions that you would want to know is, what's in those blue areas?
This is a part of mathematics that's known as representation theory.
And so this is the problem I have chosen to attack.
It's related to string theory, but it's not string theory itself.
You see, we have talked many times in this presentation about symmetries and about the
objects that cause rotations and the number of such objects.
But one thing that we haven't talked about is to ask this a very simple question.
What else are there besides ladders?
What do we mean by that?
Or what else are there besides arrows?
Let's remember some bit.
I've talked about spinners as being an object that's a little bit like an arrow, but you
have to, if it's pointing at you and you walk around at once and look at it, you actually
find it's pointing away, but if you walk around twice, it's pointing at you and nobody has
touched it in between.
That's a spinner.
What's a vector or an arrow?
Well, an ordinary arrow, if it starts pointing at me, if I walk around once and look at it,
it's still pointing at me.
Suppose I start with a ball.
Well, if I walk around the ball, not even all the way, if it has no features, it looks
the same to me.
So ball, spinner, arrow, those are what we call representations.
Each one of them has a property that you can express on traveling around it.
Are there more such things?
The answer is yes.
We know, in fact, all of the objects in this sequence that I've described, they're called
representations.
Now, for rotational symmetries, which is what it means to go around something, we know every
single object that occurs.
Cartan and his classification told us about not just rotations, but all possible symmetries.
And believe it or not, we understand all of their representations.
When Cartan was doing his work, supersymmetry was not known.
Remember, supersymmetry only appeared in the 1970s in the West.
To this day, we don't know all of its representations.
So by going back and studying the mathematical questions that are associated with this, it's
my hope to first answer this fundamental question, namely, what is there in the zoo of supersymmetry?
What's the complete list, if we think of them as denizens, as we do for the quantum world,
what's the complete list of denizens that inhabit these blue regions?
Now, this is a question, it turns out, that physicists have not been able to answer for
30 years.
In my quest to answer this question, I've joined with other physicists, I have three,
there are three of us who are mathematicians, and counting myself, three physicists.
So we have an interdisciplinary collaboration where we are studying this question about
what resides in these blue regions.
Now, you might wonder what this has to do with string theory.
Well, you see, string theory has supersymmetry all over it.
If that's the case, we know that string theory vibrates in all possible ways, and therefore,
since it vibrates in all possible ways, the expectation is, within string theory, we'll
find all possible representations.
But remember, that's what I'm looking for, is I want to know what are all the possible
representations.
Now, we haven't solved this problem, but we have found connections to interesting pieces
of mathematics.
For example, there's a subject in mathematics called k-theory, it would take me another
entire lecture course to explain to you what k-theory is, but the point is, it's an interesting
mathematical tool that we have begun to use to find these denizens that inhabit the blue
regions.
I can show you some of them, and I will in a few moments.
We've also found that there are other pictures of these objects that exist in these blue
regions.
And at this stage, one of the things that's emerging is this whole issue of picture making.
You will notice that in this course, I have mostly been talking about mathematics, but
with a minimum of mathematics.
I've been diligently trying to use the pictures of the mathematics to convey the ideas that
sit behind string theory.
This idea that pictures can replace mathematics speaks very powerfully to an alternative way
to understand mathematics.
In fact, we have used this, for example, in Feynman diagrams where there's a story associated
with the picture, and by the use of Feynman diagrams, I hope I've opened up a point of
view for you on how the quantum world works.
The fact that I and my collaborators have begun to find new pictures of this mathematics
suggests that we are reaching a deeper level of understanding that has previously occurred.
If we're successful in our efforts to find all the denizens, then of course we want to
turn the focus back to the string, because if you know all the possible ways the string
can vibrate, then you can use that as an alternative point to ask, in the equation that plays
the role of general relativity, can you describe all these possible ways of vibrating?
So things are actually linked.
Symmetries always work like that.
Remember, we've used symmetry repeatedly in this course, where by knowing one piece of
information is symmetry, we can derive other things.
So now let me introduce you to some of the denizens.
In the world of supersymmetry this time, not in the quantum world.
There are these pictures that you see before you.
Last year, working with a physicist by the name of Michael Fox, by studying the mathematics
of these blue regions, we were able to tease out of the region some of the representations.
And most remarkably, we found that there are simple pictures which contain the information
which describe these representations.
I'm showing you some of them here.
Now this of course is a little bit like going to a new continent and seeing new animals.
Imagine the first settlers that went to Australia to see kangaroos.
Well, wow, a new kind of animal that has never been seen before.
When you see a new animal, one of the things you want to do is to name it.
So these pictures needed a name, and Michael Fox and I decided to use the word adinkra.
And adinkra is a symbol that carries hidden meaning.
It comes from the West African language known as Ashanti.
So we have found these objects which are the beginning of a list of representations that
inhabit the blue regions.
We have found a number of very interesting properties.
For example, these things can be folded up, kind of like proteins, which came as a very
great surprise to us.
They come in marvelous varieties.
Here's some more of them.
They have properties where you can turn them a certain way and you get another sort of
animal.
You can switch the legs in certain ways, you get another sort of animal, and I'm using
the word animal here for in place of representation.
And so we are at this point simply classifying the number of representations, much as an explorer
in a new land would begin to classify the flora and the fauna.
Let me show you one of the most interesting set of beasts we have met so far.
There are these.
And there's a particular reason why I put these up for you, which I'll come to.
There are in these blue regions representations for which these pictures are a complete description.
Now the one that's on the left, the reason why I put it up, is you remember in the supersymmetrical
universe that we've been describing, coming from string theory, there are force carriers
and their super partners.
Also in this supersymmetric version of the standard model, there are matter fields and
their super partners.
It turns out that the picture that you see on the left is a picture of the force carriers
and their super partners.
We have been able to identify in the blue regions the representations that have exactly
the properties of gluons, gluinos, photons and fotinos, W particles and winos and what
have you.
On the other hand, the picture that you see on the right here is exactly a picture of
the quarks and the squarks, the electron and the selectron and all the rest of the spin
zero and spin one half particles that we have found in the standard model.
These pictures are very new, in fact, most physicists don't yet know that these things
exist.
It is our hope that ultimately this kind of a graphical approach will be possible for
us to find all of the inhabitants of the blue regions that I showed you.
And should that be the case, then there will be a new tool with which to begin to study
the mysterious world of M theory.
Is it going to work out?
I don't know.
That's why we call it research.
