I'm Julian Barber. Welcome to my YouTube channel and a video about shape dynamics,
which is a theory of the universe on which my collaborators and I have been working for some years.
Dr. Sean Eccles in the Physics Department of the California Polytechnic in San Luis Obispo gives an introduction.
After that, four of his summer school students give short presentations.
I'm encouraged how readily they have taken to shape dynamics,
which in the first place is a more fundamental way to represent the essential content of both Isaac Newton's and Einstein's theories of gravity.
One of the students said it's a lot easier than super string theory.
I hope you enjoyed the video and find it informative.
Hello, I am Dr. Sean Eccles at Cal Poly State University in San Luis Obispo, California.
And I'm going to give a brief introduction to shape dynamics.
Perhaps the greatest problem in theoretical physics today is the problem of creating a consistent theory of quantum gravity.
That is, we'd like a theory that combines quantum mechanics, the theory of the very, very small scales, microscopic tiny scales,
with the theory of the very, very large cosmological scales, scales at which gravity becomes very important.
Gravity is governed by the theory of general relativity.
This has proven to be a very difficult problem and very little progress has been made in the last half of a century.
Because of a fundamental misunderstanding or incomplete understanding of the background in which these theories take place.
That is an understanding of space and time.
In quantum mechanics, the theory proceeds as if it's being conducted inside of a laboratory where there's some external measuring stick and clock available to measure positions and times.
Quantum mechanics is a very absolute Newtonian based theory.
It depends on a fixed non dynamical background structure. We use Minkowski space and quantum field theory.
And likewise time is given as just a parameter that uniformly and uniquely flows forward consistently throughout the universe.
But we know from general relativity that this is in fact not the case.
There is in fact no fixed space time background space time is governed by geometries that are in fact dynamic. They change with respect to time.
General relativity can be thought of as a relational theory in the sense that it's not space and time that are primary.
In fact, the events that occur within the theory that are the primary information the relevant information of the theory and space and time only exists as descriptions of the interrelations of these events.
These are fundamentally different viewpoints of the arenas in which these theories take place. And so, perhaps to make any further progress, what is required is a fundamental reinterpretation, or fundamental understanding of the metaphysical characteristics of space and time themselves.
Space time philosophy goes back centuries.
Godfrey Leibniz was a contemporary of Isaac Newton.
And he had a very relational perspective on the universe.
Central to his metaphysics were three principles, the principle of sufficient reason that for every fact there is a reason that is sufficient to explain what and why it is the way it is, and not otherwise.
The principle of the identity of indiscernible. If there is no way of telling two entities apart, then they are in fact one and the same thing. There is no difference if we have no way of telling them apart.
The principle that the complete notion of a contingent thing requires a knowledge of not only the thing itself, but everything in the universe in which it has a relation to.
A thing is not defined as a thing itself, but in its relations to the other things in the universe.
So in this sense, the universe should be thought of as a relational dynamical system.
This is the fundamental basis of a theory of shape dynamics.
Let's give some examples of what a relational universe would mean.
The relational universe space exists only as a relationship between the objects in the universe and has no existence, no ontological existence in and of itself, apart from the existence of those objects.
Again, it's a relationship.
Likewise, motion exists only as the relationship between those objects.
How the objects change.
Time, then, is simply a measure of the relative motions of objects.
And in fact, we know this to be the case. How do we tell the time? We tell the time with a clock.
The clock is simply the motion of moving hands around a dial, ultimately calibrated to the motion of the planets through the solar system, the earth around the sun.
Or if you like, in modern definitions, the motion of the vibration of a cesium atom.
So think about the relational universe through a number of thought experiments, these thought experiments using the three key principles of Leibniz can be thought of as arguments against an absolute theory of space and time.
The first is the shifted universe. Now imagine that the universe is made up of particles.
And in fact, that it is made of fields and dynamical geometry background.
But imagine that we have a system composed entirely of individual particles.
And in the top diagram here, we're looking at all of those particles, the entire universe.
Now, imagine that every single one of those particles was uniformly shifted up into the right.
Whole universe moved.
Would there be a difference? Would we be able to tell the difference?
I would argue, no. And based on the principle of the identity of indiscernible, there is no difference, in fact, between those two universes, they are in reality, one and the same thing.
Now, why don't we twice consider the inflated universe, take every single one of those particles, and let them expand suddenly to twice the distance from every other particle.
The whole universe inflates to twice the size.
Would we know? Could we tell the difference?
All of our measuring sticks have also increased by twice the size. So everything is in fact measured in exactly the same way.
Let's take an even simpler example. Imagine that there are only two particles in the entire universe, and that's all that there is.
Is there any notion in which we could define a distance?
How would we measure the distance between those two particles? Measure it with respect to what?
How could we tell if those particles were moving relative to each other, if there's nothing to measure that motion with respect to?
Finally, consider the accelerated universe. Time, like space, should be thought of in a relational way.
Imagine that every particle's motion suddenly doubled. Everything suddenly started moving faster.
Could we tell?
Well, of course, all of our clocks are also moving faster.
Again, in this relational perspective, there would be no difference whatsoever. These are all examples of one and the same universe.
The question of time is in fact quite complex and deserves a little bit more discussion.
From a Newtonian absolute perspective, time is thought of as a real thing, an existent object.
But what is time? How do we measure time?
In physics, T, the parameter for time, is simply a parameter that monotonically increases.
And most of the laws of physics, interestingly, are in fact time invariant.
In other words, if we replace T with minus T in the equations, we end up with valid solutions to those same equations.
In fact, we get effectively the same solutions just in reverse.
The basic example is a bouncing ball influenced by gravity. Give it an initial upwards velocity. It's going to follow a parabolic trajectory, reaching some maximum height and falling back to the ground.
And just before it bounces, hitting the ground with some final velocity.
If we reverse time or rather replace time with negative time in the equations, what happens?
It's a reverse movie. Instead of a particle hitting the ground with velocity BF, it instead is shooting upwards from the ground with an initial velocity equal and opposite.
It then follows exactly the same trajectory, ending up with the same final velocity as the initial velocity we had given it in the previous picture.
And this idea of time invariance is in fact quite ubiquitous throughout physics, except for one notable exception.
This is the second law of thermodynamics.
In a statistical picture, as understood through Boltzmann statistics introduced by with Boltzmann.
Entropy, a measure of the disorder of a system always increases.
The second law of thermodynamics tells us that the entropy will always tend towards a maximum will always increase and this is indeed time asymmetric.
And because of this, the increase of entropy is oftentimes associated with an arrow of time.
Time is thought to proceed in the direction of the increase of entropy.
There are significant conceptual issues with this idea.
One of these is the fact that in order to increase an entropy, this implies that somewhere in the past, there must have been a very ordered low entropy system.
What created such a special initial condition.
This is something we'd like to understand.
Ernst Mach, the same Mach that is known for the Mach numbers supersonic travel was in fact a very wide read and wide studied physicist, and his ideas were in fact very influential to Einstein's development of the theory of general relativity.
Central to shape dynamics is so called Mach's principle, which says that local physical laws are determined by the large scale structure of the universe and depend only on directly observable quantities.
A physical laws cannot depend on things we can't see, only on the things that we can measure.
Shape dynamics is a theory constructed on this idea.
It was invented by Dr. Julian Barber.
And in his own words, shape dynamics is a theory of gravity that retains the essential dynamical core of general relativity, while removing in a well motivated way structure that is potentially redundant, and may well be responsible for the difficulties in the creation of quantum gravity.
In dynamics, we have dynamical systems that evolve as trajectories through the background that we will call shape space, the space of all possible shape configurations.
The principle of best matching is defined to is used to define an idea of distances and a natural metric in the theory.
Then a principle of least action can be used to find geodesics through this background.
The metrodynamics would then be the general relativistic or local dynamical geometry generalization of a particle theory of shape dynamics.
One step further from the general relativistic analog to a quantum gravity analog, which we might term Machian quantum gravity, and this would proceed by quantizing a theory of geometrodynamics using Wheeler-DeWitt canonical quantum gravity techniques.
The arena in which shape dynamics occurs is called shape space.
Shape space by definition, however, is background independent.
And in shape space, all absolute elements, vestiges of an absolute Newtonian space, are eliminated.
Shape space is unique because it is defined by the fewest possible observable initial data, and it is these data that will then determine the observable evolution of the system.
The only variables that we permit in our theory are those that describe the shapes of the instantaneous particle configurations.
And it is these shapes that are treated as our dynamical variables in the theory.
Shape space is the space of all possible configurations.
In shape space, time does not exist.
It is completely unobservable.
These observable, however, are the relative motions of the particles and more specifically the shapes in the system, and it is these dynamics that can be observed and perhaps reinterpreted as motion and time.
The simplest ways of describing a shape space is taking the sets of all interparticle distances between the particles in the theory, and it is these sets that can be considered the snapshots of the instantaneous shape configurations of the system.
However, distances are of course an absolute quantity and must be measured with respect to something else with some measuring stick.
What we would like are truly scale invariant variables in our theory.
So what we can do is create the idea of a scale invariant distance by dividing the interparticle distances by an overall scale factor, which we might call the root mean harmonic distance.
We can calculate it in a sense by summing over all of the interparticle distances squared in the theory.
In group theory, shape space is a reduction space of the larger Newtonian Cartesian space in which the Newtonian theory exists.
And in doing this reduction, we are in fact eliminating a level of redundant structure that is in fact unnecessary to describe the dynamics of the system.
We're getting rid of the redundant structure of absolute space.
If we start in the Cartesian space with n particles, the configuration space consists of three n dimensions, and that's because we have three degrees of freedom, say X, Y and Z positions for each particle.
But as we have discussed, there is redundant structure here.
So the first reduction that we will use is quotienting the Cartesian space by the group of translations. In other words, overall shifts of the system are redundant.
And quotienting by the translations brings us to what we would call quotient space in which we have eliminated three degrees of freedom and now are at dimension three and minus three.
And further quotient by overall rotations of the system, which again if there's nothing external with which to measure with respect to those rotations are invisible.
This again reduces the space by dimension three and brings us to what we might call configuration space.
To reach shape space, we also need to quotient by overall dilatations or changes of the overall scale of the configurations in the theory. This again reduces the dimension by one, bringing us to a dimension of three and minus seven.
In the general case, shape space requires seven less input data than the same theory to be described in a Newtonian background.
The simplest example of a shape space is for three particles, what we would call triangle space, because of course three point particles will always form some triangle.
In Cartesian space, we would need nine input data to describe the positions of each of the three particles.
But in shape space, we in fact only need nine minus seven or two datum to completely specify the configuration, the triangle.
This can be done in a number of different ways.
For example, we might choose one side of the triangle to be our quote unquote measuring stick set that equal to a distance of one in unit list variables, in which case we can measure the other two sides with respect to that one distance.
Perhaps better would be simply to use the angles within the triangle. And of course, the third angle within the triangle would be fixed by the geometry.
There are more sophisticated techniques, for example, the use of so called hop variables, as we will discuss in more detail moving forward.
And using these coordinations, we move to the expression of the shape space on the so called shapesphere, where every point on the surface of this sphere corresponds to a given configuration, ie, a specific triangle.
The equilateral triangle exists at the north and south poles, and the bilinear configurations exist along the equator.
More will be said about this later.
From the three body problem we would like to generalize to the arbitrary in body gravitational theory.
This has a number of uses.
Of course, in reality we know that our universe has quite fields, and has a dynamical structure.
We can think of this model as a sort of coarse grain structure for galaxies or even larger scale the entire universe.
And as we'll see, even the classical gravitation theory leads to quite a number of very significant insights into the nature of space and time.
Central to such a theory, we need to create a sense of the size of scale of the system, and we do so with the center of mass moment of inertia, ICM calculated in the standard way is a mass weighted distance to each object squared.
You'll notice that in order to make this scale invariant with respect to the masses we divide by the overall sum of the masses.
In this theory, we also define Newton's gravitational potential in the standard way as minus this inverse inner particle distances, multiplied by the masses of the two particles, and summed over for all inner particle pairs.
Here you'll note that we are in units in which G Newton's constant is set to one.
Now, it's Newton's gravitational potential, or rather the gradient of which leads to forces, gravitational forces in the theory.
But these forces combine the ideas of changes of shape, which is what we're really interested in our shape space, with changes of scale and rotation.
We'd like to eliminate some of that structure. And we can do so by constructing what we call the shape potential vis-a-vis.
This class really is the Newtonian potential, but multiplied by the square root of the center of mass moment of inertia in order to create a scale invariant quantity.
And it's important because now this shape potential gives rise to shape forces, which tell us only about the forces exerted on the system that change the configuration, or the shape of the system.
Related to this quantity, and in fact that in the negative of this quantity is a number that we will call the shape complexity.
The shape potential is a negative quantity.
Complexity then is just a positive number expressing the same relations, but it has a very important meaning in the theory. It tells us sensitively about the clustering of particles in the system.
Certain particles come close together. Of course, not only does the gravitational energy increase significantly, so will the complexity of the system.
But it does so in a way that is independent of the overall scale of the system itself.
Understanding shape space, we can then describe trajectories through this space.
And it's these trajectories that tell us the history of the dynamics. What has happened in the theory?
In Newtonian dynamics, we began in Cartesian space, and as time flows, the positions of those particles move, the position in that Cartesian space changes.
And we can think of this as a monotonically increasing curve, rising with a monotonically increasing time parameter.
But as we have argued, time is in fact invisible, relational.
So it is actually the curve itself projected down into the Cartesian configuration space that tells us the history of the entire system.
And that, of course, can be parameterized in any number of different ways, but the history is in fact there and existent at all times.
We'd like to make the further reduction from this Cartesian space into the shape space, because it is this shape space history, or the shape space curve rather, that tells us the truly observable history of the system.
In practice, carrying out this reduction, or this projection into the shape space, involves imposing a number of constraints on the Newtonian system.
Namely, we would like to eliminate translations, rotations, and dilatations from the system.
This is illustrated in these top triangles. In picture one, you'll notice particles A, B, and C have moved ever so slightly from their initial position represented by the gray triangle.
The dotted triangle, the dash triangle, is just a slightly different shape, a slightly different configuration from that first triangle.
You'll notice in the diagram labeled by T, that we have that same dash triangle only shifted over to the right just a little bit.
In a Newtonian Cartesian space, these would be unique motions, but they would be invisible from a shape space perspective.
Likewise, if we rotate that dash triangle relative to the original triangle in R, or scale that triangle, making a bigger triangle or dilating it, as represented in graphic D,
all of these motions would be invisible and reduced in the shape space.
So we're going to constrain these motions. We're not going to allow them. We're going to set them to zero from the get-go.
We can do so by putting the triangle at the center of mass, and requiring that the center of mass momentum is zero, so that the particle is not translating.
Likewise, we will require that the angular momentum is zero, eliminating overall rotations of the system.
And finally, we might require that the dilatational momentum, or rather the time rate of change of the center of mass moment of inertia, which tells us about the overall scale of the system, we might require that to be zero as well.
Now, this last one turns out to be a bit tricky, and we may say more about it later on.
The changes of scale and dilatation do in fact have a very significant effect on the trajectories and the dynamics of the theory itself.
In the shape space perspective, all of these different motions, translations, rotations, and dilatations, give rise to different Newtonian initial velocities, but again are all collapsed to the same position in a shape space.
There's one more condition that we need to impose, and that's setting the total energy of the system to zero.
And this is because the total energy is the sum of the kinetic and the potential, but any redefinition of time will affect only the kinetic energy and not the potential and therefore change the value of your energy.
Thus, the only scale invariant choice is to set the energy to zero so that these two quantities perfectly cancel each other out.
There's much, much more to be said about shape dynamics, but I will leave that to my student colleagues, Dutch Volts, who will be giving a talk on creating the Newtonian trajectories and the idea of a Janus point.
Margo Chesnut, who will be discussing the three body shape sphere in more detail and giving an introduction to the four body complexity space.
Teresa Samborn will give a talk on applying our trajectories from Newtonian space onto the shape sphere itself into the shape space.
And Grant Gilbert will discuss more on the structure of the shape space and how it is constructed.
My name is Dutch Volts. I'm a second year physics student at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo, and I will be speaking on Newtonian trajectories and the Janus point.
Let's imagine a universe of just a few particles, each with a mass position and velocity relative to the others.
Isaac Newton described their motion in absolute time, which he said flows uniformly forward.
Given the particles positions and velocities at an initial time, his equations determine how the particles move ever after solving the equations when the particles exert gravitational forces on each other is the end body problem, where N is the number of particles.
Because Newton's equations are symmetric in time, we can, keeping the initial positions fixed, reverse all the velocities and find the motions in the opposite direction.
Because time is not visible, and we consider the particles to be the whole universe. There is nothing that distinguishes one direction of Newton's absolute time from the other.
The measure of mass moment of inertia ICM measures the size of the end body system.
If the total energy is either zero or positive, then except in a very special case, we won't consider the size always has a unique finite minimum value from which it increases to infinity in both directions of time.
You can see how the instantaneous size changes in the spot. First going in one direction, and then the other.
On both sides of Newton's absolute time zero, the system is similar and appears time invariant.
Julian Barber has called this point of minimum size, the Janus point. Around it, the distribution of the particles is more uniform than elsewhere, becoming more clustered in both directions away from it.
To better define it, a Janus point is a point where the size of an end body system is at a minimum, and all solutions where the energy is non negative.
If there were positive energy in the system, all particles would shoot off into infinity. If there was negative energy, the potential energy would be greater than the kinetic, and the system would collapse in on itself.
The end body universe expands to infinite size becomes more clustered in both directions away from the Janus point.
The blustering defines bi-directional arrows of time. The Roman gods standing at the Janus point could look in opposite directions of time simultaneously.
As Julian Barber, Tim Kofslawski, and Flavio Markotti pointed out, the observation suggests the solution to one of the greatest mysteries in physics.
How can an arrow of time emerge from laws that do not distinguish one?
In these slides, we will visualize how particles move in Newtonian space relative to a Janus point.
Here is an example of a three particle or three body system. This system has been subjected to certain constraints, such as zero angular momentum and zero total energy.
This is a generic solution, and any system subject to these constraints will have similar results.
This specific solution shows three particles of equal mass, where other solutions would be slightly different since the masses are not the same.
On the left, we can see the trajectories of a blue, red, and green particle as they move away from the Janus point and interact with each other gravitationally.
On the right, we see the same system, but moving in the opposite direction out of the Janus point.
You will see that in both cases, two of the particles appear to conjoin and move together. We call this a Kepler pair.
The third particle, or any particle not in a pair, we call a singleton.
The Kepler pair and the singleton particle are shooting off in opposite directions as to balance the center of mass and maintain angular momentum at zero.
Notice how in different directions out of the Janus point, we see different pairs, even in the same system.
Out of one, we see the red and the green particle in a Kepler pair, and out of the other, we see a red and a blue.
Here is a zoomed in section of the same animation, so you can better see how the particles in Kepler pairs interact.
Notice how these particles come close together, quickly loop around each other, and then move away, mimicking Keplerian orbits.
Here is the original system, except we've combined both trajectories out of the Janus point onto the same plot.
To clarify, this is what the Roman god would see if they stood at the Janus point, two universes, not the same, but very similar, and with the same particles expanding out to infinity.
Now I have some more graphs to show you.
On the left is the dilatational momentum, or an increase of how the system dilates, or the measure of how the system dilates.
This is simply the rate of change of the ICM, since it is a measure of the change of the moment of inertia of the center of mass.
On the right is a graph of the complexity, or the clumping of the system.
It oscillates as the Kepler pairs get closer together, and further apart.
Now, we will look at four other instances that have been subjected to shape constraints.
Unlike our original three-body system, these particles do not have the same mass, and therefore behave very differently than what we saw last.
Despite this, we can still observe similarities.
In these three systems, we see Kepler pairs and singletons forming, although they are not very uniform or clean since the masses are not the same.
On the top left, we see a rare system where no Kepler pairs form, and rather the three particles split off as three individual singletons in opposite directions as to maintain angular momentum at zero.
Here, we will look at a five-body system with randomly generated initial conditions.
It may be difficult to see through this zoom recording, but we can see the beginnings of Kepler pairs forming between the red and the purple particles, as well as the yellow and the blue.
Additionally, these two pairs seem to expand together in what we call a cluster.
The green particle shoots off quickly from the rest of the group as a singleton.
Here is a system of 15 particles.
Notice how we have some singletons, a few difficult to see Kepler pairs, and a cluster of pairs forming right here at the top.
This variance is common to see in higher-body systems with random conditions.
To illustrate that variance, here is the graph of the complexity of the 15-particle system.
We can still observe oscillatory motion as before, but it is not as consistent.
We also begin to see somewhat of a trend in the graph that resembles a parabola.
Here, we can see that idea cemented as we observe the complexity of a thousand-particle system.
The effects of the oscillatory motion have been mostly negated by the general trend of complexity upward in both directions out of the Janus point.
End-body problems are not a foreign or a new concept.
For over 300 years, physicists and mathematicians have been using Isaac Newton's equations to try and understand our universe.
Now, the end-body problem can be used to display the universe in a new way, one that will help pave the way for the next part of this theory, where we will find a new way to look at space.
Hello, my name is Margot Chestnut, and I'm a fourth-year physics student at Cal Poly.
In my presentation today, I'll be talking a little bit about the three-body system and introducing the shape sphere, as well as talking about interesting and relevant features of the shape sphere.
Then, towards the end, I'll also introduce the four-body system.
Let's now take a closer look at the standard three-body system of three particles of equal mass.
These three crosshairs are the three particles, and this point in the middle is the center of mass.
This system always forms a triangle, and its shape can be described by two angles.
For this, we can generate a sphere of all possible configurations of the shape of the system, called the shape sphere.
This is a representation of the shape sphere.
The colors on the sphere indicate the complexity of that particular configuration.
For example, the shape of the system right now is an equilateral triangle, and is at the point of lowest complexity.
Even with equal masses, the point of lowest complexity, called the alpha point, is on the poles of the sphere.
The alpha point is the most special, most uniform shape.
I can change the shape of the system, and the corresponding position on the shape sphere will also change.
Changing the size of the configuration won't change where it lies on the shape sphere, because its shape stays constant.
The equator of the shape sphere represents the collinear configurations, of which there are the Euler configurations, like this one, and binary collisions, like this one.
The Euler point is a saddle point on the shape sphere. These collinear configurations are called central configurations, because if no other force acts upon them, the system will not change its shape.
This animation shows how the triangle of the system changes as the point on the shape sphere moves.
In this graphic, we've also added these contour lines, showing the value of where the shape potential is constant along each contour.
The shape potential is just negative the complexity.
We also have added gradient field lines corresponding to the shape force, which is the gradient of the shape potential.
The gradient field lines flow out of the alpha point, and converge at the binary collisions.
Saddle points exist on the equator at the Euler configurations.
We've been exploring the three-body system so far, but what about the four-body system?
The four-body system needs more than two coordinates to define the system, so its configuration space is five-dimensional.
However, by holding three of the four-point particles constant and having the fourth particle move around the system, we can generate a complexity density plot.
This is an example of a complexity density plot of the four-particle system.
In this case, the three particles are arranged as an equilateral triangle, and the fourth particle is free to move about.
The color and opacity of the plot directly corresponds to the value of the complexity when the fourth particle is directly at that point.
So when the fourth particle is near one of the points that make up the triangle, the clumping is greater so the complexity increases, which you can see by these orange spots right here corresponding to a greater value of complexity.
The point of least complexity for this system is when the fourth particle creates a tetrahedron with the other three particles, which you can see by the areas of least density at the points where tetrahedron would be formed.
One of these density clouds sits on top of every configuration of the three-particle system, so when the three-particle system is in the Euler configuration like this one,
you can see that a complexity density plot for this system looks like this, where there's a ring of lowest complexity that forms around the collinear configuration.
You can see the three particles are aligned collinearly like this.
Now, more investigation of the four-body system is needed to fully understand and describe the configuration space for the four-particle system. Thank you.
My name is Trace Tainwan. I'm a fourth year physics and aerospace engineering student, and I'm going to be discussing how we can apply trajectories to the shape sphere.
Earlier, how a single configuration of three particles may represent on the shape sphere is a point, so it follows that we can represent the progression of triangles, as you see here on the left, as a curve in shape space by comparing triangles as they change over time.
Now, before I go into that further, I need to introduce a concept called best matching.
Best matching is how we can find the distance between configurations within shape space, so in order to do this, we need to be able to define how different two shapes are.
And remember here, we're only discussing the shapes and not their sizes.
We'll consider these two shapes here. They're only slightly different to make the point.
First, you need to find the center of mass of each shape.
Note here as well that if we had a system of non-equal masses, the center of mass would adjust accordingly.
So once we have this point, we superimpose the two shapes, lining up the centers of mass, and then we'll rotate them to try and line them up in a way that minimizes the differences between them.
The details are better visible on these different triangles here.
To find the best matched positions, you want to minimize the mass weighted square of the distances highlighted with red dashes here.
Now that's just the same as how you could find the minimum of a function and the x value at that minimum.
But in our case, we'd be changing the angle of rotation in order to minimize that ds sub sbm value.
You can see here as well how we would find that minimum.
And once we have the triangles best matched, we can determine the path taken between them in shape space while disregarding anything that's background dependent like rotation or scale.
Now that we've established how the trajectories make it onto the shape sphere, we can look into it more conceptually.
So here you can see a three-body system evolving through time in both directions.
As was emphasized earlier, three-body systems have a tendency to form into an orbiting pair and a singleton, which you can see happen here.
This tendency is also observable on the shape sphere as the trajectory approaches the well of a binary collision.
Note that the trajectory is spiraling inward because the pair is getting further and further away from the singleton.
The triangle is becoming more stretched out.
This is again represented here with the system evolving through time where the shape trajectory spirals in towards the potential well and the Kepler pair orbits away from the singleton.
On the other end of time, a different pair forms, so the trajectory on the shape sphere approaches a different potential well.
It will be more clear here that while the particles are near each other, we observe a triangle of larger area and we see the point on the shape sphere in an area of lower complexity, not near the equator, so to speak.
And then again on the bottom row, we see that shard-like behavior as time goes on and the shape trajectory is near that well.
I also want to point out here the Janus point, which is in blue.
As a reminder, that's the point of zero dilatational momentum, and that's a great example of the Janus point not being at the point of lowest complexity, which would be up here for this trajectory.
I'm Grant Gilbert, and I'm a physics student here at Cal Poly, and I will be talking about the structure of shape space.
I'll tell you right away that the structure of shape space, which again defines all possible shapes a collection of gravitating masses can make, is determined solely by the masses and the interparticle distances.
In this talk, I will be focusing on the special three-body case because it is easier to visualize, but keep in mind that these ideas can be generalized to higher dimensions.
We make sense of the structure of shape space by use of a unitless quantity called complexity.
Let your attention to the equation here that describes complexity as a ratio of the root mean squared length and the mean harmonic length, two interparticle distances with units of length that are divided out to produce a unitless result.
This complexity is a pure number that is determined solely by the mass ratios of the particles and the distances between them.
It is useful to quantify any given shape of n particles, essentially acting as a measure of shape.
The systems of similar mass ratios and shape have the same complexity, and generally the more clustered a system is, the more complex it is, which means as a system evolves, it tends to become more complex.
Intuitively, as matches what we see in our own universe, where rich structures such as galaxies and solar systems are born out of the gravitational clustering of the early universe.
The pictures on the left show how rotating or dilating a shape does not change its complexity.
This makes sense because it is impossible for an observer inside the universe to sense any rotation dilation or translation of the entire universe, and thus these transformations should not factor into the measure of its shape.
However, as is the case for the image on the right, changing the position of just one particle in the system changes its complexity.
The particle that is moved here is highlighted in blue, which is a little difficult to see its movement, but if you look closely you will notice it.
This is meant to show that any subtle change of the shape will result in a change of complexity.
Also worth noting is that the shape of the smallest complexity, the one given a value of zero above the minimum here, appears to be the most uniform.
This is not a coincidence, and this is actually true for all shapes of minimum complexity, which may give us insight towards the uniformity of the early universe.
Now here are two representations of shapespace for the three body systems.
On the left is the shapesphere, and on the right is the shapesphere but with its complexity extruded outwards.
You can think of each point on the shapesphere being given an additional height based on the color or complexity of that point.
You can notice the similarities between the contours, color gradients, and trajectories.
The three peaks are the collisions of each particle pair, cut off at a certain point because the complexity goes to infinity, as the collision is never actually reached.
The contours represent points of equal complexity, which also stop appearing at a certain point, but that is merely visual.
The contours begin as a unified near the helpful point, but soon become disjoint and see three separate equal value contours climbing the lengths of the peaks.
The blue line is a shape trajectory of a three body system, exactly like the green line on the shapesphere itself. These are actually the same trajectories.
You can see the spiraling occurs around one of the peaks as two of the particles join in a Kepler pair.
The third particle shoots off in the opposite direction, causing the complexity to increase infinitely, thus cutting off the trajectory.
A good question to ask here is that as said earlier, complexity is a measure of clustering.
So why is the complexity increasing infinitely as the single particle and the pair grow further apart?
The answer is simple. All it takes from you is to think relationally.
From the perspective of the single particle, the two particles representing that pair would appear to approach coincidence as its distance from the pair approaches infinity.
You can imagine an isosceles triangle and you can imagine the two ends of the isosceles triangle being the particle pair and the one at the other end being the single particle.
You can imagine that as one zooms out of that isosceles triangle, you would see only two points because one of the ends would become one point as you zoom out into infinity.
This is exactly what's happening in this trajectory.
The trajectory will continue to climb higher and higher along this collision peak, but just as it will never reach the point of collision, it will never reach the top of the peak.
Of course, we're using shape dynamics to understand the universe. We must consider cases in which the interacting particles do not share the same mass.
Here is an animation of the extruded shape sphere. In this animation, two masses are kept at a value of one while the third mass is moved to five.
Two peaks seem to almost pinch off the third as it becomes smaller and smaller, which can be understood as the probability of both of the less massive particles colliding.
As the mass of one particle becomes larger and larger, it becomes increasingly likely for a Kepler pair to form with the massive particle and one of the less massive ones, which is evident by the two peaks joined together, representing both less massive particles pairing with the massive one.
Finally, note the shifting contours and alpha point, the blue point of minimum complexity, and how they are changing based on the changing mass.
This is another animation, but this time we are changing the two masses at the same time from a value of one to a value of five while leaving the third at one.
Also note that we don't care about the units of these masses because we're working relationally in the form of unitless values and ratios.
The three peaks here can be understood as both cases in which the less massive particles are colliding with one of the massive ones, and actually they're not colliding per se, but they're pairing and at infinity they would be colliding.
And the one large peak is that of the two massive particles pairing.
Note the shifting contours and the alpha point. The very structure of shapespace itself, its contours of equal complexity and alpha point are changing as we change the mass ratios.
In a relational universe, it is only the mass, it is only the ratios between the masses and the separation distances that matter.
We hope you liked the video. If you're interested in looking for more, check out Dr. Barber's website at www.plotonia.com, as well as check out Dr. Barber's latest book, The Janus Point, which details all of what we talked about in this video and more.
