Let's remember where we're up to.
We are in the process of reverse engineering, modern science, in order to understand the
roots of the idea of science and to understand how it was transmitted to the 17th century
so that it was available at that time.
In the last lecture, we looked at the invention of writing, the idea of writing, which became
incarnated as I put it, in a writing system, a symbol system that is a written form of
language with various consequences, which we discussed briefly.
In this lecture, we're going to look at the idea, the invention of the idea of knowledge.
That may sound quite odd.
In fact, it certainly does sound odd that you have to invent the idea of knowledge.
How can the idea of knowledge be invented?
But odd as it may sound, you will see that what we mean by the term knowledge, in fact,
had to be invented.
That definition is not natural, just as the idea of science is not natural.
At the close of the last lecture, I read a passage from Plato's Dialogue to Fidris,
in which Socrates explained why, gave an argument of why writing was not a gift.
That as a matter of fact, writing was not an effective means of communicating wisdom
or knowledge.
In fact, it was potentially destructive because it gives the seeming of wisdom.
It makes people seem to know things that they don't really understand, because you
cannot quiz, you cannot interrogate a text, and so Socrates himself did not write.
One imagines he could have written, but he did not write.
I am sure that it did not escape you how ironic it is that Plato should embed this argument
against writing in a written text.
In fact, Plato's writings are overwhelmingly purported to be the teachings of Socrates
who did not write.
There is an irony there.
What was Plato trying to do?
What was Plato getting at?
How did Plato think that he could overcome the arguments of Socrates against writing
in the way that he wrote the text that he wrote?
In which Socrates appears as an interrogator and not as someone who is accumulating data
to be written down in a book, hoping to make the 10 best seller list in Athens in the early
4th century BCE.
As a matter of fact, Plato's writing, he believed, had a quality of dynamism to it that causes
us to ask these questions and that the value of the dialogues is largely in the way that
we are forced to ask questions and not to use the dialogues to simply transmit Socrates'
ideas, values, and teachings, but to transmit this idea that we need to become engaged with
these questions.
And unquestionably, the question that is most prominent and central to Plato's thinking
and to Plato's depiction of Socrates is the idea of knowledge.
Here we have a word, knowledge.
What does it mean?
Where will we go to look up the definition of the word knowledge?
In what dictionary?
In what absolute dictionary will we go to find the correct definition of the word knowledge?
Obviously, there is no such dictionary.
The definition has to be invented.
Somebody has to define knowledge.
Now, based on the first lecture and comments that I made in the second lecture, there's
no reason why knowledge could not have been defined as know-how.
That would have made knowledge practical, concrete, historical in the sense that it
changes over time as experience changes over time.
But that would mean, since knowledge changes, that knowledge claims at any given time are
only probable and are contextual.
They are a function of the context in which they emerge.
Any given technique for making copper out of the ore, for making bronze, for cultivating
some particular grain could be in the future improved or changed depending on what we have
learned or what we have experienced because of some mutant that all of a sudden arose.
We see the possibility of an ear of corn that's all yellow instead of multicolored.
You may like the idea of a single grain, all the kernels of a single color rather than
multicolored.
A know-how-based definition of knowledge would be, again, practical, concrete.
I'm calling it historical in the sense that it will change over time as experience changes
over time.
And there were philosophers in ancient Greece who defended such an idea of knowledge.
These were philosophers that Plato mocked as the Sophists.
For the Sophists, knowledge was exactly practical, concrete, contextual, historical, and therefore
relative.
There was no such thing as absolute knowledge because human beings don't have absolute experiences.
This is clearly a made-up definition of knowledge, which is what we would call today pragmatic.
It's based on one particular response to human experience.
Plato and Aristotle defended a totally different definition of knowledge.
They defended a definition of knowledge which they had, which had as its ancestor the ideas
of Pythagoras and Parmenides, over 100 years before Plato and Aristotle lived, who had
defended what we would call a rationalist view of knowledge, that is to say they defended
a definition of knowledge as universal, necessary, and certain.
Know-how is particular based on particular experience that you've had.
Know-how is particular.
Know-how is probable and therefore uncertain.
So their definition of knowledge was that something can only be called knowledge if it
is universal, necessary, and certain.
For them, knowledge was timeless.
Once you know something, you know something that is timelessly true because it is universal,
necessary, and certain.
So knowledge now is defined in terms, watch this.
And in terms which have dissociated knowledge from experience because our experience is
always particular.
We experience particular things.
We experience this plant and this animal and this lump of ore.
But knowledge, according to Plato and Aristotle, is about something that is universal, necessary,
and certain.
There's nothing in our experience that is universal, necessary, and certain.
So the object of knowledge for Plato and Aristotle is something, a reality behind experience.
It's a reality that we do not experience directly, that in fact is not available to us to experience
through our bodies.
It is, the object of knowledge is accessible only to the mind.
The paradigm of this form of knowledge at, in the fourth century B.C.A., the paradigm
for Plato and Aristotle is mathematical knowledge.
Especially what we mean by mathematics, that means universal, necessary, and certain knowledge
that we have proved using deductive reasoning.
This was an invention by tradition of Pythagoras.
It was Pythagoras who took the kind of number knowledge that the Egyptians and the Babylonians
had accumulated and transformed them into what we mean by mathematics by applying the
concept of, by inventing the concept of a proof in a, in a, in a mathematical proof,
the conclusion, let's suppose we do something as, as simple as multiplying two numbers together.
If we have multiplied correctly, we can be guaranteed of the correctness of the answer.
Math, our arithmetic operations are analogous to a, a, a logical proof if we have in fact
followed the rules of arithmetic.
They represent a certain set of premises.
We define numbers in a certain way.
We agree that addition and subtraction and multiplication and division are to be done
in a certain way.
And if they're done that way, then guaranteed that the conclusion is correct.
What is fascinating is that this highly abstract and intellectualized definition of knowledge
has been dominant in the Western, in Western cultural tradition, in the Western intellectual
tradition, to the very present.
And in fact, it was the definition of knowledge that was built into science, built into modern
science as it emerged in the 17th century and continues to be the case.
Mathematical knowledge, notice, is timeless in addition to being universal.
We don't expect triangles to change or to change their properties because we have moved
from the 19th century to the 20th century or because we have moved from the 20th to the
21st or moved from Europe to Africa or from Africa to Asia.
Mathematical knowledge is universal, it's timeless, it's necessary, it's certain.
It is the paradigm of knowledge for ancient Greece and it is always referred to right
into the modern period when there are challenges raised against this definition of knowledge
which flies in the face of experience.
So that's a fascinating fact about Western culture, about Western intellectuals, philosophers
and scientists alike, that this definition of knowledge has been absorbed.
Now what the Greeks invented between Pythagoras, let's say around 500 BCE and Plato's time
in the middle of the 4th century BCE, what the Greeks invented was the science of reasoning.
They invented what we call logic today, that is to say the Greeks invented the idea that
you could study reasoning independent of what you were reasoning about, that reasoning was
a distinctive activity that the mind engaged in, different from thinking, different from
feeling, that there was such a thing as reasoning, interesting, people doubtless thought they
had been reasoning for thousands of years.
But the Greeks decided that this is what reasoning comes, you know it's like somebody
saying that oh I didn't realize, I've been speaking prose all my life.
The Plato and Aristotle, particularly Aristotle, codified 200 years of the preceding 200 years
of Greek philosophical thinking about thinking, about reasoning, that form of thinking that
we call reasoning and they divided it up into three branches.
They decided that there are in fact three modes of reasoning.
One is deduction, one is induction and one is called dialectic, it's kind of a grab bag,
we'll talk a little bit about that, it's more amorphous than deduction and induction.
The philosophical idea of knowledge, the definition of knowledge that survived or that flourished
within the western intellectual tradition was Plato and Aristotle's definition, not
the Sophist definition.
And it was key to deduction as the only form of reasoning that leads to truth and knowledge.
Deduction is a form of reasoning in which if the premises are true, if the premises
of an argument are true, the conclusion of the argument must be true.
Deduction is a form of reasoning in which if the premises of an argument are true, then
the conclusion that you draw must be true, it cannot be false.
Well this is all automatically, right from the start this is a very strange thing to
say, what forces me to say that?
Why can't I insist that it's false anyway?
So there is built into this Greek invention of reasoning as a distinctive and distinctively
structured process in the mind is the idea, the belief in a certain sense that it is not
possible for a normal mind not to draw the inferences from true deductive premises that
can be drawn from them.
Now we're all familiar and the reason why we were taught it, we were taught Euclidean
geometry in high school was not to teach us geometry but to teach us a form of reasoning
which for thousands of years now has been privileged as the most powerful and the only
correct form of reasoning if the goal is knowledge.
What Euclidean did, we'll talk about this more in a subsequent lecture, what Euclidean
did was to codify 200 years of Greek geometric and mathematical thinking into an organized
form in which there are definitions, postulates and axioms and then they become the premises
of deductive arguments, the so-called theorems of geometry so that the claim that the sum
of the interior angles of a triangle is exactly 180 degrees, must be 180 degrees is a necessary
consequence of the definitions axioms and postulates.
That is the power of Euclidean geometry that has been recognized for thousands of years,
it's an amazing thing that you can be forced to agree to that even though you might think
oh surely I can make a triangle where there's 179.8 degrees or 180.2 degrees, no the concept
of the triangle is such that given the definitions axioms and postulates the sum of the interior
angles of the Euclidean triangle defined according to the definitions axioms and postulates of
what we call Euclid's geometry which is Greek geometry of the late 4th century BCE.
As I said reflecting 200 years of accumulated Greek geometric and mathematical knowledge
because it's not just geometry, the Euclid's elements as a book is actually called.
Now there's a tremendous power associated with pulling things together in this what
we now call axiomatic way in which you take this huge body of knowledge which had grown
up over a couple of hundred years and show how it can all be deduced from a single set
of definitions axioms and postulates.
Aristotle did something analogous for logic, for reasoning.
Aristotle wrote a series of books, not just one, a series of books which became like Euclid's
standard text in all western schools right into the 19th century.
Aristotle wrote a series of books in which he analyzed deductive reasoning, inductive
reasoning, dialectical reasoning, pulling together, pulling together the previous 200
years approximately, 150 years of Greek philosophical thinking about reasoning along the lines especially
that he and his teacher Plato approved of.
So that knowledge in Aristotle and we must remember that until the 17th century and really
in logic until the 19th century, Aristotle was the authoritative voice for western intellectuals.
For everyone who went to a post elementary school, anyone who went to the university
had to study Aristotle.
Aristotle on reasoning on logic was as authoritative in the early 19th century as he had been in
science in physics until the 17th century.
So Aristotle, for Aristotle, knowledge is key to deduction.
Furthermore this is still the case today in modern science.
We consider scientific theories somehow validated, we could say proven, but validated when they
make correct predictions.
But when we talk about a scientific theory predicting something, what we're really saying
is that it is a deductive consequence of a particular theory that X be observed.
When we observe X, we say well, of course that had happened because the premises of
the theory are true, the theory is correct as shown by the fact that deductive logical
consequences of the theory are in fact observed.
So the general theory of relativity, for example, we say Einstein's theory predicted
the bending of light in a strong gravitational field.
So bending of light rays as they pass near the limb of the sun.
What that means is you can deduce from the theory that light waves are going to behave
in that way.
You can deduce from the general theory of relativity the existence of black holes and
gravitational lensing effects because the light rays can be bent so much by a really
strong gravitational field, for example a galaxy, that the galaxy can act as a lens
and let you see things bring to a focus items that are far behind that galaxy, which you
could not normally see because you can't see through the galaxy.
So these are deductive logical consequences of the theory.
So this day, scientific theories are presented in a deductive logical way.
They are presented in a way that says here is my theory.
This issue of how we got to that theory will come to that.
Here is my theory.
It is a deductive consequence of my theory that X be observed.
I predict, so to speak, but we're not really predicting the world.
What we're saying is it is a logical consequence of the theory that the world be like this.
If my theory is true, then the world's got to be like that and then you do an experiment
and you see if, in fact, if that is correct and then if it does, then we say, oh, that
gives me confidence that this theory is true.
A separate issue is that the history of science makes it very plain that many theories that
we now consider to be wrong made correct predictions.
So making correct predictions does not in fact guarantee because it turns out that it
does not, that does not, that form of reasoning.
My theory predicts X.
I observe X.
Therefore, my theory is true, does not observe the strict rules of deductive reasoning.
So it does not guarantee, a correct prediction does not guarantee the truth of the theory,
but that's the way science is taken.
So deduction is a very powerful form of reasoning and culturally it seems, it answers something,
it's deeply satisfying to us in the West.
It satisfies, apparently, some kind of an urge that we have, some kind of a need that
we have for universal and necessary and certain truth as opposed to living always with pragmatic
truth that's relative, that's likely to change as our experiences change.
So we see in the history of science that theories do change over the last three or four hundred
years.
That's quite obvious.
And yet we never, at any given time, we never let us believe that now we've got it right.
This time we've got it right.
So again, the invention that we're talking about here, the idea that we're talking about
here is the invention of a very particular conception of knowledge, a very particular
idea of knowledge in which knowledge is defined in a very specific way which rejects a pragmatic,
practical, know-how-based definition of knowledge.
Socrates and Plato and Aristotle made fun of that as Socrates did, recognized that there's
a very limited kind of knowing that crafts people have, but it's not real knowledge.
And in the case of Aristotle, as we'll see in the next lecture, knowing natural phenomena,
claiming to know a natural phenomenon, to know why there is a rainbow, to know why anything
happens, why a change took place in going from, let's say, a fertilized egg to a tadpole
to a frog.
If that's being changed, then you can only claim to know something if it is formulated
within the framework of deductive reasoning.
Let's spend a moment talking about inductive reasoning.
Induction is a form of reasoning in which, as Aristotle describes it, for example, we
go from the particular to the universal.
So based on experience, we have seen, I saw a swan today, and then I saw a swan yesterday
also, and over the last three years, my notebooks tell me that I have seen 11,343 swans, and
they were all white.
So I formed the universal generalization, all swans are white.
Now, it turns out that for thousands of years, people did think that that was the case until,
in Australia, black swans were discovered.
So experience is the basis for inductive reasoning, and because experience is the basis of inductive
reasoning, induction can never guarantee the truth of the inferences that you draw from
experience.
So an inductive argument is one in which, even if the premises are true, the conclusion
could be false.
The conclusion, putting it differently, the conclusion of an inductive argument is only
probably true.
The probability is based on the amount of experience and the relevance of the experience
to the generalization that you make.
You may think that based at, you know, how wrong could you be if you've seen 11,343 white
swans, what's the probability that you've missed black ones?
And maybe it's 11,343,343, and the next one that comes up turns out to be a black swan.
At the moment, all crows are black, but that doesn't guarantee that we will not discover
somewhere white crows.
And for all I know, there are white crows, and nobody has let us know that so that we
don't have to change logic textbooks.
So inductive reasoning has a probable character.
It is induction that leads us to universalized generalizations, but they always have a probable
character to them.
And we're going to come back to induction and the relationship to deduction in connection
with science.
But first, let me say something about the third form of reasoning, dialectical reasoning.
Dialectical reasoning is, I said, a kind of a grab bag in the sense that it applies to
a form of reasoning in which we, for various reasons, agree to accept certain premises
as true, even though we don't know that they're true.
And in the form of reasoning that Aristotle calls rhetoric, we are persuaded to accept
them by non-logical arguments.
For example, emotional arguments or threats or any kind of pragmatic argument that a lawyer
makes in order to convince the jury that a client is innocent.
So in dialectical reasoning, so a more sophisticated form of dialectical reasoning might be hypothetical
reasoning in the sciences.
Let us assume that the following is true and let's see what can be deduced from it.
In that case, you've got a dialectical argument that shades into deductive reasoning.
So for example, one might say, well, let's look at what Einstein actually said in the
special theory of relativity, in this paper that we think of as the special theory of
relativity paper.
Let's assume that the speed of light in a vacuum is a constant for all observers regardless
of their motion.
Doesn't matter what that means at the moment, we'll be talking about it in a later lecture.
If we assume that, then certain consequences follow.
Certain puzzling phenomena are solved.
In another paper he wrote in 1905, he said, let's assume that electromagnetic energy
actually comes packaged in discrete little units, quanta, which we now call photons.
If we make that assumption, then I can explain problems that have hitherto been unexplained.
I can solve those problems.
In science, what happens is once a theory like that where you say let's assume X for
the purposes of explaining Y, once the explanation is accepted, we tend to then reproduce the
theory, we teach it as if it were true.
We teach it that it's a principle of nature that the speed of light in a vacuum is a constant
for all observers in uniform motion.
It started out as a hypothesis.
Let's accept this as true and see what follows from it.
Does what follows from it match experience?
Does it explain?
Does it predict?
Does it give us control over phenomena?
Well then, that's a sign that it must, it was certainly the right thing to accept, and
maybe it was true.
So Aristotle analyzes dialectical reasoning from both sides, the kind of what you might
call a legitimate form of hypothetical reasoning, and a more emotion-laden persuasive kind
of arguing, which he doesn't have a great deal of respect for, in which he and Plato
attribute to the sophist that they taught their students how to win arguments by using
whatever technique will sway the jury's opinion regardless of whether their client is guilty
or innocent.
Let's go back to the relationship between induction and deduction, because I'm sure
that you notice that scientific, that modern science seems to incorporate induction as
well as deduction.
We all think of the experimental method as inductive, and when we get to the lecture on
the origins of the 17th century scientific revolution, two of the characters we're going
to have to talk about are René Descartes, for whom deduction was the only valid form
of reasoning, and Francis Bacon, for whom induction was the only valid form of reasoning
when you were looking for knowledge of nature, mathematical knowledge, something else, but
if what you wanted to understand is nature, then you have to use induction.
Now the experimental method, as Francis Bacon formulated it in the 17th century, was one
in which you used induction to form universal generalizations, but as I said before, they
only have a probable character of truth.
But through experimental testing, here's my hypothesis, let's test it.
If it passes the test, then that validates the generalization.
Bacon seemed to believe that you could bridge induction and deduction, you could use a controlled
form of induction using experiment to formulate universal laws that could then be the premises
of deductive arguments that would give you the truth about nature, universal and necessary
and certain truth about nature, but in fact he's quite wrong about this.
Logically speaking, you cannot bridge induction and deduction, inductive arguments are by
nature, so to speak, by definition, much better.
Inductive arguments are by definition different from deductive arguments.
You cannot bridge, you cannot use the generalizations that come out of inductive reasoning as premises
without qualifying them and saying that there is some probability that this is true, but
then where are we going to get the premises from?
Since as I said before, according to the Greek, this philosophical definition of knowledge,
the object of knowledge is not experienced and can't be derived from experience by inductive
reasoning, then where am I going to get my premises from?
If I want to have deductive knowledge, if the only form of knowledge that's legitimate
is knowledge based on deductive reasoning, for that I need to know true premises, then
I can deduce truths about nature.
Where am I going to get the premises from?
Well, Aristotle and Euclid and René Descartes, one of the founding fathers of modern science
in the early 17th century, shared the view that, well, there must be some truths that
are self-evident or that are available to us by a mental faculty they called intuition.
Some truths are intuitively obvious, that we just see that they are true, or some ideas
maybe are innate.
Some combination of those things, but all from Aristotle and Euclid's time until Descartes'
time, again, there was an explicit recognition that if what you mean by knowledge is universal
and necessary and certain, if it has to be timeless, then it's got to be keyed to deductive
reasoning.
And for deductive reasoning to give us knowledge of nature, we need to know some universal truths
about nature, some principles of nature, in order to do deduction.
How are we going to get that knowledge?
That becomes a problem that we will see recur and it underlies this whole idea of science.
We're reverse engineering and we're discovering roots, but we're also discovering some problems
that are going to recur in the history of the evolution of the idea of science from the
ancient Greeks to the modern period.
