The germ theory of disease is the cornerstone of modern scientific medicine, and of course
it's another instance of the atomistic style of thinking, but one must appreciate that
it was, when it was formulated in the middle of the 19th century, a very controversial
idea, and that opposition to the germ theory of disease continued right through the 19th
century, and that opposition was quite rational and really reflects a fundamental, let's call
it a weakness, within the atomistic style of thinking, which is that it claims too much.
The idea that any of these atoms, the atom in matter, the atom in the cell as an atom,
the germ as an atom, the gene as an atom, the DNA as an atom, as what the gene really is,
all fail to be able to generate all of the phenomena that motivate us to study those
different areas of science, because they are not the sole causes of any of those phenomena,
they act in conjunction with other factors in their environment. So one can say that
the biggest weakness of the atomistic style of thinking is that it diminishes or totally
dismisses the significance of relationships, environmental relationships, chemical relationships,
physiological relationships, social relationships. There are networks of factors that would seem
to play, are perceived in the course of the 20th century, to be perceived as playing significant
roles in determining natural phenomena, and you can't derive them all Lego building block like
from atoms. So the atomistic style of thinking has certain strengths, clearly the germ theory of
disease explained a great deal, and it translated into very powerful technoscientific applications,
that it was a theory whose technological applications based specifically on that theory
were very powerful, and we'll be talking about some of those. Nevertheless, it has limits,
and the claim that illness is the consequence of germs is something that we need to appreciate was
both controversial and legitimately opposed by some of the greatest biologists of the middle
of the 19th century. But let's step back for a moment and understand the explanatory context within
which the germ theory of disease is an idea. And that context, of course, is the question,
why do we become ill, and what can we do about it? That's two questions or two sides of the same
question. It's not just that we're intellectually interested in knowing why do we become ill. In
the case of illness, as opposed, let's say, to the atomic theory of matter, which may not concern
many of us at the existential level, when it comes to illness, we also want the nature of
illness to give us some appropriate regimen for responding to illness when it strikes us. So
now this question, which is clearly prehistoric, and one can hardly imagine human beings that we
could relate to, who would not think along these lines, why do we become ill? So to speak,
certainly the scientific response to this question is that illness is a divine visitation. And that
implies that the response to illness, the pursuit of healing, takes the form of prayer,
purification, and penitence, right, the three P's, prayer, prayer, purification, and penitence,
and that that is the appropriate response to illness. And we find in surviving documents from
ancient, from ancient Babylon, from ancient Egypt, and into the Greek period that there is a close
association between the priesthood and healing, that temples were healing centers in the ancient
world. Certainly this was the case in Egypt and in Greece, where the god Apollo was, in some sense,
the sort of super physician, and his son, through a rather complicated birth, Asculepius, became
identified as the sort of the patron saint of physicians, and the great healer, and actually
killed by Zeus, because he had discovered the secret of resurrecting the dead, of staving off
the mortality, so that human beings would not be limited by mortality, which was too threatening to
the gods. And so Zeus killed Asculepius. So this is an association of Apollo, and through Apollo,
Asculepius, with healing, and so there were temples of Apollo in the ancient world, on the island
of Kos, for example, in the city of Pergamon, and the city of Cnidus, that were healing centers,
and where people went in order to recover from illnesses through prayer, purification,
penitence, but also they were in a clean and healthful environment for the most part, and where
they had an attempt was made to give them clean water and a better diet, and so those factors may
well have contributed to whatever cures that were associated with their stay in the temple healing
center. We're familiar in the Bible with in Exodus, God saying, I am the Lord your healer. Jesus
was a healer. The identification is very strong in, for example, when syphilis arises as an epidemic,
an epidemic proportion in the 16th century in Western Europe, that it was a divine scourge,
that it was a punishment by God for the increasingly secular and promiscuous behavior
compared to the behaviors that the church preached for people to display. And even in our own time,
people have claimed that epidemic illnesses are a punishment visited upon us by God,
and that the appropriate response is to stop behaviors that God disapproves of.
So a major change in our response to the question, why do we become ill and what should we do about
it, is the idea that illness is natural, that there is something that illness is a natural
phenomenon, and the way to respond to it is within the framework of nature, as opposed to
saying that God is punishing me and I need to straighten out my relationship with God in order
to recover from this illness, or perhaps that I must just accept it as a divine punishment and show
God that I accept my fate. And we can say that at a minimum, Hippocrates in ancient Greece,
in the 5th century in ancient Greece, that Hippocrates on the island of Kos, where there was
a temple of Apollo that was a healing center, founded a school of medicine that for centuries
was extraordinarily influential and that taught that illness was strictly natural and that there
were natural remedies for illness. One of his surviving books is called Air's Waters and Places,
which talks about the importance of good air, clean water in the place that you live, inciting a
town in building a house to make sure that the air is clean and that the water is clean,
and another of his books on epilepsy treats epilepsy, which classically had been associated
as a specifically divine affliction as a natural phenomenon. A rival medical school in the city
of Canidus was focused on prognosis, as if the idea being that disease, different diseases,
had different characters, they unfolded within themselves quite independent of the patient,
so that if you could identify the pattern of the illness, you could then chart, you could
predict its subsequent development, and then if you were good at this, then you would know
that the patient was going to get better, in which case you definitely want to be their doctor,
and then you are given credit for curing them, and if your prognosis is that they're going to
die, then the best thing to do is to get out of town so that you will not be accused of having
killed them. But the underlying idea is that diseases have a character of their own,
so to speak, independent of the patient who becomes a host to that disease.
Pergamon, which also had a temple of Apollo, a healing center,
subsequently, at the end of the 2nd century CE, was the home of Galen, who was perhaps the single
most influential medical theorist in late antiquity, the Middle Ages, and the Renaissance
period, right up to the 17th century, his theory, which we need to pay careful attention to in the
context of the germ theory of disease, was that the human constitution was based on the
production by the human organism of four fluids that were associated with four
humors, that there were four different elements that went into the healthy body, and these were
blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile, and that the right balance of these four humors
was what made you a healthy person, personality-wise, psychologically, but also physiologically.
Now, in this conception, illness is quite natural, but illness is internal to the body.
You become ill when these four humors are no longer balanced, and the task of the physician
is to restore that balance by giving you appropriate natural remedies which restore,
if you have an excess of blood, then we do bloodletting. If you have an excess of bile,
if you have not enough bile, black bile, yellow bile, and this theory, this four-humor theory,
is still survives, which was very powerful, right into the 19th century as a theory of
behavior, even though it was no longer considered a theory of illness after the 17th or 18th centuries,
but in such terms as melancholy. See, the melancholy, melan, is a Greek word for black,
so a person is melancholy if they have too much black bile. A person has a choleric disposition
if they produce too much yellow bile. That excess of yellow bile makes them angry,
they have quick temper, they're always responding in a very highly temperamental way,
and so that's got to be modified, the balance has to be restored. A sanguinary person has a lot
of blood, and so they typically have a red face, and they're always cheerful, they're always smiling,
and a phlegmatic person has too much phlegm, and so like phlegm, they are very kind of slow
to respond to life situations. Why phlegm is given such a bad rap is not clear to me, but
those characterizations of people as phlegmatic, melancholic, choleric, and
and sanguinary are sanguine are all reflections of this theory of Galen's. The important point is
the idea that illness emerges from within as a result of an imbalance. The echo of this in
the 19th century is of course homeopathy, and the idea that all illness is an internal derangement
and homeopathic medicine to this day continues to focus on restoring a balance within the individual
because if you have that balance, then you can fight off the whatever illness afflicts you,
even if it's an invading germ. If your body is put together right, then your immune system will
in modern terms, today we would say is put together right, then your immune system will be able to
fight off the illness, and if you can't and you become ill, then it's because there's something
wrong within you. The idea that illness comes from the outside, that illness enters into the
body from the outside, that it is unnatural, for example, well natural in the sense that what
comes in as part of nature, but it's not part of the, there's nothing wrong with your body,
you're as healthy as you can be, you've got as much balance as anyone could want, and nevertheless
you somehow inhale or ingest something foreign, and that is what causes you to become ill.
We already find signs of this in late antiquity, alongside these other ideas, the Roman writers
Varro and Colomella speculate that maybe minute little animals in the foods and in the fluids
that we drink, that they enter into the body and they cause disease, they cause illness.
Also what's called a miasma theory, which goes back to Hippocrates on air's waters and places.
If good air is what makes you healthy, bad air, there's something in bad air, a miasma,
there's something like a swamp-like air that is very unhealthy and it's got something in it that
when you inhale it and it gets into your body causes illness. I mentioned that when syphilis
arose as a scourge in the 16th century and spread and it continues to be a serious disease entity
in society, while on the one side people, some people were claiming this is God's punishment
for sexual promiscuity, Fracastoro, an Italian naturalist, speculated, called it a living contagion,
that it was the result of having come into contact with and assimilated some living thing
that we could not see, but which was the real cause of the disease. This was consistent with
the earlier response to the plague, beginning in 1347, which revived this idea of a miasma,
the idea that there was some contagious something that emanated from people who got the disease
and so that's why quarantine was invented from the word, the French word for 40, so for 40 days
people who came into a community from outside were required to stay isolated from the community
to show that they were not ill. If they didn't become ill during that 40 day period, during the
quarantine period, which wasn't always 40 days, but that's the name that it got, then they were
permitted to come into the community. Boats that came into harbors, the sailors were required to
stay on the boat until they could prove that nobody on the boat was sick and then they were able to
come ashore. So the idea that illness is the result of something outside the body coming
into the body, which sounds to us like a predecessor of the germ theory of disease, and is, goes back
to antiquity and was revived and came into, especially after Lewin Hook and Robert Hook
used their microscope to reveal that there were tiny little creatures swimming around in the
water that we drank, for example, and not only in the water that we drank, some speculation that
maybe these creatures cause illness, but we can usefully identify the 1850s as the beginning
of the scientific germ theory of disease, which is particularly associated with two people.
Louis Pasteur in France and Robert Koch, K.O.C.H., sometimes pronounced Koch, Robert Koch in
Germany. Koch was a student of a biologist named Jacob Henley, who had studied with Müller,
and so that Johann Müller's laboratory continued to be highly influential in terms of its students
and its students throughout the 19th century. Pasteur has gotten the better press of the two,
but I think that within the scientific community Koch is at least on a par with Pasteur,
and for many, in fact, deserves more credit than Pasteur, in spite of the fact that most history
books identify Pasteur, especially if they are written in French or translated from the French,
that Pasteur was the father of the modern scientific germ theory of disease. In particular,
they point to a publication of Pasteur's in 1857, which was an essay that he wrote on fermentation,
in which he identified yeast as that there was an organism that was responsible for fermentation.
This was not the first time that yeast had been identified as containing within it, that yeast
was a living thing, that it was not simply a piece of matter, that it was alive, and that it
was an organism, and that it played a significant role in fermenting sugar solutions. Pasteur,
however, extended these earlier ideas to a speculation initially that all living processes
involve other living things that, as part of their natural life cycle, fulfill some
constructive or destructive function within all other living things, so that yeast cells are
organisms that play a particular role in the process that we call fermentation, but Pasteur
suggested there are other organisms, invisible initially, although as microscopes got better,
we saw bacteria by the end of the 19th century. Viruses were trickier, although they were identified
in 1898. It was really only in the 1930s that the tobacco mosaic virus, which was the one that
was identified in the late 1890s, was seen inside the electron microscope. Nowadays, we also would add
to the list of things that cause illness, prions, which are proteins or segments of proteins that
are associated with a particular range of pernicious diseases. The one that's most famous, of course,
is mad cow disease, and it's really only in the last 30 years that prions have been accepted as real
and as disease-causing agents, but Pasteur, in a sense, concurrently in Germany, gave voice to
this idea in a scientific form that germs, as they came to be called, that ordinarily invisible
entities entering into the body are the ultimate cause of illness. Now, some of the early opposition
to the germ theory of disease came from Rudolf Verkau, who I referred to in an earlier, in the
previous lecture, in the cell theory of life. Verkau was committed to the idea that cells
are the basis of all living phenomena, and therefore, if you become ill, it's because there's a problem
with cells in your body. And so he wrote a textbook called Cellular Pathology, which argued that cells
were, that was, that cellular processes, when they go awry, are responsible for, for causing illness.
Just as Liebig, who I also mentioned in that lecture, argued that chemical processes
within the cell are the cause of illness, and that the appropriate response is to identify
the chemical process that's causing the problem, not to focus on these disease entities that are
invisible for a while at any rate before they were actually imaged in the better microscopes
of the 1870s, and, and, and blaming them for illness. But Pasteur and Koch, more or less
in parallel, sometimes one did it first, sometimes the other, were successful beginning in, especially
the 1860s and 1870s into the early 1880s, in arguing in a very convincing way that infectious
diseases, like anthrax, like cholera, like diphtheria, were the result of tuberculosis,
I don't want to get tuberculosis on the table, those were, were responded, that were caused by
germs. Now this was not an easy thing to establish. The germ was believed to be an organism in its
own right that had its own character, so it's an atom in a sense, it has a very specific identity,
and the same germ always behaves in the same way in everybody's body, and if that is the case,
then attacking that germ will be a cure for everybody who has responded pathologically
to that particular germ. Koch's teacher, Jacob Henley, had, in the 1840s, in a textbook that
he wrote then on the cell theory, had, had formulated a set of rules. He also thought that
invisible organisms were the cause of disease. He said, if you want to prove this scientifically,
then you have to obey, you have to be able to fulfill three criteria, and Koch extended these
to four, but Henley's three criteria are the, are the key. You have to show the constant existence
of the same entity in all people who have this disease, as opposed to the view that whatever
causes the disease can take many different forms depending on the patient, and the patient's
constitution, and various other environmental factors. So the idea, if you want to argue
that disease is caused by, let's call it a germ, that tuber, tuberculosis is caused by
the tubercle of bacteria, bacillus, then you have to be able to show that the same entity
is responsible for every tubercula, every case of tuberculosis. That's the first criterion.
The second, you have to establish that there is no other thing that is causing,
that is causing the illness. So you have to isolate from any kind of interference,
any other factor. You have to make sure that no other factor can be associated with the illness,
only the entity that you have identified, in this case the tubercle, bacillus for example,
which Koch, in fact, isolated. And the third criterion is that you have to rely,
you have to be able to reproduce the illness using only that entity. If you have isolated that
entity, then you have to be able to show that every time you give that entity, the illness
follows. So if you can do those three things, which Henley could not do, then you have made
a scientific case that this illness is caused by a germ entering into the body.
Koch and Pasteur both did exactly this famously for the case of anthrax,
which both of them identified and isolated more or less at the same time, depending on who you
believe. Koch began by using serum, that's blood without any cells in it, as a kind of a neutral
base, mixing into serum tissue from animals afflicted with anthrax, and then showing that
a drop of that tissue infected serum would cause anthrax in another animal. So that doesn't prove
anything because you say who knows what was causing it. There could be lots of different
things in the blood that was causing it. So what he did was, he took what's called eight
generations of serum. He took tissues, mixed it with serum, took a drop of that serum mixture,
put it in fresh serum, took a drop of that, put it in fresh serum, and he did this for eight
specific times in order to show that no, it can't be anything else. There's one thing in the blood
that is of the infected animals that is in the tissue of the infected animals that is causing
the anthrax. But in fact, this did not convince most scientists of the day. What Pasteur did,
he did this, he used sterile urine as the base. He mixed in blood from an anthrax-afflicted animal,
and he did it for a hundred generations, showing that in each case, if you take a drop of blood,
mix it with sterile urine, inject that into an animal, they get anthrax. If you take a drop of
that stuff, put it in fresh sterile urine, and take a drop of that, you will inject that into
an animal, that animal will get anthrax. And he did this a hundred times by which time he
showed statistically, as we would now say, that anything left from that original drop of blood
has disappeared. What has happened is that eventually we had the pure agent that was causing
anthrax isolated, and that argument was convincing. And he famously in 1881 did this demonstration,
very spectacular demonstration in a very public demonstration in which he showed with big press
coverage, farmers, that here we have cattle and sheep and pigs. We give these animals anthrax,
and they all die. We give this group of animals anthrax, and none of them die, because all of
them have been rendered immune, because one of the things that Pasteur and Koch discovered
in the course of the 1860s and 70s was that animals can be made immune by vaccination.
Previously, the only kind of vaccination was smallpox vaccination, but Pasteur recognized
that animals could be made immune to germs if they had been vaccinated previously. Now,
obviously they had to survive. Now, how did that happen? It was actually quite by accident. He was
working with cholera germs, as we would now call them, and over the summer, in the course of the
summer, the heat ruined the serum that contained the cholera in it, and he didn't know that. He
injected into chickens, and they didn't die. That was kind of funny. So he said, oh well, the serum
was spoiled. So he then, a couple of months later, injected those same chickens with fresh cholera
germs, and they didn't die. And so from that, he generalized this idea that vaccination can work
for all bacterial and then for viral illnesses, because he recognized that there were smaller
entities than bacteria that were causing illnesses, although as I said, it was only in the 1890s that
viruses became entities in their own right. He and Koch then succeeded in isolating and
developing vaccines for anthrax, cholera, diphtheria, and Koch for tuberculosis. That's
what he got the Nobel Prize for, in fact, was for tuberculosis, which at the end of the 19th
century in Europe was responsible for about one seventh of all deaths in Europe were caused by
tuberculosis. So it was an incredible killer. And now finally, we had some scientific basis,
we said we need, we can now treat the tubercular patient, although it turned out that the best
treatment was penicillin, which didn't become available on a wide basis until after World War
II. It was available on a limited basis before that. So Koch and Pasteur put the germ theory of
disease on a on a firm scientific basis and the techno scientific consequences, you know, the
this idea of finding a technology that's based on a scientific theory. Here we have one vaccination
and two antisepsis along the way in the 1870s. Pasteur recognized that that killing the germs
would prevent infection. And in England, Joseph Lister made a career out of antisepsis,
and and convinced lots of his colleagues, especially in the medical profession, that
many illnesses would be prevented by antiseptic procedures, procedures that using acids, for
example, killed the bacteria that would be on the medical instruments that they were using,
that would be on their hands in those days when they were operating at a time when when
amputations counted were fatal 40 to 50 percent of the time. So by the end of the 19th century,
the germ theory of disease had triumphed. But it also clearly was problematic because there were
situations in which people could have germs inside them and not become ill. And sometimes
they displayed symptoms of an illness without any recognizable germ, any identifiable germ.
So the theory has has its pluses and its minuses and as an instance of the atomistic style of
thinking, these two go together as we will see in the next lecture.
