In 1543, Copernicus opened a door onto a new conception of the universe.
I've used that expression opening a door quite a lot with respect to technological innovations,
applying the medieval historian Lynn White's notion that a new technology only opens a door,
it doesn't force anyone to cross the threshold, but it applies to new ideas as well.
New ideas open doors, so to speak, metaphorically, and the response of scientists and society
to new scientific ideas is a very interesting index to values and attitudes that the scientific
and general communities have with respect to the implications of those ideas.
In the case of Copernicus, Copernicus opened a door to a new conception of the universe
in which the Earth's role in the universe, the Earth's place in the universe,
and its role in what was previously considered to be the great drama
that justified the universe's existence, namely the drama of human salvation or damnation,
loses its significance. It took over 100 years between 1543 and, let's say, 1687,
I think using that 1687 Newton's Principia as the date at which the overwhelming majority
of astronomers and scientists accepted the Copernican hypothesis.
It took over 140 years for European culture, European intellectual culture at any rate,
to walk through that door, to move through the door that Copernicus opened to a decisive new conception
of the universe, and it was no longer a universe that would have been recognized by Copernicus,
because Copernicus' universe was finite and it was actually quite a pretty universe
in which all of the fixed stars were in sort of a shell, which he thought was only a couple of miles thick.
They were very far away from the solar system, but they were in a spherical shell,
and so the universe had a very nice spherical, finite, spherical shape to it.
We know how beautiful the sphere is from a mathematical perspective, especially to Pythagoreans,
and then at the very center of this universe is the solar system,
and the center of the Earth's orbit is the center of Copernicus' universe.
The Earth is not at the center of the universe, but the universe has a well-defined shape in this Copernican model,
but very quickly the door that Copernicus opened up led to a truly transformed landscape for the universe,
and if you can remember, hold on to that term landscape,
because at the end of this lecture it's going to come up again with a dramatically different meaning.
The new landscape on the other side of the door that Copernicus opened
was one in which the universe became infinite in space, at least infinite in space,
and according to a growing number of thinkers, there were an endless number of stars
distributed not in a nice little spherical shell centered on the solar system,
but, so to speak, distributed throughout space, and this led to a secularization,
this reflected a secularization and a naturalization of what we meant by the universe,
that the universe lost decisively lost its character as justified by the drama of human salvation
as a hope and human damnation as a fear.
It was as if the Earth and human life on it was totally irrelevant in the greater scheme of things,
or at least it had that appearance.
The universe did not need, for its explanation, any reference to human life.
It could be explained, strictly speaking, on naturalistic and secular grounds.
We see this already in the early 17th century, well, by the end of the first third of the 17th century,
in Descartes' theory of the universe and how the universe mechanically, after the initial act of creation,
the universe evolved naturalistically, but cosmological theory,
theories of the universe really began to have a scientific character in the middle of the 18th century.
Between Copernicus and Newton, there were conceptually dramatic changes to our conception of the universe.
For example, the work of Thomas Diggs and the Italian philosopher, mystic Giordano Bruno,
who argued that the universe was positively infinite, in the case of Bruno,
that there were an infinite number of stars and that there were planets around these stars
and the life forms on these planets, some of the life forms were inferior to us,
some of them were superior to us, and nevertheless, one can call all of this, including Descartes' cosmology,
wildly speculative, but in the middle of the 18th century, there were a number of developments
that revealed this notion that the universe now needed an explanation that was strictly secular, naturalistic, scientific.
And I want to read the title, it's a very long title, editors would not allow it today,
of Thomas Wright, an English natural philosopher, in 1750, published a book called
An Original Theory or New Hypothesis of the Universe Founded Upon the Laws of Nature
and Solving by Mathematical Principles the General Phenomena of the Visible Creation.
So, okay, the universe was created by God.
Alright, now we no longer need to refer to God, put God up on the shelf, so to speak,
and we will now explain the universe on mathematical principles using laws of nature,
and Wright tries to give an account of the Milky Way, that's based as far as he can do so,
on principles of Newtonian physics and especially the Newton's Law of Gravity.
Inspired by Thomas Wright's essay, the philosopher Emanuel Kant, who was not yet the philosopher Emanuel Kant,
he was the aspiring physicist Emanuel Kant, published an essay with a monograph,
with a much shorter title, which was called Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens,
which he wrote around in 1755, but because of financial problems, his publisher,
with his publisher, it didn't actually get published until 1762,
and it was then pretty much ignored until the early 19th century,
but in that essay Kant offers an explicitly Newtonian account of the universe
as an internal, as an infinite eternally expanding structure
in which stars are born, explode, die, reform, and planetary systems, solar systems,
galaxies are continually forming and reforming in a continually expanding universe.
He's highly speculative, but he actually uses Newtonian physics as far as possible
to make mathematical sense of this and even makes predictions about the solar system
that can be, as he noted, experimentally confirmed, and if they are confirmed,
he thinks then that shows that his whole theory is correct.
He made a particular prediction about the rotation period of the planet Saturn,
for example, which turned out not to be correct,
but the sort of the most scientific expression of this new secularized conception of the universe
was Laplace in his Celestial Mechanics, turn of the 19th century, preceded slightly
by a subset called Exposition of the System of the World, which he published in 1796,
and it was in response to his Celestial Mechanics, which is a Newtonian mechanics
of how the solar system forms and how the planets are in stable orbits
that they will never spiral into the Sun, that the solar system has a kind of eternal character
that he said to Napoleon that he had no need for God in his hypothesis,
he had no need for the hypothesis of God in order to explain the solar system
and let it go with that.
Now, so by the time we get into the 19th century, the universe is a completely secularized
and naturalized structure, and we have some vague scientific idea of how the solar system
and the planets, the Sun and the planets could have formed into a single integrated physical system,
obeying laws of conservation of angular momentum, for example, and the period
and the distance laws of each planet from the Sun, the orbital period and the distance from the Sun,
but what we don't have is any sense of how big the universe is.
We have some idea, there is a prevailing idea, that what we mean by the universe is the Milky Way,
that the Milky Way is the universe, but we have no idea of how big the Milky Way is.
Given the telescopes of the time, what we would consider galaxies were, to them,
sort of clouds of light in the sky, fuzzy clouds of light in the sky,
which were assumed to be gaseous, that nebulae were clouds of gas in the distant sky,
and they were not other galaxies, they was only the Milky Way.
Kant explicitly argued that there were many other galaxies, but he had no observational evidence for it,
that's why I say it was speculative.
The question is how big is the Milky Way, how far away are these stars?
And the first estimate of the first measurement of the distance to a star
was accomplished by Friedrich Bessel, a German mathematician and astronomer,
who measured the distance to a star in the constellation Cygnus, the star is called Cygnus 61,
as approximately 10 light years away from the Earth.
So 10, the mileage would be 10 times the amount that light traveling at 186,000 miles a second
would cover in a year, so 10 times that number of miles or kilometers,
and that was 10 light years, that's quite large, but not a scary number.
Based on that number, people started guessing at how big is the Milky Way,
but these guesses had no firm basis in observational evidence,
because we lacked a way of what you might call a cosmological ruler.
We lacked a measuring rod that would allow us to say how far it is from the Earth to any given star.
The reason why Bessel was able to calculate the distance to Cygnus
is because he took advantage of the phenomenon called a parallactic displacement.
That is, if you measure the same object from two different locations,
then the object seems to have changed its position.
So for example, if you look at two stars that are lined up in June
when the Earth is at one point in its orbit, which is approximately 92 million miles from the Sun,
and then you look at those two stars again in December when the Earth is on the other side of the Sun,
and it's therefore 184 million miles away from where it had been in June,
then those two stars won't be lined up anymore if that should be the case.
Now, most stars don't show any evidence of this parallactic displacement
because they're so far away that 184 million miles is a joke.
However, the stars that are closest to us do reveal a parallactic displacement,
and if you measure enough stars, Bessel was a star cataloger,
and he cataloged the positions of 50,000 stars.
He noticed he came upon stars that did have a parallactic displacement starting with Cygnus 61,
not the closest star to us, the closest star is approximately four light years away.
But there's no way of knowing by looking at a star whether it's close to us or not.
So Cygnus 61 revealed a parallactic displacement.
Any other star closer or within maybe another 10 or so light years might also have revealed it to him,
but of those 50,000 you've got to examine all of them in order to see which ones are going to reveal a parallactic displacement.
So we're stuck with 10 light years away to what at the time was conceded to be the nearest star,
and everything else is much more distant because it doesn't reveal any parallactic displacement so far.
In the early 20th century, a woman named Henrietta Swan Levitt,
who was a computer at the Harvard Astronomical Observatory,
a computer meant at the time a human being whose job it was to compute, to make calculations.
Astronomers need lots of calculations. Henrietta Swan Levitt was one of many women
who were tragically underemployed because of the prejudices against women in science,
not to mention in society and professionally in society as well.
And Henrietta Swan Levitt in 1912 published through the Director of the Observatory,
who actually published the note in her name in an astronomy journal.
Edward Pickering was the Director of the Observatory at the time,
in which she said that she had come upon a phenomenon that could be such a cosmological ruler.
And it had to do with variable stars. There are stars that vary in their brightness with a regular period.
And she said that the apparent brightness of these stars, depending on their period,
could be used as a ruler.
What you need to do is to measure the absolute brightness, luminosity, it's called, of one of these stars.
And then whenever you see a star with the same period, you can calculate its distance from you based on its apparent luminosity,
because we know the rate at which light dims as a light moves away from us based on the distance.
So we know that if something looks, if a 50 watt light bulb has a certain luminosity when it's 100 feet away from us,
and then you move it 1,000 feet away from us, we know the formula that describes how much dimmer it's going to look
when it's 1,000 feet away from us, that's its apparent luminosity, as when it's 50 feet away from us,
and we know exactly its distance and we call that its absolute luminosity, roughly speaking.
And in fact, very quickly, a Scandinavian astronomer made such a calculation
so that here we have, in the middle of the 1910s, the first cosmological ruler and Harlow Shapley,
who was an important American astronomer of the time, working in California at one of the observatories
that preceded the 100-inch construction of the 100-inch telescope in Mount Wilson in Southern California,
Harlow Shapley estimated that the size of the Milky Way was 300,000 light-years,
and that the Earth was about halfway out on one side of the Milky Way, about 50,000 light-years away from the center of the Milky Way.
Shapley argued aggressively that the Milky Way was the universe, and in 1920 had a public debate
with an astronomer named Heber Curtis that was, in Washington, that was to, so to speak,
on this very subject, to convince the scientific community, are there more galaxies in the Milky Way
or is the Milky Way what we mean when we talk about the universe?
Shapley believed at any rate that he won that debate, but within three years,
Edwin Hubble, who became the director of the Mount Wilson Observatory
and became the master of the 100-inch telescope, Shapley was offered that job
but decided to become, to accept and offer to become the head of the Harvard Astronomical Observatory,
which at the time had a much greater reputation, but it didn't own the most powerful telescope in the world,
which the 100-inch became when its construction was completed in 1919.
Hubble used the 100-inch telescope to show that the Andromeda nebula was a galaxy,
that it was made up of stars. It wasn't a cloud of glowing gas in the sky,
it was, in fact, a galaxy, and within the next few years showed that there were dozens,
hundreds, thousands of galaxies out there. As far as the telescope I could see,
the universe was strewn with galaxies. Now, this is all by itself a dramatic
reconceptualization of the universe, but nothing compared to 1929 when Hubble announced
that his observations of the light coming from distant stars and galaxies
showed that the universe was expanding. This reflected a phenomenon called the redshift of light,
which is very familiar to us really as a Doppler effect with regard to sound.
You all know that when any wave phenomenon, when something emitting a sound wave,
moves away from us, so the sound wave is sort of dragged out and the sound sounds deeper
than if the thing was stationary with respect to us.
If it's coming toward us, the sound of a horn, of a locomotive whistle, for example,
is higher pitched coming towards us, it's lower pitched going away.
This is a shift to the lower frequencies. The same thing happens with light.
Light is in some sense a wave, although of course we now know that it's pretty complicated,
it's both a wave and a particle, that the wave-like character of light obeys this Doppler shift too.
An object, let's say a star, that's moving away from us will have the light be shifted
because the lower end of the spectrum, red is the lowest end of the visible spectrum,
and the colors are arranged in between the two.
So when we talk about the red shift of stars, we mean that a star that's moving away from us
has its characteristic light print frequencies of all the elements in that star
that are glowing and emitting electromagnetic energy as light is moving away.
Those frequencies are shifted below what they would be measured to be in the laboratory.
Of course there could be some other totally different explanation for this
and then all of this would be messed up, but that's what the red shift of light represents.
An astronomer named Wiley Schleifer had noticed this sometime in the 1910s
and had published a number of observations about this,
but somehow it didn't really catch on, although I mentioned in the last lecture
that the Dutch physicist Willem de Sitter knew about these red shift measurements
and tried to incorporate them in his own version of Einstein's general theory of relativity.
What Hubble did was to do hundreds and then thousands of these red shift measurements
and came up with everything is moving away from us, which means that the universe is expanding.
This is, now we have a totally different kind of a universe,
a universe in which is not just vastly larger than we had thought,
because it's got thousands and thousands and we now say billions of galaxies,
each of which made up of on average approximately 100 billion stars,
not just vast in that sense, but it's expanding and apparently endlessly,
but worse than that, if it's expanding then that suggests that at one point it was not,
it was a point that there was an origin, a beginning in time to the universe.
If everything is expanding away from us in a spherically symmetrical way,
which is what it looks like from the Earth, then it must be the time,
there must have been a time when the universe was at an atomic point,
a material point, not a geometric point, but all the matter in the universe was together in one place,
and so it is kind of a natural step to suspect that there was a big bang,
it was also a natural step for many more theologically inclined physicists
to think in terms of an act of creation.
This vindicates the act of creation.
So now we have two lines that we need to follow here.
First of all, the new universe continued to be redefined throughout the 20th century at one level,
namely what is the universe, what's in the universe?
We had simply tacitly assumed that the universe was the stuff that we could see,
let's call it stars and galaxies and nebulae, and we're redefining in terms of how many and so on,
but in the 1930s we began to take seriously that there were invisible things
in the universe that we had not paid attention to.
In the mid-1930s radio astronomy was founded accidentally by a couple of electrical engineers
called Janski and a collaborator of his who were working for the telephone company
and who accidentally discovered electromagnetic radiation coming first from the sun
and then from other parts of the sky, and that launched radio telescopy.
There's a lot of invisible stuff out there that is revealed to us
only through radio telescopes that the eye can't see, including clouds of molecules
that absorb photons and then radiate them at frequencies that we don't respond to visually,
but now we discovered that space is loaded with molecules including quite complex organic
or the ingredients of organic molecules, that OH-, so water with missing one hydrogen.
There are clouds of this stuff that distributed throughout space.
Cosmic rays were discovered and were understood to be another invisible aspect of the universe
and x-rays and gamma rays and neutrinos which came out of the 1930s nuclear physics
were discovered to be flooding the earth and we now have neutrino telescopes.
We also have a gravity wave telescope.
The universe in 1980 questions having to do with the stability of galaxies.
We now had sufficient information to recognize that galaxies, especially spiral galaxies,
should not be as stable as they clearly are and that led to postulating the existence
of something called dark matter which made up the bulk of the matter in the universe.
It's matter that doesn't interact with ordinary matter except gravitationally,
but it makes up most of the stuff that's out there and then in 1998 it was necessary
to postulate the existence of dark energy as it's called and which has again been
experimentally supported multiple times by further observations
in order to explain certain kinds of supernovas.
It turns out that Einstein's original formulation of the gravitational field equations
were correct and the universe is dynamic and expanding.
And it's not only expanding but the rate of expansion is increasing.
The expansion is accelerating.
We thought that the universe was going to start contracting at some point
or at least reach some stable point and not do anything,
but it turns out that the expansion is accelerating.
Dark energy and dark matter together now constitute about 97% as we think,
96% of the universe which means that the whole thing
that we used to call the universe even in its incredibly expanded form
with billions of galaxies and trillions of stars is only a minute portion
of what the universe really is.
And that's not all because in the same year that dark matter was postulated
in order to explain the stability of spiral galaxies of a physicist named Alan Goothe
postulated the inflationary theory of the universe which is today
as close as you can come to a standard view of the universe
among physicists who deal in astrophysics and cosmology.
But in order to appreciate the inflationary theory,
I want to step back a bit and go back to what I said was one aspect of the universe
that we need to consider is this question of did it have a beginning in time?
Which religious physicists and theologians jumped on in the 1930s as evidence
that they were right, that the Bible was right,
that in the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.
In the late 1940s, the idea had been floated earlier,
but in the late 1940s George Dammoff and a number of collaborators
published a series of papers arguing that in fact this was the case
that the universe had once been, all the matter in the universe
had once been contracted into a single atom, a single gigantic atom
which was unstable and exploded and led to the expanding universe
and the formulation of all of the stars and galaxies and planets
and all of the elements, etc.
In these papers, Dammoff and his colleagues predicted
that there should be a remnant of this explosion
in the form of background radiation that uniformly fills the universe
and that this radiation would now, because it's been cooling for so many years,
the figure we accept today is 13.7 billion years,
in those days it was somewhere between 10 and 20 billion
and the frequency of this radiation is now in the microwave range
so they predicted what is called the microwave background radiation
but in fact, not a lot of people took this very seriously,
in part because there was a rival theory that said,
hey, there is no such thing as a beginning.
You start talking about a beginning, you're going to get into religion.
The universe is eternal.
It's expanding, it's been expanding eternally.
If it's expanding eternally, how come the universe hasn't thinned out?
Well, there is something called a creation field.
Atoms of hydrogen pop out of the vacuum, consistent with quantum theory
and just at the rate necessary to keep the density of the universe
on a large scale constant so it's continually expanding
and it looks pretty much the same way.
This is called the steady state theory of the universe
and the lead figure in this was a British astronomer and physicist named Fred Hoyle
whose collaborators were Herman Bondi and Thomas Gold.
They made fun of Gamov's theory and they gave it the name Big Bang
as if to make fun of it but that's the name that stuck.
The problem that both theories had was that nobody could understand
how you could build up the elements from hydrogen.
You can go from hydrogen to helium in the sun, we understood that.
Hydrogen, helium, how do you get past lithium
and build up the heavier elements?
What process would explain that?
It's called the nucleosynthesis problem.
Both theories suffer from this problem.
In the 1950s and 60s, the steady, early, up until about 1963,
the steady state theory had the lead among physicists,
I think because, and astronomers,
because nobody wanted to deal with the problem of an absolute beginning to the universe.
Hoyle came to Caltech and made friends with some young physicists,
William Fowler and Margaret and Jeffrey Berbridge
and put them onto this nucleosynthesis problem.
They solved that problem by the early 1960s.
That problem was solved and they got the Nobel Prize for it
for various reasons Hoyle was not included.
In the early 1960s, the nucleosynthesis problem was solved
and it looked as though that would support the steady state theory of the universe
in spite of this bizarre creation field,
because after all physicists were used to bizarre things at that time.
But then, all of a sudden, the microwave background radiation was discovered,
again by Bell Lab engineers who were doing experiments
in order to prepare for the first communication satellites
and discovered this background hiss,
which turned out to have about the frequency,
pretty close to the frequency that had been predicted by Damov and his partners.
And now, all of a sudden, the Big Bang theory was in and has been in ever since.
But by 1980, quantum theory, having been applied to solve the nucleosynthesis problem,
was firmly part of cosmology and one of the problems that the Big Bang theory,
together with quantum theory, should have resolved
was the existence of something called magnetic monopoles.
That means the magnetic analog of a positive charge,
all of our magnets have two poles, north and south,
and you can't cut it in half and get the northern half here and the southern half here.
You've got, every magnet has a north-south pole,
but a magnetic monopole would be just one of those.
And in principle, they should exist.
This young physicist, Alan Gooth, was wrestling with this problem
and in 1980, proposed an incredible solution,
not just to the magnetic monopole problem,
but to reformulated the whole Big Bang,
which is that the universe popped out of the quantum vacuum,
which was unstable in a particular way that quantum theory allows.
He didn't invent that idea.
That was invented by a physicist before him.
But at a certain point, 10 to the minus 35 seconds
when the universe popped into existence,
when it was about large enough to hold in your hand,
or maybe put in your pocket,
it went through what's called an inflation.
It increased in size by 2 to the 100th power,
effectively instantaneously.
Now, this inflation is reflected in the distribution
of the microwave background radiation
and in the distribution of galaxies.
And it turns out that it does actually work for those purposes,
broadly speaking.
But what it implies is that the entire thing
that we call the universe,
however, with the dark matter, with the dark energy,
everything is a minute fraction
of the total entity that inflated, the real universe,
is vastly, vastly larger than we can imagine
and it is out of communication with us,
that we cannot interact with it.
Everything that we call the universe,
even in the most expanded sense of 20th century physics,
is a tiny patch on the real universe.
In a certain sense, more than that,
the attempt to unify gravity with quantum theory
has led to what's called string theory,
and we'll be talking about that in the final lecture,
but one aspect of string theory is that our universe
is one valley in a landscape of at least 10 to the 500th
possible contemporary parallel universes
and that, so we're really nothing nowhere.
