I started Magic in 2019, Magic Cloud as an open source project.
Since then I have almost 8,000 commits to it.
During a small period I had an angel slash VC investor, which allowed me to have a little bit of help from a front-end developer who created parts of the new dashboard that was created a year ago.
However, besides from that, every single commit towards Magic's GitHub repository is mine.
99.99% of every single 98.5% of all commits are mine.
The intellectual property for Magic is mine, 100%.
During those four years of maintaining Magic as an open source project, I have had zero contributions outside of this.
And I have made zero money on Magic itself.
Even though I have 8,000 commits towards the core Magic repository, Magic also consists of 42 additional projects, which also contains thousands upon thousands of commits.
So I have basically made zero money directly on Magic. In fact, the only value Magic has provided us with is in the forms of being able to start iNiro, which is a hugely successful company.
The last six months we have grown our revenue by 395%.
However, Magic as an open source project has made nothing for me or us in any ways whatsoever. However, it has made a lot of money for a lot of other people.
Magic has 10 million, 10.5 million downloads of its nugget packages.
Now, of course, this is divided between 42 packages.
And also, of course, the way continuous integrations and continuous deployment works, it downloads the nugget packages, unless you explicitly cache them, etc.
So it doesn't have 10 million users, but it has a lot of users. There's a lot of people using Magic today.
And they all have one thing in common, or actually they have three things in common.
A, they're not contributing to Magic with source code or commits or marketing or anything.
B, they're not contributing money in any ways whatsoever.
And C, I'm not entirely sure about this, but I'm like 99% sure about this. They don't tell anybody they're using Magic.
Magic is kind of like a secret. And the reasons for that is because a single software developer with a couple of months of training in Hyper Lambda and Magic can outperform entire software development departments with 20 plus software developers.
So nobody wants to publicly admit they're using Magic.
Because if they don't admit it, they can invoice as if they have 20 people working in their software department, while actually there's only one guy sitting, clicking the credit fire on the back-end generator and, you know, using workflows to add business logic.
Now, that has created the realization in me that I need to stop Magic as an open source project.
So Magic is no longer open source. I'm sorry. I apologize. It's just the way it is.
You know, if somebody out there wants to pay me eight figures a month to re-open source license it again.
Then by all means, I'm willing to discuss that. However, I want my payday.
You see, when I started Magic in 2019, it was the continuation of Phosphorus V. Phosphorus V, again, was the invention of Hyper Lambda.
I invented Hyper Lambda in 2013, implying I've been working on this thing for 11 years.
And so far, I haven't seen as much as a single dollar.
And I haven't even seen a single contribution, you know.
So Magic is like the secret that everybody's using, that's making everybody else rich. Everybody else but me.
I know at least one guy. He's got his own company. I'm not going to disclose who or anything like that.
But he's got a company. He's got some three, four consultants working for him as, you know, on a consultancy basis.
And then he's got a lot of hardware that he's probably paying like, I don't know, $20,000, $30,000 a month for.
But he's invoicing his clients $180,000 per month.
He's driving a $200,000 car.
I'm driving a 22 year old wreck.
And I made him rich.
Now, of course, he's using additional things, but Magic is one of the core building blocks he's using in his business.
And there are thousands of these guys out there.
They're not contributing to me. They're not contributing with monetary funds.
They're not contributing with contributions to the source code.
And they're not even publicly admitting on Facebook that they're using Magic.
They're not even helping us marketing the thing at all.
I mean, it's like as if they cringe to simply click like on the GitHub profile because they don't want the project to become popular.
They want it to be like their secret. They want it to be like, oh, I discovered something.
I'm not going to tell anybody about it. It's freaking brilliant.
It made me a billionaire and I'm going to be the only one who's able to use it and nobody's going to understand shit.
And I can invoice like $20,000 per hour I'm working.
Well, it's not funny. It's not funny for me.
So we have changed the license terms of magic, which we can.
We cannot do this revocably backwards in time, but since the entirety of the intellectual property belongs to me,
I can change the licensing terms of magic and I've changed it to a closed source project.
If you want access to the source codes and or you want to install it on your own servers or in your own Kubernetes cluster, et cetera, et cetera,
you need to start paying me. It's really that simple.
I want a piece of the pie. I made you rich.
You know, you got to start sharing the wealth with the guy who facilitated for it.
So magic is as of now closed source and we're charging $5,000 per month, per month for a single server license,
which will give you further record access to the source code, but you will only have the legal license terms to use it on one single server.
If you want to deploy it on a Kubernetes cluster, you're going to have to pay us $20,000 per month.
And the reasons for that is quite simple. If you are using magic and you know how to leverage it,
one single human being can replace 50 senior software back end developers.
So I mean, even for $20,000 a month, as far as I'm concerned, it's a bargain.
Have a nice day.
