It's really great pleasure to have a professor at the weekend, so he will tell us about
about an algebra of observables for digital space.
Please.
Thanks so much, Tadashi, for the introduction and also the invitation.
So there are a couple of recent papers indicated here that I'll talk about, but I want to mention
that the inspiration came from two previous papers by Lou and Lou Reiser that are indicated
there.
So I'm going to begin just with five or seven minutes reviewing a couple of basic facts
about black hole thermodynamics to orient us to the language I'll use later.
So apparently it was first Raphael Sorkin who suggested that Beckenstein and Hawking
entropy of a black hole is some kind of entanglement entropy.
And Sorkin's idea was the following.
In quantum field theory divides space into two regions, A and B.
And Sorkin's application B is the region behind the horizon of the black hole, A is
the region outside, but I'll make some general comments that would apply to any two regions.
Then Sorkin considered a state psi of the whole system.
And given such a state, you can try to define its reduced density matrix for measurements
only in one region, state of region A, in the case of the black hole, the region outside
the horizon.
And then you can try to calculate the von Neumann entropy of this density matrix.
And Sorkin's idea was that roughly the Beckenstein-Hawking entropy would be the entropy of such a state
for an observer who's only making measurements in region A so that what that observer sees
is only the density matrix rho A. And therefore this would be the appropriate entropy for
that observer.
And then however found that this entropy is ultraviolet divergence.
And the leading divergence did not depend on the state.
The divergence was an ultraviolet divergence.
In quantum field theory, all states are the same at short distances.
So regardless of the state, you get the same leading divergence.
And the coefficient of the leading divergence was proportional to the area A of the boundary
between the two regions, A and B.
Well, Sorkin did get an entropy proportional to the area.
And of course he had an infinite coefficient, whereas Beckenstein-Hawking had a coefficient
one over 4g.
But Sorkin had ignored gravity, which is like taking g to zero, so you could hope that Sorkin's
divergent answer is the correct answer if you ignore gravity.
And Sorkin was hoping that gravity would cut off the divergence and give a finite answer.
Now the next major advance I mentioned was by Saskind and Uggel in a decade later.
They made a simple observation.
So I should say Beckenstein had proposed a formula for the generalized entropy.
He had proposed that a black hole itself has entropy A over 4g H bar.
But ordinary matter outside the black hole
have ordinary entropy, which I'll call S out.
Beckenstein's idea was that the generalized second law doesn't apply to ordinary entropy
only because I could take a cup of tea and throw it into the black hole.
And then the ordinary entropy goes down.
However, the area of the black hole horizon then goes up.
And Beckenstein proposed that the second law really applies to this generalized entropy,
the area over 4g H bar, which is black hole entropy, plus the ordinary entropy outside.
While Saskind and Uggel were the first to observe that the generalized entropy is better defined
than either term is separately.
The second term has an ultraviolet divergence, which I already mentioned and which Sorkin noted.
But the first has a similar problem because there's an ultraviolet divergence in the
relation between the bare Newton constant g0 and the physical observed Newton constant g.
When Hawking did his famous work justifying Beckenstein's proposal about black body entropy,
sorry, black hole entropy, he did not take into account loops that normalize Newton's constant.
The Newton's constant in Hawking's paper was a bare Newton's constant.
But when we use this formula in the real world, we presumably have in mind the physical
observed Newton's constant. The relation between the two is ultraviolet divergence
and at one loop it has the quadratic divergence I've indicated.
Now Saskind and Uggel argued that the ultraviolet divergences in S out cancel those in the area term
that come from divergences in 1 over g. And these arguments were refined later.
So it came to be better, it came to be understood that the generalized entropy is better defined
than either of the two terms on the right hand side of the formula.
We can take that to mean that the entropy of a region is better defined in gravity than it is in
ordinary quantum field theory. In gravity, if you try to compute the entropy of a region,
you get Sorkin's ultraviolet divergence. If instead use the Beckenstein formula,
the divergence is canceled as shown by originally by Saskind and Uggel.
So gravity somehow makes the entropy of a region better defined than it would be without gravity.
And that's something we'll discuss further later.
Now at this level we could be talking about either a black hole horizon or a cosmological horizon.
And in this talk I'll discuss both, but I'll concentrate a little bit more on deciduous
space with the cosmological horizon. So in this talk I'm going to aim to give a slightly abstract
explanation of why entropy is better defined when gravity is included, at least for the basic
examples of the black hole and the sitter space, although I hope the lesson is more general.
First of all, let's discuss the origin of the divergence in Sorkin's calculation.
In ordinary quantum mechanics, when we consider entanglement between two systems A and B,
we usually assume at the start that each system has its own Hilbert space,
HA or HB. Then the Hilbert space of the combined system is a tensor product.
Now a state psi AB in the combined Hilbert space could be a simple tensor product
of states of the two systems separately. In that case systems A and B can separately
be described by pure states, namely psi A and psi B. And there's no entanglement or entanglement entropy.
But a more general state is not a simple tensor product, but a sum of tensor products like this one.
In that case we say that systems A and B are entangled and each system separately has a non-zero
entropy. Now the point of this elementary slide has been to remind us that in ordinary quantum
mechanics whether or not a state has non-zero entanglement and entanglement entropy is a property
of the state, not the system. That's not so for entanglement entropy between different regions
in quantum field theory. In Sorkin's setup the divergence is an ultraviolet divergence, so as
I already said it does not depend on the state. Every state looks like the vacuum at short distances
and therefore has the same leading divergence in the entanglement entropy. There aren't any
unentangled states. The root of the problem is that in quantum field theory it's not true
that there are separate Hilbert spaces HA and HB for the inside and outside regions.
There's only a combined Hilbert space H for the whole system.
What the separate regions A and B have are not Hilbert spaces HA and HB, but only algebras of
observables that I'll call curly A and curly B. These act on the physical Hilbert space of the
system so they can be defined as von Neumann algebras. A von Neumann algebra is just a fancy name
for an algebra of bounded operators on a Hilbert space that's in which certain kinds of limits are
allowed. Now broadly there are three types of von Neumann algebra. The one which we take for granted
without even mentioning it is the type one algebra, the algebra of all operators on the Hilbert space.
In ordinary quantum mechanics when we discuss the system A it has a Hilbert space HA
and the algebra of observables of the system is roughly speaking the algebra of all operators on HA.
For some purposes you might want to say that they're bounded self-adjoint operators or maybe just
self-adjoints, but roughly speaking all operators are allowed. In ordinary quantum mechanics we
consider all operators to in some sense be physically sensible and that's by definition a type one
algebra all operators on a Hilbert space. Now in the type one situation you can have densities and
entrapies and well I had an elementary slide where I explained a little bit of that but I'm going to
assume that we're basically familiar with densities and entrapies in ordinary quantum mechanics.
The other types of von Neumann algebra are less familiar and I'll give examples later but first the
bottom line. A type two algebra is an algebra that does not have pure states but there is a notion
of density matrix and an entropy for a system in which the algebra of observables is of type two.
A type three algebra is the worst type. A system whose observables are form a type three algebra
does not have pure states and also does not have density matrices or entrapies.
Now by now from what I've said about Sorkin's ultraviolet divergence you might anticipate the
bad news. In quantum field theory the algebra of observables of region of spacetime as in Sorkin's
picture is always of type three. So this is a result that goes back to Araki.
Approximately 1965 that might not be the exact year.
So to a region we can never associate a pure state or a density matrix or entropy.
The algebra is of type three so the notion of density matrix and entropy isn't really applicable
in quantum field theory and we can view this as the reason for the universal ultraviolet
divergence of the entanglement entropy. When we tried to define entanglement entropy in quantum
field theory we're using a concept that doesn't strictly apply. It would apply in a lattice cutoff
theory for example. In a lattice cutoff theory you would have an inside and outside Hilbert space.
There can be some subtleties in a lattice gauge theory but for simplicity in a lattice scalar
field theory the big Hilbert space with the tensor product of inside and outside Hilbert spaces
and the outside observer could have a type one algebra all operators on that space
and then you'd then you'd have a type one algebra. The only problem being that the states
that are untangled are very far from the continuum limit. In the continuum theory you have a type
three algebra and that's the reason that you have trouble when you try to define density matrix or
entropy. Well I put the reason in quotes that's an abstract explanation of the reason.
However and this is the main point of my talk including gravity in a semi-classical way
changes the picture at least in the case of the black hole or the sitter space
including gravity semi-classically changes the algebra from type three to type two.
So turning on gravity even in the limit that Newton's constant is arbitrarily small
will give us a type two algebra where density matrices and entropies are meaningful notions.
So when gravity is turned on even for recoupling the reason outside the horizon is described by an
algebra in which there is a notion of entropy though there is no notion of a quantum mechanical
microstate. Type two and type three algebras do not have microstates but they do have density
matrices and entropies. We get a type two one algebra for the sitter space and a type two
infinity algebra for the black hole. Well what are type two and type three algebras?
Roughly type two and type three algebras are the natural operator algebras that act on the system A
that has an infinite amount of entanglement with another system B.
So whenever you have an infinite amount of entanglement the algebra of observables are of
type three. For today's lecture we're interested in quantum field theory intervention but another
problem that has an infinite amount of entanglement is quantum statistical mechanics in the infinite
volume limit. There's an infinite amount of entanglement and the algebra is of type three in
fact in quantum statistical mechanics in the infinite volume limit. Anyway in quantum field
theory for operators in a given region of spacetime we always have an infinite amount of entanglement
between modes just on one side of the border between the regions and modes on just on the other
side. So modes close to the separation between the two regions are highly entangled with always
an infinite amount of entanglement and likewise as I already said in quantum statistical mechanics
for an infinite system at positive temperature there's always an infinite amount of entanglement.
So such systems are not going to give type one algebras because they have an
infinite amount of entanglement. In fact without gravity they lead to type three algebras.
A type two algebra is more special than a type three algebra but since our goal will eventually
involve type two algebras and also because the explanation is a bit shorter I'll start with type
two. For us there are actually two important types of type two algebras type two one and type two
infinity. A type two one algebra is most simply the algebra that acts on an infinite collection
of qubits that are in an almost maximally mixed state.
So we could consider n qubits that are in an exactly maximally mixed state. Here I've considered
the system A which has n qubits system B has n qubits the nth qubit of system A is completely
entangled with the nth qubit of system B. So system A is completely entangled with system B.
Now let A and A prime be operators that act on only the first k spins or qubits of system A
where k is no bigger than m. We're eventually going to take n to infinity keeping k fixed.
Then we define a function f of a which is the expectation value of a in the state psi.
Well I chose a to be maximally mixed so its density matrix is two to the minus m times the
identity. So f of a is the trace of a times the density matrix and that's two to the minus n times
the trace of a. The trace is the trace in the Hilbert space of system A because A is an operator
on system A. Now from this formula you see immediately that f of a prime equals f of a prime
because they're both multiples of the trace of a prime.
Another fact is that f of one is one because the state was normalized and the density matrix had
trace one. And finally and this is the key fact f of a has a thermodynamic limit meaning it's
unchanged if we add more maximally entangled spins to the system with the given operator
little a with the given operator a not acting on the added spins.
So we consider the limit n to infinity and we consider any operator that acts on only
finitely many qubits of system A. This function f of a has a limit as n goes to infinity because
it's unaffected by adding more spectator qubits. And in the limit it still satisfies f of one
equals one and f of a prime equals f of a prime a because it satisfied those conditions for every n.
Now so far we've defined f on the whole algebra which are a not of all operators that act on
only finitely many qubits in system A. But we can take the closure of a not environment sense
that means we allow operators that act on any number of k of qubits but the matrix
elements decay rapidly for large k. So we allow operators that can be approximated very well by
operators that act on the finite set of qubits but they don't strictly have zero matrix elements
that act on a larger number. So by taking this closure of a not we can complete a not to a
von Neumann algebra a still with a function f of a that has the same properties I've stated.
The reason we want to take this closure is that von Neumann algebras have a simple classification
but before we take the closure the algebra depends on the details of the system.
So to make simple statements we take the closure and then we have a very general
and crude classification of von Neumann algebras. Now since f of a prime equals f of a prime a
this function is usually called a trace and I'll write it as one so I'll write that f of a is the
trace of a but the trace of a is not the trace of a in any Hilbert space representation. It's more
like a renormalized trace in which we removed an infinite factor of two to the n where n was going
to infinity. We normalize it so that the trace of one is one. Now we did a certain amount of work
to describe an infinite dimensional algebra with a trace but there's a more elementary example you
all know the type one algebra b of all operators on an infinite dimensional Hilbert space h.
In this example we have a trace which is just
the trace in the Hilbert space. We take a to its trace in the Hilbert space.
That's a trace but it's not defined for all elements of b only those that are trace class.
For example the identity element of b doesn't have a trace unless you want to allow infinity as a value.
By contrast from the infinite system of cubits we constructed an algebra a in which every element
has a trace. So clearly it's an essentially new type of algebra. In fact it's the simplest type
example of a type two algebra. It's said to be of type two one and it's actually called the type
two one factor of Murray and von Neumann. Murray and von Neumann I think in the late 30s constructed
it in essentially the way I've told you. Factor means that the center of the algebra
consists only of c numbers.
There are no operators other than c numbers in the center of this algebra.
Factor is von Neumann algebra terminology that's analogous to simple for a lead group.
Now can I ask a question? Yes please. You take this k to be finite to define.
So if we take k if we are okay also can be infinite so do you get a different algebra
or it's not well defined? It's in general not well defined you have to say what you're doing
when you take k to infinity. I said it roughly here I didn't explain it completely. Here we
took k to infinity but in a restricted way. Well okay if we allow completely general operators
you know we'd end up with something extremely wild that doesn't derive much wilder than you
get in quantum field three. Well let's discuss the construction that leads to something nice.
I think it's that's I'd rather use the time that way. Von Neumann said yes we want to take k to
infinity but we only want to allow operators that have very small matrix elements if k is very large.
So we allow an operator that has matrix elements of order one let's say if they act on k qubits
but they're of order epsilon if you act on two k qubits and epsilon squared if you act on three k
qubits and so on. So von Neumann when we take the closure to get the von Neumann algebra we allow
operators that have non-zero matrix elements to act on any number of qubits but the matrix elements
act on very many qubits they're very small. To motivate it you might think that our qubits
are arranged on an incident lattice and then we want to consider operators that are approximately
local. An approximate local operator mostly acts only on a finite set of qubits the ones in the
region it's acting on but maybe without some weak long range action. Or in quantum field three
the infinite qubits correspond to modes higher and higher in the ultraviolet
and the operators we consider don't excite very high energy modes very much
so they mostly act on low energy modes but for different operators they will act on different
modes. If we take an operator higher momentum it'll act on more modes the cutoff in energies above
which its matrix elements are small depends on the operator but we only consider operators
that are unlikely to excite arbitrarily high energies. Roughly that's what this means.
If you try to consider all operators it's too wild. If you want to read more I did write an
article which is called why does quantum field three in curves space time make sense and what
happens to the algebra of observables where I explain more than I'll be able to explain today.
Now as I was saying here we all know a more elementary example of an algebra with a trace
infinite algebra with a trace that's the type one algebra of all operators on an infinite
dimensional Hilbert space but in that case not all operators have a trace for example
the identity has trace infinity and since the trace is infinity we can't normalize it to make
the trace of the entity finite then operators of finite traces would have trace zero.
By contrast from the infinite system of cubits we constructed an algebra in which
every element has a trace so curly a was an essentially new type of algebra
and as I said it's the simplest example of a type two algebra originally introduced by Morian
von Neumann. Now if a is this type two one algebra and b is the more obvious type one
algebra of all operators on an infinite dimensional space we can make a third type of
algebra as their tensor products so c I'll write as a tensor b. The new algebra still has a trace
because each factor does but the trace is not defined for all elements because of the factor of b.
In fact c is a new type kind of algebra said to be of type two infinity
and these are the important type two algebras at least for the type of applications in today's lecture
and there's only one type three algebra that's important for the in quantum field theory there
is a universal type three algebra for any region in any quantum field theory or at least that's
believed to be the case it's not completely proven. It turns out that c is related to the
black hole and a is related to the sitter space. Now what's an algebra of type three?
Well to make an algebra of type three we do almost the same thing but we start with the case
that the kth qubit of system a is entangled with the kth qubit of system b fully in the
sense that the eigenvalues of the density matrix are not zero but not maximally in the sense that
those eigenvalues are not equal. So I've written a simple example of a state where the kth qubit
of system a is entangled with the kth system of qubit b with a thermal but not maximally mixed
density matrix. We can still define the function f of a and as before it has a thermodynamic limit.
And we can use that to define an infinite algebra following the same steps as before.
The important difference is that now f of a a prime is not equal to f of a a prime
because the density matrix is not equal to a scalar not equal to a multiple of the identity.
So but nevertheless we follow the same steps as before for n to infinity we construct an
algebra a not consisting of operators that act on any finite set of qubits of the a system
and then we complete it to a binomial algebra which now is of type three and in fact
in the infinite volume limit of positive temperature the algebra of observables of almost well of
any quantum system is of type three. And what I've said is essentially well I think
marine binomial had another construction but the construction I've just told you of a type three
algebra dates to the 60s also and is due to powers Iraqi and wood.
Now algebras of type two or three do not have an irreducible representation in Hilbert space.
Another way to say it is that they don't have microstates.
What a microstate would be with the vector a pure state in an irreducible representation of the
algebra but these algebras don't have any irreducible representation. Whenever a type
two or type three algebra acts on a Hilbert space it always commutes with another type two or type
three algebra. For example in the construction I gave you of type two and type three algebras
as algebras that act on the a part of a bipartite system AB in that construction they commute with
an identical algebra on system B. So in that construction our type two or type three algebra
commuted with another type two or type three algebra and that's actually inevitable.
The difference between the type two and type three algebra is that a type two algebra has
a trace and a type three algebra does not. Moreover in a type two algebra the trace is
non-degenerate in the sense that if f of a is any linear function on the algebra then f of a is the
trace of a a prime for some unique a prime in the algebra. In particular if a acts on a Hilbert
space h and psi is a state in h we can consider the linear function that takes a to its expectation
value in the state psi and because of what I just said here that will be the trace of rho times a
for some elements of the algebra so there will be some row in the algebra that satisfies this
condition and since that's the condition by which density matrices are defined in ordinary
quantum mechanics it makes sense to call row the density matrix.
So a state of a type two algebra has a density matrix.
Once we have density matrices we also have entropies we define entropies in the usual way
as minus the trace of rho log rho so a state of a type two algebra has an entropy.
However I should warn you that in physical terms the entropy of a state of a type two
algebra is a sort of renormalized entropy from which an infinite constant was subtracted.
So we constructed our type two algebra in the example I gave from a system with an infinite
amount of entanglement so in that construction there was a maximally entangled state that we
actually started with in making the definitions. So physically it has an infinite entropy but
when we define the entropy of the type two algebra we subtract that infinity and we measure all
entropies relative to that one. So for example if we go back to that system let's go back to the
case of finite n. In the maximally entangled state the a system had entropy n which is infinite and
large n limit. As an example of the state of the system we could disentangle k qubits where we keep
k fixes n going to infinity and that's similar to the fact that we started with operators that
only act on k qubits. So an operator that acts on k qubits could project the one to a pure state
and disentangle k qubits from the b system. So with the algebra we considered we have to consider
such states such a state as entropy n minus k. Entropy of a type two one algebra could be defined
by subtracting I see here I gave an abstract definition where it's not clear that renormalization
was involved but to give another explanation where it's obvious that renormalization is involved
entropy of a type two one algebra can be defined by subtracting n before taking n to infinity.
So then the maximally entangled state has entropy zero and the state with k qubits
disentangled has entropy minus k and it's intuitively obvious that with this definition
if we subtract the entropy of the maximally entangled state all other states will have
negative entropy. That's intuitively obvious and not hard to prove. More formally we defined the
trace by the expectation value in the maximally mixed state. So in other words
but the density matrix of the maximally mixed state
would be defined by this. So comparing the definition of the trace to the definition
of the density matrix we see that the maximally mixed state of a type two algebra has density
matrix one that's indeed a density matrix because we defined the trace of the trace of the identity
is one so one is a properly normalized density matrix but the log of one is zero so the entropy
of the maximally mixed state is zero and it's not hard to prove that any other density matrix has
strictly negative entropy. Now as I've already explained in ordinary quantum field theory the
algebras of regions are of type three but it turns out at least for the black hole and
deciduous space that when we include gravity things are different. Gravitational effects even for
very weak coupling convert the type three algebras into type two algebras. That can be viewed as an
abstract explanation of why entropy is better defined in the presence of gravity. For type two
algebra there is a well-defined notion of entropy for type three there isn't so the fact that gravity
converts type three to type two can be viewed as an abstract explanation
of why gravity makes entropy better defined.
The details are somewhat different in the two cases of the black hole and deciduous space
and I'll begin with deciduous space. So here I've drawn the Penrose diagram of deciduous space.
So in this diagram time runs vertically and space are really one direction in space
runs horizontally. A spatial section of deciduous space is a sphere let's say with the south pole
and the north pole. The south pole and north pole are at the ends of the diagram and you could think
of the horizontal line as representing the latitude and following Penrose one's made a
conformal mapping to map the picture to a finite picture but the time is infinite at the top
it's minus infinity at the bottom and the conformal mapping has been made so that light rays
travel at a pi over four angle to the vertical. The picture wasn't drawn very carefully but
the diagonal red lines are meant to be at a pi over four angle to the vertical so they represent
light rays. Now we consider an observer who sits at the south pole of the sphere in the
diagram the world line of the observer is simply the left boundary of the picture
and now we see that the observer has a future horizon this diagonal red line up here
and a past horizon down here and there's what's called a causal patch.
The causal patch is the region that the observer can influence and also can see.
It's the green region the observer can then send a signal to influence the something in the causal
patch you can also see what happens so if you like if you want to know what's out here you
can shine a light beam or a flashlight beam at the out there and see what comes back.
So the causal patch is the region that you can explore actively.
The region behind the past horizon you can explore it passively you can see what
see what comes from there but you can't disturb it.
Now the center space has a killing vector field of time translations that's future
directed time like in the static patch the orbits look something like this.
It's past directed time like in the opposite static patch which would be the static patch
for an observer at the north pole. The opposite static patch is the region
space like separated from the static patch that's this region over here.
So let H be the generator of time translations.
In ordinary quantum field theory in the center space there's a natural
decider state sometimes called the bunch Davies state but actually
there are a bunch of early references on this state.
It can be obtained by analytic continuation from Euclidean signature
and an observation that goes way back to the 70s is that correlations in this state
have a thermal interpretation of the decider temperature. The decider temperature is one
over beta where R is the radius of the center space and beta is the circumference 2 pi times the
radius. One over the circumference of the Euclidean sphere is the decider temperature
and correlation functions in this state have a thermal interpretation of that temperature.
A slightly abstract way to describe this thermal interpretation is to say that the modular
Hamiltonian of the state psi ds for observations in this is for observations in the static patch
is a multiple of the Hamiltonian it's in fact beta times the Hamiltonian.
Now in ordinary quantum field theory we'd associate to the static patch
an algebra of observables and as for any region in quantum field theory it will be of type 3.
Including weakly coupled gravitational fluctuations does not qualitatively change the picture.
We could include gravitational perturbations as additional modes that we include in the
definition of the Hilbert space and we then include them in the definition of the decider state
the bunch Davies state and the algebra. What does change the picture is that in a closed
universe such as the center space the isometries have to be treated as constraints.
That means now for us the important isometry first of all since we'll be citing the static patch
what counter the isometries of the static patch but the important isometry of the static patch is
the time translation symmetry so that's the one I'm going to focus on although other isometries
can also be considered. Just considering time translations imposing the constraints means
that we should replace the algebra of observables by a not h its invariant subalgebra the subalgebra
of observables invariant under time translations but that doesn't work the invariant subalgebra is
trivial. Basically any operator that commutes with h can the can the average of roll the thermal
fluctuations and replaced by its thermal average a c number so the only operators that can meet with
h are c numbers any thought any operator in the static patch
that commutes with h is actually a c number so a not is a static patch algebra so specifically
for operators that can meet with h they're all c numbers.
Now therefore if we leave the problem as it is we're not going to get anything sensible
to get a reasonable algebra of observables we have to ask who's making these observations
so we're going to include an observer in the analysis.
Of course in principle an observer should really be described by the theory not injected from outside
a theory of quantum gravity is supposed to give a complete description of the world
so the observer is part of what the theory describes.
One way to explain what it means to include an observer is that we consider a code subspace of
states in which an observer is present in the static patch and then we'll consider
operators that can be defined in the low energy effective field theory in this code subspace
though they're not well defined in the whole Hilbert space.
Should we be surprised that we need to include an observer to get a sensible answer?
I think you can argue that the answer is no. In ordinary quantum mechanics without gravity
you can consider the observer who studies the quantum system to be external to the system.
With gravity included the observer inevitably gravitates and cannot truly be considered
external to the system. Once you include gravity either classically or quantum mechanically
anything in the world is part of the system. However in an open universe that means with
non-compact spatial sections for example in an asymptotically flat universe the gravity of the
observer can be negligible. It's in a closed universe that it may be impossible to ignore the
gravity of the observer. That's exactly the situation we're in here because deciduous space
is a simple model of a closed universe that is a universe with compact spatial sections.
The fact that deciduous space is the closed universe is what goes into the fact
that we had a problem that there aren't any operators in the static patch that can meet with
the constraints. I think the physical interpretation is that if you want to discuss observers in the
static patch you have to take seriously the observer who's making the observations and
include the gravity of that observer. We'll now include the gravity of the observer and we'll
get a sensible answer. As a minimal model of the observer we'll consider a clock with a
Hamiltonian that I'll call q or really let me just say that I will endow the observer with a
Hamiltonian. So if the observer is going to have gravity the observer has to have energy so we need
the minimum was that we need the observer to have the Hamiltonian so that we can talk about
the gravity of the observer. It turns out that to solve our problem we don't need a more elaborate
model of the observer. An observer with the Hamiltonian is enough so I give the Hamiltonian
so I give the observer a Hamiltonian q. It's physically reasonable to assume the
observer's energy is bounded below possibly by zero or maybe by mc squared but I'll take the
bound to be zero so we assume the q is non-negative. So the effect of including the observer is to
modify the Hilbert space by replacing what it was before with what it was before tensored with
square integral functions on the positive half line. The positive half line because we took q to be
non-negative. Likewise we extend the algebra. Before imposing the constraints we had an algebra
before of a0 that acts on the effect of field theory degrees of freedom but now we have the
observer's operators and we'll assume that the observer can manipulate the observer's Hilbert
space in an arbitrary fashion which means we include the type one algebra which I call b of l2
of r plus which is just all operators on l2 of r plus. So if we don't worry about the constraints
then we extend the Hilbert space in this fashion and we extend the algebra in this fashion.
Now finally we have to take the observer's gravity into account in defining the constraints.
The constraint was the generator of time translations. It becomes the total Hamiltonian
of the quantum fields plus the observer. So the constraint operator is no longer what it was
before. It's what it was before plus the Hamiltonian of the observer.
The cracked algebra of observables taking into account the presence of the observer
is therefore modified in two ways. First we extend the bare algebra and then we impose
the different constraints. Now it turns out that when we do this we get a very nice answer.
The reason is that once we an observer is present we can gravitationally dress any
operator to the observer's whirlwind. We didn't have any operators before because there was no
place they could be gravitationally dressed. In decider space because it's a closed universe
there's no region at infinity to which you can dress an operator as you would do an asymptotically
flat spacetime or asymptotically anti-decider spacetimes. But if an observer is present you
can gravitationally dress any operator to the observer's whirlwind. You do that simply as follows.
For any operator in the quantum field theory effective field theory algebra you replace it
by a dressed version which is conjugated by e to the i ph where p was the conjugate of q.
And that operator commutes with the constraints which is now h plus q. So a short calculation
will show that this operator commutes with that one. So in contrast to before where we had no
operators that commute with the constraint now we do have a lot of them because we can
gravitationally dress all the naive operators. One more operator that commutes with the constraint
is q itself or equivalently minus h. Since h plus q is the constraints, mod of the constraint q
is equivalent to minus h. So it doesn't matter whether we add q or minus h to the algebra but
we get an algebra which is generated. We get an algebra which is generated. A hat I'll call it
generated by these operators little a hat and q.
Now Kahn and Takasaki showed in the 1970s two facts. There are no more operators that commute
with the constraints and the algebra curly a that's generated by these operators a hat and q
is of type two. Well why did Kahn and Takasaki do this? They weren't studying
disorder space. They were studying type two algebras. Well sorry they were studying type three
algebras. Type three algebras were hard to understand because they were the hardest
type of von Neumann algebra. They discovered this construction which can create a type two
algebra out of a type three algebra and importantly they showed you can go backwards
and essentially reconstruct the type three algebra from the type two algebra.
So what they were doing was introducing a method to study type three algebras.
For us it's a natural physical construction in disorder space. It just happens that including
the observer landed us on this classic construction of Kahn and Takasaki.
Well to be more precise the algebra we get this way is the type two infinity
if the observer energy is not bounded below. If the observer energy is bounded below we get
an algebra of type two one. Now it's believed that the sitter space in the presence of gravity
has a state of maximum entropy. The state psi ds that can be defined by analytic continuation
from Euclidean danger and represents empty to sitter space. Often as I said called the bunch
debut state because of one of the original papers. So if we want to reproduce the fact that the
entropy has a maximum we have to assume that the observer energy is bounded below. But I think
that's a very nice result because physically one would it's obviously a much more realistic model
of an observer to assume that the observer energy is bounded below and that gives us what we need
for the sitter space. Once we get a type two one algebra there's going to be a state of maximum
entropy with density matrix one. I'll explain that for the system with instantly many qubits but
it's true generally for type two one algebra. It's not difficult to identify that state. It's the
natural sitter state of the bulk fields tensored with a simple vector in the Hilbert space of the
observer. Which roughly means that the state of maximum entropy is the sitter state that represents
empty to sitter space, tensioned with a thermal state of the observer at the decider temperature.
So this is a satisfying answer for the maximum entropy state.
So now we can draw a few easy conclusions with charminized with claims made in the past by several
authors. First of all since the maximum entropy state has radicals one you can compute its rainy
entries and you find that they're independent of alpha. Which was argued for to sitter space by
these authors and these authors made claims that are related. Given the statement that the sitter
space has a state of maximum entropy that's what you should expect. In ordinary quantum mechanics
the maximum entropy state of this system is maximally mixed with a flat entanglement spectrum
and its rainy entries are independent of alpha.
Now suppose the observer makes a measurement with two outcomes that correspond to projection
operators pi and one minus pi. The probabilities of the two outcomes are trace pi and trace one minus
pi. All values of trace pi between zero and one are possible as shown by Murray and von Neumann.
If the outcome corresponding to pi is observed after this measurement this is the density matrix.
Since the two eigenvalues of sigma are zero and one over trace pi you can find that sigma log sigma
is this. So the entropy after the observation is this one. The entropy reduction from knowing the
outcome is this and you find that the probability of the outcome is related to the entropy reduction
by this nice formula. So that's a funny formula though because it shows you
that the probability of making an observation is determined only by the entropy reduction
if you make that observation. Whereas since the sitter space has a thermal interpretation
you would have thought that for example the probability to observe an elephant in the sitter
space would have a thermal suppression the exponential of minus the elephant mass divided
by the inverse temperature times the inverse temperature. Now let me see the thermal interpretation
of the sitter space predicts that the probability of low energy observation would be controlled
thermally. So we have two different candidate formulas for the probability of making a given
seeing a given fluctuation in the sitter space. One is thermal and the other is purely entropic.
So but for consistency of the two we must have that the exponential of minus the entropy reduction
is the exponential of minus beta times the energy.
In other words thermal suppression of a fluctuation can be understood as pure entropic
suppression. That's surprising but it's been argued before on other grounds notably by
considering the case that the fluctuation is a small black hole at the center of the static patch.
Well what part of this is surprising? The formula that the probability of an observation is the
exponential of minus the entropy change is an inevitable consequence of a maximum entropy
state in which all states are equally likely. In other words if all states are equally likely
the probability of an outcome is proportional to the number of microstates consistent with that
outcome. That's language of ordinary quantum mechanics a moment ago we reached the same
conclusion in the type 2 1 language. So the surprise is not that p is e to the minus delta s
but that the maximum entropy state also has a thermal interpretation.
And I hope to talk about the black hole but I see I'm running over with the time
so instead I'm going to conclude by explaining how to see in the context of the type 2 1 algebra
that the maximum entropy state has a thermal interpretation.
So first we ignore the constraint for moments. We consider an operator a in the naive algebra
and its time dependence is defined this way and then we look at time dependent correlators such as
this two-point function and they have thermal properties that reflect the fact that they can
be computed by analytic continuation from Euclidean signatures and that's the thermal nature of
the sitter space. After imposing the constraint we replace a with the dressed version a hat
and again we define its time dependence by conjugating by the Hamiltonian
but then because the Hamiltonian annihilates the sitter space we trivially find that in the maximum
entropy state the two-point function or any correlation function of the dressed operators
is the same as was the correlators of the bare operators in the bunch Davey state.
So correlators of gravitationally dressed operators after imposing the constraints
have the same thermal properties that correlators of bare operators had before imposing the constraints.
So in other words we've reconciled the fact that the sitter space
is a maximally mixed state which sounds like infinite temperature with the fact that it also
has a thermal interpretation not a finite temperature the considered temperature
and I will stop here I had additional slides which would have
which would which involve explaining the story for gravity
so maybe we can put the slides on the website but I think I'm out of time for the talk
so I'll stop here for questions. Thank you very much.
Thank you beautiful talk so it's time for questions so if we have a question please
ask any could you put your raise your hand
ah yes
yes please go ahead
okay
Deepan go ahead Deepan yes sir sir if we have a if if we have a big man singularity
and a big trans singularity or or any kind of naked singularity will that affect the
the the the suppression of the observable or the or any of the
or or or any of the conclusions
well the argument I gave is only for the sitter space unfortunately and even if I had time to
give this last part of the talk it would have been only for the black hole so I don't really know
what happens for other uh spacetimes but I will say that the most optimistic conjecture
may be too optimistic but the most optimistic conjecture of its type
is that any observer who sees only part of the universe
describes observations by a type 2 algebra
I don't know if that's true but I view that as the most optimistic conjecture of its type
and that will be irrespective of naked singularities within the static patch
well
perhaps you have in mind deciduous Schwarzschild so the deciduous Schwarzschild spacetime has a
past singularity yes because it would be good to study the sitter Schwarzschild
it's a little trickier because the two horizons have different temperatures
so one can't trivially extend the things I've said due to sitter Schwarzschild
I'm optimistic that an observer into sitter Schwarzschild would have a type 2 algebra but
I haven't analyzed that properly and would this statement hold true even for eternal indication
say we have different point well I've only quoted a highly optimistic conjecture
if you want me to go out on a limb with a highly optimistic conjecture then yes I'm willing to
make a highly optimistic conjecture that any observer who sees only part of the universe
would describe all observations by a type 2 algebra I don't know if that's true
that would mean that such an observer has density matrices and entries but no pure states
okay thank you
hi thanks for a great talk is there a way to see this I guess the transition between type 3 to
type 2 from a path integral point of view maybe which finger or something like that
good question
um
I don't know I'd like to tell you something about the black hole which is an intuitive way to see
it for the black hole but I don't have time to explain it so
so the black hole the two-sided black hole is a globally hyperbolic space time with the
Cauchy hyper surface s and there's a conserved energy
there's a conserved charge associated with the killing vector field of time translations
that goes forward on the right and backward on the left and then heuristically you might ask
if the Hamiltonian if the conserved charge is the difference of a Hamiltonian on the right and
Hamiltonian on the left the answer to that is no that's in the absence of gravity that's false
you can't split the conserved energy as the difference in an operator on the right and
an operator on the left so this is no without gravity so sorry I'm not answering your question
about path integrals I mean I changed the question to intuitive explanations so I'm
telling you the simplest intuitive explanation that I didn't have time for in the talk I realize
it's not exactly an answer to your question without gravity you can't split the conserved charge
associated to the killing vector field of the Schwarzschild space time
as a right operator minus left operator but with gravity you can age is the ADM Hamiltonian on the
right minus the ADM Hamiltonian on the left and the content of the part I just didn't have time
for for the black hole is really that the fact that you can make this splitting with gravity but
not without gravity is the reason that with gravity you got a type 2 algebra and without
gravity you do not so that's my best intuitive explanation in the case of the black hole although
it takes more time to explain why this fact is so important
but it wasn't based on path integrals so it doesn't really answer your question
that actually does is relevant to Swinger-Galdish related
that I said may have said something useful but okay anyway I did the best if the question had
been what's a simple explanation in the case of the black hole this would have been my best
any more questions I can ask a question so if we think for example digital space in global
coordinate so it's an area across time slice is really exponentially
developing and increasing exponentially increasing and in that case cross-section
area is exponentially also increasing and much larger than digital entropy
do you think it is is it possible to understand this exponentially large area in terms of some
algebra good question I don't know
I guess maybe people would speculate that it has to do with the entropy of the state or so
sorry the complexity of the state or something I have on this it's been said for black holes
but I can't tell you anything from the point of view of the vinaigretals I can't tell you
anything at the moment I see so do you think this type 2 algebra corresponds to some particular
class of area in gravitational space time maybe I didn't have time for this sorry this is a very
important fact which I didn't have time for it's in the paper of one of the papers I mentioned at
the beginning by Chandra Sekar I'm abbreviating the names because of time Longo Pennington and me
oh well there are two papers there's also just one of the three of us
we showed that the entropy defined in the type 2 algebra
is equal to gravitational generalized entropy
plus a constant a constant independent of the state
so gravitational generalized entropy I remind you is a over 4g h bar plus s out
so you see for my lecture to make sense we need to know that the entropy I defined
agrees with what people study by other methods and I didn't explain that in this lecture
it would have been a different lecture it is explained in two of the papers
one for decider space and one for the black hole so do you think this area is for any generic surface
in no it's the area of the horizon if we take some non-horizon like minimal surface or more
generic surface do you think there are some chances that area can be interpreted as a type 2
algebra?
well what you if it's a minimal surface you might think that it would be related to the
operators to the left of the surface or to the right of the surface I don't know
I'm not sure if I should say it's such a conjecture I would need to think more
all I can tell you when I said that entropy to find this way agrees with standard generalized
entropy standard generalized entropy is for the horizon area and we're discussing space times that
differ by quantum excitations from empty decider space or the Schwarzschild black hole although we
could have done the Kerr black hole similarly so I'm not sure about the Kerr black hole that might be hard
but anyway generalized entropy in those cases involves the horizon area
so when I said that we proved that the entropy defined from the algebra
agrees with the standard thing that's in a context where the standard thing involves the horizon area
as I said before in answer to I think the first question
I don't know what generalization there is I stated highly up to this
correct so this are renormalization newton concepts which you mentioned in the very first part of
your talk it's related to this type 3 algebra goes to type 2 algebra
yes I'd say that the sauce kind of long phenomenon that the entropy is related to the type 2 3
becoming type 2 thank you very much but we miss something you see the the discussion of the
type 2 or type 3 algebra makes sense in the limit the g goes to 0 but the entropy goes to infinity
in that limit so we don't need to take g equals 0 but the discussion makes sense in the limit g
goes to 0 in the decider case I did work in the limit g goes to 0 but you wouldn't expect
perturbative corrections to change anything I see I see but because the discussion had a limit
where g goes to 0 but the entropy doesn't have a limit it's inevitable that we had to subtract
the diversion entropy in the limit so we don't see the decider entropy which diverges as g goes to 0
so what we defined was renormalize entropy so it's entropy up to an additive constant independent
of the state but as up to that constant it agrees with the standard stuff it's like classical physics
so classical physicists had relations like this one which defined the entropy up to an additive
constant but in classical physics there was no good definition of the constant and we are in a
similar situation to be able to define the constant I think you need to type one algebra with microstates
I actually have a suspicion I'm not sure how widely this is shared but
I have a suspicion that there's a clash between having microstates and having classical causality
so you see I stated a conjecture before that an observer sees only part of the universe
has a type 2 algebra but there I was using language the observer sees part of the universe
that's sort of classical language involving causality I suspect that when you use classic
such classical language you aren't able to see microstates and a type 2 algebra will be the
best possible if there is indeed always a type 2 algebra for such an observer which in general
is certainly not known thank you very much Jason Pocchino
yeah thank you for the nice talk and actually so I want to ask two questions so the first one
maybe had one question but so you said that we can define the renormalized entropy for type 2
algebra but so why we can't generalize such an subtraction to the type 3 algebra
yeah I just want to it's because the entropy is can differ by different infinite amounts
for type 3 well type a type 3 algebra doesn't have a trace so it doesn't have density matrices
so a type 3 algebra can act on Hilbert space
it can act on Hilbert space and if you have an element of the algebra you can define the function
f of a which is the expectation value in the same sign but you can't write this as the trace of a
times well because there's no trace so to have density matrices and therefore interviews you need
to have a trace uh-huh I see I see so why why if we don't have an interest in we can't define the
entropy well how would you define density matrices this is the usual definition of a
density matrix and it requires a trace okay okay yeah I see I see and the second question is so
you said that so we needed to introduce observer observer Hamiltonian or when in compact space case
so but so I think so and then so we don't need to introduce for for example in asymptotically
flat space but so if we include even in that case if we include observer Hamiltonian even in that
case then so can we get the same algebra with that observer well we'll get a similar algebra
you see in in the asymptotical flat space we can define an algebra that acts on all states
whether the observer is present or not so if the observer is present we'll just take the
operator that acts on all states and restrict it to the code subspace where there is an observer
so I'm assuming the observer is more or less addressed at infinity you see in an asymptotically
flat case you can gravitationally address the observer operators to infinity or you can gravitationally
address them to the observer world line but there isn't any important difference in those two
I see I see so if we increase the observer where asymptotically addressed in asymptotically
infinity then so basically we get the same algebra with that observer basically yes
but if we include an observer in the middle middle of the space then that may be different
different if we want to study for example an observer who goes behind the black wall horizon
we definitely need to if we want to do something like that we definitely need to include the observer
in the description okay yeah thank you
any other questions
sorry I have a question
my question is the following in which part you are using the sitter because it's a closer
universe but in which part you are using this in order to have the transition from type 3 to type
2 well I first did the black hole in the first paper I did the black hole today I lectured about
the sitter space for two reasons one is I think the results are more interesting and surprising
and secondly the paper is more recent so it's more fun to lecture about it okay but I'll take
your question to be in today's lecture where was it important that the universe was closed so
the fact that we had a closed universe
made it hard to impose the constraint
the algebra of operators is if a are the static patch operators
then the invariant operators are just c numbers
that's because to age generates time translations and to make an operator invariant under time
translations it has to be gravitationally dressed somewhere and having a closed universe meant there
was no way to do that we put in an observer and we gravitationally dressed the operator to the
observer's world line in the case of the black hole we can gravitationally dress the observers to
the operators to infinity so we didn't need the observer so in the in the first paper which was
about the black hole there wasn't any observer assumed I think it's physically interesting that
for the to get a sensible answer for the cedar space you need to include the observer and many
people at first reject that but actually I think it makes sense for reasons I said I gave one
explanation of what it means namely you're considering a code subspace of states that
include an observer even though the observer in principle is described by the system
but two in a closed universe with gravity you shouldn't expect to be able to ignore the
fact that the observer is part of the system
I see thank you thank you as always I can't make promises I can only tell you
about this analysis of the cedar space what really how really want you to understand more
general closed universes I can't make any promises
any other questions
any other question
okay so I think we have a quite many questions and so I had a question yes it's pretty easier
this is if we if we if we if we include matter in the static patch like charges and other stuff
how will that influence the
sir I didn't hear the end of the question
well if you include matter and charges how will that influence algebra somehow
well I explained how it did for weak coupling we had to replace the constraints
by the constraint plus the observer Hamiltonian
so in lowest in zero or in the limit that Newton's constant goes to zero all that happens
because of including the observer's gravity is that the constraint is modified
in higher orders of course more will happen the observer will be a source of the gravitational
field and if we include charges and other stuff make that other other kind of interactions
other than gravitational left
we could give the observer a charge in a theory which has gauge fields
if in a theory which have gauge fields we have the constraint that the total charge in the
universe is zero see that charge isn't okay suppose we had gauge fields then in addition
to the Hamiltonian constraint we'd have a charge constraint and we'd want operators we'd require
that operators are neutral
but there are lots of operators that do commute with the electric charge there are lots of neutral
operators gauge invariant operators so having octromagnetism wouldn't force us to worry about
the charge of the observer although we could give the observer a charge what was different with
gravity is that the algebra without the observer was trivial so we weren't able to impose the
constraint on the algebra without including the observer's gravity
okay so uh more question
okay so if not then let's thank the end one for a really great talk thank you very much
oh well thank you for the invitation and all the questions and be well everybody
thank you very much so actually this is the end of this our week long workshop so
I'd like to thank all the participants and the group speakers for giving us a
nice discussion and the many recent updates of this field thank you very much thank you very much
