Welcome to lecture five lecture five's title ends with a question mark is seeing believing and
there's a subtitle rainbows mirages and optical fibers now nature has a number of tricks for
bending light for altering the path of light that can actually deceive us or that can paint
very beautiful phenomena particularly in the atmosphere or on an oily film on a piece of water
of a lake or something like that in addition we can use these tricks to alter the path of light
ourselves to our own advantage and perhaps the most important example of that in today's
technology is the optical fiber which I'll spend some time on in this lecture let me begin by
reminding you that one way to change the path of light is to refract it we talked about that in
the last lecture another way is to reflect it and here I have with my optics demonstration kit
a couple of mirrors these are again just pieces of plastic but they're coated with a shiny metal
on one side and they simply cause the light to reflect so every beam striking that nice flat
mirror reflects I have a curved mirror here a concave mirror this is sort of analogous to what
would be used in an astronomical telescope I put it here and it sends the light back toward a focal
point so reflection is another way of altering the path of light those seem like two very distinct
behaviors reflection and refraction actually that distinction gets blurred a little bit and
gets blurred in a particular case that's of significance in the case is this let me consider
this triangular shaped piece of material piece of plastic right now I have it set up so light is
coming into it on the left edge not much is happening because it's striking perpendicular to the
interface between the air and the plastic but on the outgoing side light is emerging it's getting
refracted and it's actually merging away from the perpendicular to that edge and so it's bending
downward fine we know about that from refraction but now I'm going to tilt this block so that the
angle with which the light is being refracted is increasing here and you can see something's
beginning to occur I'm beginning to see a slight reflection of several of the rays coming out the
bottom here but they're still being refracted downward and as I turn that further and further
suddenly a dramatic thing happens suddenly there is no refracted light coming out at all
none of the light that is incident on this edge between the plastic and the air is coming out
at all instead it's all been reflected and you can see these reflections occurring here comes
this central beam in gets refracted just slightly and then it hits this inner edge and it bang all
comes down this way and out it goes that's a new phenomenon it's partly related to refraction
but it's partly reflection in fact it's all reflection but it's a reflection that occurred
because refraction could no longer occur it's called total internal reflection I'm not going to go
into the mathematics of why it occurs but if you want to think about it you can imagine sending
a beam of light into glass and as you get to a steeper and steeper and steeper angle there comes
a point where it's skimming along the surface of the glass and still gets refracted into it if
you were sending light out the other way and you went to an even steeper angle than that there's
no way it could come out that's basically why this phenomenon of total internal reflection occurs
so total internal reflection occurs because the light is striking an interface between a more
dense medium like glass to air and a less dense medium I was recently supervising a student who
was doing a thesis on the physics of swimming and we were shooting underwater pictures of
swimmers with a video camera and then synchronizing them to some data on the forces the swimmers were
applying to the water and we came across a problem we couldn't we hadn't anticipated which was we
couldn't tell exactly where the surface of the water was and that was because total internal
reflection was occurring at the surface of the water we couldn't see above the surface of the
pool at all and instead we saw reflected upside down image of the swimmer and it got very confusing
if you were a fish living underwater and you looked up most of the time you would see things
that were on the bottom of the water somewhere else whose light had been totally reflected off
the surface you'd only see a small cone of angles that would actually look out into the world above
you outside of the water so this is a new phenomenon it's reflection it's complete total
reflection it's related nevertheless to the phenomenon of refraction and it occurs only at
interfaces between a more dense material like glass or water when the light is going into a less
dense material like air I'm using the word density here a little bit loosely I should really be
talking about the optical properties the so-called index of refraction but that's somewhat related
to the materials physical density so I'll talk about it that way I should say when light goes
from an object with a higher index of refraction to an object with a lower index of refraction
then this phenomenon of total internal reflection can occur there's a wide variety of applications
of total internal reflection for example here's a nice pair of binoculars 8 by 56 binoculars the
reason these binoculars aren't long bite like telescopes reason binoculars are nice compact
things is because the optical path that would be required to get a high quality magnified image
is actually much longer than the length of this binocular but what's been done is the light is
sent down here it's sent back up and it's sent back down this way and it's sent through a path
which is actually longer than the length of this thing how do we achieve those reflections that
bounce the light back and forth well total internal reflection and a nice smooth interface is better
than the best mirror you can make in general and so inside the binoculars are a pair of prisms
very much analogous to this block this triangular block in fact if I send light into this triangular
block at the right angle again you can see that total internal reflection occurring and total
internal reflection occurs at the interfaces of those of those prisms with the air and that's
what causes the reflection of the image and there's essentially no loss at the total internal
reflection no distortions no loss of light the internal reflection is total and so those little
prisms in here are what enable the binoculars to be a nice short compact instrument the rest of
the binoculars work by the principles of lensing that we talked about in the last lecture but here
they are being compact folded optical devices because of those prisms that work by total internal
reflection total internal reflection it turns out if you put a couple of mirrors at right angles
and start drawing the rays coming in to that system of a couple of mirrors at right angles you can
convince yourself very easily that light coming in will bounce in such a way that it must come
back out at the same angle it came in at if you form a combination of three mirrors like the corner
of a room then light coming in bouncing off any of the three mirrors will automatically come out in
exactly the same direction it was sent in from well doing that with mirrors isn't very good
because again mirrors are not perfect it's difficult to get them at exactly that angle but if you
take a cube of glass and you slice it in half along its diagonal and you send light into that
diagonal the light goes in and it sees basically three surfaces at right angles and for reasonable
entrance angles total internal reflection occurs at each of those surfaces and such a device it's
called a corner cube is guaranteed to return any light that comes into it out in exactly the same
direction it occurred and so it makes sending a reflected beam a long distance and trying to get
it back actually a much easier thing to do than you might think and I have one demonstration of
that and then one picture that shows a remarkable application of it so here's the demonstration
this device here is a corner cube and if you look at it closely you can see a pointy little part
here this is in fact a nicely carefully formed cube of glass it's mounted in a nice stand so you
can set it up on a table with other optical components to do experiments and the other
side of the cube is a flat face that's the cut diagonal of the cube and so this device because
of those three planes at right angles and total internal reflection occurring has the property
that as long as you send light into it no matter what angle you send it in at that light will come
back out at exactly the same angle so I'm going to demonstrate that by putting this device here
I'm going to take this little handheld laser I'm going to shine the laser beam into it and I'd
like you to watch the exit slit of the laser don't look into the laser beam but you can't do that
because I'm not going to shine it into your camera but watch what happens as I hit the corner cube
no matter what angle I hit it at you can probably begin to see light dancing around right near the
exit of the laser that's because that light is being reflected back by that total internal
reflection off those three different faces in such a way that it automatically comes back in
exactly the direction it comes in in even if I'm in at this angle still happens even if I turn the
corner cube a little bit I don't have to align it perfectly as long as I can hit it the reflected
light comes back in exactly the direction it came from total internal reflection occurring
at a combination where three different planes meet at right angles like the corner of a room
results in the beam coming back automatically one of the wonderful applications of that
is our ability to reflect light off very distant objects and in particular the moon
to do experiments particularly measuring exactly where the moon is
and about 30 years ago or more astronauts left on the moon an array of corner cubes
here's a picture of them you can see in the top center of this picture the array of corner cubes
I've turned it upside down as if the rest of the moon is above that part of the picture
and down here we have a ground-based telescope and what we do is use the telescope as sort of a
giant projector to project a laser beam up to the moon we hit that device no mean feeding itself
but we don't have to hit it perfectly just hit it anywhere the angle isn't crucial as long as we
hit it that laser beam is guaranteed to come right back in the direction it came and by timing
that laser beam we're now ever able to measure the earth moon distance and track how that distance
changes to better than an inch and that provides us with a remarkable test of einstein's general
relativity theory I did mention early in the course that general relativity wasn't very often
important in our solar system because the deviations from newton's theory of gravity are tiny but
when you can measure the earth moon distance to a month to an inch as you can do with a corner
cube and measure it over the month of the moon's orbit you can actually pin down the difference
between general relativity and newtonian theory so there's a very dramatic example where that
phenomenon of total internal reflection is used but I think the most important technological
application today is the optical fiber you may not be aware but whenever you're using the internet
sending email communicating with someone by telephone on the other side of the ocean
your signals are almost certainly traveling not through copper wires but through optical fibers
optical fibers are very thin pieces of glass maybe a little bit thicker than a human hair here's
a big spool of them you probably can't see them very well but here's a piece of a foam rubber
with optical fibers wrapped all around it yep here's optical fiber these are pieces of very
very pure glass if I had a kilometer thick piece of glass about a mile thick you could still see
quite through it quite well it's that pure and these fibers are designed to transmit light
and because light has such a short wavelength and such a high frequency it turns out we can
cram far more information into light waves than we can into the signals that travel down copper
cables and therefore we can send a lot more information that's what's called bandwidth in the
words that's used widely today in describing information transmitting systems so most of
the internet except perhaps for the cable that comes out of the back of your computer and goes
into your modem and maybe into your dsl connection or whatever most of the rest of the internet and
even many local area networks is done in optical fiber rather than copper wires they're still like
copper wires carrying electromagnetic waves except the electromagnetic waves in this case
are electromagnetic waves at such high frequency that they're light and they're not being carried
by the conduction of electrons vibrating back and forth and conducting materials but rather
by light bouncing down these fibers and here's how it works the light propagates in the fiber
and this is a sort of simple way to understand it you can understand it a lot more mathematical
detail with Maxwell's theory but we'll look at it this way light propagates by total internal
reflection so here's a light ray starting out in this fiber it heads down the fiber it hits the
wall but the interface between the wall and the surrounding medium is designed so that total
internal reflection occurs as long as you don't bend the fiber too sharply total internal reflection
occurs and the light propagates down by that process of total internal reflection these optical
fibers are again very thin not much thicker than a human hair but you could make a big thick optical
fiber and here's a beautiful picture of a bee looking into a short curved piece of very thick
plastic which is functioning like an optical fiber and on the right you see the image of the
bee's head as it's looking in there so optical fibers are perhaps the most important technological
manifestation today of total internal reflection and they work by totally internally reflecting
a light beam along this fiber even when the fiber bends provided the bend isn't too sharp
and I have a couple of other demonstrations of that to give you for example here's a straight
piece of plastic it's rectangular in cross-section but you could imagine it's sort of like an optical
fiber here's a little laser again I'm going to turn on that laser shine the laser beam on the
wall here I'm going to then put my optical fiber up to the laser beam and now the light is being
transmitted through the fiber well no secret this is nice and straight it's just a straight
transparent piece of plastic so no no wonder the light beam goes through but here is a more
realistic representation of an optical fiber it's got that bend in it and you can almost see
as I hold that up perhaps that the light is going through that fiber you can kind of see it in
there because it isn't really that pure and there's some imperfections in there that are
reflecting light out so you can see some but more significantly there's the light beam having
traveled through the optical fiber and coming out the other side and my goodness you can see
some dots there and that's an interference pattern due to different parts of the beam
interfering with themselves we won't go into that but that's the phenomenon of interference
but there's an example of a macroscopic version of an optical fiber conducting light through
itself and let me give you another couple of demonstrations of optical fibers first rather
frivolous use and then a real insignificant use here is a lamp made from optical fibers these
are similar to the ones used in communication maybe a little bit thicker at the base of this lamp
are some small light bulbs
and here's a bundle of optical fibers all with their ends cut off nice and square together
I put them in the lamp turn on the lamp and the light is conducted out the optical fibers
and you see those beautiful glowing patterns which are in different colors because there are
different color lamps going into different fibers but the light is emerging from the ends of those
optical fibers so there's a nice optical fiber lamp here's a more seriously realistic description
of optical fibers I have here a green laser it's a fairly high powered laser it's a little more
dangerous to work with because it's got pretty intense light I wouldn't want to look into it
I have the light coming out of the end of the laser right here or I will have in a moment it
goes through a lens in this little device let me move this lamp in this little device
is the tip of an optical fiber it's held nicely in place by some metal holders and out comes the
optical fiber and many many meters of optical fiber are wrapped around this piece of foam rubber
and I don't want to have too great a bend otherwise it will be fine boy I've got quite a
tangle in it there but I think we'll be okay with that tangle wrapped around and then it comes out
and here is the end of the optical fiber it's well very long you probably can't even see it
but there it is it's over there somewhere and I'm going to turn on the laser and the laser beam is
going to be shined into the optical fiber it may have to do a little bit of adjustment here
no it's all set so the laser beam is being shined into the optical fiber it's going around and
around through many meters of being wrapped around this piece of foam rubber and there it is coming
out you can see that green spot that's the laser being being transmitted around and around and
around and around and out it comes through that optical fiber and that's what's going on every
time you talk on the internet send an email download a picture whatever you do the individual ones
and zeros that are representing that image or that email message or that text or whatever else it is
that sound that song you're downloading they are being transmitted as on and off of a laser which
is flashing on and off very rapidly and sending its signal down an optical fiber so that is an
extremely important part of today's technology and given the overbuilding in the 1990s we have
enormous bandwidth in the world today for transmitting information across the world
by means of optical fibers so those are important and not so important the fiber optic lamp
applications of total internal reflection in technology but there are plenty of applications
in nature as well and in particular some of the beautiful optical phenomena we observe in nature
are in fact caused by total internal reflection and a beautiful example is the rainbow so we've
all seen rainbows here's a picture of a rainbow very lovely thing red on the top yellow green
blue violet down toward the bottom the colors aren't great in this rainbow but you get the
sense of what a rainbow looks like a beautiful photo of a rainbow by the way there are many many
paintings of rainbows that have the colors reversed are wrong technically in other ways I'll show you
one example in just a minute so how do rainbows form well they form when light from the sun
undergoes total internal reflection in raindrops and remarkably the angle at which the sunlight
comes in and comes out is always the same that's basically a property of water and that angle
is always about 42 degrees and so what happens with a rainbow is here's a rainbow often the
distance with its puss of gold at the end of it perhaps here is you an observer standing looking
at that rainbow and there is the center of the arc that constitutes that rainbow if you think
of that as part of a circular arc that would be its center and here's in fact how the geometry
works there's a line from the sun right through your head in your eyes that must end right at the
center of the rainbow if I'm standing next to you and we're looking at rainbows we're looking at
two different rainbows because we have two different center points if you're standing three feet away
for me our center points are three feet away and we're actually looking at different rainbows each
of us sees the same rainbow I see it's a different rainbow the rainbow may look the same but each
of us sees a different rainbow because we have a different center because the rainbow is located
so that its center, the center of that arc,
is always on a line between the sun, the observer's eyes,
and then the center of the rainbow.
By the way, we tend to see rainbows
that look like arcs that end on Earth,
but there's no reason you can't see
the whole circle of the rainbow.
And if you go up a very high mountain
and look down when a rainstorm is occurring,
you may see the full circular arc,
or if you're in an airplane,
you may also see the full circular arc of the rainbow.
Well, how does this geometry occur?
Here comes some sunlight in.
The sunlight is totally internal to reflect it.
I'll look at more details of that in a minute,
off raindrops, and comes to you.
And that angle is always about 42 degrees.
It varies a little bit for the different colors,
but it's roughly 42 degrees.
So that's basically the geometry of the rainbow.
It must be like that.
It can't be otherwise.
And having said that, here's a painting,
a famous painting by Harry Fenn called Niagara.
And I'm asking you, pause a second
and think about what's wrong with this painting.
Okay, start up again, and let's talk about that.
Those rainbows in this painting
are approximately semicircular arcs.
From the center out to the arc in any direction
is 42 degrees, roughly.
So from one side of the semicircular arc to the other
must be twice that, or about 84 degrees.
Well, four times eight is 32, four times four is 16,
that's almost a full 360 degrees, four times that.
And so this diagram, this picture,
which depicts something roughly, oh,
three or four times the width of those rainbows,
must be actually a panorama that is almost 360 degrees.
And yet that's certainly not what the artist had in mind.
So there's an example of rainbow arc,
which clearly is not consistent with the physics.
It's not consistent with the physics
because the arc of the rainbow from the center
out to where the rainbow arc is,
is always about a 42 degree angle.
So across a full semicircle,
it's always about an 84 degree angle.
And so these rainbows are much too small in that picture,
which probably doesn't subsume more than 60, 70 degrees
of angle or something, maybe even less than that.
Well, let's look at the details of how these rainbows form.
Why do we have a rainbow?
Well, here's a raindrop.
And I want to draw this raindrop in great big detail.
And here comes some light in,
and the light is refracted at that first boundary.
And at the back boundary, it's totally internal reflected.
There's the total internal reflection,
and it's refracted again.
It comes out at some angle.
That's just one light ray coming in.
Another light ray coming in at a different point
and the rainbow is refracted slightly differently.
Another one slightly differently.
Another one slightly differently.
Another one slightly differently.
That one's considerably differently
because that one's coming straight in
and going almost straight out.
Another one, maybe at some other angle.
But the point is, if you draw all the rays
that might be coming into that rainbow,
hitting, right into that raindrop,
hitting it at different points,
a remarkable thing happens.
The majority of them cluster to come out
at about that angle of roughly 42 degrees.
So there's the 42 degree angle.
It comes from the fact that most of the light
that enters the raindrop
is eventually deflected through 42 degrees.
It's not absolutely rigorous, truly true.
There's a bit of a range,
and some other light is coming out at different angles,
but most of it is refracted at 42 degrees.
So that's why we see a bright band, 42 degrees,
from that center line between the sun
and our head.
Why is it colored?
Well, that's a different issue.
And the different issue is because refraction occurs
slightly differently for different wavelengths of light,
different frequencies of light, different colors of light.
So red light, in fact, is deflected
because of the differences in refraction angle
through 42 degrees.
And here I haven't shown all the details of the refraction,
but I've shown the fact
that there's this 42 degree deflection.
For purple, that deflection's only about 40 degrees.
Now, if you were the observer I've drawn here
looking at this raindrop,
and you were looking right in the direction of the red ray,
you wouldn't see the purple ray,
because it would be missing you.
But you might see the purple ray
that is refracted and totally reflected
through its 40 degrees from a different raindrop.
So the different colors are actually coming
from different raindrops.
And maybe there's a green drop in between,
or drop in between that's refracting green light
right to your eyes.
And that's why you see the colors,
and that's why you see them in the pattern you see.
Red on top, yellow, green, blue, violet.
There's a reason for that.
It has to do with the fact
that the red is deflected through a greater angle.
By the way, in some very clear conditions,
you'll see a secondary rainbow
that involves multiple internal reflections,
and there the colors are reversed.
And once in a great while,
you'll see a tertiary rainbow
that involves even more reflections.
Each time there's additional reflections,
there's some loss.
So those rainbows get fainter and fainter.
So that's how the rainbow works.
So we see not only a bright band
at about 40 to 42 degrees,
but we see a bright band that separates the colors slightly
because the refraction is different for different angles.
By the way, it isn't just raindrops.
It's also ice crystals.
For example, here's a photograph
from a high mountaintop of the so-called glory,
which is this hazy rainbow-like ring.
And you often see this looking down from an airplane window,
and you'll see it surrounding the shadow of the airplane,
just as in this picture, it surrounds the mountaintop.
And that's a phenomenon resulting
from refraction in ice crystals.
And there are a host of other rarer optical phenomena
that also result from refraction in raindrops,
and particularly ice crystals.
Another optical phenomenon is the blueness of the sky itself.
If you look up at the sky, the sky is blue.
That's sort of obvious.
Well, why is that?
Well, if you go into the details
of how electromagnetic waves work,
electromagnetic waves go into material.
They shake the electrons.
The electrons shaking will get more of this in module three
in turn emit electromagnetic waves.
And it turns out the shorter the wavelength of the wave,
the more effective the molecules or electrons are at doing that.
And consequently, that means that blue light,
which has a shorter wavelength, is more effective
at excitingly electrons in the molecules of air
and causing them to re-radiate that blue light
at possibly different directions.
Red light is less effective at doing that.
So here's what happens.
Here's the sky.
It's full of these little air molecules, which
I've represented by little gray circles.
Here comes some light from the sun.
Here comes some red light.
And the red light basically goes through essentially
undeflected, maybe once in a while,
a beam of red light, a piece of red light,
a bit of red light scatters a little bit off a air molecule.
Most of the time, it doesn't interact much with the air
molecules.
When it does, you don't get much scattered light out.
On the other hand, blue light, much shorter wavelengths,
tends to bounce around from air molecule to air molecule.
So the blue light, if you look up into the sky,
looks like it's coming not from the direction of the sun,
but from all directions.
And that's why you see a blue sky, not a red sky.
That's why there's a blue sky.
What happens near sunset and sunrise
when the sunlight is coming through a much thicker
amount of atmosphere is that this effect,
even though it's smaller for yellow light and green light
than it is for blue light, there's
enough air molecules in that great massive air
that you have to go through at sunrise and sunset
that, in fact, even the blue and yellow and green
get scattered out and you're left with only red.
And that's why we see these beautiful red colors
at sunrise and sunset.
That's because all the other light has been scattered away,
and basically only the red light is coming through to us,
unimpeded.
Finally, I'll mention that these optical phenomena
can also deceive us.
And there are two beautiful examples,
one of them known for centuries,
and one of them very contemporary,
where nature is doing this to us.
And I want to show you both these examples.
Here's a mirage.
Here's how a mirage is formed.
Here we are on, say, a desert.
There's a car off at the right.
The view or the observer is that funny little stick
with the head.
And you'll notice that I've drawn the atmosphere here,
so it's thicker, darker at the top.
And what that's indicating is increasing air density, which
is typically caused by the air being heated at ground level.
So the air density is increasing.
And because of that increase in air density,
there's an increase in the refractivity of the air.
And consequently, the air, even though it isn't shaped
in a curved shape, is acting a bit like a lens.
And so here's what happens.
Light from that car that happens
to be traveling downward gets refracted
by that variation in the density of the air,
in the refractive properties of the air.
And it goes not in a straight path to you,
but in a curved path.
The light that, in fact, was coming off the car
and that was heading toward you actually
got refracted upward, and you don't see that light.
So you see the light that is coming off the front of the car
and started out going downward, but then headed upward.
But what direction do you look in to see that light?
You're looking a little bit downward.
The light looks like it's coming to you from down below.
And so it looks to you like the light is coming from there.
And so you see an image of that car, which is, in fact,
upside down and looks like it's coming from somewhere
different.
Now, that's a pretty rare kind of mirage.
And I'll leave it to you to convince yourself
that the image will, in fact, be upside down.
A more common kind of mirage you frequently
see are these highway mirages in which it looks like there's
water on the highway ahead.
And they're basically mirages that
result from the refraction of air giving you
an image of the blue sky above.
So there isn't really water on the road.
And as you approach, the water seems to vanish mysteriously.
That is a mirage caused by this phenomenon of refraction.
You could sort of think of this refractive phenomenon
as kind of like total internal reflection,
but occurring sort of gradually.
The same thing, by the way, happens for radio waves
that bounce off the charged layer in the atmosphere called
the ionosphere.
And that's what makes long distance radio communication
by short wave radio possible.
The radio waves go bouncing between the ionosphere
and the surface by a process that is pretty similar
to total internal reflection.
Finally, let me end with one of the most dramatic examples
of nature fooling us by means of optical distortions,
shall I say.
And that's the phenomenon of gravitational lensing.
This is something that Einstein predicted a long time ago,
but wasn't really discovered till the 1970s,
and by now has become a major tool for astrophysicists
trying to study the universe.
And what gravitational lensing involves
is the bending of light, not by lens-like structures,
not by optical phenomena involving different media,
but by the strength of gravity itself,
which, as Einstein showed, affects not only matter,
but also light.
And Einstein predicted this, but it
was not until the 1970s that people actually saw it happening.
Nowadays, we look out into the universe,
and there might be a very dense, massive galaxy
and some object way behind it, far, far away,
maybe billions of light years, very distant.
And the light from that distant object
is bent around the galaxy.
And we can actually look in several directions
and see the same object.
So we see multiple images, often, of the same object.
And that tells us something about the structure that
is doing this gravitational lensing.
In this particular image, the bright yellowish objects
in the center, well, some of them are stars,
but then there are some brighter galaxies in the center.
And then around the outside, you see some bluish structures
that look like they're forming a ring.
And those are very distant galaxies whose images have
been smeared out into these ring-like arcs
by this process of gravitational lensing.
This is not just limited to distant objects.
People are actually searching for planets
around other stars by the gravitational effect.
The planet, which itself might not be able to be seen,
would have on the light as it passes from the distant star
past the planet as it affected by its gravity.
That's called microlensing.
So the phenomena of refraction and internal reflection
provide us with a huge variety of technological and natural
phenomenon, some of them quite beautiful
and some of them quite useful.
So I'm going to go ahead and show you some of these.
I'm going to go ahead and show you some of these.
I'm going to go ahead and show you some of these.
I'm going to go ahead and show you some of these.
I'm going to go ahead and show you some of these.
I'm going to go ahead and show you some of these.
I'm going to go ahead and show you some of these.
I'm going to go ahead and show you some of these.
I'm going to go ahead and show you some of these.
I'm going to go ahead and show you some of these.
I'm going to go ahead and show you some of these.
I'm going to go ahead and show you some of these.
I'm going to go ahead and show you some of these.
I'm going to show you some of these.
