But welcome to lecture 14, Harnessing the Electrical Genie.
Most of the electrical devices we use are not based on the motions of individual charges
or placing individual charges like the image forming on the light sensitive drum of a Xerox
machine or laser printer.
Instead, they're based on the flow, the large-scale organized flows of electrical charges, usually
electrons through materials in which electric charges can easily move.
Those materials are called conductors.
We have a number of quantities we use to describe those flows.
Electric current is simply the rate at which electric charge is flowing.
You've certainly heard of current.
Current is measured in amperes, more about those shortly.
Another important quantity is electrical voltage, something you've also heard of.
You know to be careful of high voltage.
You may realize that a normal flashlight battery has one and a half volts.
What does that mean?
The voltage actually has a very close relationship to energy and we'll see that shortly.
Our most sophisticated control of electric current flow and electric charges results
in devices like transistors, which are ultimately the heart of our semiconductor electronics
revolution that's led to the modern era of computers and all manner of other electronic
equipment.
And we'll get to more of that in the next module, but we'll look briefly in this lecture
at the flow of electric current and how we control it in more simple situations.
I should also mention that although electric current is wonderfully valuable to us, it's
also hazardous.
Electric currents passing through our body, even very small ones, if they pass near the
heart can be dangerous and even fatal.
So we have to be careful of electric current, but having some understanding of how it works
gives you both more respect for it and more of a sense of what situations can be dangerous.
So as I mentioned in the last lecture, it's the net flow of electric charge that constitutes
an electric current.
In typical materials, particularly conducting materials like metals, charges are moving
around all the time, whizzing around from the sort of random motion associated with
the fact that the material is at some temperature above absolute zero, much more about that
in module five.
But if in addition to those random motions, there is a bulk flow, then that's an electric
current.
I'll give you a couple of other examples of electric currents.
For example, again, if you're watching this lecture on a very old fashioned TV or maybe
not so old fashioned, but one that's got a cathode ray tube, that beam of electrons
that's coming from the back of the tube to the front to paint the picture on the screen,
that beam of electrons constitutes an electric current, and we can blame Ben Franklin for
this because the electrons are coming from the back of the tube toward the front and
they're negative electrons, the current is actually flowing from the front of the tube
to the back, even though it's being carried by electrons moving from the back to the front.
We don't want to get into that complication.
As I mentioned, materials that carry electric current easily are called conductors, and
conductors tend to be materials in which there are free electric charges.
They're sitting there and they may be moving around in random thermal motions, as I just
described, but they're ready to respond to an electric field.
If an electric field is somehow applied to this material, maybe by putting some charge
on one end of it, the opposite charge on the other end, or putting it in a region where
there's a strong electric field, whatever, those charges are free to move and they will
do so.
The most common conductors are metals, and in metals, the atoms of the outermost electrons
of the atoms making up a metal, and this is literally what basically defines a metal,
the outermost electrons, when you put all the atoms together to make a solid hunk of
this metal, the outermost electrons lose their affinity for individual atoms, and they basically
form a sea of free electrons that can wander throughout the material and the electrons
are not attached to any particular atoms.
Now the material stays electrically neutral, each atom typically is one or maybe on average
in some materials, one and a half or maybe even two, but somewhere in that vicinity electrons
to this communal sea of electrons that are free to move throughout the metal.
The metal still remains electrically neutral, individual atoms have given up electrons,
but the total number of electrons and protons in the metal is usually still the same, and
so the metal is electrically neutral.
But that sea of electrons can respond en masse to an applied electric field and they can
move along and that constitutes a flow of electric current.
By the way, we think of electric current as something that happens very quickly because
when you turn on a light switch, for example, the light comes on immediately.
Actually the motions of the electrons carrying current in a typical metal are a few millimeters
a second, that's the kind of average motion that they may have imposed on some random
thermal motions, maybe hundreds of meters a second.
That sounds very slow, how come the light bulb comes on immediately?
Well the wire is full of electrons in the same way a garden hose is full of water and
when you turn on the faucet of the garden hose, water comes out the other end immediately
if the hose was full of water, if it wasn't it took a while for it to get to the end,
but if it was full of water already, the water that comes out of the faucet pushes the next
water pushes the next water and out it comes, and it's the same way with the electrons.
When I flip the switch, the electrons that are moving where the switch was originally
open exert electric forces on the neighboring electrons which exert electric forces on the
neighbor and so on, and that process occurs at very nearly the speed of light.
So that's why the electrons come out almost immediately, even though their motion is actually
rather slow.
But there are other important examples of electrical conductors, I mentioned last time
that water is an excellent solvent, when you put things in water they tend to dissolve,
they break up into positive and negative parts, positive and negative ions, and if you apply
an electric field in that liquid solution, salt water is a good example, blood is another
good example, many, many chemical solutions are good examples, then an electric current
will flow in that material, in that solution, and the process of electric current flow in
solutions is used, for example, to plate metals onto substances, the process called electroplating.
Salt for example, put it in water, those ions, the chlorine ions and the sodium ions that
I showed you in the previous lecture, they separate, the salt dissolves and they're free
to move through the material, through the solution, and again, an applied electric field
will drive one kind of ion in one direction, the other kind in the other direction, and
we'll have an electric current that's carried by both kinds of ions, moving in opposite
directions.
There are even minute electric currents associated with the flow of ions in and out of the cells
that make up our bodies, and that's a really important process, that's how our cells ultimately
get in materials they need, and ultimately extrude waste materials that they don't need
anymore, so that's a very fundamental process to life.
The 2003 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded, in fact, in part for the recognition and exploration
of those channels which allow materials to flow through the walls of our cells and get
into our cells and provide us with the materials we need.
And here is a picture which shows a schematic diagram of the membrane of a cell, which itself
is an interesting electrical structure because it tends to have positive charge on one side
and negative charge on another, and has electrical properties similar to a device called a capacitor,
which we use in electronics.
But within this cell membrane are these things called ion channels, and you see two of these
ion channels here, one of them cut in half to show the cross-section, and some positive
ions are moving in from the exterior environment into the inside of the cell through that channel,
and you can actually think of that as a tiny electric current.
So your currents, as I mentioned last time, are measured in amperes, and ampere is a coulomb
of charge per second, and a coulomb is a roughly a million trillion electrons worth of charge.
So a current of one ampere is a lot of electrons going by.
These are tiny, tiny currents flowing through your cells.
Typical currents in household equipment, household lighting, household motors, that sort of thing,
might range from a fraction of an ampere up to 10 or 15 amperes.
So your typical electric circuits in your house can carry at most 15 or 20 amperes typically,
and at that point they will blow a fuser circuit breaker to prevent the wires from overheating.
So electric currents come in a whole wide range of sizes, from the tiny, tiny currents
flowing in this picture here of a cell membrane to the large-scale currents that are flowing
in the electrical devices in our houses.
There are some other kinds of things that conduct electric current that are perhaps a little
less familiar to us.
One of the most important, from the point of view of the universe, although not so much
here on earth, is a plasma.
And a plasma is simply a gas that has become so hot that the collisions among the particles
are sufficiently violent to knock electrons off individual molecules and atoms.
And in that case, you have a gas that contains free electrons, just like in a metal that
are free to move, and also positive ions that are also free to move, although because
they're more massive, they're less easily moved.
And that gas becomes an electrical conductor.
And the properties of those electrically conductive gases are remarkable.
As you'll see later in this lecture, they respond also to magnetic fields, and consequently
they exhibit a lot of magnetic effects, but they also can carry electric currents.
And I'll show you a picture of that in just a moment.
Although we don't have very much plasma here on earth, the main place we have it is during
a lightning strike.
The air is heated up enough to become a plasma.
Inside a fluorescent lamp, there's a plasma.
Inside a neon lamp, there's a plasma.
There's a number of technological innovations that use plasmas, plasma TV, for example,
plasma flat panel, plasma TV displays.
But ionized gas, plasma is rare as a natural occurrence here on earth.
On the other hand, among that 5% of matter that I suggested in the first lecture is the
matter we know about, remember 95% of the stuff of the universe, we don't even know
what it is.
But that 5% we do understand, about 99% of that is in the plasma state, in the stars,
in some of the gas between the stars and even between the galaxies, and the properties
of plasma, particularly the fact that it conducts electricity, makes it a very remarkable substance.
The stars are made of plasma, the sun is made of plasma, and the sun's atmosphere and behavior
of the atmosphere of the sun, which is my own field of research, is dramatically different
from the earth's atmosphere.
And the primary reason for that difference is that the sun's atmosphere conducts electricity.
And I'd like to show you here a picture, a beautiful picture, taken by the Trace spacecraft,
Trace stands for Transition Region and Coronal Explorer.
And this is a beautiful picture of the sun's surface, basically, you see the slight curvature
of the sun's surface in that picture, and you see these wonderful, delicate, arch-like
structure coming above the surface.
And that structure is plasma, hot plasma.
It's so hot that it's giving off ultraviolet light, and this picture was actually taken
with an ultraviolet camera, not with a visible camera, so it isn't really red, it's really
giving off mostly ultraviolet light that is invisible to us.
And those structures, those delicate, loop-like structures are actually outlining regions of
the sun's magnetic field, we'll talk more about that in a subsequent lecture, but electric
currents are flowing along those structures, and those electric currents are in fact helping
to create the magnetic field.
In the atmosphere of the sun, electric currents play a remarkable and important role.
Only two other important structures that conduct electricity, semiconductors, you've
all heard of semiconductors.
Semiconductors are materials that are somewhere between conductors and insulators.
Insulators are materials that don't conduct electricity well, because they don't have
free charges.
Semiconductors are somewhere in between.
They don't conduct electricity very well, but they can be modified and made to conduct
much better, and it's the control of their conduction properties that gives us the whole
modern electronics revolution.
And that's important enough that I've devoted all of module four to semiconductors and what
we make from semiconductors, and they're important because their electrical properties
are so precisely controllable.
And finally, another kind of material you've heard about are superconductors, and superconductors
are materials they were first discovered in 1911 that at very low temperatures completely
lose any resistance to the flow of electric current.
It's remarkable, completely gone.
Electric current set up in superconductors will persist literally forever.
We've done measurements, and clearly the time that they would persist would be longer than
the age of the universe, much longer if we were able to carry out the experiment that
long.
So they look like they persist essentially forever.
There's essentially no resistance to the flow of electric current in superconductors.
Unfortunately, we can only make superconductors at very low temperatures, although in 1986,
in a remarkable series of discoveries, a whole class of ceramic-like materials was developed
that conduct electricity, superconduct electricity at temperatures of liquid nitrogen, which
is a much higher, easier temperature to achieve than some of the very low-temperature superconductors
we had before.
One of the holy grails of applied physics is to find a room-temperature superconductor,
a material that would conduct electricity without any losses at room temperature.
That'd be really important.
We lose about 10% of the electricity we generate in this country simply through electrical resistance
and wires.
A little more about that later.
By the way, it's no coincidence that the materials that are good electrical conductors
tend to be shiny.
Think about metals.
Metals are all shiny.
Think about common things that are good insulators, plastic, like this plastic case here, glass,
things like that.
Many of those materials are transparent.
That's not a coincidence.
The reason is this.
Light is an electromagnetic wave, much more about that in the last lecture of this module,
and that means it has electric and magnetic fields, and when light impinges on an electrically
conductive material, a metal, the electrons in the metal respond to the vibrating electric
field of the light wave, and they in turn re-emit the light wave back out from where
it came from.
And that's a microscopic Maxwell's Equations electromagnetic theory description of a process
I talked about in the first module, namely, reflection.
Reflection occurs at the surface of the metal simply because the electrons in the metal
are excited by the incoming electric field because they're free to vibrate, free to move,
and they re-emit the wave out in the other direction.
They absorb the energy temporarily, goes into their motion, and they re-emit it, and that's
the process of reflection.
Insulators on the other hand don't have any free electrons, so they don't respond nearly
as much to the incoming electric field.
They respond only a little bit.
The molecules stretch and vibrate a little bit, but the electrons aren't free to move
wildly about, and the net effect is the materials, the insulating materials, simply slow down
the passage of the electromagnetic wave somewhat.
Light travels through plastic and glass and water at roughly two-thirds of the speed of
light that has light in air or vacuum.
By the way, you may have read experiments done in the late 1990s and beyond that actually
slowed light first to the speed of a bicycle and eventually brought it to almost to a complete
crawl.
Those are remarkable optical materials that interact more strongly with the light, and
a lot of those materials are just now under study.
Now I mentioned superconductors because that's sort of something we'd really like to discover
at room temperature because then we could pass electric current without any loss of
energy, but we can't do that.
In all electrical conductors except superconductors, the flow of the electric charges involves
collisions with the individual particles that are making up that material, and those collisions
invariably result in energy loss.
As a result, we have to apply an electric field, and we have to supply energy to keep
an electric current flowing in a conducting material.
What happens is the individual electrons, as we accelerate them with the forces of electric
fields, there we are using Newtonian physics again, accelerate them with forces of electric
fields, they bang into ions that are left behind when the electrons have left to form
that sea of electrons, and they give up their energy.
Ultimately that energy goes into the vibration of the whole material, random motions, and
that's what we call heats of the materials, heat up.
That's why a wire heats up when you run electric current through it.
That's why when you turn on your electric stove or your toaster, those wires look inside
your toaster.
You see the bare wires in there, and they're glowing bright red.
That's with the energy given up by the electrons that have been accelerated by electric fields
and then crash into the individual atoms.
I have an example here that shows kind of schematically how that happens.
Here's a kind of symbolic picture of what a metal might look like.
A metal usually forms a crystalline structure in which the atoms are placed at regular intervals.
I've marked them here as positive because the atoms have each given up a few electrons
to this sea of free electrons in the material.
Here comes an electron into the material, and it bangs into that atom, and it bangs
into the next one, and it goes around, and it collides with atoms and keeps getting its
direction changed.
Sometimes it goes backwards, and sometimes it goes forward.
But if there's an electric current in this metal, there is superimposed on all that random
bouncing around, which is occurring at very high speeds, hundreds of meters a second
as the electron bounces around with the high speed it has because of its reasonable temperature.
Nevertheless, there is a slight drifting to the right, and in this picture I've made
that happen so the electron has drifted gradually to the right, and that means there is a slight
electric current flowing to the left in this material.
Left because the electron is negative, moving to the right, must be a current moving to
the left, thanks Ben Franklin.
Here is how electric conduction occurs in metals.
In most materials, most common conductors like metals, it turns out that the amount
of energy we have to apply, the electric fields we have to make the current go, depend on
how much current we want to have flow, and also some electrical properties called resistance
of the material.
And the famous Ohm's Law that you may have heard of that relates electrical voltage,
electrical current, and electrical resistance is not some deep fundamental law of nature,
but an approximate description of some common materials.
And I want to take a minute and talk now about the second of the two main electrical quantities
which we need to understand something like Ohm's Law, and to understand how electrical
conduction occurs.
And that's voltage, and you've certainly heard of voltage.
What you may not be aware of is what voltage actually is.
Voltage is actually something pretty simple.
It's a measure of energy.
It's a measure of energy per unit of charge, and what do I mean by that?
Here is a battery, it says, number 156, 1.5 volts.
This is a 1.5 volt battery.
What does that mean?
It means for every coulomb of charge that flows from the positive terminal of this battery
to the negative terminal, through whatever device we might connect, a light bulb, a motor,
whatever, the battery imparts 1.5 joules of energy to it.
The joule is the basic unit of energy in the standard meters kilogram second system
of units that all scientists use.
We could work out some American system.
It would be the foot pound, but let's not worry about that, or the BTU is another unit
of energy.
The joule is the unit of energy I'll talk about.
And 1.5 volts simply means that every coulomb of charge, every roughly 6 million trillion
electrons that move from one terminal to the other of this battery, the battery does work
on them, supplies them with energy in the amount of 1.5 joules.
That's all voltages.
It's energy per unit of charge.
So I have here a bunch of batteries, for example.
Here's the one I just talked about.
Here's another 1.5 volt battery.
That's a D-thaschite cell.
That's also a 1.5 volt battery.
Voltage has nothing to do with the size of these batteries.
Here's a C battery.
That's 1.5 volts also.
Here's an AA battery and a AAA battery, and here's this tiny little button cell, like
you'd put in a watch or maybe a calculator, and that's also a 1.5 volt battery.
The 1.5 volts, by the way, is determined ultimately by the chemistry that goes on inside those
batteries.
Voltage doesn't have a lot to do with the size of a battery or how powerful it is.
Here's a 3 volt battery, which is smaller than most of my 1.5 volt batteries.
Here's a 9 volt battery, which isn't significantly bigger, and it's certainly smaller than that
D cell.
Here's a bigger battery.
It happens to be a 6 volt battery, and here's a 12 volt battery.
It happens to be the biggest battery I have and also the highest voltage, but that's meaningless.
I could easily put two of these together or three of these together and have an 18 volt
battery, and it'd be a lot smaller than this 12 volt car battery.
What makes those batteries different in size is not just the voltage they deliver, the
amount of energy they deliver to each coulomb of charge, but also how many coulombs of charge
they can supply.
This battery can supply a huge amount of charge.
It can supply 100 amperes, charge at the rate of 100 coulombs every second, which it needs
when it cranks the starter motor, trying to start your car.
You could never do that, hooking a couple of these 6 volt batteries together, they would
just go completely dead.
They wouldn't do anything trying to start your car, but this one has a lot of power.
It has a lot of current producing capability as well as 12 volts, but this gives every
coulomb that flows from one terminal to the other through whatever we connect, 12 joules
of energy.
That's why it's a 12 volt battery.
That's all voltages.
Higher voltage does not mean higher power.
It does mean all else being equal to battery could force more current through a given resistance.
That's what Ohm's Law tells us, but it doesn't necessarily mean more power.
By the way, the volt is named after Alessandro Volta, who was in the 18th and 19th centuries
and was the person who really invented the electric battery.
Now I want to talk about one other quantity, and that's electric power.
In fact, any kind of power.
I've talked about energy.
We know about time.
Power, sometimes measured in watts or horsepower or a lot of other units is a measure of the
rate at which we use or supply or produce energy and a watt is simply a joule of energy
every second.
So when I have 100 watt light bulb, that uses 100 joules of energy every second.
And because power is energy per second and electric current is charge per second and
voltage is energy per charge.
If I take energy per charge and multiply it by charge per second, I'm bordering on the
mathematical now, but I won't write any equations.
If I take energy per charge and multiply it by charge per time, I get energy per time.
And that's power.
So in electrical circuits anyway, power is simply the product of voltage and current.
And I want to emphasize that here with a little demonstration.
Here I have a system.
And by the way, let me pause.
I early on in this series, I thank the Pasco Company for supplying us with a lot of equipment.
I also want to thank two members of Middlebury College's technical staff, Tony Desatels
and Chris Butler.
Tony assembled much of the demonstration apparatus, the new apparatus that was built specifically
for this course and for other courses I teach.
And Chris helped get all the other equipment that we use together.
So they did a great job.
And Tony built this piece of apparatus, which consists very simply of 200 watt light bulbs.
They're both 100 watt light bulbs.
This one is a standard 100 watt light bulb.
You buy at the hardware store and each of them is connected to a meter, a volt meter
on the top and an ammeter on the bottom.
So this one's going to measure voltage and this one's going to measure current.
And the meters have roughly the same scales and I've chosen them that way intentionally.
So here for this left hand light bulb, left hand to you is the voltage and the current,
the voltage across and the current through that one.
And here's the voltage across and current through this one.
And these light bulbs differ.
The one on your left is a standard 100 watt light bulb like you would buy at your hardware
store or grocery store.
100 watts, that means the volts times the current times the amps have to be 100 watts.
Well, out of the wall comes about 120 volts.
If it was about, if it was exactly 100 volts, it would be 100 volts times one amp.
So it's going to be a little less than one amp, 120 volts, it's about 0.83 amps, multiply
them together.
You get 100 watts.
There's the 100 watt light bulb.
The other light bulb is also a 100 watt light bulb.
But it's a light bulb bought for an RV or camper or something that has a 12 volt electrical
system run off a 12 volt battery.
So I'm going to take that one and not going to plug it into the wall or it would blow
up.
I'm going to connect it instead to this 12 volt car battery.
And there's that 100 watt bulb going.
They're both 100 watt bulbs.
And if you look at the meters, the meter for the 120 volt standard AC power line light
bulb is reading a high voltage about 120 volts and a relatively small current, some
fraction of an ampere.
Multiply them together.
You should get about 100 watts.
The 12 volt light bulb, in contrast, very low voltage, but very high current.
Multiply them together.
You still get the same power, 100 watts.
Electric power is voltage times current.
By the way, some of you who are old timers may remember when cars had 6 volt electrical
systems.
They had 6 volt batteries.
There was a transition occurred in the 1960s, roughly, to 12 volt electrical systems.
And that transition occurred because for economic reasons, the cost of copper was going up.
And the cost of a 12 volt battery is a little more than the cost of a 6 volt battery.
There's more cells in it.
But the time the cost of copper went up enough, it became more economical to build a 12 volt
battery and then you could use thinner wires because you were passing less current to get
the same power.
12 volts times less current is the same power as 6 volts times more current.
That's also the reason we transmit electric power long distances over very high voltage
transmission lines because we transmit at high voltage, therefore there's low current
and we don't spend a lot of energy heating up the wires.
But high voltages are dangerous, so when we get to our household, we have to step them
down and use them at lower voltage.
And we'll talk in a later lecture about how we achieve that stepping down of voltage.
Finally, let me end by talking a little bit about some of the possible hazardous effects
of electric current.
Most of us know to beware of high voltage.
Well, why beware of high voltage?
It's really the current that matters.
Well, you've got to beware of high voltage because it's high voltage that can put lots
of current through you.
What are the effects of current?
Here's a table that shows you the effects of current from, typically in the range of
milliampures, a milliampure is a thousandth of an ampere.
That's not much.
If there's a few as about a milliamp here, half a milliamp to two milliamps flowing,
you can begin to feel that if that's flowing through you.
And here I'm talking about currents through unbroken skin, grabbing onto two wires with
your hands or something.
If they're flowing through your heart, things could be a lot worse at lower currents.
By the time you're up to 10 to 15 milliamps, your muscles will contract involuntarily.
At 15 to 100, you get severe shock.
You probably can't let go of anything you're holding onto it and your breathing becomes
difficult.
100 to 200 milliamps throws your heart into fibrillations and you're dead within minutes.
And more than 200, you actually have cardiac arrest, your breathing stops, but it's a
little easier to revive you.
But the point is, it takes a relatively high voltage to put significant current through
my body.
My body is not that good a conductor.
Here's a 12 volt battery.
It can supply 100 amps.
Whoa!
But it can't push much current through me at all.
Not enough for me to feel.
So it's an issue of both voltage and current.
So danger high voltage, yeah.
Worry about high voltage, but also worry about the current that that voltage can pass
through you.
If you simply touch a point that is at a high voltage, that's not enough to cause you
damage.
You need to touch points at two different voltages so that a current can be driven through
you.
That's why you can see a bird or a squirrel land on a wire and nothing happens to it.
That's also why this worker in the cherry picker truck is working up in the wires and
if that worker contacts the wire, that's not a big problem for them because they're insulated
from the ground by the rubber of the tires.
And that's why their truck carries a sign that says to you, danger, electrocution hazard
keep clear because if accidentally that worker or the bucket touch the high voltage wires,
no problem for them because they're not in contact with two different places.
But then if you touch the truck and you're standing on the ground, all of a sudden current
can flow through you and maybe through the line worker as well.
When we work with electrical devices, we have to be careful to avoid situations in
which electric current would flow through us to some other point.
And typically in our electric household wiring, one side of the wiring is grounded for electrical
safety.
I'll say a little bit more about that.
But that means that if I had, say, a metal electric drill or a lamp with metal parts
or something and something went wrong inside there and I touched that thing at the same
time I was connected to the ground, say a water pipe or I was standing in the basement
or something, I could get a bad, possibly fatal shock.
And so in modern electric wiring, most of our outlets have not two holes but three and
the third is for this round longer grounding prong.
Please don't cut that off.
It's there for your safety.
I'm going to show you how it works.
So here's a situation in which somebody is doing something with an electrical device.
Here's a, here's somebody drilling with an electric drill over at the wall on the right
is the outlet.
There are two wires feeding current to the drill.
Everybody's happy.
But what if something goes wrong?
Well, one of those wires is already connected to the ground.
That's what that symbol means.
One is called the hot wire.
The one that's not connected to ground.
The other one's called the neutral.
What if a short circuit occurs?
A short circuit simply means a piece of wire where it shouldn't be or a metal metallic
conduct to that metal case.
Now I'm standing on the ground.
All of a sudden there's a current path to ground through me and that's very bad.
I could be seriously injured or killed by that electric current.
So what we do is add that third wire, the ground wire.
And normally the ground wire does nothing, but it is connected to any exposed metal parts
in the device.
And now if the short circuit occurs to the metal case, the current flows back through
the ground and it's a big amount of current because it's a short circuit.
There's a, there's almost no resistance there because it's not going through the mechanism
of the drill.
And so a fuse or circuit breaker blows and shuts off the current and I'm perfectly happy.
If that weren't good enough, we now have in electric circuits in places like kitchens
and bathrooms and around swimming pools, very sensitive devices.
You may have seen them.
They look like this.
They have little test buttons and they say GFCI ground fault circuit interrupter.
And these things sense current flowing down to different, the two different wires.
And if there's any slight imbalance, they assume that some electric current is leaking
through something else, possibly a human body and they immediately sense that and shut
off the circuit.
We have a number of devices now to protect us from the hazardous effects of electric
current.
And lest I end on a bad note for electric current, let me also say that it is the very
disruption of the body's internal electrical circuitry that makes electricity dangerous
to us that also allows us to build life saving devices like for example, defibrillators which
intentionally pass short bursts of big current through the body to start a stalled heart.
