So where does all this electricity come from that does so many useful things for us?
Well, that's the topic of lecture 16, making electricity.
I'm going to spend about the first half of this lecture going through a number of ways we make electricity,
none of which are terribly significant in the grand scheme of things,
most of which you've heard of, but some of which you perhaps haven't heard of.
And I want to look at these devices. They all have to have something in common, though.
Ultimately, any device that makes electricity somehow has to drive positive and negative electric charge in opposite directions.
It has to exert a force somehow that does that.
And then by connecting an external circuit, a light bulb, a motor, a computer, whatever,
those charges, usually just electrons, but maybe other charges as well,
will flow through that device and do good, useful work for us,
supplying, turning the electrical energy into some other form.
Perhaps the most familiar way of making electricity, although by far less significant than the one I'll get to at the end of this lecture,
are batteries. So here's a battery.
And a battery is simply a chemical device that has two metallic terminals, two conducting terminals.
One is positive, one is negative.
And what the chemistry inside the battery does, and there are different chemical reactions working in different batteries,
is to drive positive charge to one terminal and negative charge to the other.
At least that's the way to think about it. Most of the batteries simply move electrons around,
so they drive electrons to the negative terminal, and that leaves the positive terminal positive because it's got a dearth of electrons.
This particular battery is a 6-volt lantern battery.
It actually consists of four 1 1⁄2-volt cells connected together one after the other in what's called series.
That's because the common chemistry of these alkaline batteries makes a battery of about 1 1⁄2-volt.
So that's why we have 1 1⁄2-volt D-cells and C-cells and A-cells and AA-cells, as I showed in a previous lecture.
But that's what a battery is. It's a device with two terminals, and chemical reactions inside the battery drive charge to those two terminals,
one positive, one negative.
Those chemical reactions, by the way, are liberating chemical energy to make electrical energy,
not while the battery is just sitting there, but anytime I connect something across it,
like I did last time I connected an electromagnet across that same battery,
then charges were flowing, energy was being produced, in that case heating up the wire that made up the electromagnet,
and that energy was coming ultimately from the chemical reactions inside the battery.
Those chemical reactions themselves involve electrical energy,
which is the electrical energy associated with the charge distributions of the individual electrons and protons within molecules.
And as chemical reactions occur and rearrange the atoms to make new molecules,
what is ultimately happening is a reconfiguration of the electric field to a state of lower energy,
and that energy is ultimately what's being released.
So when I say chemical energy, it's not something new and mysterious.
It's actually a more microscopic form of electrical energy.
This particular kind of battery, when the chemistry is all used up, it's done and you have to get rid of it,
and it's quite a hazardous waste disposal problem because there's some unsavory chemicals used in some batteries,
particularly mercury, which is a big hazard to our environment.
Other batteries, like this car battery, are rechargeable many, many, many times.
They can supply electric current, and if we pass current through them in the other direction, we get them charged up again.
The chemical reactions can run in reverse, and the battery is rechargeable.
If we want to see conceptually what a battery does, take a look at this picture.
Here's a battery, looks like a typical D cell flashlight battery.
It's got the positive terminal on one end.
The metal case of the battery is the negative terminal, and it's exposed at the bottom end.
And there's chemical reactions going on inside that battery which separate charge.
The positive charge piles up on the top terminal, negative charge on the bottom terminal.
And if I connect some other external electrical load, a light bulb, a motor, whatever,
electric current will flow from positive to negative.
It's actually electrons flowing from negative to positive.
Thanks again, Ben Franklin.
But there it is, and the light bulb will light, and you're turning chemical energy inside the battery,
stored in the manufacture of the battery, into the electrical energy,
which drives that current, and ultimately it's being turned into light energy in the light bulb.
So that's conceptually how a battery works.
Batteries are familiar parts of our everyday lives.
They're not the most efficient way of storing energy, but they're very, very useful.
And with the advent of cordless power tools and laptop computers,
there's been a lot of research on making better batteries,
and there have been significant improvements in battery technology.
Another very, I think in the future, very significant source of electricity is the photovoltaic device.
A photovoltaic device, a photovoltaic cell, is a semiconductor-based device,
and we'll see more about the workings of it in detail in the next module
when we talk about semiconductors.
But photovoltaic device uses the energy of light, typically sunlight,
again to separate positive and negative charge.
You can think of it as sort of a light-powered battery.
Take the light away, and the internal part of the battery isn't working.
Shine light on it, and it drives charge to separate regions,
and therefore allows us to connect an external circuit and have current flow
and turn that sunlight energy into electricity.
No moving parts. Wonderful kind of device.
Today, photovoltaic cells are used largely in remote locations where it's not easy to get power.
For example, many spacecraft, especially those that are in the Earth's vicinity
or closer to the Sun than Earth or even out some ways further out into the solar system,
use photovoltaic devices.
Further out in the solar system, the sunlight isn't strong enough for them to be terribly effective.
A lot of smaller remote devices are increasingly using photovoltaics.
You may have something which is a bit of a novelty, a photovoltaic calculator,
which charges its own internal batteries with the basic room light that's around you all the time
and it never needs its batteries changed.
I keep woodchucks out of my garden with a solar-powered electric fence charger
that puts a high voltage on a thin strand of wire a few inches off the ground around my garden,
and that's enough to keep the woodchucks out.
And the battery in this device is charged by sunlight,
so I don't have to keep changing a battery, throwing away a battery, and so on.
You may have those little solar lights near your house that attach sunlight in the daytime,
charge up a battery, and light up at night.
Again, those are all simple applications of photovoltaics.
But photovoltaics also have a much greater potential for producing electricity than we're now using.
And I'd like to demonstrate one to you, but to do that, we have to go outside and take a look at it.
Before we do, let me just look at conceptually what a photovoltaic device does.
So here we have the semiconductor layer with positive and negative charge.
Light comes in, it drives positive charge toward the bottom of this device,
negative charge toward the top, we connect an external circuit.
Once again, charge flows, current going from positive to negative, and the light bulb lights.
So let's see one of these things in action.
Let's step outside where it's a bright sunny day and we'll take a look at how this works.
So here we are outside the teaching company,
and I've got a small photovoltaic panel here.
That's the blue panel you see.
Let's look at it close up.
You see a kind of grid work of metallic wiring,
and down here is a little appliance, a fan that we're going to run.
Let's take another look at the photovoltaic panel.
The vertical lines and the horizontal lines that you can barely see are the metallic wires attached to the panel
that carry the current away as the charges are separated due to the presence of the sunlight.
You may also see a kind of modeled appearance to the device.
Those are the different planes of silicon crystals which make up the device.
This is called polycrystal and silicon,
and this particular cell is made of different crystals oriented at different angles
and then cut into very thin film.
Here's the fan.
I'm going to connect the wires to the fan, and it's a bright sunny day.
There it goes.
The fan starts up right away, turning and turning.
This particular panel is capable of producing about 30 watts of power,
which is far more than is needed to run this fan,
so the fan is happily turning at a brisk rate in the bright sunshine.
Notice what happens if I shade the panel even slightly.
Drop my shadow of my hand across the panel.
The fan comes to a halt.
Even though most of the panel is still in the sunshine,
some of the cells have ceased to be conductive of electricity,
and that's cut off the flow of current, and so the device doesn't work anymore.
We have to keep the entire panel in sunshine.
This panel has many, many, many individual solar cells.
Because there's about 10,000 times as much sunlight coming to Earth as we human beings use,
there's actually an enormous potential for solar energy making electricity
if we could figure out how to make photovoltaic cells inexpensively.
Another device you've probably heard of,
it's somewhat like a battery also, is a fuel cell.
A fuel cell is like a battery in that chemical reactions
are ultimately what produce the electrical energy.
But unlike a battery that when you buy it comes with all the chemicals built into it,
a fuel cell involves fuels.
Fuel is fed into the cell, a chemical reaction occurs inside the cell,
and that reaction produces electrical energy.
Let me give you a conceptual sense of how a particular kind of fuel cell works.
The diagram here shows what's called a proton exchange membrane fuel cell.
There are catalysts which are thin layers of material on which chemical reactions occur.
This particular fuel cell, one of the most promising kinds,
is a fuel cell that uses as its fuel hydrogen and oxygen.
In comes hydrogen from one side.
The electrons in the hydrogen are split off in a chemical reaction at the catalyst on the left.
The protons go through the so-called proton exchange membrane.
They go to the catalyst.
Oxygen comes in from the other side.
The oxygen combines with the protons to make the byproduct of this particular device,
namely hydrogen, namely water, H2O, very benign device.
It only produces water as its byproduct.
And if we hook up an external circuit to the two catalysts,
basically, which constitute the electrodes, the terminals of this sort of battery-like thing,
there we have a complete circuit.
And again, we turn chemical energy into electrical energy.
I have here a little model.
In fact, it's a working model, although I don't have it charged up so it isn't working right now.
Of what our future energy source might look like.
On one end of this device, I have a photovoltaic panel, a very small one.
The electricity from the photovoltaic panel goes into this device, which is a electrolyzer,
which is basically the opposite of a fuel cell.
And what it does is break water up into hydrogen and oxygen.
It takes energy to do that.
The hydrogen is stored in this tank.
The hydrogen and oxygen then flow into this device, which is the fuel cell,
just like the one I showed you in the picture.
The electrical load, which is a small fan, which can be turned by that device.
People talk about a hydrogen economy coming in the future.
If we do have a hydrogen economy, that economy would involve developing
and storing large amounts of hydrogen as the fuel.
And it would be a useful fuel because it could power our vehicles.
It would be a pollution-free fuel.
There are some misconceptions about hydrogen as a fuel, though.
People think, gee, why don't we just make fuel cells
and power our cars and our houses with hydrogen?
Well, there isn't any hydrogen free in our world.
Hydrogen has been all burned up to make water.
There's plenty of water around.
But when the water was formed, it released the energy already.
In order to make hydrogen, we have to supply at least as much energy
as we're going to get back out when we, quote, burn the hydrogen in our fuel cells.
So don't think of hydrogen as some wonderful new energy source.
Hydrogen is a wonderful energy storage medium.
And if we had fuel cells, we can extract the energy from it in a pollution-free way.
But how do we make the hydrogen?
We could make it by burning fossil fuels and coal-burning power plants
and using that electricity to break up water.
But that won't gain us much.
We could use it, we could make it by photovoltaic cells,
which would, as this model shows, produce hydrogen in a pollution-free way.
We could make it with nuclear reactors if we wanted to go that route.
That would also produce hydrogen in a way that didn't pollute the atmosphere
but leaves us with some other problems.
So fuel cells are very promising,
particularly for mobile sources like mobile vehicles like cars and trucks,
where we need a relatively compact source of energy
and we need a way of converting it quickly to motion.
Of course, the fuel cell would then drive an electric motor.
But we aren't there yet.
And the main thing we're missing, in addition to perfected fuel cells,
which are already in use in spacecraft and other places,
is the hydrogen economy and the way of making the hydrogen in an environmentally sensible way.
I'll mention briefly a couple of other ways of making electricity
that you probably haven't thought much about but maybe have used.
It turns out certain crystals, quartz is an example,
when you squeeze them, they generate an electric charge, a fairly large voltage,
and that can actually be used to make small bursts of electrical energy.
If you've got one of those electronic matches or an electronic ignition on your grill
or your stove, gas stove, that actually compresses a crystal like this.
It's called a piezoelectric crystal, and that produces a high-voltage spark that lights that thing.
In contrast, by the way, if you apply a voltage to one of these crystals,
it will deform slightly, and that's the basis of some very precision machinery
used to actuate things and move things at microscopic levels.
Another approach to making electricity that you probably haven't heard of
is called the thermoelectric effect.
It turns out when you take two dissimilar metals and connect them together
and heat that junction of them, a small electric current is generated.
It's not a big, powerful source of electricity.
It's not terribly efficient, but it does produce electricity,
and there are some occasions where it's actually useful.
One of them, I mentioned spacecraft used solar photovoltaic cells,
but spacecraft to the outer planets don't have enough sunlight to do that,
and so they actually use thermoelectric devices powered typically by the radioactive decay
of certain radioactive materials.
In a previous lecture, I talked about the Cassini mission to Saturn
and how difficult it was to get the energy to get out to Saturn
because it had to go by Venus and Earth twice.
It did so carrying about 50 pounds of plutonium in so-called thermoelectric generators.
Here's a picture of the Cassini spacecraft,
and the arrows are marking two of the three thermoelectric generators
which supply all the power for this device.
By the way, you can reverse this thermoelectric effect,
sending electricity into a junction, and you can actually cause cooling,
and portable refrigerators often used to transport medical supplies
to remote places use thermoelectric coolers of that sort.
The effect is also used simply as a temperature measuring device.
But none of the ways of making electricity that I've talked about so far
are at all significant in terms of the amount of electricity
that it takes to run modern human society.
Almost all the electricity we use, any significant stent,
are produced by electric generators,
and electric generators involve another and new intimate connection
between electricity and magnetism,
and I'm going to spend the rest of this lecture exploring that connection
in a theoretical sense and a practical sense,
and then I'm going to spend almost the entire next lecture
talking about practical applications of this new principle
because it's one of the most dramatic, most exciting,
most intellectually interesting connections between electricity and magnetism.
So I'm going to begin by repeating some experiments
that were done first in the 1830s
by the English scientist Michael Faraday and the American Joseph Henry,
and they discovered that magnetism can indeed be a source of electricity.
We already understand that magnetism involves moving electric charge,
but this is a new connection between magnetism and electricity.
And in particular, these two discovered something about changing magnetism
and how changing magnetism produces electricity.
I remember as a kid thinking there must be some connection there,
and I took a horseshoe magnet and I remember connecting a flashlight bulb
with wires to the two poles that would be kind of disappointed it didn't light.
It didn't light because magnetism itself does not produce electricity,
but changing magnetism produces electricity.
And that's the essence of this effect that I want to now show you.
So I'm going to move over here where I have some apparatus.
I have this meter.
You might say, why in this modern era of the 21st century
am I using this ancient piece of equipment that looks like Faraday
and Henry could have been using it in the 1830s?
There's a good reason. This is a beautiful antique for one thing.
But the other reason is it's completely transparent.
If I had a modern digital meter up here, it would have a closed box
and the electronics in it would have a battery or it would be plugged in
and there'd be all kinds of extra stuff going on here and there
that we don't want to think about.
This meter is transparent and simple.
And here's how it works. It's also an electromagnetic device.
You see a thing there that looks like a bow tie.
That's actually a magnet.
And if you look very closely in here down at the bottom,
there is actually a little coil of wire suspended on some bearing
so it's free to twist in this direction and it's attached to that needle.
So what happens? Electric current comes in here.
It flows through that coil.
That coil becomes an electromagnet as always happens when electric current flows
because magnetism is caused by moving electric charge
and that little magnet interacts with the big magnet
and pushes the needle in one direction or the other
depending on which way the current is flowing
and how far it pushes it is determined by how strong the current is
and there's a spring that keeps it from just going flopping all the way over.
So this becomes a meter that measures the strength
and also the direction of the electric current
and it's completely transparent.
There's nothing else there. There's no batteries. There's no electronics.
There's no amplifiers. Very simple.
In particular, right now, I have this meter connected up to another very low-tech device.
This is just a coil made of many turns of wire.
The wire is coated with a plastic insulation with white paint and green stripes on it
but it's just copper wire wound around.
Nothing more complicated. A little bit of tape wrapped around it to hold it in place.
Nothing else.
In particular, in this whole system, there is absolutely no source of electrical energy.
I've talked about batteries, fuel cells, photovoltaic cells, none of them are in here.
There is no source of electrical energy.
Here's my bar magnet.
The bar magnet doesn't seem to have any effect on the coil
but now I'm going to take the bar magnet, I'm going to thrust it toward the coil,
away from the coil, toward the coil, away from the coil, toward the coil, away from the coil
and you can see very clearly that there's an electric current flowing
and the electric current is not flowing because the magnet is there
because if I stop the magnet right in the middle of the coil, nothing happens.
But if I move the magnet in the vicinity of the coil,
so the coil experiences a changing magnetic field
because the magnetic field of this magnet is strongest right near itself, right near its poles
and so as the poles move through here, the magnetic field changes,
that coil experiences a changing magnetic field and a current flows in it
and that implies because it's got electrical resistance, there must be a voltage being generated in it
and this is the principle of the electric generator.
This is where our electricity really comes from.
And it doesn't matter, by the way, whether I move the magnet near the coil
or hold the magnet stationary and move the coil near the magnet,
the effect is exactly the same, that may be obvious to you,
but actually if you look at the theory of electricity and magnetism,
at least it was understood in the 1800s,
the description of those two happenings is dramatically different
in terms of what's going on microscopically
and in the very first paragraph of his paper, famous 1905 paper
that introduced the special theory of relativity,
Einstein commented on this reciprocal action he called it of a magnet and a conductor
and he pointed out that it depended only on the relative motion of the two
although conventional wisdom would have very different descriptions for those two
and it was this kind of thinking that led Einstein to relativity.
So I can move the magnet near the coil or I can move the coil near the magnet
and I get the same effect.
Now I can do something else that perhaps isn't surprising
given what we know about magnetism and electricity.
I can make another electromagnet. Here I have another identical coil
and this one is hooked up to something higher tech.
I could hook it up to my car battery, but I didn't bother.
I have it hooked up to a power supply which is simply a device that takes the alternating current
at 120 volts coming out of the wall out and turns it into direct current
like a battery would produce and this one has a variable amount of current I can vary.
So I'm going to turn this power supply on.
I'm putting a lot of current through here, 10 amperes.
This coil is going to get warm pretty fast.
I'm not going to spend a lot of time on this.
So this coil is now an electromagnet and if I move this electromagnet
near the other coil, not touching it, just moving it near it,
exactly the same thing happens.
No surprise if you believe that magnetism is caused by moving electric charge.
This thing, although it looks very different from my bar magnet,
is in fact basically the same kind of thing.
It's a magnet. It doesn't matter whether I move the magnet in my left hand on your right
near the coil or the coil near the magnet.
The effect is the same.
So not surprisingly, I can do this experiment with a bar magnet or with an electromagnet.
It works the same way.
Either way, this coil, the one in my right hand, the one on your left,
is experiencing a changing magnetic field.
Once again, if I hold them stationary with respect to each other,
there's no effect. It's the change that matters.
By the way, I've been making that change by moving things back and forth.
Another way to make the change would be simply to twirl this coil in the presence of the magnet.
Just keep it twirly in some direction.
If I had some way of keeping the wires from getting twisted up and getting the current off,
that's how an electric generator actually works.
It spins a coil of wire in a magnetic field and we'll see more about that in the next lecture.
But now I want to do something else.
I'm going to put these two coils near each other but not touching.
The fact that they're on a metal rod is completely irrelevant because they're electrically insulated.
It could just as well be a plastic rod or I could be holding them in my hands.
It doesn't matter.
It's when I'm close to each other so they experience each other's magnetic fields.
And I want them not moving with respect to each other.
So they're just sitting there, stationary.
Now I'm going to turn on the current in the coil that's on your right, my left, this coil.
I'm going to turn on the current.
And during the instant the current was coming on, watch the needle again.
It jumped.
Right now, it's not moving.
There's a lot of current flowing in this coil that's getting very warm, very fast.
If I leave it on too long, the insulation will melt and it'll start to smolder.
I'm going to stop it.
I'm going to turn off the current.
Watch the needle.
The current went off.
The needle jumped again.
I'm going to turn on the current.
Watch the needle.
There's a little jump.
Turn it off.
There's a little jump.
If the current in this coil changes, there is a current in this coil.
Why?
Because changing the current in this coil, and it didn't matter whether I turned it on
or turned it off, caused a changing magnetic field in the vicinity of the other coil.
I'm going to do one more thing.
I have two coils.
I'm going to turn on the power, and I'm going to vary the current by turning a knob back
and forth rapidly.
And you probably see the needle going back and forth, back and forth as I do that.
It's not because of any motion that's occurring or not occurring.
It's because the magnetic field is changing due to the changing current in the one coil
that I have hooked up to my power source.
I have transferred electrical energy from that power source into this coil without any
electrical contact whatsoever.
Remarkable.
That phenomenon is a new phenomenon, a new basic principle of how the universe works,
and it's called electromagnetic induction.
And I want to just summarize these experiments I've just done with electromagnetic induction.
So here are the experiments we did.
We found that we move a magnet near an electrical conductor and current flows in the conductor.
We move the conductor near a stationary magnet.
Again, current flows.
We move an electromagnet.
We make them the electromagnet first.
We pass current through a coil or a conductor.
Move it near another conductor, and current flows in that second conductor.
Move the second conductor instead of the first one.
Current still flows.
And finally, most significantly in a sense, place the two conductors in proximity.
They're both stationary.
They're not moving.
And you change the current in one, and the result is a current in the other.
All these have one particular thing in common, and that is a changing magnetic field.
And in simple English terms, the statement of electromagnetic induction,
which is called in mathematical form Faraday's law or Faraday's equation,
is simply this statement.
A changing magnetic field produces an electric field.
It's that electric field.
It's called an induced electric field in this coil that is driving the current around there.
It's separating charge just like a battery would except it's doing it by an entirely new principle of physics.
So if I have to summarize electromagnetic induction in a nutshell,
it simply says a changing magnetic field produces an electric field.
There's a new source of electricity in the world besides electric charge,
and it's changing magnetism.
But it produces electric fields that have exactly the same effect on electric charges as do other charges.
There's two ways to make electric fields, and one of them is by changing magnetism.
Now, I want to emphasize that there's energy involved here.
I had transferred energy from one coil to another, and I want to give you a more dramatic illustration of that.
I have here a little device that consists of a coil of wire and a power supply underneath it
that can rather quickly change the current in that coil.
And remember, change is what's important.
I'm going to put a little aluminum ring.
It has nothing to do with being magnetic.
This is aluminum. It's not magnetic.
There's no effect when I touch it to my magnet.
My magnet won't pick it up. It's aluminum, not steel.
But it will become a magnet if current flows through it,
and it will be repelled by the magnet that is produced by this coil.
And there will be a transfer of energy partly into that current flowing through this aluminum,
and some of that, because these two magnets will repel each other,
will be converted into kinetic energy.
Here it goes. This will not be terribly dramatic at first.
Do it again. Current is induced in that ring, and up it goes.
If I intensify the magnetism by putting an iron rod here, it gets quite a bit more dramatic.
There's a conversion of electrical energy to magnetism.
The magnetism changing rapidly induces more electric current in here.
That makes this a magnet, and away we go.
A conversion of energy is involved in these electromagnetic induction experiments that we're doing.
Now, I want to emphasize that there's no free lunch here.
If I do this experiment, take this simple copper loop,
and I push this magnet toward it, we know that an electric current is induced in here.
It's the same experiment I just did. I just don't happen to have this hooked up to a meter.
If I did this fast enough, and I had a light bulb in the circuit,
I could actually light the light bulb, for example.
We'll do that in a couple of lectures.
Actually, we'll do it in the next lecture.
But when I do this, I must be inducing a current in this loop,
and this loop has electrical resistance, so in principle, it's getting hot.
If I keep doing this, that loop is getting warmer.
Now, here's the idea. There's no free lunch.
So it must not be easy for me to do this.
I must have to do like that in order to thrust this magnet toward this loop.
Why am I having to do work? Why is it hard to do this?
Well, there must be some force that is keeping this magnet from wanting to go in there.
Now, this red part is the north pole of this magnet.
And what that means is, when I induce a current in this loop,
that current must be flowing in such a direction.
And knowing about how the right hand works to figure out magnetic fields,
I know it's that direction.
That will make that end of this loop.
Remember, this loop doesn't look like a bar magnet, but it is when it's got current in it.
That will make that loop have its north pole in that direction.
And then I'll have two magnets with their north poles coming toward each other.
And that's hard to do.
You can see it with this bar magnet.
You can't see it as much with this loop, but the same effect is there.
There's a repulsion.
And if I try to pull this loop away, it's the opposite.
It has to be hard to do that.
The current has to flow the other way to become a south pole.
So, energy has to be conserved.
If that didn't happen, all the electric generators in the world would happily turn forever on their own
without having to supply any coal, uranium, energy, anything else.
No free lunch. Here's a picture of what I just described.
In comes a magnet toward this conducting ring.
There has to be a current.
It flows in that direction, and the conducting ring becomes effectively a magnet
with the two north poles opposing each other, making it hard for me to push that magnet in.
In the next lecture, we'll see a much more dramatic illustration of this.
On the other hand, if I pull the first magnet away, the current goes in the other direction.
The current, again, caused by the changing magnetic field of the first magnet,
goes away, goes in the other direction in order that that become a south pole
and tries to keep the north pole of the one magnet from coming away.
And finally, let me end with one more interesting example of this phenomenon
that we're involved here with energy conversions when we talk about these induced currents.
Here I have a hollow aluminum tube.
That's all it is, hollow tube, and I have two objects which I'm going to drop through there.
These are two cylinders. They look identical, and they weigh exactly the same.
I'm not going to bother to weigh them, but they do.
I'm going to drop this one through the cylindrical tube.
There's nothing sticky in there or anything. It goes right through. Bingo. Gravity.
I'm going to drop the second one through.
What's different?
Well, as you probably saw when I picked the one up off the microwave oven,
that one's easy to pick up off it. This one's a magnet.
So what's happening is that magnet falls through this aluminum, not iron.
It would have just stuck to iron. Through this aluminum tube,
the motion of the magnet causes the aluminum to experience a changing magnetic field.
That changing magnetic field induces currents that flow in the aluminum.
That heats up the aluminum a little bit, and energy had to come from somewhere.
Where does it come from? It comes at the expense of the kinetic energy of the falling magnet,
and therefore the magnet falls much more slowly, and it took a very long time to fall through this tube.
Energy has to be conserved. The equations of electromagnetism know about that
and this phenomenon of electromagnetic induction doesn't come to us for free.
We have to supply energy to make those induced currents.
