Lecture 19, The Miracle Element.
This is the first lecture in module 4, which is entitled From Adam to Computer.
This is a rather different module than the others.
It's very narrowly focused on how ultimately computers and other electronic devices work.
I'm trying to do a hierarchical progression from individual atoms all the way up to computers
where you can understand with no significant gaps every step in the process that takes
us from atoms to building complete computers.
At the end you won't be able to build a computer yourself, but you'll have some sense of exactly
what's going on inside all those chips and silicon devices and keyboards and whatever
else there is that makes up a modern computer.
Now it's been pretty obvious I think so far that physics in your life is not just low
tech physics of rolling wheels and bouncing balls and that sort of thing, but there are
a lot of high tech components involved.
Certainly the whole electromagnetic revolution involves high tech things and particularly
the electronics revolution.
Modern semiconductor electronics is at the heart of so much that goes on in our lives.
Increasingly semiconductor devices, little tiny computers literally, are built into everything
from thermostats to car door opening systems to car ignition systems to appliances and
so on.
All these devices are getting smarts, they're getting smart because they have semiconductor
electronics built into them.
And module 4 is about semiconductor electronics and ultimately how it works and then how we
build it into practical devices that do real things for us.
So we begin with an outline here of module 4 to give you a sense of where we're going.
Lecture 19, this lecture is called the miracle element.
It's about silicon, the element behind most of the electronics revolution.
Lecture 20 talks about the 20th century's greatest invention.
Well with a question mark, I can think of three or four candidates for that award, but
certainly the transistor is one of them and lecture 20 is about transistors.
Lecture 21, building the electronics revolution.
How do we actually produce semiconductor electronics devices from individual transistors to integrated
circuits that today hold a billion or more transistors?
Lecture 22, circuits so logical, looks at how we actually build up from these transistors
to circuits that do very, very simple functions.
And it turns out we really only need to do very, very simple functions that anybody can
understand in order then to build up to doing more complicated functions.
Circuits, so logical.
Lecture 23, how's your memory?
Well, your computer's memory is what I'm asking about there.
How is your computer's memory?
How big is it?
And particularly, how does it work?
And finally, we go back over the whole thing from atom to computer and we look at how all
the elements of a modern computer fit together based on what we've seen before.
At the end of each of these lectures, I'm going to have a diagram that starts with a
silicon atom and builds us up to where we've gotten to at the end of that lecture so that
by the very end, we'll go from a silicon atom all the way through a series of logical steps
to understanding how a computer works.
So let me begin with a miracle element, silicon.
Silicon for you who would like to know a little chemistry happens to be atomic number 14.
It sits right below carbon and right above germanium in the periodic table.
I'm not a chemist and I'm not going to say much more about that except to say that silicon
is representative of a class of materials called semiconductors which lie somewhere
between electrical conductors and electrical insulators in their electrical conductivity,
in their ability to conduct electricity.
It's not just that they're bad conductors or that they're bad insulators because they
conduct a little bit.
They work by an entirely different mechanism and we need to understand that mechanism to
understand how semiconductor electronics works.
Now remarkably, and I think this is just almost miraculous fact, the element that has fueled
the electronics revolution is not some rare thing that we have to go to some exotic place
on earth that happens to be politically unstable or something and there's one mind that produces
this.
Rather, silicon is the second most abundant element in the Earth's crust.
Second only to oxygen.
It exists largely in the form of silicon dioxide, SiO2, where it's been combined with oxygen
and some materials that are basically silicon dioxide include quartz, much of the sand on
the world's beaches, which is ground up quartz and glass.
So silicon is a very, very common material.
By the way, you might ask why silicon and oxygen are so common.
I'll get to that in the very last lecture.
It has to do with the nuclear physics going on in the interiors of stars and what elements
are preferentially cooked up.
So the very final lecture of this whole course, Your Place in the Universe, will give us a
sense of how we and everything around us on earth come from the interiors of stars.
That happens to be why silicon is so abundant on earth.
It's the second most abundant material in the crust of the earth.
Now, semiconductor materials share with other materials a bonding together, particularly
when they're in the solid state.
That's why devices that use semiconductor electronics are called solid state devices.
Although that happened, we tended to use that term earlier in the electronics revolution
to contrast them from the earlier vacuum tube devices.
Now everything is semiconductors almost, and that's less of an issue.
But silicon bonds itself together into a crystalline structure by covalent bonding, something I
discussed in a previous lecture, one of those methods whereby atoms join together electrically.
In this covalent bond, all the electrons that join the individual atoms that are shared
by the individual atoms are basically tied up in this bonding between the atoms.
And in principle, and in fact, at low temperatures, silicon is exactly like an insulator.
It is in fact an insulator.
In fact, in one sense, all semiconductor materials are insulators.
They just happen to have some unusual properties.
They are qualitatively the same as insulators, but quantitatively different in a way I'm
going to describe.
Now the key to silicon is its chemistry, and again I'm not a chemist, remember I've mentioned
a few times that chemistry is determined by the outermost electrons of an atom.
And silicon has four outermost electrons that participate in the bonding to other atoms.
That's a pretty large number.
It's like carbon in that respect, and that's because it lies right below carbon in the
periodic table of the elements.
People have even speculated, might it be possible for there to be silicon-based life?
Its uniqueness is that it reaches out with these four bonds and can make very complicated
structures.
So, each silicon atom bonds itself through these four shared electrons to four nearest
neighbors.
And we're going to be dealing largely with pictures like the one I'm showing here, which
is a very simplified two-dimensional model of a silicon crystal.
And in this model, you see the large red balls are silicon atoms.
They're actually positively charged because the four outer electrons are shared.
So the red are positively charged silicon ions, basically.
And you see lines that represent bonds, forces joining each of these to its nearest neighbors.
And because the silicon has four electrons to share and its neighbor has four electrons
to share, each silicon atom and its nearest, one of its nearest neighbors are each sharing
two of their electrons.
So I show those bonds as two lines with each line having a single electron on it.
So each silicon is bonded to four nearest neighbors and there are two electrons participating
in each bond, and that's the important thing we need to understand.
Now, this is a two-dimensional picture, and I'm going to show it over and over again to
understand how semiconductors work.
But don't think silicon is two-dimensional.
Here is a three-dimensional model of a silicon crystal.
The structure is actually somewhat complicated.
Each atom is joined in a tetrahedral-shaped structure, sort of like a pyramid, as if one
atom is at the center of a pyramid and the other four atoms it bonds to are at the vertices
of that pyramid.
So it's quite an interesting complicated structure.
I borrowed this from a geologist colleague.
It is, in fact, not the structure of silicon but the structure of diamond, but because
silicon and carbon are basically similar because they occupy the same column in the
periodic table.
This is also the structure of silicon.
So silicon is more complex looking than the simplified two-dimensional pictures I'm going
to show you.
It's a three-dimensional tetrahedral structure, but the basic idea of the physics of what
makes semiconductors work will be perfectly clear from the two-dimensional pictures.
Now, at very, very low temperatures, the picture you have on your screen right now is exactly
the picture of what a silicon crystal looks like.
All the electrons are participating in these covalent bonds.
The outer electrons are all being shared among the atoms, and there are no electrons that
are free to move throughout the material and carry an electric current.
That is a contrast with a metal.
In a metal, as opposed to an insulator or a semiconductor, when you assemble the atoms
in a crystal, the outermost electrons, typically one or two, leave their individual atoms and
become completely free to wander throughout the material, forming this sea of free electrons
that can respond to electric fields and carry electric current.
That's why metals are conductors.
This picture I've shown you here is why silicon, semiconductors in general, and any insulator
are insulators.
There's a difference between a semiconductor and an insulator in this picture, and I'll
give you a quantum mechanical explanation at the end of this lecture that makes sense
in another way.
But in this picture, the energy it takes to dislodge an electron from one of those bonds
in a semiconductor is much less than in a normal insulator.
That, for example, is the principal difference between the silicon crystal and the diamond
crystal.
Diamonds are really good insulators.
Silicon is not.
It's a semiconductor because it takes only a little bit of energy to dislodge one of
those electrons.
Where does that energy come from?
Well, at normal temperatures, and this will be the subject of the next module, which is
on heat and related physics, at normal temperatures, there's some random jostling of the atoms
and the electrons and so on in a material.
And once in a while, enough energy gets together in one place that it has the possibility of
dislodging one of those electrons.
So at normal room temperature, silicon has an occasional electron dislodged from one
of these bonds, not very many, but a few.
And there are enough that if I were to apply an electric field to this material, the electron
would feel the electric force and it would move and that would constitute an electric
current.
And again, thanks to Ben Franklin, because the electric field I've drawn here is pointing
to the left, the electron being negative is going to move to the right.
So there it goes.
It moves a little bit to the right.
It moves further to the right.
And that motion to the right constitutes an electric current.
So here's the picture of a pure piece of silicon semiconductor at normal room temperatures.
It's got an occasional free electron and not remarkable.
And we know that when free electrons are there, they can carry electric currents.
The more interesting thing that's happening is what comes next.
Let's focus for a moment on the place where the electron was.
There's a bond there.
Well, the bond is broken.
I've shown it's still there, but the bond is partly broken.
It's weakened because there's a missing electron.
But right next to that electron is another electron.
Well, it's not really right next to it, but it's participating in bonding to the same
atom.
And it feels a slight force from that electric field also to the right.
And although it's in that bond, there's a good probability that it will leap from where
it is over into the place where it isn't.
It won't leap freely through the material, but it might switch which of those two bonds
it's on.
And in fact, that place where the electron isn't, which I've represented here with a
little circle, a little hollow circle, is simply a place where an electron isn't a bond
that doesn't have an electron in it.
Semiconductor people call that a hole.
It's a place where an electron isn't.
And the fact is that that electron right next to that hole can move over and occupy the
hole, and then the bond becomes complete on the right, but not on the left.
We would say the electron falls into the hole, or we would say the electron and hole recombine.
So what's going to happen now is that electron, under the influence of that electric force,
is going to jump into that hole, fall into that hole.
There it is.
OK?
Nothing remarkable there, but here's what's happened.
The hole has moved, and it's moved to the left in the direction of the electric field.
This absent electron, it's as if it's a little positive charge.
And the beautiful thing about semiconductors, and this is the remarkable thing that makes
them so useful, is they have two kinds of things that carry charge.
They have electrons and holes.
Now, you might say the hole isn't really real.
It's only the absence of an electron, true.
But it behaves very differently from the free electrons.
The electrons that are jumping from one bond to another are effectively moving positive
charge to the left here in this picture, and that means the hole really behaves as a particle.
You can even calculate its apparent mass.
Now there is another electron.
It's in a bond up above, in that horizontal bond, and that's close enough to feel the
effect of this hole nearby.
And given the electric field that's tending to drive electrons to the right, it's possible
for that electron to jump into the hole, and the hole has moved further to the left, and
then the hole jumps a little further to the left, and the hole jumps a little further
to the left, and further to the left, and the hole ultimately moves to the left.
The beautiful thing about semiconductors is they have two kinds of charge carriers,
holes and electrons, and it's that fact that gives all the usefulness to semiconductors,
and it's the manipulation of that phenomenon, holes and electrons carrying electric current
that makes the whole semiconductor revolution possible.
In fact, in this so-called intrinsic silicon, this is pure silicon, what happens when an
electron is freed is a hole is created, and in fact an electron-hole pair is created.
I'll say a lot more as I go on about electrons and holes and electron-hole pairs, but the
point is there's a big difference between semiconductors and ordinary metal and metallic
conductors.
In metals, it's only electrons carrying the current.
In semiconductors, it's also holes.
Now in pure silicon, as you can see in the picture where I show an electron-hole pair
being created, for every electron that's freed, there's also a hole.
So electrons and holes occur in pure silicon in exactly the same numbers.
The conduction is equivalent by each of them.
Pure semiconductors aren't terribly useful.
I'm going to just show you a couple of examples of where they're used, but they themselves
are not useful, not that useful in the electronics revolution.
Let me just give you one example of what we do use a pure semiconductor for, however,
and then I'll move on to tell you what we really do.
Let me see if I'm sick.
Nope, I'm okay.
How do I know?
Because your modern thermometer doesn't contain mercury, horrible toxic substance that expands,
although its battery may have some mercury.
It has a tiny little place at its tip where there is a tiny little chunk of intrinsic
semiconductor, probably silicon, and intrinsic semiconductor means a semiconductor is really
pure.
That's the only thing that is in it.
A piece of pure semiconductor is called a thermistor, and I have over here a thermistor.
You can just barely see it.
It's this little tiny device.
It's in a little glass bead, and there's two wires coming out of it.
And the beautiful thing about a thermistor is these electron hole pairs, remember, are
produced by agitation due to thermal energy.
So the hotter it gets, the more electron hole pairs ought to be created.
And so a piece of pure intrinsic semiconductor becomes a very nice temperature sensor.
And right now this thing is sitting at room temperature, and this meter is measuring its
electrical resistance.
It's 9.26,000 ohms.
An ohm is the unit of electrical resistance.
It's the amount of resistance that would cause one volt to force a current of one amp
here to flow.
One volt would cause a current of much less than one amp here to flow, in this case about
110,000.
Now, I'm going to put my fingers on this thermistor, this piece of intrinsic semiconductor, and
that's going to make more electron hole pairs, and you can see that driving the resistance
down.
And I'm going to take that thermistor, and I'm going to dip it in ice water.
And you can see the resistance going up.
It's now off scale.
Let's press a different button.
It's now 22,000 ohms.
So a piece of intrinsic semiconductor, although it's not what we use in making most of the
electronics revolution, becomes a very useful temperature sensor.
Another thing intrinsic semiconductors are used for is radiation detectors.
Detecting nuclear radiation, that works because the high energy radiation comes in, it produces
electron hole pairs, and we can actually measure not only the fact that radiation is there,
but by determining the energy given to these electrons and holes, we can determine the energy
of the radiation.
Some sophisticated radiation detectors use intrinsic semiconductors also, but that's
not the big deal.
The big deal is we can modify the properties of semiconductors, and the whole electronics
revolution is based on our ability to do that.
And what we do is intentionally contaminate pure, pure silicon.
We have to start with really pure silicon.
We contaminate it with low levels of contaminants.
The levels I'm talking about are typically a vary depending on what the application is,
but they're typically something on the order of one impurity atom in about 10 million silicon
atoms, and that has to be controlled very carefully, but that control gives us immense
power over the electrical properties of the material.
So here's a picture of silicon that's been doped by arsenic.
Arsenic is not such a nice material, and that's why some of the products used in making semiconductors
are terribly toxic.
Arsene gas, you don't want to be near it, but that's available in semiconductor manufacturing
facilities, and it's pretty bad stuff.
So I've shown you the arsenic atom.
I've shown it bigger than the silicon atoms, and the thing about arsenic is it has five
electrons in its outermost layer.
It's pentavalent.
It has five electrons it would like to contribute to bonding.
Well, it doesn't really bond the same way silicon does, but if I put arsenic at the level
of one in every 10 million in silicon, it'll do the best it can to fit into the crystal
structure of the silicon.
The problem is it will have one extra electron, and that won't fit into that bonding structure,
which requires bonds, four bonds to your nearest four neighbors.
It's not what arsenic wants to do, but it will nestle into that crystal structure and
kind of fit in there as an impurity, but the problem is it gives up this free electron.
It can't participate in the bonding, and that electron becomes free, like the electrons
in metal, to conduct electric current.
And that electron, even at the level of one arsenic in every 10 million silicon atoms,
that electron, those electrons contributed by that small amount of arsenic, are enough
to greatly swamp the electron hole pairs that are created intrinsically, and they become
the dominant charge carriers in this material.
So there's a free electron in there, and that makes the material a much, much, much better
conductor than it would be otherwise.
We call those electrons in this material the majority charge carriers.
There are still some electrons that have been released by the thermal process.
They are also majority carriers, because they mix in with these, they're not distinguishable.
And there are a few holes, they're called minority carriers.
But the vast number of charge carriers in this material, this arsenic-dope silicon is
our electrons.
And for that reason, the arsenic-dope silicon is called an n-type semiconductor, n for negative.
Now be very clear on this, that doesn't mean the material is negatively charged.
The arsenic gave up this extra free electron, but it also had an extra proton in its nucleus.
And so the material is still electrically neutral.
It means not that the material is negative, but that the things that are in the material
that are free to carry electric current are negative, and they are electrons.
Now those are not the only types of atoms we could dope a semiconductor with.
We can also dope a semiconductor with atoms that have fewer electrons.
An example of that is aluminum.
So here's aluminum-doped silicon.
I've shown the aluminum atom as being slightly smaller.
It's still a positive ion in there.
It has three outermost electrons to contribute to this bonding.
So when it nestles into the crystal structure, which again it can do when we're doping at
the level of one part in 10 million or something, it nestles into that crystal structure, but
there's a bond that doesn't have an electron in it.
What we know about the absence of an electron in semiconductors, that's a hole.
So this aluminum-doped silicon produces holes which are not matched by electrons.
It does not make electron-hole pairs.
It simply puts a few places in the structure where there aren't electrons, and they behave
like holes do, and I showed you that before.
The hole can move through the material in response to an electric field.
So even at very low levels of doping, again one part in 10 million or something, these
holes dominate the electrical conduction in this material, and therefore we call that
a P-type semiconductor.
Again, it's not positively charged.
It's still electrically neutral, but the things that are free to move in it are holes.
They're positively charged.
Now you might say, yeah, isn't it really electrons that move?
Sure it is.
But they're not moving freely.
They're jumping from one bond to another.
It's basically the hole, the positive thing, that is free in this case to move throughout
the material.
So the key here is we have two different types of semiconductors.
We have P-type and N-type, and putting those two together gives us a host of wonderful responses
that determine how we build our electronic devices.
Before we go on and start building those devices, I want to give you just a little more insight
into these P and N-type materials and semiconductors versus insulators and conductors in a quantum
mechanical sense.
I haven't said much about quantum mechanics in this course, or quantum physics, but you
may know enough to know that quantum means discrete, little discrete hunts, and one
of the implications of quantum physics is that the electrons in atoms cannot just have
any energy or be in just any orbit around the nucleus, but only certain orbits are allowed.
And that fact, which you probably learned somewhere in high school science maybe, is
the key to understanding semiconductors from a quantum physics point of view.
So here's a picture of a quantized atom.
Again, this is this crude solar system model that really doesn't correctly represent what
an atom looks like in quantum physics.
The electrons are again in this sort of statistical cloud, but this picture will help us to understand
what's going on.
I've shown two levels of orbits, and in fact, typically two electrons can occupy exactly
the same state, well not quite exactly because one of them's got its spin pointing down and
one pointing up, and I'm not going to go into that, but the fact is, at most two electrons
can occupy what you would think of as an orbit.
And I've shown three orbits here, two of which are occupied, they're full in fact, with two
electrons each, and one of which is unoccupied.
And if I drew a diagram of the energy associated with those orbits, it might look something
like this, on the vertical direction is energy, the horizontal direction in this picture is
meaningless, and think of those as little shelves at different levels where electrons
can live.
And this particular atom now has two electrons in that lowest level, and two electrons in
the next level, and no electrons in the third level.
And it's possible to promote an electron upward, and I've made it happen here, let me do that
again, I've made it happen in both pictures, in the actual physical picture of the atom
and in the energy diagram, the outermost electron, or one of the electrons in that outermost
occupied ring is going to jump upward.
And it takes some energy to do that, that discrete amount of energy that causes spectra
and all kinds of other things from atoms.
Well, that's all well and good.
But semiconductor electronics is not about individual atoms, it's about atoms coming
together in the solid state to make dense structures, dense crystal structures.
We want to know what happens to this quantization of electron energy levels, to the fact that
they're only discrete levels, when you begin to bring atoms together, and let me show you
what happens.
So here's a couple of atoms, and if they're far apart, each of those atoms has exactly
the same energy level structure that I showed before.
Electrons occupying the upper atom and electrons occupying the lower atom, they don't know anything
about what the other atom is doing, so they are happily occupying their levels as if they
were the only atom of that sort in the universe.
But bring the atoms together, they have this energy level diagram like we saw before, each
atom does, but bring the atoms close together.
Now they're close enough together that each atom, quote, knows through the medium of their
interacting shared electrons, what's going on in the other atom.
And so an electron that was happily in its level in one atom, and an electron that was
happily in the same level in the other atom when they were far apart, now they can't be
in the same level.
And consequently, those levels split slightly into two levels separated slightly in energy.
And chemists, this is exactly the kind of thing chemists who are trying to understand
chemistry from first principles like the model, they want to understand what happens if you
put the two atoms together, and what become the new, more complicated energy levels in
the molecules.
Because what I've got here is a diatomic molecule, two atoms joined together to make a molecule.
The electrons deep down inside the so-called lowest energy electrons are tightly bound
to the atomic nucleus, their levels aren't affected much by this, they're again still
isolated largely by the outermost electrons from this process of joining.
But the outermost electrons, the one that participate in the chemical bonding, they really understand
now that they're part of a two atom system, and they really feel these different levels.
And so I've shown the upper levels splitting more dramatically than the lower levels.
Well this is molecular physics, or the beginnings of chemistry, but it certainly isn't solid
state or what we now call it condensed matter physics, it isn't a structure as complicated
as this.
But what if we join lots of atoms?
Well if we join lots of atoms to make a solid structure, and here's sort of a symbolic representation
of a crystal, this one has only 16 atoms in it, and a real one has a 10 with 20 something
zeros after it, in typical macroscopic sizes, then those levels become so close together,
and there are so many atoms that we get effectively where each level was a whole band of allowed
energies, and even though in principle if the crystal is finite in size, which every
real crystal is, there are actually discrete individual levels, they're so close together
they become completely indistinguishable, and again the further up you are in energy,
the wider those bands are.
And those bands of allowed energies are separated by gaps, and it's the band theory of semiconductors
which is ultimately the way of understanding them quantum mechanically.
And let me emphasize again, this is beginning to look sophisticated and complicated, but
it is nothing but a manifestation of the fact that individual electrons in atoms can only
have certain discrete energy levels, and it's a complication of that fact that results
as we bring more and more atoms together, bring two atoms together, and those levels
split in two, bring zillions of atoms together, and those levels split into zillions of closely
spaced levels that form these bands, but there are still gaps, and they correspond in some
sense to the individual, the gaps between the individual levels in the original atoms.
So what happens here?
Ok, well let's talk now about conductors, insulators, and semiconductors in the context
of this theory.
Here's what makes a conductor.
A conductor is a material, and I'm showing you here only the outermost two energy bands
that would have electrons in them, the whole host of higher bands, but they typically don't
have any electrons in them.
And in a conductor, the next highest band is completely full, but the outermost band
that contains any electrons has only some of its levels occupied.
So in this picture I'm showing the band in gray as I did in the previous picture, but
I'm showing the occupied states, the occupied levels in blue.
That means there are electrons at those energies, and because there are only some electrons
in the upper band, the energy difference between the highest energy electron at the
top of that band and the next level, remember these levels are so close that they form a
sensitive continuous band, is almost nothing.
So it takes almost no energy to promote an electron from that highest occupied level into
the unoccupied levels, and once the electron is in an unoccupied level, it's free to move
throughout the material, because there are additional occupied levels right next to it,
unoccupied levels right next to it, so you can apply an electric field and you can give
it more energy.
That's the point.
If an electron can respond to a tiny bit of energy, then it's free to move throughout
the material.
So that's how a conductor works in band theory.
It has a filled band and a so-called conduction band, which is partially filled.
How does an insulator work?
Well, an insulator has a different structure.
It has a filled band, and then there's a big gap.
There it is.
A large gap before there is an unfilled band, the empty band, something that's called the
valence band, it's unfilled, that band has no electrons in it.
And in order to promote one of the electrons from the filled band to the empty band, you
have to apply a very large amount of energy.
You could in principle apply enough electric field and pull those electrons out of the
bonds in an insulator, but take a huge electric field to do it.
That's why insulators are insulators.
Finally, what about semiconductors?
They are, as I said, essentially insulators.
The difference is the band gap is much smaller.
They have a very small gap, and they are at zero temperature, at absolute zero temperature,
they are insulators.
There's no way to get across that gap, but at even any reasonable temperature, thermal
energy is enough to promote a few electrons into this empty band.
Those are the ones that I showed before as being freed, and those are the ones that become
free to move throughout the material, and they are the conduction electrons, and now
the material has a structure like the structure of a conductor.
In an n-type semiconductor, what we do is introduce a new energy level associated with the impurities,
so called the donor level, and that can easily give lots of electrons to this unfilled band
becomes a conductor.
In the p-type material, same thing, we put an empty band down below.
We can promote some electrons into that band, and we again get conduction now by holes because
of that empty unfilled space down below.
So that's an explanation of semiconductors on the basis of these bands.
So let me wrap up with the picture I'm going to show you at the end of every lecture in
this module.
We started out with silicon atoms, we built silicon atoms into crystals, the crystals
had electrons and holes as possible conducting current carriers, and so we developed out
of that n and p-type semiconductors, and from that we're going to build the whole semiconductor
revolution.
